[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32054)  [Next](cc32056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.liv"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p1"></span><span id="ii.liv-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
17:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="ii.liv-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.liv-p1.2"></span>[Mark
9:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002)<span id="ii.liv-p1.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.liv-p1.3"></span>[Luke
9:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028)<span id="ii.liv-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p2"></span><span id="ii.liv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
17:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="ii.liv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p3"></span><span id="ii.liv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
9:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002)<span id="ii.liv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p4"></span><span id="ii.liv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028)<span id="ii.liv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p5"></span>**1**. And after six days Jesus taketh
Peter, and James, and John his brother, and leadeth them to a high
mountain apart; **2**. And was transfigured before them: and his face
shone as the sun, and his garments became white as the light.
**3**. And, lo, there appeared to them  <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472) Moses and Elijah talking with him.
**4**. And Peter answering said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be
here: if thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles; one for thee,
and one for Moses, and one for Elijah. **5**. While he was speaking, lo,
a bright cloud overshadowed them; and, lo, a voice out of the cloud,
which said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear him.
**6**. And having heard this, the disciples fell on their face,  <span
id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473) and were exceedingly afraid.
**7**. Then Jesus approaching touched them, and said, Arise, and be not
afraid. **8**. And when they had lifted up their eyes, they saw no man
but Jesus only.

<span id="ii.liv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.liv-p9"></span>**2**. And after six days Jesus taketh
Peter, and James, and John, and leadeth them to a high mountain apart by
themselves, and was transfigured before them. **3**. And his garments
became shining, exceedingly white as snow, so white as no fuller on
earth could make them. **4**. And there appeared to them Elijah with
Moses, and they were conversing with Jesus. **5**. And Peter answering
said to Jesus, Rabbi, it is good for us to be here: and let us make
three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
**6**. For he knew not what he said; for they were terrified. **7**. And
there came a cloud that overshadowed them; and a voice came out of the
cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son; hear him. **8**. And suddenly,
when they looked around, they saw no other person, but Jesus alone with
them.

<span id="ii.liv-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.liv-p11"></span> **28**. And it happened about eight days
after these words, and he took Peter, and James, and John, and went up
to a mountain to pray. **29**. And while he was praying, the appearance
of his countenance was changed, and his raiment became white and
dazzling.  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474) **30**. And, lo, two
men talked with him; who were Moses and Elijah; **31**. Who appeared in
a majestic form, and spoke of the decease which he would accomplish at
Jerusalem. **32**. And Peter, and they that were with him, were
overpowered with sleep; and when they awoke, they saw his glory, and the
two men who were with him. **33**. And it happened, while they were
departing from him,  <span id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475) Peter said
to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah: not
knowing what he said. **34**. And while he was speaking these words, a
cloud came and overshadowed them; and they were afraid as they entered
into the cloud. **35**. And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This
is my beloved Son; hear him. **36**. And while the voice was uttered,
Jesus was found alone.

<span id="ii.liv-p14"></span> 

<span id="ii.liv-p15"></span><span id="ii.liv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p16"></span>**<span id="ii.liv-p16.2"></span>[Matthew
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)<span id="ii.liv-p16.2"></span>.**
*And after six days.* We must first inquire for what purpose Christ
clothed himself with heavenly glory for a short time, and why he did not
admit more than three of his disciples to be spectators. Some think that
he did so, in order to fortify them against the trial which they were
soon to meet with, arising from his death. That does not appear to me to
be a probable reason; for why should he have deprived the rest of the
same remedy, or rather, why does he expressly forbid them to make known
what they had seen till after his resurrection, but because the result
of the vision would be later than his death? I have no doubt whatever
that Christ intended to show that he was not dragged unwillingly to
death, but that he came forward of his own accord, to offer to the
Father the sacrifice of obedience. The disciples were not made aware of
this till Christ rose; nor was it even necessary that, at the very
moment of his death, they should perceive the divine power of Christ, so
as to acknowledge it to be victorious on the cross; but the instruction
which they now received was intended to be useful at a future period
both to themselves and to us, that no man might take offense at the
weakness of Christ, as if it were by force and necessity that he had
suffered.  <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476) It would manifestly
have been quite as easy for Christ to protect his body from death as to
clothe it with heavenly glory.

<span id="ii.liv-p18"></span>We are thus taught that he was subjected to
death, because he wished it to be so; that he was crucified, because he
offered himself. That same flesh, which was sacrificed on the cross and
lay in the grave, might have been exempted from death and the grave; for
it had already partaken of the heavenly glory. We are also taught that,
so long as Christ remained in the world, bearing the form of a servant,
and so long as his majesty was concealed under the weakness of the
flesh, nothing had been taken from him, for it was of his own accord
that he *emptied himself*, (<span id="ii.liv-p18.1"></span>[Php
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.liv-p18.1"></span>;)
but now his resurrection has drawn aside that veil by which his power
had been concealed for a time.

<span id="ii.liv-p19"></span>Our Lord reckoned it enough to select
*three witnesses*, because that is the number which the Law has laid
down for proving any thing;

<span id="ii.liv-p20"></span>at the mouth of two witnesses or three
witnesses,  
(<span id="ii.liv-p20.2"></span>[De
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006)<span id="ii.liv-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.liv-p21"></span>The difference as to time ought not to give
us uneasiness. Matthew and Mark reckon *six* entire *days*, which had
elapsed between the events. Luke says that *it happened* *about eight
days afterwards*, including both *the* day on which Christ spake these
words, and *the day* on which he was transfigured. We see then that,
under a diversity of expression, there is a perfect agreement as to the
meaning.

<span id="ii.liv-p22"></span><span id="ii.liv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p23"></span>**2.** *And was transfigured before them.*
Luke says that this happened *while he was praying;* and from the
circumstances of time and place, we may infer that he had prayed for
what he now obtained, that in the brightness of an unusual form his
Godhead might become visible; not that he needed to ask by prayer from
another what he did not possess, or that he doubted his Father’s
willingness, but because, during the whole course of his humiliation, he
always ascribed to the Father whatever he did as a divine Person, and
because he intended to excite us to prayer by his example.

<span id="ii.liv-p24"></span>His *transfiguration* did not altogether
enable his disciples to see Christ, as he now is in heaven, but gave
them a taste of his boundless glory, such as they were able to
comprehend. Then *his face shone as the sun;* but now he is far beyond
the sun in brightness. In his *raiment* an unusual and dazzling
whiteness appeared; but now without *raiment* a divine majesty shines in
his whole body. Thus in ancient times God appeared to the holy fathers,
not as He was in Himself, but so far as they could endure the rays of
His infinite brightness; for John declares that not until

<span id="ii.liv-p25"></span>they are like him will they see him as he
is, (<span id="ii.liv-p25.1"></span>[1Jo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.liv-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.liv-p26"></span>There is no necessity for entering here
into ingenious inquiries as to the *whiteness* of his *garments*, or the
*brightness* of his *countenance;* for this was not a complete
exhibition of the heavenly glory of Christ, but, under symbols which
were adapted to the capacity of the flesh, he enabled them to taste in
part what could not be fully comprehended.

<span id="ii.liv-p27"></span><span id="ii.liv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p28"></span>**3.** *And, lo, there appeared to them
Moses and Elijah.* It is asked, Were *Moses and Elijah* actually
present? or was it only an apparition that was exhibited to the
disciples, as the prophets frequently beheld visions of things that were
absent? Though the subject admits, as we say, of arguments on both
sides, yet I think it more probable that they were actually brought to
that place. There is no absurdity in this supposition; for God has
bodies and souls in his hand, and can restore the dead to life at his
pleasure, whenever he sees it to be necessary. *Moses and Elijah* did
not then rise on their own account,  <span
id="fr_477"></span>[478](#fn_477) but in order to wait upon Christ. It
will next be asked, How came the apostles to know *Moses and Elijah*,
whom they had never seen? The answer is easy. God, who brought them
forward, gave also signs and tokens by which they were enabled to know
them. It was thus by an extraordinary revelation that they obtained the
certain knowledge that they were *Moses and Elijah*

<span id="ii.liv-p30"></span>But why did these two appear rather than
others who equally belonged to the company of the holy fathers? It was
intended to demonstrate that Christ alone is the end of the Law and of
the Prophets; and that single reason ought to satisfy us: for it was of
the utmost importance to our faith that Christ did not come into our
world without a testimony, but with commendations which God had formerly
bestowed. I have no objection, however, to the reason which is commonly
adduced, that *Elijah* was selected, in preference to others, as the
representative of all the Prophets; because, though he left nothing in
writing, yet next to Moses he was the most distinguished of their
number, restored the worship of God which had been corrupted, and stood
unrivaled in his exertions for vindicating the Law and true godliness,
which was at that time almost extinct.

<span id="ii.liv-p31"></span>*And they conversed with Jesus.* When they
*appeared* along with Christ, and held *conversation* with him, this was
a declaration of their being agreed. The subject on which they conversed
is stated by Luke only: they *talked of the decease* which awaited
Christ *at Jerusalem* This must not be understood to refer to them as
private individuals, but rather to the commission which they had
formerly received. Though it was now a long time since they had died and
finished the course of their calling, yet our Lord intended once more to
ratify by their voice what they had taught during their life, in order
to inform us that the same salvation, through the sacrifice of Christ,
is held out to us in common with the holy fathers. At the time when the
ancient prophets uttered their predictions concerning the death of
Christ, he himself, who was the eternal wisdom of God, was sitting on
the invisible throne of his glory. Hence it follows that, when he was
clothed in flesh, he was not liable to death any farther than as he
submitted to it of his own free will.

<span id="ii.liv-p32"></span><span id="ii.liv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p33"></span>**4.** *Lord, it is good for us to be
here.* Luke tells us that Peter uttered these words *while Moses and
Elijah were departing;* and hence we infer that he was afraid lest, at
their departure, that pleasant and delightful exhibition should vanish
away. We need not wonder that Peter was so captivated by the loveliness
of what he beheld, as to lose sight of every other person, and rest
satisfied with the mere enjoyment of it; as it is said in the psalm,

<span id="ii.liv-p34"></span>In thy presence is fulnessess of joy,
(<span id="ii.liv-p34.1"></span>[Ps
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="ii.liv-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.liv-p35"></span>But his desire was foolish; first, because
he did not comprehend the design of the vision; secondly, because he
absurdly put the servants on a level with their Lord; and, thirdly, he
was mistaken in proposing to build fading tabernacles  <span
id="fr_478"></span>[479](#fn_478) for men who had been already admitted
to the glory of heaven and of the angels.

<span id="ii.liv-p37"></span>I have said that he did not understand the
design of the vision; for, while he was hearing, from the mouth of
*Moses and Elijah*, that the time of Christ’s death was at hand, he
foolishly dreamed that his present aspect, which was temporary, would
endure for ever. And what if the kingdom of Christ had been confined in
this way to the narrow limits of twenty or thirty feet? Where would have
been the redemption of the whole world? Where would have been the
communication of eternal salvation? It was also highly absurd to
conceive of *Moses and Elijah* as companions of the Son of God, as if it
had not been proper that all should be reduced to a lower rank, that he
alone may have the pre-eminence. And if Peter is satisfied with his
present condition, why does he suppose that earthly supports were needed
by those persons, the very sight of whom, he imagined, was enough to
make him happy?

<span id="ii.liv-p38"></span>Justly, therefore, is it stated by two of
the Evangelists, that he *knew not what he said;* and Mark assigns the
reason, that *they were afraid;* for God did not intend that the
apostles should, at that time, derive any advantage from it beyond that
of beholding for a moment, as in a bright mirror, the divinity of his
Son. At a later period, he pointed out to them the fruit of the vision,
and corrected the error of their judgment. What is stated by Mark must
therefore mean, that Peter was carried away by frenzy, and spoke like a
man who had lost his senses.

<span id="ii.liv-p39"></span><span id="ii.liv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p40"></span>**5.** *Lo, a bright cloud overshadowed
them.* Their eyes were covered by *a cloud*, in order to inform them,
that they were not yet prepared for beholding the brightness of the
heavenly glory. For, when the Lord gave tokens of his presence, he
employed, at the same time, some coverings to restrain the arrogance of
the human mind. So now, with the view of teaching his disciples a lesson
of humility, he withdraws from their eyes the sight of the heavenly
glory. This admonition is likewise addressed to us, that we may not seek
to pry into the secrets which lie beyond our senses, but, on the
contrary, that every man may keep within the limits of sobriety,
according to the measure of his faith. In a word, this *cloud* ought to
serve us as a bridle, that our curiosity may not indulge in undue
wantonness. The disciples, too, were warned that they must return to
their former warfare, and therefore must not expect a triumph before the
time.

<span id="ii.liv-p41"></span>*And, lo, a voice from the cloud.* It
deserves our attention, that the *voice* of God was heard from the
*cloud*, but that neither a body nor a face was seen. Let us therefore
remember the warning which Moses gives us, that God has no visible
shape, lest we should deceive ourselves by imagining that He resembled a
man, (<span id="ii.liv-p41.1"></span>[De
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015)<span id="ii.liv-p41.1"></span>.)
There were, no doubt, various appearances under which God made himself
known to the holy fathers in ancient times; but in all cases he
refrained from using signs which might induce them to make for
themselves idols. And certainly, as the minds of men are too strongly
inclined to foolish imaginations, there was no necessity for throwing
oil upon the flame.  <span id="fr_479"></span>[480](#fn_479) This
manifestation of the glory of God was remarkable above all others. When
he makes a cloud to pass between Him and us, and invites us to himself
by His voice, what madness is it to attempt to place Him before our eyes
by a block of wood or of stone? Let us therefore endeavor to enter by
faith alone, and not by the eyes of flesh, into that inaccessible light
in which God dwells. *The voice* came *from the cloud*, that the
disciples, knowing it to have proceeded from God, might receive it with
due reverence.

<span id="ii.liv-p43"></span>*This is my beloved Son.* I willingly
concur with those who think that there is an implied contrast of *Moses
and Elijah* with Christ, and that the disciples of God’s own Son are
here charged to seek no other teacher. The word *Son* is emphatic, and
raises him above servants. There are two titles here bestowed upon
Christ, which are not more fitted to do honor to him than to aid our
faith: a *beloved Son*, and a Master. The Father calls him my *beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased*, and thus declares him to be the
Mediator, by whom he reconciles the world to himself. When he enjoins us
to *hear him*, he appoints him to be the supreme and only teacher of his
Church. It was his design to distinguish Christ from all the rest, as we
truly and strictly infer from those words, that by nature he was God’s
*only Son* In like manner, we learn that he alone is *beloved* by the
Father, and that he alone is appointed to be our Teacher, that in him
all authority may dwell.

<span id="ii.liv-p44"></span>But it will perhaps be objected, Does not
God love angels and men? It is easy to reply, that the fatherly love of
God, which is spread over angels and men, proceeds from him as its
source. The *Son* is *beloved* by the Father, not so as to make other
creatures the objects of his hatred, but so that he communicates to them
what belongs to himself. There is a difference, no doubt, between our
condition and that of the angels; for they never were alienated from
God, and therefore needed not that he should reconcile them; while we
are enemies on account of sin, till Christ procure for us his favor.
Still, it is a fixed principle that God is gracious to both, only so far
as he embraces us in Christ; for even the angels would not be firmly
united to God if Christ were not their Head. It may also be observed
that, since the Father here speaks of himself as different from the Son,
there is a distinction of persons; for they are one in essence and alike
in glory.

<span id="ii.liv-p45"></span>*Hear him.* I mentioned a little ago, that
these words were intended to draw the attention of the Church to Christ
as the only Teacher, that on his mouth alone it may depend. For, though
Christ came to maintain the authority of *the Law and the Prophets*,
(<span id="ii.liv-p45.1"></span>[Mt
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ii.liv-p45.1"></span>,)
yet he holds the highest rank, so that, by the brightness of his gospel,
he causes those sparks which shone in the Old Testament to disappear. He
is *the Sun of righteousness,* whose arrival brought the full light of
day. And this is the reason why the Apostle says (<span
id="ii.liv-p45.2"></span>[Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.liv-p45.2"></span>) that

<span id="ii.liv-p46"></span>God, who at sundry times and in various
ways spoke formerly by the Prophets, hath in these last days spoken to
us by his beloved Son.

<span id="ii.liv-p47"></span>In short, Christ is as truly heard at the
present day in the Law and in the Prophets as in his Gospel; so that in
him dwells the authority of a *Master*, which he claims for himself
alone, saying, *One is your Master*, *even Christ*, (<span
id="ii.liv-p47.1"></span>[Mt 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span
id="ii.liv-p47.1"></span>.) But his authority is not fully acknowledged,
unless all the tongues of men are silent. If we would submit to his
doctrine, all that has been invented by men must be thrown down and
destroyed. He is every day, no doubt, sending out teachers, but it is to
state purely and honestly what they have learned from him, and not to
corrupt the gospel by their own additions. In a word, no man can be
regarded a faithful teacher of the Church, unless he be himself a
disciple of Christ, and bring others to be taught by him.

<span id="ii.liv-p48"></span><span id="ii.liv-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p49"></span>**6.** *And having heard this* God intended
that the disciples should be struck with this terror, in order to
impress more fully on their hearts the remembrance of the vision. Yet we
see how great is the weakness of our nature, which trembles in this
manner at hearing the voice of God. If ungodly men mock at God, or
despise him without concern, it is because God does not address them so
as to cause his presence to be felt; but the majesty of God, as soon as
we perceive him, must unavoidably cast us down.

<span id="ii.liv-p50"></span><span id="ii.liv-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p51"></span>**7.** *Then Jesus approaching touched
them.* Christ raises them up when they had fallen, and by so doing
performs his office; for he came down to us for this very purpose, that
by his guidance believers might boldly enter into the presence of God,
and that his majesty, which otherwise would swallow up all flesh, might
no longer fill them with terror. Nor is it only by his words that he
comforts, but by *touching* also that he encourages them.

<span id="ii.liv-p52"></span><span id="ii.liv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p53"></span>**8.** *They saw no man but Jesus only.*
When it is said that in the end they saw Christ *alone*, this means that
the Law and the Prophets had a temporary glory, that Christ alone might
remain fully in view. If we would properly avail ourselves of the aid of
Moses, we must not stop with him, but must endeavor to be conducted by
his hand to Christ, of whom both he and all the rest are ministers. This
passage may also be applied to condemn the superstitions of those who
confound Christ not only with prophets and apostles, but with saints of
the lowest rank, in such a manner as to make him nothing more than one
of their number. But when the saints of God are eminent in graces, it is
for a totally different purpose than that they should defraud Christ of
a part of his honor, and appropriate it to themselves. In the disciples
themselves we may see the origin of the mistake; for so long as they
were terrified by the majesty of God, their minds wandered in search of
men, but when Christ gently raised them up, they saw him *alone* If we
are made to experience that consolation by which Christ relieves us of
our fears, all those foolish affections, which distract us on every
hand, will vanish away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_472"></span>[473](cc32055.htm#fr_472) <span
id="ii.liv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p6.1"></span>Et voyci,
ils veirent Moyse et Elie parlans avec luy;” — “and, lo, they saw Moses
and Elijah talking with him.”

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc32055.htm#fr_473) <span
id="ii.liv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p7.1"></span>Ce qu’ayant
ouy les disciples cheurent sur leur face en terre;” — “which the
disciples having heard, fell on their face to the earth.”

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc32055.htm#fr_474) <span
id="ii.liv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p12"></span> “<span
id="ii.liv-p12.1"></span>Resplendissant comme un esclair;” — “dazzling
like lightning.”

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc32055.htm#fr_475) <span
id="ii.liv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p13"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p13.1"></span>Et adveint
quarid ceux-la furent departis d’avec luy;” — “and it happened when
those men had departed from him.”

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc32055.htm#fr_476) <span
id="ii.liv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p17.1"></span>Comme si
par force et contreinte il fust renu endurer la mort;” — “as if by force
and constraint he had come to suffer death.”

<span id="fn_477"></span>[478](cc32055.htm#fr_477) <span
id="ii.liv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p29.1"></span>Moise et
Elie ne sont pas lors ressuscitez pour eux, et pour le regard de la
resurrection derniere;” — “Moses and Elijah did not then rise for
themselves, and with respect to the last resurrection.”

<span id="fn_478"></span>[479](cc32055.htm#fr_478) <span
id="ii.liv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p36"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p36.1"></span>Des
tabernacles terriens;” — “earthly tabernacles.”

<span id="fn_479"></span>[480](cc32055.htm#fr_479) <span
id="ii.liv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.liv-p42"></span> “<span id="ii.liv-p42.1"></span>Il
n’estoit ia besoin de ietter de l’huile au feu pour enflamber davantage
le mal;” — “there was no necessity for throwing oil on the fire to
inflame the evil still more.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 17:9-13; Mark9:9-13; Luke 9:36](cc32056)
