[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32019)  [Next](cc32021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 13:18-23; <span
id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Mark
4:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#013)<span id="ii.xix-p1.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.xix-p1.2"></span>[Luke
8:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p2"></span><span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
13:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#018)<span id="ii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p3"></span><span id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#013)<span id="ii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p4"></span><span id="ii.xix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#011)<span id="ii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p5"></span> **18**. Hear therefore the parable of the
sower. **19**. When any one heareth the word of the kingdom, and
understandeth not, that wicked one cometh, and taketh away what was sown
in the heart. This is he who received seed near the road. **20**. But he
that received the seed thrown into stony places, is he that heareth the
word, and immediately receiveth it with joy: **21**. But hath not root
in himself, but is of short duration: when affliction or persecution
ariseth on account of the word, immediately he is offended. **22**. And
he that received the seed among thorns is he that heareth the word, and
the care of this life, and the deceitfulness of riches, choke the word,
and it becometh unfruitful. **23**. But he who receiveth seed into a
good soil is he that heareth the word and understandeth it, and who
afterwards yieldeth and produceth fruit,  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) some a hundred-fold, some sixty-fold,
and some thirty-fold.

<span id="ii.xix-p7"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p8"></span> **13**. And he said to them, Know you not
this parable? and how shall you know all parables? **14**. The sower is
he that soweth the word. **15**. And there are some that (receive the
seed) near the road, in whom the word is sown; and when they have heard,
immediately Satan cometh, and taketh away the word which was sown in
their hearts. **16**. And in like manner there are others who receive
the seed into stony places, who, when they have heard the word,
immediately receive it with joy; **17**. And have not root in
themselves, but are of short duration: afterwards, when affliction or
persecution ariseth on account of the words, immediately they are
offended. **18**. And there are others who receive the seed among
thorns: these are they that hear the word, **19**. And the anxieties of
this life, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the desires of other
things, entering in, choke the word, and it is rendered unfruitful.
**20**. There are others who have received the seed into a good soil,
who hear the word, and receive it, and bear fruit, some thirty, some
sixty, some a hundred.

<span id="ii.xix-p9"></span> **11**. Now the parable is this: The seed
is the word of God. **12**. And they that (received the seed) near the
road are those who hear: afterwards cometh the devil, and taketh the
word out of their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.
**13**. For they that are on the rock are those who, when they have
heard, receive the word with joy: but these have not roots, who for a
time believe, and in the time of temptation fall away. **14**. And what
fell among thorns are those who have heard, and, going away, are choked
by the anxieties, and riches, and pleasures of life, and do not yield
fruit. **15**. And what fell into a good soil are those who, with a good
and upright heart, keep it, and yield fruit with patience.

<span id="ii.xix-p10"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p11"></span> 

<span id="ii.xix-p12"></span><span id="ii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p13"></span>According to Matthew and Luke, Christ
explains the parable to his disciples simply, and unaccompanied by a
reproof; but according to Mark, he indirectly blames them for being slow
of apprehension, because those who were to be the teachers of all did
not run before others.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) The
general truth conveyed is, that the doctrine of the Gospel, when it is
scattered like seed,  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) is not
everywhere fruitful; because it does not always meet with a fertile and
well cultivated soil. He enumerates four kinds of hearers: the first of
which do not receive the seed;  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)
the second appear, indeed, to receive it,  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) but in such a manner that it does not
take deep root; in the third, the corn is choked;  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) and so there remains a fourth part,
which produces fruit. Not that one hearer only out of four, or ten out
of forty, embrace the doctrine, and yield fruit; for Christ did not
intend here to fix down an exact number, or to arrange the persons, of
whom he speaks, in equal divisions; and, indeed, where the word is sown,
the produce of faith is not always alike, but is sometimes more
abundant, and at other times more scanty. He only intended to warn us,
that, in many persons, the seed of life is lost on account of various
defects, in consequence of which it is either destroyed immediately, or
it withers, or it gradually degenerates. That we may derive the greater
advantage from this warning, we ought to bear in mind, that he makes no
mention of despisers who openly reject the word of God, but describes
those only in whom there is some appearance of docility. But if the
greater part of such men perish, what shall become of the rest of the
world, by whom the doctrine of salvation is openly rejected? I now come
down to each class.

<span id="ii.xix-p19"></span><span id="ii.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p20"></span>**<span id="ii.xix-p20.2"></span>[Matthew
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019)<span
id="ii.xix-p20.2"></span>.** *When any one heareth the word of the
kingdom, and understandeth it not.* He mentions, in the first place, the
barren and uncultivated, who do not receive the seed within, because
there is no preparation in their hearts. Such persons he compares to a
stiff and dry soil, like what we find on a public road, which is trodden
down, and becomes hard, like a pavement. I wish that we had not occasion
to see so many of this class at the present day, who come forward to
hear, but remain in a state of amazement, and acquire no relish for the
word, and in the end differ little from blocks or stones. Need we wonder
that they utterly vanish away?

<span id="ii.xix-p21"></span>*That which was sown in their heart.* This
expression, which Christ employs, is not strictly accurate, and yet it
is not without meaning; for the wickedness and depravity of men do not
make the word to lose its own nature, or to cease to have the character
of seed. This must be carefully observed, that we may not suppose the
favors of God to cease to be what they are, though the good effect of
them does not reach us. With respect to God, the word *is sown in the
hearts,* but it is far from being true, that the hearts of all *receive
with meekness* what is planted in them, as James (<span
id="ii.xix-p21.1"></span>[Jas
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021)<span id="ii.xix-p21.1"></span>)
exhorts us to *receive the word.* So then the Gospel is always a
fruitful seed as to its power, but not as to its produce.  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198)

<span id="ii.xix-p23"></span>Luke adds, that *the devil*  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) *taketh away the seed out of their
heart, that they may not believe and be saved* Hence we infer that, as
hungry birds are wont to do at the time of sowing, this enemy of our
salvation, as soon as the doctrine is delivered, watches and rushes
forth to seize it, before it acquires moisture and springs up. It is no
ordinary praise of the word, when it is pronounced to be the cause of
our salvation.

<span id="ii.xix-p25"></span><span id="ii.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p26"></span>**20.** *But he that received the seed
thrown into stony places.* This class differs from the former; for
temporary faith, being a sort of vegetation of the seed,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) promises at first some fruit; but
their hearts are not so properly and thoroughly subdued, as to have the
softness necessary for their continued nourishment.  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) We see too many of this class in our
own day, who eagerly embrace the Gospel, and shortly afterwards fall
off; for they have not the lively affection that is necessary to give
them firmness and perseverance. Let every one then examine himself
thoroughly, that the alacrity which gives out a bright flame may not
quickly go out, as the saying is, like a fire of tow;  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) for if the word does not fully
penetrate the whole heart, and strike its roots deep, faith will want
the supply of moisture that is necessary for perseverance. Great
commendation is due, no doubt, to that promptitude, which receives the
word of God with joy, and without delay, as soon as it is published; but
let us learn, that nothing has been done, till faith acquires true
firmness, that it may not wither in the first blade.

<span id="ii.xix-p30"></span><span id="ii.xix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p31"></span>**21.** *When affliction or persecution
ariseth on account of the word.* By way of example, Christ says that
such persons are made uneasy by the offense of the cross. And certainly,
as the heat of the sun discovers the barrenness of the soil, so
*persecution* and the cross lay open the vanity of those, who are
slightly influenced by I know not what desire, but are not actually
moved by earnest feelings of piety. Such persons, according to Matthew
and Mark, are *temporary,*  <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) not
only because, having professed, for a time, that they are the disciples
of Christ, they afterwards fall away through temptation, but because
they imagine that they have true faith. According to Luke, Christ says
that they *believe for a time;* because that honor which they render to
the Gospel resembles faith.  <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) At
the same time we ought to learn, that they are not truly regenerated by
the incorruptible seed, *which never fadeth,* as Peter tells us, (<span
id="ii.xix-p33.2"></span>[1Pe 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)<span
id="ii.xix-p33.2"></span>;) for he says that these words of Isaiah, *The
word of God endureth for ever,* (<span id="ii.xix-p33.3"></span>[Isa
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span id="ii.xix-p33.3"></span>;
<span id="ii.xix-p33.4"></span>[1Pe
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#025)<span id="ii.xix-p33.4"></span>,)
are fulfilled in the hearts of believers, in whom the truth of God, once
fixed, never passes away, but retains its vigor to the end. Still, those
persons who take delight in the word of God, and cherish some reverence
for it, do in some manner *believe;* for they are widely different from
unbelievers, who give no credit to God when he speaks, or who reject his
word. In a word, let us learn that none are partakers of true faith,
except those who are scaled with the Spirit of adoption, and who
sincerely call on God as their Father; and as that Spirit is never
extinguished, so it is impossible that the faith, which he has once
engraven on the hearts of the godly, shall pass away or be destroyed.

<span id="ii.xix-p34"></span><span id="ii.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p35"></span>**22.** *And he who received the seed among
thorns.* He places in the third class, those who would have been
disposed to receive the seed within, if they had not permitted *other
things* to corrupt and render it degenerate. Christ compares to *thorns*
the pleasures of this life, or wicked desires, and covetousness, and the
other anxieties of the flesh. Matthew mentions only *the care of this
life,* along with covetousness, but the meaning is the same; for under
that term he includes the allurements of pleasures, which Luke mentions,
and every kind of desire. As corn, which otherwise might have been
productive, no sooner rises into the stalk than it is choked by thorns
and other matters injurious to its growth; so the sinful affections of
the flesh prevail over the hearts of men, and overcome faith, and thus
destroy the force of the heavenly doctrine, before it has reached
maturity.

<span id="ii.xix-p36"></span>Now though sinful desires exert their power
on the hearts of men, before the word of the Lord springs up into the
blade, yet, at first, their influence is not perceived, and it is only
when the corn has grown up, and given promise of fruit, that they
gradually make their appearance. Each of us ought to endeavor to tear
the *thorns* out of his heart, if we do not choose that the word of God
should be *choked;* for there is not one of us whose heart is not filled
with a vast quantity, and, as I may say, a thick forest, of *thorns.*
And, indeed, we perceive how few there are that reach maturity; for
there is scarcely one individual out of ten that labors, I do not say to
root out, but even to cut down the *thorns.* Nay more, the very number
of the *thorns,* which is so prodigious that it ought to shake off our
sloth, is the reason why most people give themselves no trouble about
them.

<span id="ii.xix-p37"></span>*The deceitfulness of riches.* Christ
employs this phrase to denote *covetousness* He expressly says, that
riches are imposing or *deceitful,* in order that men may be more
desirous to guard against falling into their snares. Let us remember
that the affections of our flesh, the number and variety of which are
incalculable, are so many injurious influences to corrupt *the seed* of
life.

<span id="ii.xix-p38"></span><span id="ii.xix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p39"></span>**23.** *But he that received the seed into
a good soil. None are compared by Christ to a good and fertile soil,*
but those in whom the word of God not only strikes its roots deep and
solid, but overcomes every obstacle that would prevent it from yielding
fruit. Is it objected that it is impossible to find any one who is pure
and free from thorns? It is easy to reply, that Christ does not now
speak of the perfection of faith, but only points out those in whom the
word of God yields fruit. Though the produce may not be great, yet every
one who does not fall off from the sincere worship of God is reckoned a
*good and fertile soil* We ought to labor, no doubt, to pull out the
*thorns;* but as our utmost exertion will never succeed so well, but
that there will always be some remaining behind, let each of us
endeavor, at least, to deaden them, that they may not hinder the fruit
of the word. This statement is confirmed by what immediately follows,
when Christ informs us that all do not yield fruit in an equal degree.

<span id="ii.xix-p40"></span>*Some a hundred-fold, and some sixty-fold,
and some thirty-fold.* Though the fertility of that soil, which yields a
*thirty-fold* produce, is small, compared with that which yields a
*hundred-fold,* yet we perceive that our Lord classes together all kinds
of soil which do not entirely disappoint the labors and expectation of
the husbandman.  <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) Hence too we
learn, that we have no right to despise those who occupy a lower degree
of excellence; for the master of the house himself, though he gives to
one the preference above another on account of more abundant produce,
yet bestows the general designation, *good,* even on inferior soils.
Those three gradations are absurdly tortured by *Jerome,* to denote
virgins, widows, and married persons; as if that produce which the Lord
demands from us belonged to celibacy alone, and as if the piety of
married persons did not, in many cases, yield more abundantly every
fruit of virtue. It must also be observed, in passing, that what Christ
says about a *hundred-fold* produce is not hyperbolical; for such was at
that time the fertility of some countries, as we learn from many
historians, who give their report as eye-witnesses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc32020.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p6"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p6.1"></span>Celuy qui
oit la Parole, et l’entend, a scavoir celuy qui porte et produit
fruict;” — “he who heareth the word, and understandeth it, that is he
who beareth and produceth fruit.”

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc32020.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p14"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p14.1"></span>Ne passent
autrement les autres pour leur monstrer le chemin;”— “did not go beyond
others to show them the road.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc32020.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ii.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p15"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p15.1"></span>Estant
espandue ca et la comme le b1e qu’on iette en terre;”— “being scattered
here and there, like the corn which is thrown into the earth.”

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc32020.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ii.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p16"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p16.1"></span>Desquels
les premiers ne retienent pas la semence en leurs coeurs pour germer;” —
“the first of which do not retain the seed in their hearts so as to
spring up.”

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc32020.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ii.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p17"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p17.1"></span>Les
seconds semblent bien l’avoir gardee iusques a venir a germer;” — “the
second appear to have kept it till it came to spring up.”

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc32020.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ii.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p18.1"></span>Aux
troisiemes, le ble estant en herbe est estouffe;” — “in the third, the
corn, while yet in the blade, is choked.”

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc32020.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p22"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p22.1"></span>Mais non
pas a ce qui s’accomplit es hommes;” — “but not as to what is
accomplished in men.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc32020.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ii.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p24"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p24.1"></span>Le
mauvais;” — “the wicked one.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc32020.htm#fr_200) <span
id="ii.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p27"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p27.1"></span>La foy
temporelle, qui est comme le germe de la semence;”— “temporary faith,
which is as it were the germ of the seed.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc32020.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ii.xix-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p28"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p28.1"></span>Mais les
coeurs ne sont point tellement cultivez et preparez, qu’ils ayant une
douceur pour nourrir et entretenir ce qui est commence;” — “but the
hearts are not so cultivated and prepared, as to have a softness for
nourishing and supporting what is begun.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc32020.htm#fr_202) <span
id="ii.xix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p29"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p29.1"></span>De peur
que ceste ardeur et alaigrete qui est de grand monstre pour le
commencement, ne s’en aille bien tost en fumee comme un feu d’estouppes,
ainsi que porte le proverbe commun;” — “lest that ardor and alacrity,
which makes a great show at the beginning, may soon vanish into smoke,
like a fire of tow, as the common proverb goes.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc32020.htm#fr_203) <span
id="ii.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p32"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p32.1"></span>Temporels,
c’est a dire, de petite duree;” — “temporary, that is to say, of short
duration.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc32020.htm#fr_204) <span
id="ii.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p33"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p33.1"></span>Ressemble
aucunement a la foy;” — “somewhat resembles faith.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc32020.htm#fr_205) <span
id="ii.xix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xix-p41"></span> “<span id="ii.xix-p41.1"></span>Esquelles
le laboureur ne perd pas du tout sa peine;” — “in which the husbandman
does not entirely lose his trouble.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 13:24-30, 36-43](cc32021)
