[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32007)  [Next](cc32009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Luke
10:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p2"></span><span id="ii.vii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
10:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p3"></span> **17**. And the seventy returned with joy,
saying, Lord, even the devils are subject to us in thy name.  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49) **18**. And he said to them, I beheld
Satan falling from heaven like lightning. **19**. Lo, I give you power
to tread on serpents and scorpions, and on all the power of the enemy,
and nothing shall hurt you. **20**. Nevertheless, rejoice not in this,
that the spirits are subject to you; but rejoice, because your names are
written in heaven.

<span id="ii.vii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ii.vii-p6"></span><span id="ii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p7"></span>**17.** *And the seventy returned.* It is
evident, that the faith of the *seventy* disciples in the words of
Christ had not been full and complete, when they *returned,* exulting
over it as a thing new and unexpected, that they had cast out *devils*
by the power of Christ. Nay, they had received this power accompanied by
a command. At the same time, I have no doubt that, when they departed,
they were convinced that nothing which the Master had said to them would
fail of its accomplishment; but afterwards, when the matter proceeded to
an extent which surpassed their expectations, they were astonished at
the sight.  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) And this is frequently
the case with believers, that they receive from the word but a slight
perception of the Divine power, and are afterwards excited to admiration
by actual experience. What was the nature of that joy will more clearly
appear from Christ’s reply.

<span id="ii.vii-p9"></span><span id="ii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p10"></span>**18.** *I beheld Satan* From one instance
Christ leads them to the whole class; for he commanded his Gospel to be
published for the very purpose of overturning Satan’s kingdom.  <span
id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) So then, while the disciples rested
solely on that demonstration which they had obtained from experience,
Christ reminds them, that the power and efficacy of their doctrine
extends farther, and that its tendency is to extirpate the tyranny which
Satan exercises over the whole human race. We have now ascertained the
meaning of the words. When Christ commanded that his Gospel should be
preached, he did not at all attempt a matter of doubtful result, but
foresaw the approaching ruin of Satan.  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) Now since the Son of God cannot be
deceived, and this exercise of his foresight relates to the whole course
of the Gospel, we have no reason to doubt, that whenever he raises up
faithful teachers, he will crown their labor with prosperous success.

<span id="ii.vii-p13"></span>Hence we infer, that our deliverance from
the bondage of Satan is effected in no other way than through the
Gospel; and that those only make actual proficiency in the Gospel, in
whom Satan loses his power, so that sin is destroyed, and they begin to
live to the righteousness of God. We ought also to attend to the
comparison which he employs, that the thunder of the Gospel makes *Satan
fall like lightning;* for it expresses the divine and astonishing power
of the doctrine, which throws down, in a manner so sudden and violent,
the prince of the world armed with such abundant forces. It expresses
also the wretched condition of men, on whose heads fall the darts of
Satan, who rules in the air, and holds the world in subjection under his
feet, till Christ appear as a Deliverer.

<span id="ii.vii-p14"></span><span id="ii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p15"></span>**19.** *Lo, I give you power.* This is
said by way of admission. Christ does not affirm that the gift of which
they now boast is not illustrious, but reminds them, that they ought to
keep their eye chiefly on something loftier still, and not remain
satisfied with outward miracles. He does not altogether condemn their
joy, as if it were groundless, but shows it to be faulty in this
respect, that they were immoderately delighted with a temporal favor,
and did not elevate their minds higher. To this disease even the godly
are almost all liable. Though the goodness of God is received by them
with gratitude, yet the acts of the Divine kindness do not assist them,
as they ought to do, by becoming ladders for ascending to heaven. This
makes it necessary that the Lord should, as it were, stretch out his
hand to raise them up, that they may not rest satisfied with the earth,
but may aspire to heavenly renovation. *The power of the enemy* is the
name given by him to every kind of annoyance; for all that is hostile to
us is wielded against us by Satan. I do not mean that every thing which
tends to injure men is placed at his disposal; but that, being armed
with the curse of God, he endeavors to turn to our destruction all his
chastisements, and seizes them as weapons for the purpose of wounding
us.

<span id="ii.vii-p16"></span><span id="ii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p17"></span>**20.** *Your names are written.* As it was
the design of Christ to withdraw his disciples from a transitory joy,
that they might glory in eternal life, he leads them to its origin and
source, which is, that they were chosen by God and adopted as his
children. He might indeed have commanded them to rejoice that they had
been regenerated by the Spirit of God, (<span
id="ii.vii-p17.1"></span>Titus 3:5,) and become *new creatures in
Christ,* (<span id="ii.vii-p17.2"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii-p17.2"></span>;)
that they had been *enlightened* (<span id="ii.vii-p17.3"></span>[Eph
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)<span id="ii.vii-p17.3"></span>)
in the hope of salvation, and had received *the earnest of the
inheritance,* (<span id="ii.vii-p17.4"></span>[Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="ii.vii-p17.4"></span>.)
But he intended to point out, that the source from which all these
benefits had flowed was the free election of God, that they might not
claim any thing for themselves. Reasons for praising God are no doubt
furnished by those acts of his kindness which we feel *within* us; but
eternal election, which is *without* us, shows more clearly that our
salvation rests on the pure goodness  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) of God. The metaphorical expression,
*your names are written in heaven,* means, that they were acknowledged
by God as His children and heirs, as if they had been inscribed in a
register.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc32008.htm#fr_49) <span
id="ii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p4"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p4.1"></span>Par ton
Nom;” — “by thy Name.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc32008.htm#fr_50) <span
id="ii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p8"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p8.1"></span>Ils furent
esmerveillez et esbahis de voir cela advenir;” — “they were astonished
and overwhelmed at seeing that happen.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc32008.htm#fr_51) <span
id="ii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p11"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p11.1"></span>A ceste
fin de renverser et destruire;” — “for the very purpose of overthrowing
and destroying.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc32008.htm#fr_52) <span
id="ii.vii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p12"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p12.1"></span>Christ n’a
point entreprins, ou essaye une chose a l’aventure, et de laquelle
l’issue fust incertaine: mais a veu que la ruine de Satan s’en
en-suyvroit;” — “Christ did not undertake or attempt a thing at random,
and the result of which was uncertain; but saw that the ruin of Satan
would follow from it.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc32008.htm#fr_53) <span
id="ii.vii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p18"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p18.1"></span>La pure et
simple bonte;” — “the pure and simple goodness.”

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc32008.htm#fr_54) <span
id="ii.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii-p19"></span> “<span id="ii.vii-p19.1"></span>Comme
s’ils estoyent escrits en une rolle, ou enregistrez en quelque livre;” —
“as if they were written in a roll, or registered in some book.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 11:25-30; Luke 10:21-22](cc32009)
