[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc32047)  [Next](cc32049) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 32: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part II*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p1"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>[Matthew
15:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>; <span id="ii.xlvii-p1.2"></span>[Mark
7:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p2"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
15:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#021)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p3"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
7:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p4"></span> **21**. And Jesus departing thence
withdrew into the territories of Tyre and Sidon. **22**. And, lo, a
woman of Canaan, who had come from those territories, cried saying, Have
compassion on me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously
afflicted by a devil. **23**. But he made no reply to her, and his
disciples approaching implored him, saying, Send her away; for she
crieth after us. **24**. But he answering said, I am not sent but to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel. **25**. And she came and worshipped
him, saying, Lord, help me. **26**. But he answering said, It is not
seemly to take the children’s bread, and throw it to the dogs.
**27**. But she said, Certainly, O Lord; yet the dogs eat of the crumbs
that fall from the table of their masters. **28**. Then Jesus answering
said to her, O woman, great is thy faith; be it to thee as thou
desirest. And her daughter was cured from that time.  <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413)

<span id="ii.xlvii-p6"></span> **24**. And he arose and departed thence
into the borders of Tyre and Sidon; and, entering into a house, he
wished that no man should know it, but he could not be concealed.
**25**. For a woman, whose daughter had an unclean spirit, no sooner
heard of him than she came and fell at his feet, **26**. (For the woman
was a Greek, a Syrophenician by birth,) and implored him to cast the
devil out of her daughter. **27**. And Jesus said to her, Allow the
children to be first satisfied; for it is not seemly to take the
children’s bread, and throw it to the dogs. **28**. But she replied and
said to him, Certainly, O Lord; for even the dogs  <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414) under the table eat of the children’s
crumbs. **29**. And he said to her, On account of that saying go away,
the devil is gone out of thy daughter. **30**. And when she had gone to
her own house, she found that the devil had gone out, and her daughter
lying on the bed.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ii.xlvii-p10"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p11"></span>In this miracle we are informed in what
manner the grace of Christ began to flow to the Gentiles; for, though
the full time was not yet come when Christ would make himself known to
the whole world, yet he intended to give some early manifestations of
the common mercy which was at length offered indiscriminately to Jews
and Gentiles after his resurrection. A remarkable picture of faith is
presented to us in the woman of Canaan, for the purpose of instructing
us by means of comparison, that the Jews were justly deprived of the
promised redemption, since their impiety was so shameful.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p12"></span>The *woman,* whom Matthew describes as
*of Canaan,* is said by Mark to have been *a Greek,* and *a
Syrophenician by birth* But there is no contradiction here; for we know
that it was the prevailing custom among the Jews to call all foreign
nations *Greeks,* and hence that contrast between *Greeks* and *Jews,*
which occurs so frequently in the writings of Paul. As she was a native
of *the territories of Tyre and Sidon,* we need not wonder that she is
called a *Syrophenician;* for that country was called *Syria,* and
formed part of *Phenicia.* The Jews disdainfully gave the name of
*Canaanites* to all the inhabitants of that district; and it is probable
that the majority of them were descended from the tribes of *Canaan,*
who when banished from their native country, fled to a sort of retreat
in the neighborhood. Both agree in this point, that the woman was a
native of a heathen nation, that she had not been instructed in the
doctrine of the law, and that she came of her own accord to Christ,
humbly to entreat his aid.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p13"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p14"></span>**<span id="ii.xlvii-p14.2"></span>[Mark
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p14.2"></span>***. He wished that no man should know it.*
We must attend to this circumstance, which is mentioned by Mark, that
when Christ came to that place, he did not erect his banner, but
endeavored to remain concealed for a time, in that obscure situation,
like a private individual. Mark speaks according to the ordinary
perception of the flesh; for, although Christ by his divine Spirit
foresaw what would happen, yet so far as he was the minister and
ambassador of the Father, he kept himself, as his human nature might
have led us to expect, within the limits of that calling which God had
given him; and in that respect it is said that what he wished, *as man,*
he was unable to accomplish. Meanwhile, this occurrence, as I have said,
tends powerfully to condemn the Jews, who—though they boasted that they
were the heirs of the covenant of the Lord, his peculiar people, and a
royal priesthood—were blind and deaf when Christ, with a loud voice and
with the addition of miracles, offered to them the promised redemption;
while this woman, who had no relationship with the children of Abraham,
and to whom, at first sight, the covenant did not at all belong, came of
her own accord to Christ, without having heard his voice or seen his
miracles.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p15"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p16"></span>**<span
id="ii.xlvii-p16.2"></span>[Matthew
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p16.2"></span>.** *Have compassion on me, O Lord.* Though
this woman was an alien, and did not belong to the Lord’s flock, yet she
had acquired some taste of piety;  <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415) for, without some knowledge of the
promises, she would not have called Christ the *Son of David.* The Jews
indeed had almost entirely departed, or at least had greatly turned
aside, from the pure and sound doctrine of the Gospel; but a report of
the promised redemption was extensively prevalent. As the restoration of
the Church depended on the reign of David, whenever they spoke of the
Messiah, it was customary for them to employ the name, *Son of David;*
and indeed this confession was heard from the lips of all. But when the
true faith had died out amongst them, it was an amazing and incredible
display of the goodness of God that the sweet savor of the promises
reached the neighboring nations. Though this woman had not been
regularly educated by any teacher, yet her faith in Christ was not a
notion adopted by her at random, but was formed out of the law and the
prophets. It was therefore not less absurd than wicked in that dog,
Servetus, to abuse this example for the purpose of proving that faith
may exist without promises. I do not deny that, in this sense, there may
sometimes be a sort of implicit faith, that is, a faith which is not
accompanied by a full and distinct knowledge of sound doctrine; provided
we also hold that faith always springs from the word of God, and takes
its origin from true principles, and therefore is always found in
connection with some light of knowledge.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p18"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p19"></span>**23.** *But he made no reply to her.* In
various ways the Evangelists bestow commendation on the faith of this
woman. Here they bring before us her unshaken constancy; for the silence
of Christ was a sort of refusal, and there is reason to wonder that she
was not cast down by this trial, but her continuance in prayer was a
proof of her perseverance. This appears, however, to be inconsistent
with the nature of *faith* and of *calling upon God,* as it is described
by Paul, who assures us that no man can pray aright till he has heard
the word of God.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p20"></span>How shall they call on him in whom they
have not believed?  
and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?  
(<span id="ii.xlvii-p20.3"></span>[Ro
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p20.3"></span>.)

<span id="ii.xlvii-p21"></span>Who then will say that this woman had
faith, who takes courage from her own feelings, though Christ is silent?
But as Christ has two ways of speaking and of being silent, it must be
observed, that though he withheld at that time the words of his mouth,
yet he spoke within to the mind of the woman, and so this secret
inspiration was a substitute for the outward preaching. Besides, her
prayer arose out of the *hearing of faith,* (<span
id="ii.xlvii-p21.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p21.1"></span>;) and, therefore, though Christ does not
immediately reply, she continually hears the sound of that doctrine
 <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) which she had already learned,
that Christ came as a Redeemer. In this way the Lord often acts towards
those who believe in him; he speaks to them, and yet is silent. Relying
on the testimonies of Scripture, where they hear him speaking, they
firmly believe that he will be gracious to them; and yet he does not
immediately reply to their wishes and prayers, but, on the contrary,
seems as if he did not hear. We see then that the design of Christ’s
silence was not to extinguish the woman’s faith, but rather to whet her
zeal and inflame her ardor. But if a small seed of doctrine in *a woman
of Canaan* yielded such abundant fruit, it ill becomes us to be
dejected, if at any time he delays and does not immediately grant a
favorable answer.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p23"></span>*Send her away.* The disciples present no
request in favor of the woman, but as they are annoyed by her
importunity, they desire that, in some way or other, she may be
dismissed. It is a childish contrivance, which the Papists have
endeavored to support by means of this passage, that departed saints are
allowed to plead for us; for, granting that this woman solicited the
disciples to give her some favor or assistance — which, however, cannot
be proved from the passage — still there is a wide difference between
the dead and living. It must be also observed, that, if they really
intended to aid her by their advocacy, they obtain nothing.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p24"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p25"></span>**24.** *I am not sent.* He informs the
Apostles that his reason for refusing the woman of Canaan arises out of
his desire to devote himself entirely to the Jews to whom alone he was
appointed to be a minister of the grace of God. He argues from the call
and the command of the Father, that he must not yield any assistance to
strangers; not that the power of Christ was always confined within so
narrow limits, but because present circumstances rendered it necessary
that he should begin with the Jews, and at that time devote himself to
them in a peculiar manner. For as I have said in expounding <span
id="ii.xlvii-p25.1"></span>[Mt
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p25.1"></span>*, the middle wall of partition* (<span
id="ii.xlvii-p25.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.xlvii-p25.2"></span>)
was not thrown down till after Christ’s resurrection that he might
proclaim peace to the nations which were aliens from the kingdom of God:
and therefore he prohibited the Apostles, at that time, from scattering
anywhere but in Judea the first seed of doctrine. Justly therefore, does
he affirm that, on this occasion, he was sent to the Jews only, till the
Gentiles also followed in the proper order.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p26"></span>*To the lost sheep of the house of
Israel.* He bestows the designation of *sheep of the house of Israel*
not on the elect only, but on all who were descended from the holy
fathers; for the Lord had included all in the covenant, and was promised
indiscriminately to all as a Redeemer, as he also revealed and offered
himself to all without exception. It is worthy of observation, that he
declares himself to have been *sent to LOST sheep,* as he assures us in
another passage that he *came to save that which was lost*, (<span
id="ii.xlvii-p26.1"></span>[Mt
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011)<span
id="ii.xlvii-p26.1"></span>.) Now as we enjoy this favor, at the present
day, in common with the Jews, we learn what our condition is till he
appear as our Savior.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p27"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p28"></span>**25.** *And she came and worshipped
him.* We might be apt to think that this woman contends with some
measure of obstinacy, as if she would extort something from Christ in
spite of him; but there is no reason to doubt that she was animated by
the conviction which she entertained as to the kindness of the Messiah.
When Christ expressly declared that it did not belong to his office, she
was not intimidated by that refusal, and did not desist from her
purpose. The reason was, that she adhered firmly to that previous
sentiment of faith which I have mentioned, and admitted nothing that was
opposed to her hope. And this is the sure test of faith, that we do not
suffer that general commencement of our salvation, which is founded on
the word of God, to be in any way torn from us.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p29"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p30"></span>**26.** *It is not seemly.* Christ’s
reply is harsher than ever, and one would think that he intended by it
to cut off all hope; for not only does he declare that all the grace
which he has received from the Father belongs to the Jews, and must be
bestowed on them, otherwise they will be defrauded of their just rights;
but he disdainfully compares the woman herself to a *dog*, thus implying
that she is unworthy of being a partaker of his grace. To make the
meaning plain to us, it must be understood that the appellation of *the
children’s bread* is here given, not to the gifts of God of whatever
description, but only to those which were bestowed in a peculiar manner
on Abraham and his posterity. For since the beginning of the world, the
goodness of God was everywhere diffused—nay, filled heaven and earth—so
that all mortal men felt that God was their Father. But as the children
of Abraham had been more highly honored than the rest of mankind, *the
children’s bread* is a name given to everything that, relates peculiarly
to the adoption by which the Jews alone were elected to be *children*
The light of the sun, the breath of life, and the productions of the
soil, were enjoyed by the Gentiles equally with the Jews; but the
blessing which was to be expected in Christ dwelt exclusively in the
family of Abraham. To lay open without distinction that which God had
conferred as a peculiar privilege on a single nation, was nothing short
of setting aside the covenant of God; for in this way the Jews, who
ought to have the preference, were placed on a level with the Gentiles.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p31"></span>*And to throw it to the dogs.* By using
the word *throw*, Christ intimates that what is taken from the Church of
God and given to heathens is not well bestowed. But this must be
restricted to that time when it was in Judea only that men called on
God; for, since the Gentiles were admitted to partake of the same
salvations—which took place when Christ diffused everywhere the light of
his Gospel—the distinction was removed, and those who were formerly
*dogs* are now reckoned among the children. The pride of the flesh must
fall down, when we learn that by nature we are *dogs* At first, no
doubt, human nature, in which the image of God brightly shone, occupied
so high a station that this opprobrious epithet did not apply to all
nations, and even to kings, on whom God confers the honor of bearing his
name.  <span id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) But the treachery and
revolt of Adam made it proper that the Lord should send to the stable,
along with *dogs*, those who through the guilt of our first parent
became bastards; more especially when a comparison is made between the
Jews, who were exempted from the common lot, and the Gentiles, who were
banished from the kingdom of God.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p33"></span>Christ’s meaning is more fully unfolded
by Mark, who gives these words, *Allow the children first to be
satisfied* He tells the *woman of Canaan* that she acts presumptuously
in proceeding — as it were, in the midst of the supper — to seize on
what was on the table.  <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) His
chief design was, to make trial of the woman’s faith; but he also
pointed out the dreadful vengeance that would overtake the Jews, who
rejected an inestimable benefit which was freely offered to them, and
which they refused to those who sought it with warmth and earnestness.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p35"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p36"></span>**27.** *Certainly, Lord.* The woman’s
reply showed that she was not hurried along by a blind or thoughtless
impulse to offer a flat contradiction  <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) to what Christ had said. As God
preferred the Jews to other nations, she does not dispute with them the
honor of adoption, and declares, that she has no objection whatever that
Christ should *satisfy* them according to the order which God had
prescribed. She only asks that some *crumbs* — falling, as it were,
accidentally — should come within the reach of *the dogs* And at no
time, certainly, did God shut up his grace among the Jews in such a
manner as not to bestow a small taste of them on the Gentiles. No terms
could have been employed that would have described more appropriately,
or more justly, that dispensation of the grace of God which was at that
time in full operation.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p38"></span><span id="ii.xlvii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p39"></span>**28.** *Great is thy faith.* He first
applauds the woman’s *faith*, and next declares, that on account of her
*faith* he grants her prayer. The greatness of her *faith* appeared
chiefly in this respect, that by the aid of nothing more than a feeble
spark of doctrine, she not only recognized the actual office of Christ,
and ascribed to him heavenly power, but pursued her course steadily
through formidable opposition; suffered herself to be annihilated,
provided that she held by her conviction that she would not fail to
obtain Christ’s assistance; and, in a word, so tempered her confidence
with humility, that, while she advanced no unfounded claim, neither did
she shut against her the fountain of the grace of Christ, by a sense of
her own unworthiness. This commendation, bestowed on a woman who had
been a heathen,  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) condemns the
ingratitude of that nation which boasted that it was consecrated to God.

<span id="ii.xlvii-p41"></span>But how can the woman be said to
*believe* aright, who not only receives no promise from Christ, but is
driven back by his declaration to the contrary? On that point I have
already spoken. Though he appears to give a harsh refusal to her
prayers, yet, convinced that God would grant the salvation which he had
promised through the Messiah, she ceases not to entertain favorable
hopes; and therefore she concludes, that the door is shut against her,
not for the purpose of excluding her altogether, but that, by a more
strenuous effort of faith, she may force her way, as it were, through
the chinks. *Be it unto thee as thou desirest*. This latter clause
contains a useful doctrine, that faith will obtain anything from the
Lord; for so highly does he value it, that he is always prepared to
comply with our wishes, so far as it may be for our advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_413"></span>[414](cc32048.htm#fr_413) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p5"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvii-p5.1"></span>Et des
ce mesme instant sa fille fut guairie;” — “and from that very instant
her daughter was cured.”

<span id="fn_414"></span>[415](cc32048.htm#fr_414) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p7"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvii-p7.1"></span>Car les
chiens mangent, *ou, mais aussi* les chiens mangent;” — “for the dogs
eat, *or, but even* the dogs eat.”

<span id="fn_415"></span>[416](cc32048.htm#fr_415) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p17"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlvii-p17.1"></span>Quelque goust de piete et vraye religion;” —
“some taste of piety and true religion.”

<span id="fn_416"></span>[417](cc32048.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p22"></span> “<span
id="ii.xlvii-p22.1"></span>Toutesfois ceste doctrine ne laisse pas
tousiours de retentir en son coeur;” — “yet that doctrine does not fail
to resound continually in her heart.”

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc32048.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p32"></span> This is probably an allusion to <span
id="ii.xlvii-p32.1"></span>[Ps
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="ii.xlvii-p32.1"></span>,
*I* *have said*, *Ye are gods; and all of you are* CHILDREN OF THE MOST
*HIGH*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc32048.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p34"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvii-p34.1"></span>De
vouloir ainsi mettre la main sur la table des enfans, au milieu de
souper;” — “in wishing thus to put her hand to the *children’s* table in
the midst of the supper.”

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc32048.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p37"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvii-p37.1"></span>Pour
se rebequer et heurter directement;” — “to give a saucy and open
contradiction.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc32048.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ii.xlvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.xlvii-p40"></span> “<span id="ii.xlvii-p40.1"></span>Ceste
femme, profane de nation;” — “that woman, a heathen as to her nation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 15:29-39; Mark 7:31-37, 8:1-10](cc32049)
