[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm22)  [Next](ssbm24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

### CHAPTER XXII

### THE PRACTICAL USE OF THE MAGIC OF THE MIRACLE

The first stage, that of investigating the ancient Huna system is
nearing its close. Little more can be done to further our knowledge of
it and to check conclusions already tentatively reached until news of
the investigation has spread and interest has been aroused so that
experimental groups can begin work.

Individuals may begin work by themselves and develop the ability to
accumulate high charges of low voltage vital force, then transfer it
with thought forms of healing to those to be healed. Almost anyone can
learn to use this low magic.

To learn to use the High Magic one has to get rid of hindering
complexes, and this is difficult to do for one's self. This difficulty
will be best met by group work in which one person assists another to
unlock the path of contact with the High Self.

Of course, one can skirt around his own sin or guilt complexes and try
for contact. Or, and this is a way open to all, the decision may be made
as to just what is wanted, the prayer formulated, and then repeated
frequently with the command held over the low self to give the prayer
and low mana to the High Self when automatic contact is made during
sleep. It is a slow method, but better than the blind prayer offered
without

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

an understanding of its mechanism or of the High Self.

Unfortunately there are no kahunas left to whom we can turn at this late
date for healing. We will have to develop our own healers, and this will
take organization and the selection of those naturally gifted for the
work of experimenting. Whether we act swiftly or tardily, depends on
ourselves. There are many who cannot wait too long for healers to become
trained, and love and mercy urge speed.

For these, however, there is hope, and for their use I offer here, in
ending my report of the ancient Science of Huna, these suggestions:

If one aspires to daily practice to learn to contact the High Self,
there are several things which will be of great help.

The first of these is the daily reading of writings which will bring
before one the desirability of the undertaking and its complete
possibility of success. We must never forget that we are creatures of
massive mental habits. We get into the habit of thinking certain things
in certain ways, and have to pull ourselves up by the bootstraps to
prevent the habits from making us give up the practice before the first
week is out.

Read each day the accounts given in my report if you wish to keep the
original urge to practice polished and to the fore. The Christian
Scientists understand this better than any group I know. The person who
desires healing of body or purse is set to a daily reading of the
writings which make the philosophy appear before the mind clearly and
impressively. The low self is impressed by the printed page. It is a
PHYSICAL

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> STIMULUS, and if
the middle self believes the printed teachings to be correct or even
workable, though illogical, the low self will gradually fall into line
and accept the ideas. On the other hand, if we do not reread the
material frequently, the low self will forget it. It will replace the
urge to practice with the old lazy urges to do less strenuous things.
Read. Reread. Read and read and read. This will help form a new habit of
thought. Thought habits are not all bad or obstructive. If a good
Christian has developed habits of mentation which make for faith and
trust in the Christian concept of God, this provides a bridge over which
the healing practices can pass swiftly. Quimby tied his teachings to the
already habituated beliefs of his patients. They believed that God could
not be anything but good. They had the complexed belief gained in
childhood that God was perfect, that He was good, and that He was
all-powerful. Building on these fixed and complexed habits of belief,
lodged in the low self and shared by the middle self, Quimby found it
easy to cause the patient to believe in his theory that illness and all
bad conditions could not exist because they were not of God, who was
perfect.

Our complexed beliefs can be a help as well as a hindrance. It is,
however, necessary for us to pull ourselves together mentally at daily
intervals and make a close and critical examination of our many
pertinent beliefs. We may have to dwell daily on the great Huna truth
which is for us the epitome of liberation—the truth that we cannot sin
against Higher Beings, and that there is no sin other than hurting
another human being. NO HURT, NO SIN! Shout it from the housetops

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

each hour for a year if needs be. At all costs GAIN THE SALVATION OF
LIBERATION FROM FALSE DOGMAS OF SIN. Or, if you fail in that, humor your
complexed low self and cease to do the things it stubbornly and blindly
insists on considering sinful.

In any event, READ. The literature of Huna is still scant, but one can
read Unity's "Daily Word" or similar publications, with their lessons
and affirmations to be repeated day by day. One who knows the secret
lore of the kahunas can translate all such readings into terms of Huna.
God becomes the High Self—for that is as high as we can ever reach—and
we can be very certain that any contact with the still higher Beings
will be made for us by the High Self.

The kahunas did not hesitate to use anything that came to hand so long
as it furthered their work. They welcomed doctors and enjoyed churches.
To them Huna was a thing alive and growing. They welcomed the early
missionaries, hoping that they would bring fresh and advanced knowledge
and better healing methods. They, like the Polynesian race as a whole,
showed the most surprising open-mindedness. They were eager for all
things new and good if they proved practical.

Huna is not crystallized and set and dead. It is a living, practical
system which holds fast to the proven while reaching out eagerly to
inspect anything new and promising. But those who aspire to benefit by
the ancient discoveries which compose the heart of the Secret, must also
be open and ready for change.

Read this report over and over, if you would break

<span id="page_367">p. 367</span>

your old habits of belief and profit by the new. At your first reading
you will catch the gleam. A week later you will try to recall what you
read and find it confused in your memory. That is because the new ideas
have clashed with the old ones you have had for years. If you reread the
report the gleam will return and stay longer. If you do not, the
confusion will increase and in a month you will forget that you ever
caught the gleam at all. The low self is the custodian of all our
memories and habits of thought and belief. It stores all our memories
and thoughts in its low shadowy body, and presides over them stubbornly
and illogically. It takes time and practice, reading and rereading, to
bring it into line and keep it there—ready to make contact with the High
Self.

 

While the experimental work carried on by individuals will be of great
importance, and while almost anyone may discover that he has unsuspected
talents in the use of both high and low magic, it is through the groups
that the best general advance on the pioneer fringe of the recovered
psycho-religious system of Huna will be made.

For instance, those who begin experimenting with the low magic, and use
the Baron Ferson method, or a variation of it, to build up an increased
charge of vital force in their bodies will need others upon whom to use
the force. The force will attract like a magnet if the hands are laid on
the shoulders of one less highly charged, then slowly withdrawn. The
force will leave one and enter another, carrying thoughts of healing,
and the

<span id="page_368">p. 368</span>

transfer of the force itself will make response to the healing thought
more effective.

The individual who has studied my report with care, will be able to plan
his own steps, and set himself a daily practice. As prayer is based on
telepathic ability (except during natural contact with the High Self
during sleep) the practice of telepathy is important. But in this work a
partner is absolutely necessary, and, in a group, tests can be made to
find out which people work best together. One person may concentrate on
a symbol, a picture, a word, etc., and the others in the group may
remain receptive and wait to see if they get impressions of a telepathic
nature from the sender.

A regularly formed group offers a stimulation of interest and the chance
to share one's findings. Organization and team work under an appointed
leader, with definite projects and meeting times, is far better than
unorganized work.

As experimentation goes forward, and individuals of proper talent begin
to get results in healing with low magic or healing with high magic,
with fire-immunity, changing the future, etc., it would be well to have
a central organization through which findings may be cleared from group
to group, and through which information concerning the newly developed
healers can be given to those desiring it. Bulletins giving the results
of group and individual experiments would be in order, and special
instructions should be issued covering specific needs as they arise.

Indications that we are entering a new period in our progress toward
world civilization is to be seen in the step from the age-long secrecy
of Huna to an open

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

knowledge available to all. The cult of secrecy fostered priesthoods,
and priesthoods fostered special privileges and usually ended in
imposition, the victims being the laymen.

While there will be those who possess certain natural talents which will
enable them to learn to use the kahuna methods and thus to become
healers, there will be no longer a blind of secrecy and mystery about
the methods used. The layman, while perhaps not aspiring to become a
professional healer of body or purse, will be able to read the
literature and know the principles of the new psycho-religious system.

This system, while based on ancient fundamentals, will undoubtedly move
ahead very rapidly when modern discoveries and laboratory methods are
brought into use. For instance, we can now measure and graph on paper
the electro-vital impulses which move through the brain at an average
speed of about ten to the second (as done by Prof. George L. Keezer of
Cornell with an electro-encephalograph) and in no long time we should
know more about the *mana* of the kahunas than they ever knew. This is a
machine age, and it is safe to predict that our recovery of the knack of
using Huna will be tied up with machines in various ways as we improve
steadily on the ancient practices.

The effect of a general knowledge of Huna on world social structures
will be fascinating to watch. Because we have had no sufficiently
detailed and workable psycho-religious knowledge, we have had no way of
unifying our ideas on these subjects. With Huna acting as a criterion
and catalytic agent, the chaos of ideas in these fields can be reduced
to order. A large part of

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

our social ills has come because, while we have come to know almost
everything else, the lost science of Psychology (with its much smaller
element of religion) was not recovered after the Dark Ages as was the
knowledge of mathematics, physics and astronomy. These early beginnings
made possible the swift building of a machine civilization, but left a
painful void where there should have been a workable knowledge of man
and his elemental parts, powers and associations in physical life, and
after physical death. Without the science of psycho-religion, we have
lived as animals in a way, prating about high ideals, and brotherhood,
but unable to do anything about it because we could not understand
ourselves. We have not known what we were, why we were here, or where we
were going. In other words, this department of life has been, and is,
disorganized and jumbled. We hurt each other, and unite in groups and
nations to make war on other groups and nations—a pretty spectacle for
intelligent beings in our stage of development.

If we can settle the basics in this field of knowledge, we shall be on
the road to apply that knowledge to the betterment of humanity, as we
now apply what we know to agriculture and animal husbandry. By freeing
ourselves from the blindly resisting dogmas of outmoded religions, we
will be able to take sensible and practical steps in a forward
direction, replacing the disorganized growth under the dispensation of
the animal-like low self by the dispensation of the middle self aided by
the High Self. It is as if our civilization had long been allowed to
grow as a form of wild life, creating tangled forest and jungle growths,
fields choked with

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

weeds, and with the ever-present danger of fire wiping all away. The
"wild growth" can be replaced with planned and ordered fields and
forests, so to speak, with firebreaks protecting the cultivated sections
from those still left wild.

While there will always be those die-hard individuals to whom a new idea
contrary to their fixed and dogmatic beliefs will act as a red rag to a
bull, and cause furious protests, it is plain that the average man or
woman, thanks to the public school system, is capable of approaching new
things with a fairly open mind. These, who form the great majority, need
only to organize and begin to work together to bring back the lost
science which is needed to complete and perfect the civilization which
we have all known for some time was mysteriously defective.

That we will organize and press forward may be taken for granted. In
every other line we have been swiftly progressive. The disaster of World
War II has made us more than eager to find some way in which to turn for
betterment, some answer to the shocking failure in the management of
human affairs. Disorganized, we remain a jungle growth. Organized, we
can move a world to order, let only each individual do his small part.

Union is strength, prosperity and safety. The High Beings ruling the
ants and bees demonstrate this. Rugged individualism and disunion, as
demonstrated by preying animals who eat other animals, and are in
constant danger of being eaten, represent the stage of growth in which
the hard lessons of life under Free Will must be learned. Following that
stage comes the

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

one which we have been missing so long; the stage in which the man
returns to united and cooperative effort, still possessing his free
will, but using it in the right relation to his fellows and their free
will. And, above all, in the right relation to the High Selves from
whence come both help and guidance.

We are at the turning of the road at last, and the prospect which lies
ahead, even when seen mistily through a time veil as yet, appears to be
very bright indeed.

THE END

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](ssbm24.md)
