[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

### APPENDIX

William Reginald Stewart, who found in the keeping of a North African
Berber tribe the same secret magical lore as that possessed by the
Hawaiians, was told by his native teacher that a special language was
necessary to the discussion of the elements of the Secret Lore.

While it is true that such a language is very handy for this use, we can
coin words or combine common words in any language to approximate the
meanings of words and word symbols used by the kahunas.

Of course, a century ago many words were still lacking in modern
tongues, such words as: vital force, subconscious, conscious and
superconscious.

If we were confronted today by the need to make up a list of terms
descriptive of the various elements in Huna psychology, we would,
undoubtedly, have recourse to symbols to cover more general meanings,
just as did the ancient discoverers of Huna. It is to be supposed that
the discoverers used psychic powers of observation to reach their
conclusions. For instance, they found that the electro-vital force in
the human body flowed, much as water flows. It followed a thread of
shadowy body substance as electricity follows a wire or as water follows
a pipe. Like water, it also flowed in a mass formation through the hands
of the healers into the patients. Like a vine, it divided itself in its
flow, going from the low self to the middle and to the High Self. Like
the vine, which bore clusters of grapes, this

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

climbing, dividing vital force carried clusters of thought forms upward
to the middle self or High Self from the low self.

The Hawaiian word for water is *wai*, which is shorter than the word
*mana*, for vital force of the voltage used by the low self. *Mana-mana*
means to branch out and move upward or outward as a growing vine. It
symbolizes the vital force when raised in voltage and used by the middle
self. *Mana loa* translates strongest vital force and represents the
high voltage of force used by the High Self. By using the short *wai*,
the kahuna indicated vital force in a general rather than a specific
way.

The word *mana*, for vital force is made of the roots *ma* and *na*
combined. *Ma* means to entwine as a vine does a tree. The root *na* has
a meaning not entirely clear in this connection, perhaps a formative or
an "ing" meaning as in English (see *ana*), but for the purposes of this
study it is sufficient to be able to identify in the word mana the
symbol of the vine.

Each of the three selves of man has its own invisible body. These were
spoken of by the kahunas simply as shadowy bodies, disregarding the fact
that there were three spirits in man and therefore three kinds of these
invisible bodies. *Aka* means shadowy and *kino* means body, while *lau*
means to spread out, four hundred, or signifies many, so, in the word
*kino-aka-lau*, we have the term applied to a ghost or spirit, the word
simply describing the ghost as one with several shadowy bodies,
therefore a normal ghost having three selves. Other words for ghost,
are: *wai-lua*, translating water-two, or a normal ghost with two
voltages of vital force, and, it is taken for granted, the usual two
selves and shadowy

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

bodies. (It was customary to leave out the High Self in the construction
of these terms as it was not believed to be closely associated in a
physical sense with the two lower selves and was not visible to psychic
sight); *kino-wai-lua*, translates, ghost-of-two-waters (voltages of
vital force); *aka-lau* translates shadowy (bodies)—many.

The foregoing will give an idea of how words were built up through the
use of both clearly defined words and roots and symbol-words.

Many of the words used by the kahunas to describe the elements of Huna
were made of combined roots which gave the words a general meaning,
while the roots gave other meanings which described the nature of the
thing named in the larger sense of the term. The word aka for shadowy,
is a good example. From its roots we get an excellent description of the
manner in which the shadowy body of the low self sticks to everything it
touches, pulling away only to leave an adhering thread of its shadowy
substance stretching out to an endless distance and remaining as a
permanent connecting thread of contact or communication. This thread is
not filled with vital force and is, for this reason, not activated under
ordinary conditions. But, once such a thread has tied together any
person and thing or any two persons, it may at any time be activated by
sending along it a flow of vital force, and by projecting a small
portion of the shadowy body to follow the thread and make it large and
stronger for the moments of contact. (It is to be recalled that sensory
organs may be projected in part with this shadowy substance, and may get
and send back sensory impressions, or thought forms of memories or

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

other impressions may flow back and forth, as in telepathy and mind
reading, or, as in prayer to the High Self.) The root *ka* in *aka* also
means a vine whose branches run and divide, linking the meaning of the
word directly to the idea that the *mana* flows along the shadowy
substance masses or threads. *Ka* also means to radiate out like rays of
the sun, symbolizing the radiation in all directions of the numberless
threads which connect every individual with the people and things he has
touched. An alternate meaning is that of moving from one place to
another, which points to the movement of vital force and thought forms
along the aka threads. (The very similar root *ka-a* means a thread or
cord, also a branch of a vine.) The root *ka*, doubled to make *ka-ka*
means a cluster as of grapes, and is the symbol of the cluster of
thought forms which compose a prayer as it is moved on a flow of vital
force along a shadowy thread from the low self to the High Self.

The word for "to think" is *mana-o* (or it may be divided into its roots
to give *mana-ao* or *ma-nao*). From a study of the meanings to be
derived from the root formations it is to be seen that the kahunas
believed that all thinking involved the use of *mana* or vital force
which divided itself in reciprocal flows between the low, middle and
High selves, but primarily between the low and middle. The component
root *o* holds the meaning of carrying something, in this case, thought
forms on a flow of vital force. It also means to reach out and pierce
something, as the shadowy body of another to whom telepathic thoughts
are sent, or of the High Self to whom prayer thought forms are
projected. As a symbol, *o* means to reach into a dark opening, feel
about,

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

find something, and pull it out. This is the kahuna way of symbolizing
the manner in which the middle self causes the low self to find the
stored thought forms of memories and present them to the middle self.
All thinking is done by recalling memories. Without memory there is
little or no thinking ability, the materials of rationalization being
lost. Still another meaning for this important little root is that of
calling for a desired thing, as for a memory, or as in making a prayer.
The root *nao* has a similar meaning, particularly that of the symbolic
reaching into a dark receptacle to find and pull out something. The root
*na* is often used to replace the root *ana*, which gives the meaning of
small round balls of substance, this being the symbol of the thought
forms, which are made of shadowy body substance by an action of vital
force, so that thinking (*m-ana-o*) includes the work of manufacturing
permanent thought forms which can be stored as memories or can be
duplicated and sent along shadowy threads in telepathy or prayer.

Because of its importance to Huna, vital force received much attention
from the discoverers of Huna when formulating definitive words. *Mana*
also means strength, power, intelligence, divided or branching out, and,
with the causative *hoo* (as *hoo-mana* or make *mana*), to worship or
reverence. This latter word, *hoo-mana* or *ho-mana*, has, in reality,
little connection with either reverence or worship, both these things
being rather foreign to the kahunas. The *o* meaning in hoo was probably
the secret one, and *ho* stresses the meaning of transfer or carry,
pointing to the carrying of thought

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

forms on the flows of vital force. *Aho*, including the same root, means
a thread, cord or line, as does the word *aha*. Another meaning of *aho*
was patience, suggesting that working with the prayer mechanisms
demanded much patience on the part of the person who made a prayer and
depended on the low self to send it along a shadowy thread to the High
Self.

The most complicated task confronting the makers of the original words
in Huna must have been that of uniting roots to describe in one short
word the many things composing the low self and the many things done by
it. The result of their early labors has come down to us in two
interchangeable words, *unihipili* and *uhinipili*. From these two
words, both of which mean the low or subconscious self, come an amazing
number of direct descriptions of the self in question, and also pointers
indicating elements and characteristics not so fully defined. Many of
the roots involved have as high as a dozen meanings. Only the ones
important to this study will be considered.

*U:* This root is a shortening of *au* as found in the word for the High
Self, *Au-ma-kua*. It means a "self" or spirit or entity, as a separate
and independent unit of consciousness, not as a part of another
consciousness. The root *u* also begins the word for the middle self,
*uhane* (which has but three roots). The secondary meanings of *u* (and
these are particularly applicable to the low self) are (1) to project,
indicative of the projection of threads of the shadowy body and flows of
vital force along them; (2) to impregnate or tincture or intermingle
with something else, which tells the story of

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

how the low self and middle self are intermingled in the physical body
as well as in their shadowy bodies; (3) to drip, leak or drizzle a slow
drip of water, this meaning symbolizing the manufacture of vital force
or mana by the low self, and its slow use in the work of living and of
supplying the middle and, at prayer times, the High Self.

*Nihi:* This root means to be thin and weak so as to appear almost
broken. It embodies the symbolic description of the shadowy threads when
they are not filled with vital force or activated—when they are as
nothing. *Hi:* Here we have the symbol of the flowing of vital force.
This root means to flow away, as water. Doubled to make *hi-hi*, the
meaning becomes a vine, and points directly to the other meanings held
in the vine and water symbols.

*Uhi:* This double root has the meaning of a veil, skin or other
covering. It symbolizes the covering of the lower selves by both the
physical body and the shadowy bodies. After death the shadowy bodies of
the low and middle selves remain interblended and act as a covering to
contain the selves or conscious entities, low and middle, but not the
High.

*Hini:* Like *Nihi*, this root combination gives the meaning of thin and
weak, as an unused thread of shadowy substance. It has a secondary
meaning of speaking with a weak voice, as ghosts are supposed to do.
(Both roots, especially *nihi*, give the meaning of silent, careful and
secretive action, also that of refraining from certain actions for fear
of displeasing those in authority. This indicates the way in which the
low self does much of its work without its activities being brought to
the attention

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

of the middle self. It also points to the manner in which a complex
causes the low self to refrain from certain actions.)

*Pi:* This root has several meanings, but the one important to
understanding the kahuna concept of the low self is that of water
flowing drop by drop, symbolizing vital force in the water symbol, and,
in the drops, which are small and round and almost invisible in rain,
the thought forms carried on a *mana* flow. Rain has been used as a
symbol combining this double meaning in prayers, and a further meaning
has been included, that of a return downpouring of vitalized thought
forms from the High Self—these taking the form of such conditions or
events as compose the answers to prayers. *Pili:* This root has the
meaning of sticking to a thing, as the shadowy body of the low self
sticks to whatever it touches. Upon drawing away after the touch, the
threads of shadowy substance are pulled out much as when one touches the
sticky balsam on flypaper. There is also the meaning of attaching
oneself to another as a servant, companion or close associate. This is a
very definite and direct statement of the relationship of the low to the
middle self.

The word for the middle self is *uhane*, and from the shortness of the
word and the little descriptive matter carried in its roots, it is to be
seen that the kahunas of old did not believe that the middle self had
much native ability other than that of using inductive reason. It was
the guest in the bodily house, the teacher, guide and master. The root u
has the meaning of a self, already discussed; ha is a pipe or channel
for water, and indicates the ability of the middle self to take and
convey

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

the vital force made by the low self; *ni* means to talk or whisper. It
may be noted that the ability to talk is peculiar to human beings and
sets them off as apart from the rest of the animal kingdom. The idea of
"talk" is found in the words used to name both the low and middle
selves.

*Au-ma-kua* for High Self, is one of three terms, the other two being,
*akua-noho* or "the god who dwells with men," and *akua-ulu*, "the god
who inspires men," as when a prophet sees the future and describes it.
In *Au-ma-kua*, *au* is a self, also a period of time, a flow of water,
an action of mind, and a condition in which one is entirely engaged in a
certain course of action or in a course of conduct. *Ma* is to entwine
as a vine. *Kua* is the high point of a land, as a mountain, giving the
symbol of the High Self as higher or more evolved than the middle or low
selves. The combined roots *makua* give the meaning of parent, so we
have in the full word, *Aumakua*, the "older, entirely trustworthy
parental self." The word *akua* has been translated "god," but it has
more nearly the meaning of a higher being, thus a being supposed to be a
step higher in the evolutionary scale than the *Aumakua* is called the
*Akua Aumakua*. In *Aumakua* the root word *akua* stands out clearly
(*Au-m-akua*, a formation which might give the word *aum* or *om* used
in Oriental religions. It is to be guessed that in their travels from
near Egypt to the South Seas, the kahunas left behind them some of their
Huna ideas as they touched various lands on the route).

The root *la* is part of many words used as symbols. It means the sun or
light. It is the symbol of the normal

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

condition when a man is free of complexes of guilt and his low self is
in proper contact with the High Self, delivering to the High Self the
prayers of the man as well as the vital force to be used to make the
"seeds" or thought forms of the prayer "grow" and become the prayed-for
condition. Spirituality (to use the word in the Western sense) is
symbolized by light. *La-a* is to be consecrated and holy. *A-la* is a
path, and symbolizes the normal path of connection along a connecting
shadowy thread, with the High Self. *Ka-la* is to cleanse ceremonially
to remove guilt fixations which "block the path." *Ka* is to radiate or
reach between two places, and *la* is the Light, so this cleansing is a
process that involves reaching to touch the source of the symbolic
Light, the High Self. *La-la* means to branch out or divide, which is a
pointer toward the vine and the general symbology of vital force,
indicating the relation of vital force and the connecting shadowy cord
leading to the High Self. *Hoo-lala* in which the first root is the
causative, gives the meaning of to make or lay a foundation for a
work—this suggesting that a prayer with the division of vital force lays
the foundation for an answer to the prayer.

*Ho-ano* is translated, "to reverence in the highest degree," and this
meaning was given the word in translating the Bible into Hawaiian over a
century ago. From the roots of the word comes a meaning quite unlike the
Christian idea of "reverence." The meaning derived is, from *ho*, to
transfer something from one place to another, and from *ano*, seeds. To
transfer seeds symbolizes sending thought forms of prayer along

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

the shadowy cord to the High Self. *Ano* also has the meaning of
"immediately" which connects this prayer process with immediate or
instant healing.

*Hoo-la* means to heal. From the roots it translates, "to cause light,"
and this causing of light or restoring the normal relation to the High
Self, symbolizes the basic element in healing. Two very similar words
are used for "to pray for something desired," these are *wai-ha* and
*wai pa*. In both may be seen the word for water, *wai*, symbolizing
vital force. In the first word the root *ha* means the tube or channel
through which water is made to flow, showing that prayer is a process in
which vital force flows to the High Self, and the expanded root *a-ha*
gives the meaning of the thread or cord. In the root *pa* as used in the
second word given for "to pray for something desired," we find the
meaning of "to divide," which is the symbol of dividing or sharing vital
force as between the low and High selves.

There are many, many other words in the language used by the kahunas,
which contain the direct or symbolic root meanings. One may safely
conclude that such a closely interlocked set of meanings could not have
been accidental. Modern usage follows the pattern laid down by the early
Missionaries to Hawaii, who knew nothing of the science of Psychology
and were not initiates into Huna. For this reason it is very natural
that modern students of the Hawaiian language should object to root
translations as used in this study. However, until such students can
also show why hundreds of similar words should not have been translated
according to the meanings of their roots by the Missionaries and by
Lorrin Andrews when making his dictionary in 1865, it seems

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

safe enough to use root translations so long as the general meanings
average up.

Without such root translations it is impossible to see the slightest
reason for certain meanings having been given certain words. As an
example, there is the word for "prophet," *ka-u-la*. This word means a
rope, a cord or a string. Such meanings seem utterly foreign to the
secondary meaning of "Prophet," but if one has a knowledge of the kahuna
belief that a prophet gets his information concerning the future from
the High Self, by way of a shadowy cord of connection, the implications
become clear. The root *ka* has the familiar meaning of to reach from
place to place as the shadowy cord. The root *kau* means to put
something in a high place, as thought forms of a prayer for vision of
the future, in the shadowy body of the High Self. The root *la*
completes the picture by symbolizing the form of enlightening knowledge
which comes only from the High Self.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

The various steps in the healing processes of Huna may be traced through
the terms used by the kahunas. These terms, when translated through
their root meanings and given additional meanings through the symbols
used, furnish an insight into the theory as well as the practice of
healing and related rites.

To heal a person of physical or mental ills, or to cause his future to
change for the better, the preliminary step is that of the *ka-la* or
cleansing away of guilt and other fixations which block the path of free
contact with the High Self of the patient. Hurts done to others must be
stopped and old hurts made good. The attacks

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

of spirits seeking to avenge the ones hurt must be stopped, if there are
any. The cleansing rite of *ka-la* reopens the path of connection with
the High Self.

With the symbolic "path" opened to its normal condition, the prayer for
the desired condition is to be made. This is a step involving three
elements or actions. (1) A surcharge of vital force must be gathered by
the officiating kahuna. (2) The prayer must be decided upon in detail
and then thrice spoken to cause it to be made into a strong cluster of
thought forms to be sent to the High Self, and (3) The High Self must be
contacted and the prayer sent to it on a flow of vital force along the
connecting shadowy cord.

Action No. 1 is *hoo-mana* or "make *mana*." The dictionary translation
for this word is "to worship," which is not at all what the roots
suggest. Action 2 is *hoo-ano-ano*. The dictionary gives this word the
meaning of "to solemnize the mind as for worship." The root translation
gives several most important and illuminating meanings: (A) To make
seeds, which symbolizes the making of the thought form cluster of the
prayer. (B) To make an image, likeness or form, which is exactly what
the making of the thought forms of the prayer accomplishes—a mental
image of the thing desired. (C) To make a change or transformation of
something, in this case a change from the present unwanted condition to
the desired condition prayed for. (D) To make something new, which would
be the purpose of a prayer for a new condition instead of a change in a
condition already present. Action No. 3 was described in the usual
prayer endings of the kahunas when

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

they said, "*Amama ua noa. Lele wale akua la*." The external translation
of these two phrases is given by Thrum as, "The prayer takes flight. Let
the rain of blessings fall." However, the roots tell another story and
show that Thrum reversed the sequence of the phrases. *Amama* means to
give to the gods; *ua* is rain, which is the symbol of the vital force
or thought forms (small balls of water symbolic of thought forms), and
is the thing given; *noa* means to finish a prayer rite and has the
translation of "release," in this case meaning to let the vital force
and the thought forms pass from the low self to the High Self. In the
second phrase, *lele* means to take upward flight, and symbolizes the
movement of the prayer to the High Self. *Wale* has a strange meaning
which cannot be translated by any English word. This is to act or do
something without limitations being put on the means to be used. It
means, also, to exist in a state of being not limited by time or
space—in short, it describes well indeed the fact that we lower selves
cannot understand the ways in which the High Self works to produce for
us answers to our prayers. *Akua la* tells to whom the prayer has been
sent, the High Self in its realm of symbolic Light. A secondary meaning
in this phrase is to be found in the combined words giving *lelewale*,
which has the general sense of asking for the "falling" or return
descent of thought forms from the High Self to act as an omen to tell
whether or not the prayer will be granted.

When a prayer has been made, faith in the outcome is demanded in
Christianity, so we look for the word for "faith" to see what the
kahunas believed about faith.

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Their word was
*pau-lele*, which means "to stop flying upward," and indicates a
condition of confidence in which one stops praying.

The condition of being healed is called *hoo-la* which means that the
normal contact with the Light or High Self has been reestablished. A
variation of the word is *hoo-ola* meaning "make life." In *o-la* the
roots show that life depends on the symbolic action (*o*) of touching
the High Self (*la*). The kahunas recognized no Salvation and no Savior,
such as are found in many religions. For them salvation was a normal
condition in which normal intercourse with one's High Self was
maintained, either in physical life or in the after death state in which
life continued in the shadowy bodies amidst the dream-like images of
familiar surroundings.

If a prayer had been made for a supply of worldly goods, the supply was
called by the kahunas, *la-ko*, which, from the roots gives "to possess
Light." It was believed that the High Self could provide all the
necessities for the life and well-being of the lower selves, provided
the normal contact was maintained in workable condition.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

It is evident that many words and phrases used by the kahunas are now
lost. They do not appear in the dictionaries of Polynesian dialects, and
there are no longer kahunas who know the whole of the ancient Secret.

No word has been found for fire-walking, to give one example, although
this ceremonial demonstration of the power of prayer to the High Self
was part and

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

parcel of the lives of the Hawaiians less than a century ago.

.      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .

#### <span class="smallcaps">Note on the Stage Magician Who Used Genuine Fire Magic:</span>

The stage magician who used genuine magic in his performances, came to
see from my questioning that I would understand him if he told me the
truth about his training and his performance. He had been born of white
parentage in India and left an orphan in an isolated district. Native
fire-walkers adopted him and set to work to teach him their art at an
early age. He sat for a time each day before a small butter lamp trying
to sense the god behind the flame. His elders frequently demonstrated
their ability to pray to the god of the flame and gain fire-immunity.
They held their hands over the flame without injury and, under their
protection, the boy also did. Little by little he became aware of a
conscious something connected with the flame but invisible and
intangible. In due time he became able to ask for fire-immunity and get
it. He underwent no purification process or ritual, observing only the
rule that he do nothing to injure others or to make himself ashamed. In
adult life he observed these rules and, upon beginning his fire
performance did not need to make a prayer. At contact with the flame or
heat he seemed automatically to make an inner prayer and receive the
usual protection. His wife had learned to climb a ladder of naked sword
blades from Japanese religionists. (These magicians who roll on broken
glass

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

and whose cuts are healed instantly by a word from the master of
ceremonies, have been mentioned in the text of my report.) Both these
performers had been given a form of "introduction" to High Self types of
Beings in their early training, much as had the student kahunas in
learning weather control.

 

THE DEATH PRAYER (see note at end of Chapter 4). This is called
*ana-ana* in Hawaiian, but the word can apply to any form of divination
or sorcery. The word has also a meaning of "tremble from great fatigue"
indicating the fact that death is brought about through a loss of vital
force. The root *ana* means to be "satiated with food," and indicates
the fact that the attacking spirits draw their fill of vital force from
the victim and become satiated as they bring about his death. The full
word has also the meaning of something occurring "in small balls," which
is the standard Huna symbol for the thought forms, which, in the death
prayer were given to the attacking spirit to implant in the center of
consciousness of the low self of the victim to force him, as with
superhypnotic suggestion to allow the attackers to fasten themselves to
his shadowy body and drain away all vital force. (Quoted phrases above
are taken from the Hawaiian-English dictionary.)

 

 

 
