[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm14)  [Next](ssbm16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

### CHAPTER XIV

### STARTLING NEW AND DIFFERENT IDEAS FROM THE KAHUNAS CONCERNING THE NATURE OF THE COMPLEX AND HEALING

What the doctors and psychologists have failed to see clearly is the
rather startling fact that the subconscious or low self is not the only
one afflicted with fixations of ideas—the complex.

Freud, Jung, Adler—all of them fixed their attention on the
subconscious, not realizing that the conscious self had similar and
equally dangerous fixes.

The astounding truth is that almost all persons have CONSCIOUS BELIEFS
OR OPINIONS WHICH ARE FULLY AS FIXED AS ARE THOSE OF THE LOW SELF. For
instance, take some outstanding examples which will be instantly
familiar to all of us. There is the person who is set in some political
belief. He has passed beyond all appeals to common sense and logic in
his rabid belief that his political party is right and all others are
wrong. He will not listen to any argument against his convictions. Any
effort to point to parts of his belief that are wrong will be met with
anger and loud resentment.

A similar example can be found in any of the millions who have accepted
a religion, and who close their minds

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

entirely against any possible change of their opinion. New facts, new
findings, or new circumstances make not the slightest impression on
these individuals. They have developed a complexed set of beliefs or
opinions which are SHARED BY BOTH LOW AND MIDDLE SELF.

Here is another secret from the lore of the kahunas: if you wish to know
whether a person has a complexed belief which is shared by his low self,
watch to see whether the *emotions* react to any suggestion that the
beliefs might be less than correct.

If you say to a Republican, "I think the Republicans are making a
mistake about last week's legislation," and if you are met with an
emotional reaction instead of a quiet consideration of the reasons you
may go on to give for your opinion, there is a complex behind the
political beliefs of the man.

Criticize a man's religion and watch in the same way for the nature of
the reaction. The low self is the only one responsible for emotional
reactions. The middle self reacts only with logic and reasoning unless
it is entangled with the low self in holding complexed views, in which
case reason fails to begin to function as emotions flare.

A man's political complexes, fortunately, seldom react on his health.
His religious fixations frequently cause endless illness and misfortune.

The kahunas knew what the psychoanalyst has overlooked to a painful
extent. It is the fact that when a man has "sinned" and his low and
middle self agrees that he has sinned, the low self may have a fixed
idea that punishment must be given for sin. If this is the

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

case, the low self may set about punishing the man through illness or
accidents.

The point can be illustrated by the case reported by a psychoanalyst, of
a young man who had been brought up by an aunt who had given him a very
strict religious training. As he finished high school he felt the urge
to take up the ministry, but gave up the idea to take a job in a
furniture factory. In the factory the paint and varnish fumes sickened
him. He was sent to the wood working department, and the sawdust gave
him asthma. He got another job and then another. In every case he was
made ill by something connected with the job. He chanced to fall into
the hands of a doctor who recognized the symptoms as the indications of
a deep-seated complex. His original complex had been formed when he had
given up the idea of devoting his life to religious service in the
ministry. The low self had shared with the middle self a deep sense of
guilt for refusing to give his life to the service of God. Because it
was painful to think of the refusal, the young man had shut away the
memory of it. But that memory had remained in the low self as a part of
the fixation of guilt. As he had been taught that all sins and guilts
are punished by God, his low self had expected and feared punishment.
However, as the middle self refused to think about the sin of refusing
to go into the ministry, the low self did what is known as "translating"
or changing the externals of the complex. It hid its anxiety to have the
man become a minister behind a dislike that amounted to illness for
every other occupation.

The doctor, after the usual questioning and observation period, dug out
the cause of the trouble, but instead

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

of being able to point out the source of the fixation and so rationalize
and drain it off, he met a new obstacle. When the young man was forced
to recall his refusal to enter the ministry, he was still convinced that
he had been guilty before God of a great sin of omission.

The doctor tried to argue with him and met a blank wall. The patient
would not listen to reason. He became angry and insisted on denouncing
himself. In the end he was advised to enter the ministry to regain his
health. He did as advised and his illnesses vanished.

In this case the complex was not removed. It could not be removed in the
ordinary way because it was held by low and middle selves alike. Reason
could not get a hearing. The only remedy was to let him act in such a
way that he would obey the dictates of the dual fixation.

In his report, the doctor showed his failure to recognize the complex as
a part of the conscious mind of the patient. He wrote: "… although the
fixation was at last brought to light and submitted to the usual process
of rationalization, it became evident that it had not been removed. Upon
making a visit to the furniture factory where the first symptoms
developed, the smell of paint and of wood sandings sickened him in turn.
Recovery came only after the fixation was accepted as immutable and a
school for ministers was entered."

The urgency of the need for better understanding of the single and dual
complex and the ways to combat them may be realized when one considers
the dire fact that one out of every family of six will eventually need
treatment on this score. Unfortunately the present methods of treatment
are far inferior to those formerly

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

used by the kahunas. The most effective method is "deep analysis," but
this takes months of time and mints of money. If a cursory review of the
case and a small amount of treatment by suggestion does not bring a
cure, the patient has an alarming chance of joining the throngs which
crowd the hospitals for the insane.

A complex of simple nature or a dual one shared by both selves, if not
allowed to have its way, creates a "house divided against itself" which
certainly will fall—into insanity, or chronic invalidism.

Dr. Edward S. Cowles, famous for his "soul clinics," said a few years
ago that he was certain that the mental conflicts caused by fixations
were the direct cause of the steady lowering of "nerve energy" which, if
continued, ended in disaster. He explained that if the usual supply of
nerve energy or vital force falls slightly below normal, the individual
begins to feel a lack of spirit and cheerfulness. This turns to a
feeling of depression. Further depletion results in melancholia, and
there come the progressive symptoms as depletion continues: deeper
states of depression, hysteria, fear, nervous breakdown, mania, and
psychosis. The dismal fringe of insanity is touched. If one continues to
sink lower, exhaustion brings helpless insanity in which reason is lost
and memory vanishes. In this condition the patient lies inert and must
be artificially fed.

It might be added that during the gradual depletion, there is always the
danger that a poltergeist type of low self which has been separated from
its middle self, may drive out the selves of the ailing body and obsess
it. In these cases there is a return of physical energy but, with

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

the original low self deposed, memories are gone, and with the original
middle self gone, all reason is lacking.

With violent death so frequent in the two World Wars, it is inevitable
that there are more of these ghostly low self spirits of the poltergeist
class abroad awaiting a chance to seize a body and obsess it. We
continually read articles calling attention to the alarming increase of
insanity. At the present rate of increase, some estimate, we shall in a
few years have so many insane that there will not be enough sane people
to feed and care for them.

In self defense we need to learn what methods were successfully used by
the kahunas to combat the complex in its single and dual form, and to
treat the unfortunate victims of obsession.

For the moment let us take up the first part of the problem.

#### <span class="smallcaps">Case 25</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Kahunas Treat Illness Caused by Dual and Single Complexes</span>

*Preliminary Notes:*

Because modern psychology is so young and so little advanced, it offered
little help when I tried to understand the significance of the things
the kahunas did in treating patients to remove complexes. Their success
proved to me that they had a very superior method, but from a close
study of what they did, I was unable to learn what action of mind they
used or what force was employed, both of these things being invisible
and silent in operation. Only from the externals of treatment and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

ritual could I draw conclusions. Much later I was able to see what
actually took place.

*The Cases:*

\(A\) There was a driver of "rent" cars in Hawaii in 1926, a handsome,
healthy and charming Hawaiian. He had been brought up by a very
religious father and had married a very religious wife. He attended
church faithfully.

A few years after his marriage he fell violently in love with another
woman, even though he remained devoted to his wife. He was much
afflicted by his conscience, and greatly oppressed by a sense of guilt
for having sinned. His wife discovered his infidelity but, after a
stormy scene, forgave him on his promise that he would not repeat his
offense.

However, before a year had passed, he had again fallen by the wayside.
This time he was not found out, but his sense of guilt was greater than
before.

At this time he happened to catch cold. The cold took on the symptoms of
influenza, and despite excellent medical care and nursing, he failed to
recover. On the contrary, he gradually became weaker and weaker. He lost
interest in his surroundings, refused food, and turned his face
resolutely to the wall.

His wife, after hearing the verdict of the doctor that he could not live
more than another day or two, called in one of the few remaining kahunas
who were at work in Honolulu at that late date.

The old kahuna listened carefully to the wife's account of what the
white doctor had said. He asked a few questions, and then began his
treatment. He bared the body of the sick man and began to rub him
slowly.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> From time to time
he paused and rubbed his own hands slowly together, then applied them to
the sick man's back, chest or head, always telling in a low voice how he
was pouring strength into the patient to make him strong.

After a time he began questioning the man, asking what he might have
done that had hurt someone—had been a sin. At first he was met by a
stubborn refusal to answer, but finally the sin was blurted out. After
making his confession the patient asked to be let alone to die in peace.

The kahuna, however, reasoned gently. He called in the wife who had been
sent to prepare a hot tea of native *ti* leaves, and told her very
simply that her husband had sinned against her and was dying because he
could not face her. The wife was enraged for a moment, but facing the
danger of death to her husband, agreed to forgive once more. She kissed
him and wept over him, then went back to her kitchen.

The kahuna, following a very ancient ritual, produced from the bundle
which he had brought with him, four small white stones. He placed one of
these at each corner of the bed, commanding them to act as a wall to
keep away any spirit who might come to try to interfere with the
treatment. Next he took sea water and a brush of green leaves,
sprinkling the room while he ordered all unwelcome spirits to leave the
place.

The wife brought the decoction of *ti* leaves boiled in salted water,
and it was diluted with cold water in a calabash bowl. Taking a brush of
the green sword-like *ti* leaves, the kahuna approached the patient,
telling him that because his wife, who had been sinned against, had

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

forgiven him, his sins could now be washed away with the water in the
bowl. Describing carefully the way the sins were being dissolved in the
water and being washed away, he sprinkled the patient's body, then
brushed vigorously with the leaves, getting some water back into the
bowl. He declared that all the sins had now been washed away and had
entered the water remaining in the bowl. He asked the wife to raise the
patient's head so he could see with his own eyes that the water carrying
the sins was poured on the ground outside the door and so was disposed
of forever.

The patient was carefully dried and rubbed, being told that his strength
was rapidly returning and that he would soon be very hungry, would eat,
and then sleep. Upon awakening he was promised that he would be well on
the way to recovery. The man's strength did return, he did eat, and he
fell asleep. When he awakened hours later, he sat up and called for more
food. His wife brought thick soup and he was sitting up happily talking
with her when the white doctor called. He was one long in the Islands
and experienced. After a careful examination of his patient he turned to
the wife and asked, "You had the other kind of doctor?" She nodded, and
he went out shaking his head wonderingly.

\(B\) A white woman, young and lately married to an officer of the
Marines, was my neighbor during part of my years in Honolulu. Before her
marriage she was a very staid Methodist, looking upon dancing as a sin
and considering drinking a very grave sin indeed. Her husband introduced
her into a circle where dancing and drinking were the order of the day.
She was laughingly pressed to join the fun, and gradually threw off her

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

reluctance and began to learn to dance, even taking a cocktail. She had
learned to dance a little when, during a dance at the home of a friend,
she tripped over a rug and twisted her ankle. The twist was slight and
she continued dancing. But the next day the ankle remained slightly
sprained. It did not get well as she had expected that it would, and in
a week or so became worse. She went to a doctor, who examined the ankle
and made X-ray pictures, finding nothing to explain the failure to
recover. In a short time she could hardly walk. Then there developed a
strange, deep running sore below the ankle joint. The doctor called in a
consultant. It seemed very puzzling. All treatment failed. It was then
that the young woman came to me to ask my opinion as to whether the
kahunas—of whom she had heard me speak—might be able to help her. I
advised her to try one, and she did.

This kahuna was a younger man and more worldly wise if less expert than
older healers might have been. He at once suspected a complex—or, as
they say, "something eating inside." He asked what sins she had been
committing, and she at once confessed dancing and drinking, telling him
of her former church affiliations.

With great patience he set to work to explain to her the kahuna point of
view regarding sin of all kinds. The kahunas had a very simple way to
tell what was a sin and what was not. One asked oneself whether any act
was such that it injured another or hurt another's feelings. *If it hurt
no one in any way, that act was not a sin*. He pointed out to her the
logic of the kahuna belief that God was too high and all-powerful for
any human being to hurt by any act. Little by little he convinced

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

her that dancing and the taking of a cocktail were not really sins. This
done, he performed a ritual of forgiveness of sin, sprinkling her bare
arms and face with salt water and declaring that all her guilts of every
sort had been forgiven and washed away. He then carefully massaged the
bad ankle, telling her over and over that it was now becoming healed. He
bound the ankle in a poultice of native herbs and told her to repeat
frequently to herself, aloud: "I cannot sin against God. I am too small.
I have been forgiven for all my sins. I have hurt no one. My ankle is
getting well very fast."

The success of the kahuna's treatment became apparent in a short time.
The running sore closed and healed with hardly a scar. The ankle
recovered its full strength and flexibility.

Not realizing the fact that the trouble had been caused by a state of
mind which had been altered by changing her attitude toward dancing and
drinking, the young woman failed to obey the kahuna's orders to continue
her affirmation of "No hurt, no sin." Again she danced a little and
drank a little. As habits of thought are as easily reestablished as, for
instance, habits of smoking or using alcohol to excess, her two selves
gradually slipped back to the old beliefs. She found herself worrying
for fear the kahuna had been wrong and her religious instructions of
childhood right.

One morning, to her dismay, she found that the sore had reopened. Going
back to the kahuna, she asked him to heal her anew, but when he had
questioned her, he refused. He explained that when an old habit of

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

thought, "an eating inside," had been awakened after once having been
removed, it was almost impossible to remove it a second time. In the end
the ankle was operated on by doctors, bone cut away, and it is to be
supposed, enough pain suffered to convince her low self that she had
made amends for her sins. She gave up dancing and cocktails, and the
sore did not return.

*Comment:*

In the two cases given above, the important thing to note and to
remember is that the middle self can share a complex with the low self.

In Case "A" the Hawaiian had sinned by being unfaithful to his wife. No
form of forgiveness could have convinced him that he had not so sinned.
To convince his reasoning middle self that he had been forgiven, his
wife had actually to forgive. He had to see her and hear her speak the
words of forgiveness—these being physical stimuli which could and did
impress the low self which had accepted or brought on illness as a
punishment for the sin. While this case does not deal with a deep-seated
and hidden complex, it illustrates very well the common cause of illness
based on strong fixed beliefs which have their origin in actual facts,
and which are shared by both low and middle selves.

The kahunas taught that nothing is a sin if it does not hurt someone.
This is a truth which must be shouted from the housetops endlessly if we
are to escape the ill effects of the teaching that it is a sin to break
dogmatic taboos of various religions. There is no way of knowing how
many thousands of cases of illness, insanity and disaster have been
caused by complexed religious beliefs

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

developed in childhood, such as the belief of the young woman in Case
"B" that dancing and drinking were sins.

The sex urges are the most prolific sources of complexed ideas of sin
with which we have to contend, since as children we are taught modesty
and are shamed or punished for any display of sex interest. Religious
[instruction](errata.htm#6.md) implants the idea that sex urges are sinful
and that, therefore, children are born from and in sin.

The kahunas were logical in their approach to sex. If sex acts did not
hurt another, they were not considered sins. In any case such acts were
not sins against Higher Beings. *Sins were only acts that hurt others*.

Dr. Emmanuel Freud, discoverer in the West of the subconscious or low
self, found that in treating illness by suggestion, the subconscious
would not accept suggestion in many cases. His search for the reason for
this brought to light the complex of ideas which can be held by the low
self. It was found that the low self, which is the one which accepts
suggestion, will reject suggestions which are contrary to its fixed
beliefs in morals or its complexed belief in some imaginary condition.

Later on it was discovered that the low self, if thwarted in acting in
accordance with a complexed belief, would "translate" that complex or
change it so that it seemed to have little connection with the first and
important complex.

There was the case of the small boy who developed a complexed dislike
for attending church. He may have been forced to attend church when ill,
weak or

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

otherwise indisposed. (He may have been punished for not wishing to
attend church and so given a shock complex.) The boy loved his parents,
and when they explained why he must go to church to worship, and begged
him to be a good boy and do as he was told, he tried to obey. He tried
to love church, as he had been instructed, and seemed properly convinced
that it was his religious duty to attend services. However, the low
self, which had become complexed with dislike for attending church,
showed the animal-like craftiness so well known to psychologists and the
kahunas of old. It *translated* its fixed determination not to go to
church into a major dislike for the smell of incense. Upon smelling
incense, the boy would invariably be sick and have to be rushed from the
church. The situation then became one in which the child was willing
enough to go to church, but could not. The low self had its way.

In complexes built upon sex restraints, the low self may translate the
externals of the complex several times. The result of such action is
that even the long psychoanalytical study of the patient's dreams and
thought associations may fail to bring to light the original complex so
that it can be talked over and submitted to "rationalization"—being thus
"drained off" or brought under the control of the middle self as are
normal thoughts and ideas.

Freud decided that all complexes were based on sex frustrations. Later
psychologists modified the severity of this decision, but there is still
a school of psychologists who hold with Freud and present very telling
arguments to support his stand.

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Because the complexed low self will refuse to accept suggestion to
remove the symptoms of trouble caused by the complex, the healing value
of suggestion is greatly lessened. In Case "B" the low self of the young
woman would have refused healing suggestion after the complex had been
restored in the second breaking out of the ankle sore. Low selves refuse
to accept any hypnotic suggestion that is contrary to the subject's
moral beliefs. A hypnotist cannot force a subject to perform acts which
he considers immoral.

Because the low self creates all of the emotions for us, it is possible
in many instances to discover the presence of a complex or fixation by
watching for an emotional reaction when such a complex is stirred into
action.

We are accustomed to the spectacle of someone "flying into a blind rage"
over some trivial happening. It may be only a word. These small things
that touch off emotional explosions are the "triggers," so to speak.
Once the trigger has been touched, the full force of all former rages
connected with the circumstance that created the complex in the first
place is released.

On the other hand, there are good complexes and their triggers. One may
have many complexes developed in connection with his daily occupations.
For example, the alarm clock rings, and even against our desires, we
stir and begin to follow our habitual actions of arising.

One of the ways in which the low self forces its wishes on the middle
self is through engulfing the middle self with a great wave of
emotion—in which it usually is caught and overpowered. Waves of hate or

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

of desire or of distaste are well known, as are those of homesickness
and longing. Of all the emotions, love is the most interesting to study.
It seems to be the one which the middle self can most nearly share.
Basic physical attraction may be added to by elements of parental or
filial love, and to these may be added the logical approval and
admiration of the middle self. The resultant emotional mixture is one of
the driving forces on all levels of consciousness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. The Secret Kahuna Method of Treating the
Complex](ssbm16.md)
