[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm20)  [Next](ssbm22) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

### CHAPTER XX

### THE HIGH SELF AND THE HEALING IN PSYCHIC SCIENCE

Much healing has been done by the spirits of the dead. Many have been
doctors in physical life and, with the aid of mediums, have diagnosed
and prescribed much as they did in life.

Spirits have often taken over the body of mediums and have healed by
laying on of hands. From many accounts, it is evident that use of the
low voltage of vital force is made even while its nature is not well
understood.

Mesmerists have made passes over diseased parts of the patient's body
for the purpose of healing. The spirits have done likewise. Healing has
often been remarkable.

The kahunas, however, seem to be the only ones who knew of the three
voltages of vital force and of the fact that vital force could be
transferred through the hands from healer to patient, carrying along
thought forms of healing to implement the vital force and set it to
doing the desired work of restoration.

It is generally agreed that children of less than five years of age do
not readily respond to suggestion or hypnosis. Despite this fact, they
respond to treatment in which a flow of vital force is made to enter
their bodies while the healer creates the thought forms of

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

healing. Liebault, in trying to prove that suggestion was not
responsible for all healing in mesmeric practice, laid hands on many
children, making many cures. Some of the children were under three. In
later times Ochorowitz had similar success healing children under two.
Animals have also been healed in this way. Plants have been stimulated
thus to outstrip their untreated fellows.

All the evidence indicates that the kahunas were right in their belief
that the vital force of the healer was a potent healing agent, whether
the healer is living in the flesh or has died and become a spirit.

The spirits of the deceased have often showed fine powers of psychic
diagnosis of the ills of the living. A friend of mine had a son who
developed a strange illness while in college. Doctors failed to discover
the cause, and mother and son went as a last resort to have a sitting
with a famous medium by the name of [Cayce](errata.htm#7). (See the
book, *There Is a River*.) This medium was used by a spirit doctor who
was responsible for many amazing cures. He made a psychic examination of
the young man and said that the illness was caused by some fractured
sections of the spinal column, going on to say that the injury had
occurred in a canoe accident. The patient had forgotten the accident,
but he recalled it at once as very painful at the time. The spirit
doctor said that an operation was needed to repair the broken vertebrae,
but that the only man skilled in that type of operation in the United
States, was in Europe, although he would be at home in Boston soon. The
doctor's name was given, but not his address.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

After the sitting the mother and son had an X-ray picture made of the
spine and a doctor who was not familiar with the case pointed out the
breaks. As the spirit doctor had been correct that far, a long distance
call was made from New York to Boston, and it was found that there was a
doctor of the name given who had just returned from abroad, and who was
the ranking specialist in surgery of the kind needed to repair the
spinal injuries. He was engaged, and his operation brought the young man
back to normal health.

Spirits frequently practice absent healing of a peculiar kind. When the
medium through which they work is given a lock of hair of a distant
patient (or some other thing formerly in contact with the patient), a
fine demonstration of psychometry often follows. The ills of the distant
patient are diagnosed and remedies indicated, or treatment by mental or
"spiritual" means is undertaken from a distance. Here again we see the
threads of shadowy body stuff used as a means of contacting distant
things and people, also as a means of getting information, and as a
means of sending back healing forces and thought forms.

In all the foregoing healing practices the spirits work much as do the
living, provided the latter are psychic enough to make a proper
diagnosis, and provided the spirits can accumulate enough vital force to
do the healing. In still another matter there is a close parallel. We
pray to Higher Beings and so do the spirits of the dead.

Many a medium, controlled by a spirit healer, has been seen to pray in
order to call down healing. The

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

spirits have spoken endlessly of the High Self, calling it all manner of
names, according to their religious training during life.

And, somewhat like the kahunas, a few of the spirits have had sufficient
understanding to enable them to call for and get the aid of the High
Self for healing the living. (The instant healings thus brought about
are very rare, perhaps because so few of the spirits are familiar with
the technique of instant healing, and because the patient is not
cleansed of guilt complexes and otherwise made ready to accept such
healing. On the other hand, spirits make use of the help of the High
Self in the production of physical phenomena such as apporting,
materialization, the making of ectoplasm and so on.)

Spirits have sometimes appeared to the living in visions, as did the
"Lady" to Bernadette Soubirous at the grotto near Lourdes, and have in
some way been instrumental in causing miraculous healing.

In some cases no vision of a spirit has been seen, but the presence of a
spirit healing agent has been discovered in one way and another. The
records of the Church of Rome are filled with instances in which healing
has taken place at the tombs of men and women who had lived saintly
lives. A conclave of twenty-two archbishops and bishops wrote to Pope
Clement XI: "We are witnesses that before the tomb of Father John
Francis Regis the blind see, the lame walk, the deaf hear, the dumb
speak."

In 1731 and for as long as twenty-five years afterward there was an
invisible and unidentified healing agency at work at the tomb of Abbé
Paris, a Jansenist.

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Many cases were
studied, among them a famous one in which a woman, Mlle. Coirin, had
been miraculously healed of a cancer which had entirely destroyed her
left breast. Her doctors had given up all hope for her. The breast was
restored to its original form, even to the nipple, and not a scar could
be seen. The case was vouched for by several physicians who made
depositions before notaries at the time, and even the royal physician,
M. Gaulard, investigated, was satisfied as to the authenticity of the
healing miracle and so reported to the king.

In Hawaii some years ago, two large and oddly shaped stones, supposedly
connected in early centuries with kahuna rites, were seen in a dream by
a Hawaiian. He later found the stones and had them hauled to a place
beside a modern cemetery, and stood on end. A little later the report
circulated that a healing agency was to be contacted at the stones.
People flocked from all parts of Hawaii to visit them, pray before them,
and make offerings of flowers, food, money or whatever their particular
religious beliefs dictated. Some veritable cases of healing resulted.
The authorities had difficulty handling the crowds for a time, and then
the healing power seemed to vanish. One can only speculate as to the
coming and going of the invisible beings responsible for healing in
these ways and places. While a High Self might possibly undertake such
healing work of its own accord, the kahuna theory is that a lower and
middle self must make the request before the High Self will take a
direct hand in the affairs of the lesser selves, be they in the flesh or
spirits surviving physical death. If we are to credit tales of saintly
or

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

sainted persons appearing as spirits at the healing centers, we can
conclude that these have learned to call down the aid of the High Self
for the healing of the scattered few suppliants who are free of guilt
complexes and so are able to accept healing ministrations.

If, on the other hand, shrines and sacred relics act as physical stimuli
to aid the suppliants in making a workable prayer for healing, that may
be the major answer to the mystery of such miraculous healing. The High
Self of any who come to pray for healing might be caused to take action.
(The kahunas considered the individual High Self the proper source of
all healing. Spirits of a level above the High Self were thought to have
less personal things to do than heal earthlings. The kahunas recognized
no saints in their lists of High Selves.)

The question of the supply of vital force needed by the High Self for
healing at shrines can be answered easily. If poltergeists can steal
vital force from the living for their noisy activities, it is to be
taken for granted that a High Self can draw vital force from those in
its care.

The true picture of a healing at a holy shrine should be something like
this: One or more normal departed spirits (each having its low and
middle selves united to make them normal) elect to remain at the shrine
and do all they can to help heal those who come asking for healing.
These normal spirits will have learned to call on their High Selves and
get them to heal instantly or in a matter of a few hours or as long as
three days (as recorded at Lourdes). Many come to pray, making what may
be considered a "circle" of value similar to

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

gatherings at spiritualistic seances. The normal spirits are supplied
with vital force by the living, so also are the High Selves. When anyone
who is free of guilt fixations and who has faith, is able to make a good
thought form picture of the desired condition (healing), and is also
able to make telepathic contact with the normal spirits and/or (1)
through them with a High Self, or (2) without their aid contact their
own High Selves directly, the miracle of healing results.

Ectoplasm, as known in the seance room is, as we have seen, bodily
substances changed to their invisible form through the use of the high
voltage of vital force by the High Self. In instant healing, the
physical substance of the broken bone, the cancerous breast, the blind
eye, the crooked spine, and similar structures is, according to Huna,
dissolved into ectoplasmic form, then solidified as healthy substances
filling the part of the patient's shadowy body which corresponds to the
injured part. It must be remembered that the shadowy body is a mold of
each cell, of all tissues, including blood and other fluids of the body.
This shadowy body belonging to the low self is not breakable or subject
to disease or injury. Theoretically, a leg that has been amputated for
years could be restored were there a source from which to draw ectoplasm
which would not need to be returned. If the shadowy body of the low self
could be injured, heaven would be filled with [cripples](errata.htm#8)
instead of restored and happy spirit people who have died to find that
they have left behind all their physical abnormalities.

There is another peculiar thing about such healing as is under
discussion. It has been pointed out by doctors

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

who have made a study of those healed at Lourdes that often those who
have come to pray for the healing of others, have themselves been
healed. Mary Austin, the writer, developed cancer. She was given about a
year to live, and chose to go to Rome to spend that year studying early
documents of Christianity. She became so absorbed in her studies that
she was able to forget the cancer. One day, so she wrote in her account
of the matter, she came to the sudden realization that the cancer was
gone. She had not prayed for healing. But, with her mind on the things
of religion, healing came.

The point to this peculiar phase of healing is that it indicates that,
if the door is once opened by prayer-requests to the High Self so that
it can take a hand in the affairs of the low and middle self person, it
may act of its own accord and bring healing when not directly asked.
This possibility would account for the help given us, even if not
explicitly asked. Nearly everyone can recall some narrow escape from
disaster which seems to have been brought about by the guardian angel,
or High Self.

The close and constant cooperation and contact between the lower pair of
selves and their High Self, is well demonstrated in the case of the
strange cult of religionists in Japan whose members walk, or roll with
bare backs, on broken glass, cutting themselves, but having their cuts
healed instantly and without a scar through a word spoken by the master
of ceremonies.

I talked to a woman who had been a member of such a group, although she
was a blond American. She had gradually learned to contact the Being
responsible for

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

the healing, and later, to get the aid of that Being in keeping her feet
from being cut in her hourly performance of walking up a ladder of naked
sword blades.

While suggestion may be used as auto-suggestion to prevent bleeding from
small wounds, the instant healing of very considerable cuts from broken
glass would demand the instant healing action of the High Self.

Unfortunately, when a missionary group of this Japanese cult came to
America to convert us (to them we were the heathen), their work was
classed with stage magic or circus trickery. After a few demonstrations
they gave up, washed their hands of us, and returned to Japan, all of
which is very strange when we consider the anxiety shown by so many to
learn the truth about God and religion. Here was a chance to study both
from a new angle, but we are so crystallized in our beliefs, taking us
as a whole, that we overlook such striking opportunities when they come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI. How the Kahunas Controlled Winds, Weather and the
Sharks by Magic](ssbm22)
