[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm04)  [Next](ssbm06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### THE TWO SOULS OF MAN AND THE PROOFS THAT THERE ARE TWO INSTEAD OF ONE

One of the most intriguing and radically different elements in the
system of psychology used by the kahunas, must be introduced at this
point in the report in order to continue the presentation of the vastly
important subject of vital force and accompanying magnetism.

Dr. Brigham was able to learn more about the magical methods used in the
"death prayer" in Hawaii than about any other kahuna practice. In a
moment I will present a case from his experience, but first we shall
have to have some general notes.

The kahunas had a number of beliefs which they did not keep secret. For
instance, they shared with the common people their knowledge of the fact
that man has two souls or spirits instead of one. The early missionaries
thought this a most droll and idiotic concept, worthy only of heathen
and savages. To them, man had but one soul, and their job was to save it
if possible. As they arrived in Hawaii in 1820, and the subconscious was
not discovered by Freud until over half a century later, they can hardly
be blamed for laughing at the kahuna beliefs.

The kahunas went a step farther than modern psychology

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

has gone (except for some of the most advanced thinkers, amongst whom
was William McDougall, early mentor of Dr. Rhine, and a pioneer in the
field). The kahunas knew that the subconscious, as we call it, was one
spirit, and the conscious mind another. They dwell together in the body,
each soul (or spirit or self or psyche—call it what you will) performing
its part in the general task of living and thinking.

Each of our two spirits has its own mental abilities. The subconscious
(*unihipili*) can remember but has only elementary reasoning power such
as a dog or horse may have. On the other hand, the conscious (*uhane*)
cannot remember a thought once it has let it go out of its center of
attention. It has to depend on the subconscious to give back any thought
needed as a memory. Sometimes the subconscious cannot find the right
memory when it is desired, and often it must be given time to make a
search. We have all had the experience of being unable to remember a
name, and then, some time later, having the name suddenly come to us.
The conscious mind has two powers which are its very own, however. One
is the power to use will of the hypnotic kind (more potent than the
elementary will of the subconscious self). The second power is that of
using the highest known form of reason, the inductive, which sets man
apart as a superior animal in the animal kingdom.

The subconscious accepts and reacts to hypnotic suggestion (or mesmeric
treatment). The conscious cannot be hypnotized. Under the influence of
suggestion, the subconscious, being illogical to a large degree, will
accept and react to even absurd suggestion. In the theatrical
performances based on hypnotic demonstrations,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

people can be made to believe most absurd facts about themselves, and
thus amuse the audience. (Unfortunately.)

#### <span class="smallcaps">Case 8</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">Data on the Use of Vital Force in the Kahuna "Death Prayer" as Related to the Belief that Man Has Two Spirits, the Subconscious and the Conscious</span>

*Preliminary Notes:*

During my years in Hawaii, the stage play, *The Bird of Paradise*, was
advertising Hawaii, its volcano and the kahunas with their "death
prayer," throughout the civilized world. Hardly a tourist arrived in
Honolulu who had not seen the play and learned of the deadly use of
magic by the native priests.

One of the questions most frequently asked by visitors concerned the
verity of the "death prayer." Usually they were told that there was
nothing to it. Or they might be treated to wild tales of death through
this form of magic. The truth was that over a period of several years
during which time I checked the data through doctors frequenting the
Queen's Hospital in Honolulu, not a year passed but one or more victims
of the potent magic died, despite all that the hospital could offer in
the way of aid. And the old time doctors had recognized the familiar
symptoms year after year.

There were several kinds of kahunas in Hawaii before they ceased almost
entirely to understand the ancient lore. Some were hardly more than
spiritualistic mediums. Some were prophets. Some labored to control
winds and weather. A few were able to perform

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

almost any part of the magic, be it healing or controlling the elements.

Among the specialists were kahunas who might have several magical
abilities, but who also could use the "death prayer" (*anana*).

The ability to use the "death prayer" was based on a mechanism so
strange, and to us so fantastic and incredible, that it stretches the
imagination to grasp it before we understand the full details of kahuna
lore.

As I have explained, the kahunas believed that man had two spirits, the
lower or subconscious one being illogical and subject to the influence
of hypnotic suggestion.

To become able to use the "death prayer" a kahuna had to inherit from
another kahuna one or more ghostly subconscious spirits. (Or he might,
if sufficiently psychic, locate subconscious spirits or ghosts, and use
hypnotic suggestion to capture and enslave them.)

In very early Hawaii, prisoners of war or other unfortunates were
sometimes given what apparently was hypnotic suggestion in a potent
form, to cause their subconscious spirit, after death, to separate
itself from its conscious mind spirit and remain as a ghost to serve as
guard at sacred stone enclosures or native temples of the degraded form
of Kahunaism. It is probable that some of these unfortunates were given
orders to serve kahunas in the "death prayer" magic after they were
executed.

In any event, the kahunas in question had one or more—usually about
three—of these enslaved ghostly subconscious spirits. When a person was
to be prayed to death for any one of many reasons, the kahuna called

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

to him his enslaved spirits and gave them mesmeric orders to absorb
*mana* from food and drink placed on a mat on the ground and surrounded
with ceremonial objects such as small white stones and certain pieces of
wood.

This *mana* was vital force such as we have been discussing. It was
undoubtedly transferred from the body of the kahuna into the food, drink
and ceremonial objects which were called the *papa* or "forbidden." It
was thought that when the *mana* was taken from the food and drink, some
of the substances were also taken, especially alcohol from gin set as
the *papa* in later days. (Recall Baron Ferson's experience with the
transfer of intoxication from a drunk person to himself.)

The spirits were also given very definite instructions as to what they
were to do with the force. They were to catch the scent from a bit of
hair or soiled garment belonging to the intended victim, and follow it
much as a dog does a track. Upon reaching the victim they were to await
their chance to enter his or her body. This they were able to do because
of the power to use as a paralyzing shock the surcharge of vital force
given them by their master. The order which the spirits were trained to
obey was recorded in one case. It was:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O Lono,  
Listen to my voice.  
This is the plan:  
Rush upon ——— and enter;  
Enter and curl up;  
Curl up and straighten out."</span>

</div>

The "curl up" and ''straighten out" had other meanings than we give the
words in English. The process

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

was one of entering the body of the intended victim or attaching
themselves to it. That done, the vital force of the victim was taken by
the intruding spirits and stored in their ghostly bodies (of which we
have much to say in due time). As the vital forces of the victim were
withdrawn from the feet a numbness came to them which rose gradually
over a period of three days to knees, hips, and finally to the solar
plexus or heart, at which time the victim died.

When the death had been accomplished, the spirits left the body, taking
with them their great charges of vital force, and returned to their
masters. If the victim had been rescued by another kahuna, and the
spirits sent back by him to their owner with hypnotic orders to attack
their master, they might make such an attack with fatal results. In
order to avoid such a danger, a magic ritual of cleansing was usually
performed by the kahuna sending out the spirits (*kala*). Or, as was
most often the case, the person who had hired the kahuna to send the
"death prayer" to another, and who had vouched for the fact that the
intended victim deserved such drastic punishment, would be named as the
one responsible and to be attacked should another kahuna send the
spirits back before their task was accomplished.

In the event of a return from a successful mission, the kahuna ordered
his spirit slaves to play until they used up the vital force they had
taken in the process of killing the guilty one. Their play usually took
the form of what we would call "poltergeist activities." They would move
or throw objects, make loud noises and create a bedlam of some
proportions. Dr. Brigham

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

once heard a great commotion in the hut of a kahuna at night, and was
later told that spirits were at play in this manner.

None of the usual explanations of the "death prayer," such as the use of
a mysterious poison or of "dying of superstitious fear" were true.
Almost never did the victim know that he was about to be killed by
magic.

To illustrate this, let me tell of two cases in which the fear element
could play no part.

*The Cases:*

\(A\) A young Irishman came to Honolulu with the first of the modern
taxicabs. He was rough and ready, his hair was red and he was afraid of
nothing.

Before he had been long in the city he had contrived to get a fine
Hawaiian girl so much in love with him that she broke off her engagement
to a Hawaiian boy. The girl's grandmother did her best to break up the
new affair, seeing as she did that the Irishman had no good intentions.
She even went so far as to make veiled threats that heaven would punish
him if he did not leave the girl alone.

Very naturally, the Irishman had no fear of heaven. He was very much of
the scientific attitude, and probably quite accustomed to the futile
threats of angry mothers and grandmothers. It is certain that such
threats could not have had the least effect on him. One day his feet
"went to sleep." He did his best to right matters, but the prickling
numbness crept slowly upward. In the course of a day he had passed
through the hands of two doctors and landed in the hospital.

Every effort was made to discover the cause of the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

malady, but no cause was found and no treatment availed. In fifty hours
the prickling had reached his waist. When several doctors had interested
themselves in the case, including one of my friends, there came
headshakings and grave suspicion. An old doctor who had practised long
in the Islands was called in. He recognized the symptoms at once as
those of the "death prayer."

Taking the patient in hand he questioned him closely and soon learned
the story of the girl. More questioning brought back the memory of the
grandmother's threats, which the boy regarded as piffle and as of no
consequence in diagnosing his strange malady. Saying nothing, the wise
old doctor set off to visit the grandmother. Later he gave the substance
of the conversation he had with her.

"I know that you are not a kahuna and have had nothing to do with this
case, Grandma," said the doctor. "But, just as a friend, will you tell
me if you think anything could be done to save the man?"

"Well," said Grandma, "I know nothing about the matter, and I am no
kahuna—as you know. But I think that if the man would promise to take
the next ship for America and never return or even write back, he might
recover."

"I will guarantee that he will do just those things," said the doctor.

"All right," said Grandma imperturbably.

The situation had to be explained over and over again to the unbelieving
Irishman, but when the idea finally was driven home to him, he became
terrified and was willing to agree to any terms. That was in the early

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

afternoon. That night he was on his feet again and able to catch a
Japanese ship for the "Coast."

\(B\) I will give the next case as I transcribed it from my notes
shortly after an evening spent with Dr. Brigham. I will use his words as
nearly as possible.

"I went to Napoopoo on the Big Island," said Dr. Brigham, "soon after
the Museum was built. I wanted to climb Mauna Loa to collect indigenous
plants. It was to be a three-weeks' trip with native guides and a pack
train.

"At Napoopoo I spent five days getting men and pack animals together,
but finally set out with four Hawaiians and eight horses and mules. It
was good weather, and aside from the usual difficulties of those days
when trails were all but lacking, we got on very well.

"I had reached the barren country above the rain forests and was making
for the summit crater of Mauna Loa when one of my boys became ill. He
was a strong lad of twenty. I left him behind with a man to care for him
and went on to the summit, thinking it was the altitude which was
bothering him, and that he would soon be all right.

"We spent the day in the crater and got back to the lower camp and the
sick boy early in the evening. He was stretched out on a blanket, now
too weak to rise. I decided to move him to a lower level the next
morning, and was about to sit down to my evening meal when one of the
older men came to me.

"'That boy very sick,' he said. Then, after much beating about the bush,
it came out that the Hawaiians had decided that he was being prayed to
death. I was

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

slow to believe, but went to the boy and questioned him.

"'Do you think you are being prayed to death?' I asked.

"'No! No!' He was instantly frightened within an inch of his life. I
next asked him if he had any enemies who might want to have him killed.
He could think of none, and was more than anxious to have me say that I
still thought it was the altitude that was bothering him.

"I made another and more thorough examination, but found nothing
significant except the usual symptoms of slow paralysis of the lower
limbs and threatening general collapse, all of which symptoms belong to
the death prayer. At last I became convinced that the old man was right
and that some kahuna was at work. When I admitted this, all the men
became frightened. For all they knew the whole party might be killed.

"I went back to my meal and thought things over. Meantime, one of the
men kept on questioning the boy. After a while he got some interesting
information. The boy's home was on the windward side of Hawaii in a
little out-of-the-way village in a narrow valley which ran to the sea.
There was little to bring the *haoles* (whites) to the village, and its
old kahuna had endeavored to keep the people isolated and living in the
old way. Among other things he had commanded them to have no dealings
with the *haoles* under penalty of being prayed to death. The boy had
left home and gone to live in Kona several months back. He had all but
forgotten the command.

"Up to the time of my arrival at Napoopoo, the boy had lived entirely
with his Hawaiian friends and had

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

not come into contact with white men—at least not in a business way.
When I was hiring men for my trip up the mountain, he had joined me
without a second thought. It had not occurred to him that the command
still held outside his village.

"As I heard about these things I became more and more angry. My temper
was no better in those days than it is now when it comes to someone
injuring my friends. I sat there wishing I could lay hands on the
kahuna, and also facing the fact that my work would have to stop if the
boy died and I had to take him down to the coast.

"While I was thinking things over, the old man came to me as spokesman
for the others and made a perfectly natural suggestion. He politely
called my attention to the fact that all Hawaiians knew that I was a
great kahuna and even a fire-walker. To him it seemed simple enough that
I should adjust matters by praying the kahuna to death and saving the
boy.

"The men waited expectantly, and I could see in their eyes their
confidence that I would turn back the death prayer and that all would be
well. On my part I was cornered. I had bluffed for years, and now my
bluff had been called. I was most uncomfortable. If I refused to do the
obvious thing they would be sure that I was afraid of the kahuna and not
the strong fellow I pretended to be.

"Now I've always had a considerable pride, and at the thought of showing
what might be mistaken for the white feather before my men, I decided
there and then to try my hand at sending the death prayer back to the
kahuna. This is perhaps the easiest thing an

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

amateur magician could be called upon to do. The spell had been
initiated and the trained spirits sent out. All I had to do was to put
up the usual big arguments to talk the brainless things over to my side,
and then exert all my will to send them back and make them attack the
kahuna. I felt this would be fairly easy as the boy was guilty of no
actual sin.

"I was a long way from the *ti* leaves which are usually brushed over
the victim as a part of the ceremony to help drive out the spirits, but
I had never believed them very necessary. Moreover, I was angry and
impatient. I got up and said to the men: 'You all know that I am a very
powerful kahuna?' They agreed most enthusiastically. 'Then watch me,' I
growled. With that, I went over to the boy and set to work.

"The trick of the thing is to put up an argument of such cunning that
the spirits will be made to think that their master must be a devil to
send them to kill one so pure and innocent. I knew that if I could win
them over and get them worked up to a high emotional state and ready to
revolt, I would be successful. Of course, I had to chance the kahuna
having *kala*-ed (cleansed) himself; but I thought that improbable as he
would have no fear that I would send back his death prayer. I doubted if
he had ever heard of me over on that side of the island.

"I stood over the boy and began to advance arguments to the spirits. I
was smoother than a politician. I praised them and told them what fine
fellows they were, how deserving and clever. Little by little I worked
around to tell them how sad it was that they had been made slaves by a
kahuna instead of being allowed

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

to go on to the beautiful heaven that awaited. I explained just how they
had been captured by the kahuna and imposed upon. I told them how pure
and innocent and good the boy was and how black and vile the kahuna was.
I still consider that argument a masterpiece. The Hawaiians blubbered
from time to time as I described the pathetic condition of the spirits.

"Finally I decided that I must have the spirits ready to pull the kahuna
limb from limb. I was ready to give them the command to return and visit
the kahuna with ten times the punishment he had ordered for the boy. I
could bull-roar in those days with the best. I can yet! \[The doctor
threw back his head and gave a roar that shook the house.\] Well, I gave
my commands in about such a tone. I yelled so loudly that I frightened
the pack animals. The men drew back hurriedly and the boy whimpered like
a frightened child.

"It was a supreme effort, mentally, emotionally and physically with me.
I put every particle of will and concentration into that command. When I
had repeated it three times, I sat down by the boy, trembling and
dripping.

"I continued to keep my mind fastened like a vise on the project in
hand, never letting it waver from my willed determination to see that
the spirits obeyed my orders. The light faded and the stars came out.
The boy lay silently waiting. From a safe distance the men watched me
with faces now expectant and now reflecting horrible fear of the unseen.
At times the air about us seemed to tremble with the fury of some
unearthly conflict of forces.

"The longest hour in history was about gone, when

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I suddenly felt an
odd sensation. It was as if the tension in the air had gone in a flash.
I drew a deep breath. A few minutes later there came a whisper from the
boy. *'Wawae ... maikai'* (Legs ... good).

"I could have shouted in my triumph as I set to work to massage the
twitching limbs which seemed to react as if they had been frozen and
were gradually becoming warm again. Little by little circulation was
restored and the toes began to wiggle. The men crowded around me to
offer timid congratulations. It was the high point in my career as a
kahuna. In an hour the boy was up and eating his *poi*.

"But that isn't the end of the story. I had a pleasant conviction that I
had killed something deadly. I wanted to check on my performance and see
what had happened to the kahuna. I decided to cut my trip short so I
could go down to the boy's village—the collecting had been less
successful than I had hoped, anyway.

"We covered the ground rapidly in the few days we stayed on the
mountain-tops. We camped one night at the lake on Mauna Kea, and
explored the crater of Mauna Loa. We roasted by day and froze by night.

"In due time we pulled out for the lower country on the north side of
the mountains. Water was easier to get, but the country was badly cut up
and the forests heavy. At last, however, we got down to the ocean and
struck a trail which took us along the bluffs and up and down through
valleys and ravines. Always we followed the sea.

"Late one afternoon we came straggling out of the brush into a clearing
in a fair valley. An old woman

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and a girl were working in a *taro* patch as we came along. They took
one look at me and the boy, then flew screaming before us. We followed
and soon came to a cluster of grass houses. Not a person was to be seen.
I sat down outside the big hut where the kahuna had lived, and waited
while the boy went to see if he could find someone.

"I heard him shouting for a time and then it was quiet for several
minutes. Pretty soon he came back with news. On the night I had sent
back the death prayer to the kahuna he had been asleep. He had awakened
with a scream and rushed around to get ti leaves and began to fan
himself to fight off his spirits. Between gasps he told the people what
had happened. He had neglected to *kala* himself and the white kahuna
had taken a low advantage of him. In a very short time he had fallen to
the ground and lay there groaning and frothing at the mouth. He was dead
by morning.

"The people were certain that I had come to wipe out the entire village.
I told the boy to go back and tell them that I had taken my revenge and
that if they behaved themselves I would consider them my friends.

"We waited some time before the head man came back with his flock. He
wasn't at all happy, and most of the women were frightened nearly to
death. However, I soon reassured them, and in no time we were all great
friends. In fact, they seemed to consider me quite a fellow. No one
seemed to resent my having killed their kahuna—that was all a part of
the game to them.

"Some of the horses were tired out, so we accepted an invitation to stay
and be fêted. They gave us a *luau* 

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (feast), which,
considering the poverty of the village, was not bad. They had no pigs,
but the dog was as tasty as you please—being *poi*-fed meat. I had never
taken kindly to dog, but as a full-fledged kahuna, I no longer
hesitated. We parted blood brothers.

"The one thing which I could never understand about the matter is this:
The old kahuna had found out that I had hired the boy—and by psychic
means—but he had not found out that I had turned kahuna and was sending
his death prayer back to him. The only way I can account for this is
that he must have turned in for the night at dusk and gone at once to
sleep.

"Another thing which seems certain is that the kahuna was of a fairly
powerful class. Only those well up in their art can see at a distance.
Just why he had not seen into the future, I cannot say, unless he was
not quite up to that."

*Comment:*

There is another kahuna method of causing death by magic, known as
*kuni* or the burning. It seems to be one seldom used in the old days,
but was said to consist of the rite of burning a hair or other part of
the victim's body and casting the ash into the sea. I have no reliable
data to offer in this matter, and simply mention it in passing lest
there be something of importance in this practice which later
investigators might overlook if left unmentioned.

The killing of a person by magic was thought by the kahunas to depend
upon whether or not the victim had a deep sense of guilt which was
caused by wrongs done others. Such a guilt sense (complex) made the
attack of the *unihipili* or subconscious spirits successful. Without

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

this sense of guilt, the subconscious of the victim would successfully
ward off the attacking spirits.

Down the centuries there has been a form of magic practiced (or tried)
which consisted of making a doll or image of the intended victim, then
thrusting pins into the image, a fresh pin each day. The idea was that
some form of sympathetic connection was established with the victim, and
that a magical reaction would be set up to cause death in due course of
time. While this practice may have little potency, it cannot be tossed
aside contemptuously. We are on the far forward fringe of exploration in
a field which has not been fully explored. We must consider all possible
sources of information lest we overlook some important clue to the full
understanding of such things as instant healing.

 

The vital force or *mana* of the kahunas has three strengths. If it is
electrical in nature, as modern experiments have demonstrated, we may
safely say that the three strengths of *mana* known to the kahunas equal
three voltages.

The kahuna words for the three voltages were mana, for the low voltage
used by the subconscious spirit, and *mana-mana* for the higher voltage
used by the conscious spirit as "will" or hypnotic force. There was a
still higher voltage known as *mana-loa* or "strongest force," and this
was thought to be used only by a superconscious spirit associated with
the two lesser spirits to complete the triune man.

Modern studies of the vital electricity have been made by attaching
wires to the skin of the body and of the scalp, then using very
sensitive instruments to

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

measure the electrical discharges carried by the wires.

*Life* magazine files show in the issue of October 18, 1937, some
pictures of tests with charts and graphs. Two voltages of electricity
have been found, a low voltage in the body tissues and a higher voltage
in the brain. From this it has been discovered that all thinking
involves electrical activity of the higher voltage of vital force.

The kahunas associated all thinking processes with *mana*. The word
*mana-o* means "to think," the "o" added to show that the process is one
of using *mana* to produce thought.

From the foregoing it will be seen that the ancient kahunas were good
psychologists. They knew the subconscious and conscious as two spirits,
and they knew the two strengths of vital electrical force which we call
"body waves" and "brain waves." The kahunas also knew a superconscious
spirit and a voltage of vital force used by it, this voltage being the
highest. Although these last two elements are not yet known to modern
science, they probably will be in time. In our present investigation
there is much evidence to be considered which points to the correctness
of the kahuna psychology. (One must always remember that the kahuna
system of psychology, even if not complete and accurate in its smallest
details, made possible such things as fire-walking. It was a workable
system, and we cannot rest on our oars until we find one equally
workable.)

 

Either the vital force or the magnetic force generated by the presence
of vital force in bodily tissues, has been found to exert other strange
effects on various things.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

Experiments carried on in France with a famous medium showed that meat
and fish could be prevented from decaying by being held in the hands and
treated to a "magnetizing" process. Oranges and other fruits, as well as
vegetables, so treated, did not decay but slowly dried up.

Other experiments showed that the vital force could be stored for a time
in various substances such as wood, paper and cloth. Water took and held
charges. Glass did not.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Kahuna System and the Three “Souls” or Spirits of
Man, Each Using Its Own Voltage of Vital Force. These Spirits in Union
and in Separation](ssbm06)
