[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [New Thought](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ssbm17)  [Next](ssbm19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00260GY16/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Secret Science Behind Miracles*, by Max Freedom Long, \[1948\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

### THE SECRET WITHIN THE SECRET

The Secret within the larger Secret was the fact that there was a third
self connected with man and his two lower selves. The nature of this
High Self (*Aumakua*) and the means of gaining its aid also belonged to
the inner Secret.

In this the kahunas were very far ahead in their findings. They knew
that they could never do more than guess at the fact of, or nature of
Beings higher in the scale of consciousness than the High Selves.

Their guess was a traditional one. They guessed that the Higher Beings
would be similar to the lower ones which they knew in man. They
subscribed to the ancient axiom "As above, so below." They may have
originated it, for no other psycho-religionists seemed to have had
definite and detailed knowledge of the three separate and independent
spirits which compose the man.

The kahunas knew man to be a triune being—one of three spirits—so they
guessed that the gods and even the final highest and SUPREME BEING would
be triune in nature. This idea may have originated with the kahunas or
it may not, but it spread around the world and appears in Christianity
and Brahmanism if not in the lore of the Great Spirit of the
Amerindians.

Wherever the symbol of the triangle appears, it is safe to say that the
secret of the triune nature of man

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

and possibly of the gods was incorporated in the religion of the people.
True, the real meaning of the three sides of the triangle representing
the three selves of man, may have been lost or misunderstood, but the
symbol was retained and revered. In Egypt the pyramids presented to the
world four faces of triangular form. In Central America the triangle was
known and used in religion.

Another ancient and widespread belief which was common to the kahunas
and later religionists was that there had been a descent into physical
matter of some of the CONSCIOUSNESS OF HIGHER BEINGS. This accounted for
the creation of the earth and lower forms of life and gave rise to
various versions of the "FALL" which are met in several religions. As a
logical result of a belief in a "fall," there followed the belief that
all lower creatures, headed by man, were on their way back up the scale,
slowly returning to Ultimate God.

Religions are filled with the intricacies of the descent and ascent, but
because of his mental limitations, man of the middle self level can
never do more than speculate. The ways of the High Self are unfathomable
in a large part, and the ways of still higher beings are totally
unfathomable. The various scriptures which have been supposed to have
been given mankind by divine revelation, show in the things revealed the
inventions of the middle self mind. No two of the revealed writings
agree. THE ONLY THING OF WHICH WE CAN BE FAIRLY CERTAIN IS THAT THERE IS
A HIGH SELF which can be approached to get aid in the problems of daily
living.

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

In nearly all religions may be found some of the beliefs of the kahunas,
even if warped to uselessness and stretched to fantastic lengths.

The kahunas knew that the spirits of man come back at least once to be
born again in physical bodies. The low self comes back to be born as a
middle self in another human body. Some spirits may return to be born
again several times in a physical body, but the idea of endless
incarnations of man as a single spirit in innumerable bodies is an
example of stretching an original idea to absurd lengths. In
Christianity and in the teaching of the Jews, Mohammedans and American
Indians the idea of reincarnation is found only in vague reminders. In
the latest of the "revealed" religions, that based on the new Oahspe
Bible, no doctrine of reincarnation is to be found.

The same may be said in a way about the doctrine of Karma which has
become such a millstone around the necks of religionists in India. The
original idea seems to have been that when we hurt others we laid
ourselves open to spirit attack, or we formed guilt complexes and
because of them were cut off from direct contact with our own High
Selves—resulting in various difficulties.

The Hindu idea of Karma resulted from stretching the simple original
conception, even more than the reincarnation idea. With some logic it
was taught that the "Law of Karma" began to function in the level of
consciousness just below God-the-Unmanifest.

All beings lower than this Supreme had to be governed by the Law. To
complete the logic of this absurd guess at conditions in such
unthinkable levels of

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

consciousness, the "Lords of Karma" were invented to execute the fine
justice. They had to have endless helpers to watch each sentient being
in the lower heavens and on earth to record his good and bad deeds. The
records had to be written, and the writing demanded a book, which was
invented in the form of invisible akasha where all records were kept and
all things recorded to the last tick of time.

The Lords of Karma, as could be plainly seen, did not punish the wicked
in the same incarnation in which the wickedness was performed. The
wicked flourished very often as the green bay tree. This flaw in the
scheme was covered up by inventing the idea that punishment was
administered in some later incarnation.

The same idea of an ideal and absolutely balanced divine form of justice
is to be found in the Old Testament, but no attempt was made to cover
with reincarnation the flaw of the flourishing wicked man. Punishment in
hell was fully as effective and made a fine contrast with the idea of a
heaven for the good after death.

In Christianity we find many things which did not come as a direct
teaching of Jesus, and the origin of which is lost. The idea of the
Lords of Karma is replaced by St. Peter as the keeper of the gate of
Heaven, and by the Book of Life in which, in some indefinite manner, the
angel recorders keep a record of each life.

Christianity is the nearest to the original kahuna lore of any of the
great religions. In the rituals of the Church of Rome—the origin of the
rituals being unknown—we find the counterparts of the kahuna rituals
used in healing. The kahunas required a confession

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

and used water which had been charged with vital force as a physical
stimulus to accompany the spoken word of suggestion to "forgive" a
patient or break down a guilt complex after amends for hurts to others
had been made. In the Roman Church, after confession, holy water is used
in the ritual of forgiveness with the spoken words of forgiveness, but
the part played by both complex and suggestion has long since been
forgotten. The penance done at the order of the priest before the rite
of absolution or forgiveness is, however, quite in line with the older
rite as a good physical stimulus, even if there are sins to be forgiven
which do not consist of hurt to others.

The kahuna methods of exorcising obsessing or haunting spirits is still
to be seen in a way in the rites of exorcism of the Church.

The kahuna belief in the High Self or *Aumakua* is well preserved in
Christianity. Jesus, according to the records as they appear in the New
Testament, prayed to his Father in Heaven when he wished divine aid in
performing miracles. That is what the kahunas did, only with a method of
praying in which there was more ritualistic action because of the
various elements involved. In instructing his disciples, Jesus is
reported as saying that they should also pray to the Divine Father, but
stressed the fact that the prayer should be made in His name. This would
be logical only if Jesus looked upon himself as a High Self. In any
event, the matter is not one that will make the slightest difference in
using a form of prayer to the High Self in obtaining aid in healing.
Fire-walking is performed with the aid of the High Self, and that aid is
obtained by men of a

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

surprising variety of religions—none of whom, oddly enough, is
Christian.

In India there is a hint in the Bhagavad Gita at the fact of the three
spirits of man, but the High Self of the kahunas is confused with the
"spirit of the Supreme," which is of an entirely different level. (Judge
translation, page 57: "Those who rest in me, knowing me to be the
*Adhibhûta*, the *Adhidaivata*, and the *Adhiyajña*, know me at the time
of death.") Because it is considered the duty of each person to suffer
and so live down his bad karma, no prayers are made by the majority of
Hindus to gain aid from the Higher Beings in the matter of meeting the
problems of daily life.

In Christianity there is a curious and almost unique mechanism to be
seen in the vicarious atonement for sins. This doctrine is obscure in
its origin, but closely resembles the kahuna belief that one can be
forgiven for sins instead of suffering under a hard and fast law of
karma to repay to the last iota. Jesus made the final and complete
atonement for the sins of the world by his death on the cross, according
to Christian beliefs. These sins of the world seem to include the sins
of the newly born babes who are "born in sin"—a strange dogma at best.
The Christian does not necessarily have to make restitution or amends in
kind. In fact, he could not in case he had taken the name of God in
vain, for his words could not be recalled. Logically, he would have to
suffer in hell after death to make amends, but, according to the
Christian plan of salvation, he may repent and get forgiveness from a
priest

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

or, better yet, by direct prayer appeal to God in the name of the great
atoner, Jesus.

The kahunas, to repeat once more, knowing that the Higher Beings cannot
be injured by the living man and so cannot be sinned against, recognize
no such sin as that of using profanity. The one recognized sin is to
hurt a fellow human being. For such a hurt amends must be made to the
one hurt. In no other way can the evil-doer convince himself that he has
balanced his account and is no longer guilty of that standard sin. If
not convinced that he is no longer guilty, his guilt fixation held by
his low self cannot be removed by the ritual cleansing or
*kala*—forgiveness or restoration of the symbolic Light.

In this matter of forgiving the sin in Christianity and removing the
guilt complex in the kahuna system, there is one point of great
significance which must not be overlooked. It is the fact that the
Christian believes that his sins are against God as well as against man,
and that he must get forgiveness from God, even if not from those he has
injured. In the kahuna practice, the Higher Being is not asked for
forgiveness. It seems to have been taken for granted that the sinner had
to make amends and bring about his own forgiveness by appealing to the
one he had injured. This is startling in its logic to the average
Christian to whom it has never occurred that the one and only place to
get forgiven is from the individual sinned against. Under the kahuna
system, the rational is seen of the Jewish and karmic demand for exact
and full repayment for sins, with no evasion through repentance or
vicarious

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

atonement. However, the kahuna system is kept down to the size of the
sin itself and is not expanded to include gods whose existence and
nature are things at which we can only guess.

It will be seen that the Huna system was definite and detailed, logical,
and right to the point. It was simple and satisfactory because of a
fuller knowledge of the complex and the low self which harbors the
complex.

Another angle of the atonement for sin is to be seen in the part played
by sin in preventing normal contact between the low self and the High
Self of one guilty of a sin. Since the kahunas held that one cannot
injure the High Self in any way, and that the High Self has no part in
cutting off the line of contact between itself and the low self, it
follows that the low self, because of its sense of guilt which it shares
with the middle self, feels shame and is like a naughty child which
avoids the presence of its parents because of its sense of guilt and
shame.

It is thought that the low self has no sense of right and wrong of its
own, being an animal self still. It gets whatever idea it has in such
matters from the middle self, whose reasoning power makes it possible
for it to know right from wrong. Because the low self is taught to
accept blindly the decision of the middle self as to the right and wrong
of any and all actions, it tends to develop fixations of guilt in a
rather surprising fashion. Once a decision is reached as to the right or
wrong of an action by the middle self, and that decision is given as a
thought form to the low self for safe keeping, the fixation process is
almost automatic. This is because the low self has been present and has
sensed the

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

solid physical action which caused the hurt to the one injured. This is
a physical stimulus of a solid tangible kind and when it has been
observed by the low self, it has the effect of fixing the guilt sense
immediately, rendering it a complex of much gravity. To drain off this
complex it is necessary to convince the middle self that amends have
been made before there can be hope of getting the low self to let go of
its fixed belief.

If a Christian or other religionist believes that he can sin against
God, and perform harmless acts which he believes to be sins, such as the
failure to attend mass or the use of profanity, the fixation is not so
important for the reason that it has not been accompanied by such a
direct physical stimulus. In such cases a vague and general method of
making amends is found in fasting and other forms of self denial. As
such things are excellent physical stimuli, they work well indeed in
clearing up the lesser guilt fixations caused by the breaking of
dogmatic religious commands. It is for a very good and practical reason
that fasting and prayer have continued down the years to be the most
used rite of all in seeking forgiveness for sins.

The sins of omission are generally the ones treated through fasting and
other powerful but indirect physical stimuli by the kahunas. To be less
than kind, to neglect one's duty, or to fail in any way which leaves one
feeling ashamed, tends to form a guilt complex. Often such guilt
complexes are present without our knowing it.

The low self is the "conscience," once it has received from the middle
self a training in what is right and wrong. This training is usually
received in childhood

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

at the instigation of watchful parents. Spankings do much to fix beliefs
in right and wrong in the low self before the age of six. When one is
smitten by his conscience, it is an emotional reaction, not a logical
one. Of course it may be both, if the middle self agrees that it is
doing wrong. This vital fact is well illustrated by the peculiar
morality of the savage head hunters. They would consider it a great sin
to take the head of a friend, but an act of great virtue to take the
head of an enemy. Conscience is NOT a God-given instinctive something.
It is simply the natural emotional reaction of a low self which has been
taught that certain things are right and others wrong.

Only the middle self can sin. The animals in the jungle eat each other
without sinning. The low self is an animal even if associated with a
middle self, and it is also incapable of sinning.

As has been explained earlier, the contact between the High Self and the
lower man is through the low self and along the connecting cord of
invisible shadowy body substance derived from the shadowy body of the
low self. If the low self is convinced that the man has been guilty of a
wrong act, it feels shame and refuses to contact the High Self in the
regular telepathic way across the connecting cord. Thus prayers are not
delivered to the High Self. Its aid is not requested—and, under the law
that man must be allowed to be a free agent in most things—no aid or
guidance is given. The result is that the man blunders and gets into
trouble. The kahunas spoke of this as a BLOCKING OF THE PATH. The
"path," the "way," and the "light" are all symbol words indicating the
connection between the

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

low self and the High Self. The kahuna words *la* and *ala* translate
into these three words. The same use of these words as symbols is found
in India and in Christianity, but with less direct and definite
meanings.

 

Because it is confusing to try to consider the teachings of many
religions at the same time and to compare them with the lore of the
kahunas, it is better to compare the kahuna beliefs with the basic
activities found underlying religions.

The first thing to examine is the basic human urge to look to a "god" of
some kind for help, or to try to appease the god if he seems to be angry
and visits mankind with plagues and disasters.

A contact with the god must be made, and a spoken prayer or request for
attention is made, as "Oh, hear our prayer!" As prayers were either not
heard or not given attention, the suppliant resorted to various aids to
prayer. The American Indians in our Southwest made elaborate sand
paintings to symbolize the thing desired in prayer. Jews and Christians
fasted as an adjunct to prayer. There were cleansing rites which were
supposed to make man sufficiently spotless to be acceptable before the
god in prayer.

This cleansing process grew to be an elaborate ritual in most religions.
Dogmas developed to teach that a man guilty of sins could not make his
prayers heard unless he was first "forgiven" and ritually cleansed.
Because the prayers of the good men got scarcely better answers than
those of the wicked, there was a hunt for sins of which a good man might
be guilty. The sins of omission, and the "original sins" were invented.

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

In the process of obtaining forgiveness for all forms of sin, and for
the general purpose of pleasing the gods and thus gaining their favors,
OFFERINGS were made. Such offerings were common in the dawn of history.
Fruits, flowers, foods, sacrificial animals, and even human sacrifices
were used. Altars were erected as the place of sacrifice, and priests
were appointed to officiate in making both offerings and prayers.

When the gods were appeased and the floods and plagues or individual
difficulties ceased, there were thank-offerings, but these played a
small part in the general scheme.

At the time of death, and the departure of the (almost universally
recognized) soul or souls of the man from the body, prayers and
sacrifices were made by the living for the happiness and comfort of the
departed in the "other world." The wicked might go to a hell, or the
average run of men might go to a place of temporary punishment. A
deathbed ritual of prayer was commonly performed by a priest in as
widely separated places as the Western seats of Christianity and the
inner fastnesses of Tibet.

There nearly always arose a doctrine of a "chosen people" in the course
of development of religions. The Jews were such a chosen people. The
convert to Christianity became one of the chosen because he accepted
Jesus as the focal point of his religious beliefs and depended upon an
initiation into the ranks of the chosen through baptism, confirmation
and various similar rites, the end being to attain "salvation."

All the "salvations" were more or less alike in religions. All need of
being "saved" arose from a dogmatic

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

belief that man in his normal state was lacking in some way or ways. He
might have been "born in sin," or he might have been from a tribe which
was not of any one "chosen" people. In India where there was no
vicarious atonement and resulting salvation through a belief in a
"savior," the way of salvation was long and difficult. It led through
thousands of incarnations while karma was being lived down.

Nearly all religions eventually developed to the point where there was a
dogmatic belief that a special building or place was necessary for
proper prayer to the gods. From the altar and shrine grew the church and
the temple. While the primary purpose of religion was to appease the
gods or gain answers to prayer from them, there was also an idealistic
concept frequently present in the belief that praise and worship of the
gods was necessary. The primitives danced to entertain the god. They fed
the god with burnt offerings and blood sacrifices—blood long being
considered a probable source from which the god might derive sustenance
(in Christianity the "blood of the Lamb" was necessary to appease God
and get Him to allow a vicarious atonement for the sins of the world,
etc., etc.).

Dogmas multiplied and priesthoods flourished as each religion grew
older. In the eternal search for a means of getting an answer to prayers
from a god, most illogical and surprising practices developed.
Flagellation, castration, abhorrence of all normal sex relations,
circumcision to prevent masturbation—the list is very long. In India the
austerities practiced were and are surprising. The teaching of
Christianity that one should "sell all and give to the poor, then follow
me," has

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

never produced a great effect in individual action except as one became
a monk or nun, but in India the beggar's bowl and yellow robes are taken
outside the monastery as well as by members of monastic orders.

Here and there may be seen religious dogmas combined with rites of
purification which touch on the realm of high magic. In Ceylon a rite of
purification depends upon the ability of the individual to pass the
stern test of the fire-walk. (I have described this rite as seen by the
Englishman in Burma and filmed, and whose motion pictures I saw. Some of
the candidates walked the fire successfully, and others failed painfully
or fatally.)

The Science of Psychology and the Science of Psychism are not a part of
religion. Religion has to do with reverence for gods or with the fear
and worship given them. As soon as we ask favors of the gods through
prayers and additional rites, we enter the field of magic, which is not
pure religion. "Religion," to quote again from Professor Paul Tillich of
Columbia University, "is the relation to something ultimate,
unconditioned, transcendent. The religious attitude is consciousness of
dependence, surrender, acceptance.… Magic is the exercise of immanent
power; religion is the subjection to the transcendent power.… And even
then, the distinction is permanently endangered from two sides. First,
there is the necessity that the transcendent manifests itself
concretely, and, thereupon, these concrete manifestations become for the
religious imagination magic powers. And secondly, there is the natural
desire of man to gain power over the divine, thus making it an object of
magical practices."

Huna may be called a science rather than a religion

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

because it has almost nothing of religion (as defined above by a
Professor of Philosophical Theology) in it. The High Self is not a god.
It is the third spirit or part of the man. It is no more divine than is
the low self or the middle self. It is simply a step advanced in

Or mental powers and creative abilities. It is older and wiser and is
parental in its attitude. It falls under the science of psychology as
certainly as do the low and middle (or subconscious and conscious)
selves.

In presenting this report on Huna, I have elected to call Huna a
psycho-religious system for the reason that it includes so much that has
always been considered a part of religion. However, I consider Huna a
science in the strictest sense of the word. The kahunas knew nothing
about gods—Beings higher, perhaps, than the High Self. They had no way
of sensing such Beings. They admitted freely that it was probable that
there were such Beings, but were honest in saying that they were
convinced that the human mind would never be able to do more than
imagine them—invent them in terms of lower humans.

In other words, the basic urge of older religions to appease gods or
gain favors from them (religion plus magic) is replaced in Huna by the
purely magical operation of prayer to the High Self for the purpose of
gaining favors in the way of healing or bettering our circumstances
through a change in the predictable future.

Through the High Self an appeal was made by the kahunas to the spirits
able to control wind and weather, also to spirits in control of lower
forms of life. (Pacts made in this manner prevented sharks in Hawaiian
waters from attacking human beings—or at least that

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

is the claim made by the kahunas of yesterday. In any event, the same
breed of sharks that attacks men in other places is harmless in Hawaiian
waters.)

Instead of feeding the gods with blood and burnt offerings, the kahunas
understood the secret that lay behind the externals of all sacrifice.
The High Self, in order to produce results in the physical plane must
draw from the physical body of the earthy man sufficient vital force or
mana to use in the work.

The custom of building temples or shrines to aid in contacting the gods
was not practiced by the genuine kahunas, although the spurious kahunas
of later times built temples of stone and offered sacrifices in vain
efforts to get magical results.

The true kahunas needed no temples or shrines. They knew how to send the
telepathic message to the High Self at will, regardless of place or
conditions. They used no altar symbols, no incense or other mechanisms.
(These things were reserved for use as physical stimuli to impress the
low self when suggestion was being given for various purposes.)

The various rites used in religions to insure the dying a survival in
spirit form and a certain amount of happiness as a spirit, were unknown
to the kahunas. They had no place in their matter-of-fact science for
dogmas which would demand a "salvation." Their teaching was simply that
all people should know that the spirits of men survived death and that
the memories and complexes of physical life were carried over into the
spirit life, making it advisable for the individual to rid himself of
guilt complexes before death. (This may have given rise in ancient times
to the non-kahuna practices

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

aimed at preparing man for a better life after physical death.)

The kahunas believed that after death there was a continuation of growth
and progression, the low self reincarnating as a middle self in due time
and the middle self eventually rising to the level of the High Selves,
first learning to watch over lesser forms of life, and in the end
becoming the "utterly truthworthy parental spirit" or High Self of a low
and middle self incarnated in the physical., Not a great deal was known
about this process of growth and progression, so little was taught about
it except as a part of the speculative doctrines of Huna. The
graduation, so to speak, of the low self to the level of a middle self
is accomplished after death during a period of inactivity resembling a
long sleep. One is reminded of the worm which becomes a pupa, is
inactive for a time, and then bursts forth a butterfly.

The most important preparation for death must be done by the individual.
He must reduce his guilt complexes to the minimum and free himself of
dogmatic religious beliefs which will hinder him after he becomes a
spirit. It is not necessary to spend more than a few months on the
spirit plane before continuing the growth process, providing one knows
the ropes as did the kahunas. Knowing Huna is knowing the ropes.

All we can take with us at the time of death is knowledge, and it should
be the first duty of each of us to accumulate the correct
"take-withable" knowledge by a careful study of the psycho-religions and
the discarding of beliefs which cannot be substantiated.

It should be held in mind that no two inspired or revealed religions
agree, and that teachings obtained

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

from the departed through mediums show a similar disagreement. There may
be one correct revealed religion and one correct teaching from a spirit
or a spirit group, or there may be a partial truth in all such sources
of information.

At present we have before us only one basic and practical criterion by
which to measure such material, and that is Huna. I say this, because
Huna worked. It made fire-walking practical. It made mental healing
practical, also instant healing through the aid of the High Self. It
made practical the system of gaining the aid of the High Self in
changing the circumstances and future of the individual.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. The Secret which Enabled the Kahunas to Perform
the Miracle of Instant Healing](ssbm19)
