[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tao81)  [Next](ltw287.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

ESSAYS

INTERPRETING TAOISM

by

HENRI BOREL

Translated by M. E. REYNOLDS

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### PREFACE

THE following study on Laotzu's "Wu-Wei" should by no means be regarded
as a translation or even as a free rendering of the actual work of that
philosopher. I have simply endeavoured to retain in my work the pure
essence of his thought, and I have given a direct translation of his
essential truths in isolated instances only, the rest being for the most
part a self-thought-out elaboration of the few principles enunciated by
him.

My conception of the terms "Tao" and "Wu-Wei" is entirely different from
that of most sinologues (such as Stanislas Julien, Giles, and Legge),
who have translated the work "Tao-Teh-King." But this is not the place
to justify myself. It may best be judged from the following work whether
my conception be reasonable or incorrect.

Little is contained in Laotzu's short, extremely simple book, the words
of which may be said to be condensed into their purely primary
significance--(a significance at times quite at variance with that given
in other works to the same words <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0).md)--but this little is gospel. Laotzu's work
is no treatise on philosophy, but contains, rather, merely those truths
to which this (unwritten) philosophy had led him. In it we find no form
nor embodiment, nothing but the quintessence of this philosophy.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

My work is permeated with this essence, but it is no translation of
Laotzu. None of my metaphorical comparisons, such as that with the
landscape, with the sea, with the clouds, are anywhere to be found in
Laotzu's work. Neither has he anywhere spoken of Art, nor specially of
Love. In writing of all this I have spoken aloud the thoughts and
feelings instinctively induced by the perusal of Laotzu's deep-felt
philosophy. Thus it may be that my work contains far more of myself than
I am conscious of; but even so, it is but an outpouring of the thought
and feeling called up in me by the words of Laotzu.

I have made use of none but Chinese works on Laotzu, and of those only a
few. On reading later some of the English and French translations, I was
amazed to find how confused and unintelligible these books were.

I adhered to my simple idea of Laotzu's work, and of my work I could
alter nothing, for I felt the truth of it within me as a simple and
natural faith.

HENRI BOREL.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[73:\*](ltw286.htm#fr_0.md) By Confucius, for
instance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ltw287.md)
