[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw201)  [Next](ltw203.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

# ALL WE KNOW ABOUT LAOTZU

SZE MA-CH’IEN (136-85 B.C.) wrote that Lao-tzu was born of the Li family
of Ch’ujen Village, Li County, K’u Province, Ch’u State. His proper name
was Err, his official name was Poh-yang, his posthumous title was
Yueh-tan. He held the position of custodian of the secret archives of
the State of Cheu.

Confucius went to Cheu to consult Laotzu about certain ceremonials;
Laotzu told him: "The bones of these sages, concerning whom you inquire,
have long since decayed, only their teachings remain. If a superior man
is understood by his age, he rises to honor, but not being understood,
his name is like a vagrant seed blown about by the wind. I have heard it
said that a good merchant conceals his treasures, as though his
warehouses were empty. The sage of highest worth assumes a countenance
and outward mien as though he were stupid. Put aside your haughty airs,
your many needs, affected robes and exaggerated importance. These add no
real value to your person. That is my advice to you, and it is all I
have to offer."

Confucius departed and when he later described to his students his visit
to Laotzu, he said: "I understand about the habits of birds, how they
can fly; how fish can swim; and animals run. For the running we can make
snares, for the swimming we can make nets, for the flying we can make
arrows. But for the dragon, I cannot know how he ascends on the winds
and clouds to heaven. I have just seen Laotzu. Can it be said, he

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

is as difficult to understand as the dragon? He teaches the vitality of
Tao. His doctrine appears to lead one to aspire after self-effacement
and obscurity."

Laotzu lived in Cheu for a long time; he prophesied the decay of that
state and in consequence was obliged to depart, and went to the
frontier. The officer at the border post was Yin-hi, who said to Laotzu,
"If you are going to leave us, will you not write a book by which we may
remember you?" Thereupon Laotzu wrote a book of sonnets in two parts,
comprising in all about five thousand characters. In this book he
discussed his conception of the Vitality of the Tao. He left this book
with the soldier, and departed, no one knows whither.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction to Second Edition](ltw203.md)
