[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ltw202)  [Next](ltw204.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# INTRODUCTION TO SECOND EDITION

When the first edition was published in 1919, the writer was a Christian
and had very little first hand acquaintance with Taoism. Since then he
has become a Buddhist and by frequent visits to China has been studying
Buddhism and Taoism for twelve years. The present translation was made
by a Taoist-Buddhist monk, named Wai-tao (King Yun-pen) . He is about
fifty years of age, learned English as a boy in a Mission Academy, and
later graduated from the Department of Chinese Philosophy in the
National University in Peiping. Soon after graduation he became a member
of a Taoist-Buddhist Brotherhood and remained with them for many years
until he left to enter the great Kwei-tsung Buddhist Monastery. After he
had remained with them for three years, he returned to his earlier home
with the Taoist-Buddhist Brotherhood. The writer visited him at his
hermitage in the mountains of Southern Chekiang Province in the winter
1935 and remained with him for a number of weeks going over this
translation of Laotzu's *Tao-teh-king* and two other translations.

The present translation is nearly double the length of the Chinese text,
not because it is expanded by interpretation, but because it is
necessary to do so in order to bring out the meaning of the five
thousand ideographs which make up the text. Even when Chinese classical
texts are transliterated into the colloquial the text is extended fifty
percent and Laotzu's

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

text is exceptionally condensed until it is almost cryptic in places.
The translator had the use of a number of Taoist commentaries and was
able to consult with a number of living Taoist masters. There are
hundreds of these commentaries extant and many of them, in fact most of
them, are exceedingly cryptic owing to the Taoist habit of expressing
their teachings in secret symbols. The commentary which Wai-tao most
consulted was a famous one entitled: *Tao-teh-king-ching-chu-chieh*. It
is based upon the "divine elucidation" given to two great masters
through the planchette.

The Tao conception is the most inclusive and concise conception in human
thought, if not the grandest also. The Christian conception of God must
be supplemented by doctrines and dogmas; the Buddhist conception of
Buddhahood must be elucidated by other profound conceptions, such as,
Dharmakaya, Sambhogakaya, Prajna, Tathata and Tathagata; but the Tao
conception is self-contained, all-embracing, profound and inscrutable.
It is, just as it is. "How do I know this? Because of Tao."

Arthur Waley in his recent scholarly study of Laotzu and this
*Tao-teh-king* translates the title, The Way and its Power. (George
Allen & Unwin Inc., London) . He speaks of Tao as the Principle of
Naturalism which is excellent, but by seeking to crowd the book into a
preconceived idea of its place in literary history, he makes the
translation pedantic and disappointing. His painstaking study of its
authorship is also unconvincing. Even if there was three Laos to whom
the book has been credited (Laotzu, Lao Lai Tzu, and Lao Tan), who lived
a total of perhaps two

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

hundred years apart, there is no good reason why he should credit the
book to the last, in the face of the almost universal Taoist belief that
it was the original teaching of Laotzu. It is probably true that the Lao
Tan in his teachings used earlier material, and if the book was not put
into its final form until his time, it is more natural to think of Lao
Tan as an editor, than it is to eliminate the earlier Laotzu, as does
Waley. Moreover, Taoists universally believe that Laotzu and Lao Tan are
the same person; in fact, there is some evidence that there was an
earlier Lao Tan and that he was the same man as Laotzu. Admitted, it is
a puzzling question but the general belief, in this is worthy of respect
and confidence.

The London modernist and "higher critic" asserts that the book is a
product of the Third Century by a Taoist politician combatting the
Confucian and political realism of his day. Opposed to this I would like
to offer another hypothesis. Shakyamuni Buddha lived in India at about
the same time that Laotzu is credited with living in China. (Buddha,
544-463 B.C. Laotzu.)

Waley thinks that the writing, *Tao-teh-king*, was put into its final
form about 240 B.C. That it was in the main the writing of an unknown
political realist, who wove into it earlier Taoist mysticism and
metaphysics. Then he inclines to the belief that this unknown writer was
a certain 4th Century official named Lao Tan. But there is a persistent
belief that there was another Lao Tan who lived a century or two earlier
and is credited as being the same person as the official Laotzu commonly
called "the old Philosopher." This leaves a gap of some two hundred
years during

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

which certain Taoist writings had been increasingly credited to "the old
philosopher," *i.e.* Laotzu.

The hypothesis I venture to suggest is this:--That the teachings of the
Indian Shakyamuni Buddha had percolated into China during those two
hundred years, being carried by travelling merchants and scholars. These
Buddhist teachings being unwritten in those early days were necessarily
carried in memory and became more or less confused and distorted, but as
they blended easily with the current Taoist [philosophy](errata.htm#0.md),
they were commonly accepted and more or less kept together, and credited
to "the old philosopher," Laotzu. This hypothesis explains the vagueness
and confusion as to authorship and also the affinity of Laotzuan ideas
with Buddhist thought. This hypothesis may seem fantastic to some but it
is no more fantastic than is the other, that it is a Third Century
polemic of political realism. It has the merit, at least, of being in
harmony with the universal Taoist belief and of defending the name of
Laotzu.

The foregoing suggestion explains the many singular likenesses in its
thoughts and even words to the teachings of Buddhism, and it further
explains why in the following centuries as Indian Buddhism came into
China that it found an affinity with the Laotzuan philosophy and was
profoundly influenced by it, until by the Sixth Century A. D. the type
of Buddhism taught by Hui-neng, the Sixth Patriarch of Dhyana Buddhism,
became indigenous. Substantially all the very early leaders of Buddhism
in China were Taoist scholars and for a thousand years, even down to
today, it is often hard to say whether Buddhism is more Buddhistic or
Taoist. Buddhist temples

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and Taoist Temples, in both images and ceremonial, are often almost
indistinguishable. This very translation was made in a Brotherhood that
first bow in adoration to Maitreya Buddha and then turn to bow to Taoist
worthies and to the name of Laotzu. The Pure Land type of Buddhists
first started in just this way of synthesizing the conceptions of Tao
and Buddhahood but later veered over to a more exclusive adoration of
the name of Amitabha Buddha, and, by so doing, departed from the free
and un-theistic spirit of Shakyamuni, which is preserved in the
conception of Tao. I have written more at length of this origin of
Dhyana Buddhism in China in an essay that is included in my book
entitled, A Buddhist Bible; the Favorite Scriptures of the Zen Sect, and
therein show at some length the steps of this influence of the
*Tao-teh-king* upon early Buddhism as it developed in China.

DWIGHT GODDARD.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Central Teaching of Laotzu](ltw204.md)
