[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ctdi03)  [Next](ctdi05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BELIEFS.

Cinon Duro (Hokoyel Mutawir), the last hereditary chief at Mesa Grande,
a living repository of the knowledge of the past, felt more keenly than
any of the old men the lasting value of the ancient rule of life. It was
sacrilege to reveal the religious mysteries to a stranger, or even to
hint at the sacred ritual so solemnly imposed. His affection for the
writer and his consciousness that the past was to die with him, led him
to give for friendship what could never have been bought for money. But
the struggle between his inbred reluctance to reveal the things of the
past, and his promise to do so, led him to give the recital in the
briefest way.

A satisfactory rendering of this recital could be given only by an
interpreter combining a full knowledge of old Indian terms with a good
acquaintance with the English language; and such a one was not often to
be found at Mesa Grande, where most of the younger Indians know only
enough of their mother tongue for conversation with parents and
grandparents in the house. Any Diegueño word not in common use, any
allusion to the myths, the gods, or ceremonies, is foreign to
them. <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_8) It is extremely fortunate that
in the Manzanita region an excellent interpreter was found, familiar
with the rare terminology of the past. The loss is great that in the
death of Cinon Duro, September 17, 1906, there must die many a secret of
the past.

The ceremonies which Cinon performed and the ancient religion he adhered
to had been carefully taught to him by his father, that they might be
transmitted to posterity with exact detail. The myths and sacred songs
had been acquired in the same way. His father's name was mentioned with
the greatest reverence in a half-whisper, since the names of the dead
are spoken with reluctance. Where his father gained this knowledge was
not distinctly explained, though it was stated that all religious ritual
had been devised and directly given by Tuchaipa himself.

It is extremely interesting to trace the reciprocal influence of the two

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

tribes, Luiseño and Diegueño, each upon the other as shown in the
surviving fragments of their ancient worship. To one who has long
studied the subject it becomes increasingly evident that many of the
ceremonials used among the Diegueños were acquired directly from their
neighbors the Luiseños, as the latter declare. The toloache initiation
ceremony, the eagle fiesta, and the whirling eagle-feather dance are the
ones especially stated to have been thus introduced.

The value of the Chungichnish worship as a conquering faith has been
noted. The Luiseños declare that they received it themselves from their
brethren of the coast. It is not probable that it displaced an earlier
and more primitive religion, but much more likely that its ritual became
fused and blended with whatever of the sort already existed in both
tribes. It would be impossible at this late day to disentangle all these
associations and to make positive assertions in regard to the matter,
but the statement made by the Luiseños that some of the sacred songs
sung by the Diegueños in their ceremonies are in the Luiseño language
may be possible of verification later. Certain it is that the language
of these songs is acknowledged by the Diegueños to be foreign or unknown
to themselves.

The differences between these two tribes are very striking, and based on
deep-lying racial factors. The Diegueños' natural affiliations are with
the Mohaves, Maricopas, Havasupais, etc. The great creator-gods Tuchaipa
and Yokomatis are held in reverence. Diegueño mythology deals with
characters powerful in themselves, and representative of those who are
to come after; as, for example, Sinyohauch, the wonder-working woman,
typical of the various powers of Nature; and Cuyahomarr, the
wonder-working boy, who gives names to all the plants and animals in the
world. These characters have no counterparts in Luiseño mythology, which
is subtler, less dramatic, and more metaphysical than the Diegueño. The
death of Tuchaipa has many of its details either lent to the Luiseños or
borrowed from their moon myth, the sickness and death of Moyla the Moon
in its waning, and its rebirth as the crescent in the resurrected Ouiot.

All tribes with early affiliations with Mexico might naturally adopt the
myth of a dying god or demi-god, but these influences are lost in
obscurity. It will be found an important and perhaps not a hopeless task
to trace the reciprocal give-and-take in two tribes so racially distinct
and geographically and socially conjoined as the so-called Luiseños and
Diegueños.

On review of the notes of Cinon's conversations, it appears that in his
account of the toloache ceremony he mentions Wanawut, not by that
Luiseño term of course, but by saying that "the boys jumped in a ditch
which had a redo (woven net), with stones in it, in the bottom of it."

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

In describing the girls' ceremony, he remarked that red, white, and
black were the colors for women.

Such of the Luiseño form of ritual as was adopted by the Diegueños of
Mesa Grande seems to have been introduced about a hundred and twenty
years ago. In the two tribes there were some minor differences in
performance. Instead of the lump of sage-seed and salt, rabbit-meat and
salt were put into the girl's mouth in the ceremony Wukunish. Instead of
the dry root of the toloache, a freshly-dug piece was pounded and the
juice expressed in the boys' initiation ceremony.

In the Story of Creation as he first gave it, Cinon did not mention any
primeval existence antedating Earth and Sky; but on a later occasion he
sang the songs referring to the birth of the creator-gods, and mentioned
in an obscure way the First Existence, typified in Luiseño myths by
Kivish Atakvish. If he had lived, the Diegueño version of this most
obscure and important part of the Creation myth would probably have been
heard, since a few hours before the accident which resulted in his death
he promised next time to tell "a part of the Creation story he had never
yet related."

The words of the Songs of Creation which he sang, and which were
recorded on the graphophone, are as follows:--

First song, sung by the Sky father who begot the creator-gods Tuchaipa
and Yokomatis:--

Yi-haw-ma-ya-a i  
Yi-haw-ma-ya-a i (repeated six times)  
(A long sigh repeated)  
Ich-a-pa-wha-chi-ho  
Yo-o-o  
Ich-a-pa-wha-chi-yo  
Yo-o-o  
Ma-to Tu-chai-pa  
Mai-i-i Yo-ko-mat  
Ich-a-pa-wha-chi-yo  
Icha-a-pa-wha-chi-yo.

The second song by the Earth mother describes the bringing forth of the
creator-gods:--

Chu-pa-chu-wha  
Wi-i-i  
Chu-pa-chu-wha  
Wi-i-i  
Tu-chai-pa  
Chu-pa-chu-wha  
I-i-i  
Yo-ko-mat-is  
Chu-pa-chu-wha  
Wa  
Wi-i-i  
Wi-i-i.

The weird intonation of the chant, and its strange changes, cannot

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

be described, nor the intense reverence for the old religion expressed
in every look and gesture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[232:1](ctdi04.htm#fr_7) The Mesa Grande Chaup
story (*Journal of American Folk-Lore*, 1904, vol. xvii, pp. 217-241) is
an exception, being well interpreted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Significance of Myths](ctdi05)
