[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ctdi01)  [Next](ctdi03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### A DANCE-SONG FROM MANZANITA.

This includes Tutomunp, a Mohave dance-song, and Kachawharr, a Jacumba
dance-song, accompanied by a basket rubbed with a stick.

Hatakek of Manzanita is to sing the Diegueño song Kachawharr with basket
accompaniment; but he begins by singing part of Tutomunp, a dance which
originated with the Mohave Indians. The song always begins at sunset;
and all these Western Indian songs have a "starter," the interpreter
explains. The "starter" in this case is in the Mohave language, so the
Diegueño interpreter attempts no translation.

The old man chants on and on, showing the most wonderful lungpower,
continuing for five or ten minutes at a time, and ending each song or
section of the song with a loud "Hup!"

Again he begins, and continues his loud and monotonous singing, for
another five minutes or so. The tone of the chant varies. It rises to a
higher pitch, "Hup!"

The same song again; and by this time a circle of men and women should
be dancing, so the old man keeps time with his foot to show the measure
of the dance. "Hup!"

For the next half-dozen songs he gives the translation in Diegueño. They
relate to two brothers whose father is Homatimilya. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) The names are all in the Mohave
language. <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

Another song with varied tones ending in "Hup!" The meaning of the song:
"They are going along. All is dim and hazy before them."

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

Song: More excited, with varied cadences. The singer keeps time with his
foot. The song ends suddenly, "Hup!"

Song: Monotonous beginning, varied tones at end. Meaning: "We are going
on. We have a long way to go."

Song: "We are going on. Many people live in other places, but we go on
alone."

Another song: "We are going on, but some day we may meet somebody
coming."

Now begins the dance-song of the Diegueños themselves, Kachawharr. This
was taught the Manzanita people by those of Jacumba. All these dances
are of course religious ceremonies. The singer, or leader of the dance,
old Hatakek, takes a flat bowl-shaped basket turned upside down, and,
part of the time seated, but mostly kneeling on the ground, he
alternately rubs and taps this as if it were a drum, keeping time to the
music of his chant.

Song: This is about the two brothers, the gods Tuchaipa and Yokomatis or
Yokomat (the two names are sometimes given in one: Chaipakomat), who
came forth from the ground at Jacumba, at the hot-spring there. Meaning
of the song: "They are at Jacumba. They do not know where they came
from. They came forth from the earth."

Song: "Let us build a house. It is going to rain." A hill at Jacumba is
the house they built covered with earth. There is a hot-spring at the
south of the hill, and this is the door of the house. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

Song: They were in the house at night and it began to rain on them.

Song: It leaked on them through the holes in the brush covered with
sand. One brother was tapping on the roof of the house with a club (as
the curving basket is tapped with the stick).

Song: He tells the other it is all right. "We have made it good and
solid." He came out of the house and felt on the ground with his hands.
The tobacco-plant was growing there. He could not see it in the
darkness, but he could feel it. "It is ready to bloom."

Song: It was bigger the next time he felt it. He felt all around.

All kinds of plants are beginning to grow. The rain has started them in
the night." He felt the plants. They were shaking in the wind.

Song: The brothers are talking of how they can gather seeds when the
plants are ripe. The plants are growing fast in the rain, but they have
no wives to gather the seeds.

Song: When the wind blows, the plants look like the waves of the sea. It
is a fine sight.

The old singer, squatting on bended knees, pounds gently on the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

basket which rests on his lap. Then he rubs it with the stick. Chawharr
is said to mean "rubbing." He holds the stick with his right hand, the
basket with the other. He rises by straightening his body, pounds more
loudly, and sings louder. He moves his body up and down in time to the
song. Song and movements stop suddenly, as is always the case in these
dances. The old man is exhausted. This is hard work, and he is
unaccustomed to it, since these dances are no longer performed, and it
is many years since he has led the song.

He begins again, hitting the basket gently in time, and rubbing it at
intervals.

The song is short, ending suddenly. It means: "They are going to make
smoke out of the tobacco-plant. It is ready now to bring into the
house."

Now they are going towards the west after the girls whom they wish for
their wives. They run with balls, kicking the ball with their foot,
running after it, throwing it again with the foot. With three bounds of
the ball they reach the ocean where the girls are. But they do not stay.
They turn and go back home, their hair flying in the wind, the east
wind. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md)

Song: The girls get to thinking why the boys came.

Song: The brothers come home and see their plants ripe. "Who will gather
the seeds? We need women for the work."

Song: They hunt cotton-tail rabbits at Jacumba.

Song: They are trying to see who can shoot the farthest. They begin to
gamble with bow and arrows according to the length of their shots. The
younger brother loses all the time. He comes home with nothing.

Song: They try another game. They first shoot one arrow. Then whoever
comes close to the first arrow wins. The younger loses again.

Song: They gamble again, springing sticks edgewise. The younger gets
thin. The elder wins everything.

Song: The younger begins to stake and to lose his fingers, arms, legs,
all the parts of his body. He begins to wager every hair of his head.
Nothing is left but his heart. "We will play with these long poles with
hoops. I will stake my heart. If you win, you can eat it."

Song: They go east and get long poles and begin to straighten them in
the fire to play with. The younger loses his heart and falls down dead.
The elder sees him dead and dances all around him.

Song, with basket accompaniment. The old man rises on his knees and
pounds vigorously. Meaning: "He began to skin and eat him."

Song, with basket accompaniment as before: The Coyote brings a big

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

load of wood and drops it on the ground. The brother tells Coyote he
will roast (burn?) the body.

Song, with basket: The elder brother is behind the house. He sees a
little bird flying there. He thinks it is the spirit of his dead
brother.

Song, slow time, with basket, more excited than ever at the end.
Meaning: He sees many birds fly out. He is afraid and wants to run away.
He goes south through piles of rocks where the trail leads. He gets
hungry and pulls up fresh yucca-plants to cook and eat. He looks at the
plants.

Song: He sees deer-tracks going toward the water.

Song: He goes on towards the desert, and sees a band of mountain-sheep,
which he frightens, and they run away from him. He is talking to them.

Last song: He goes to the Maricopa Indians. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](ctdi03.htm#fn_6.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[228:3](ctdi02.htm#fr_2.md) Evidently the Mohave
Matevilye.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[228:4](ctdi02.htm#fr_3.md) One of these songs was
obtained on a phonograph record (American Museum of Natural History, no.
1017), described in the paper now in press at the University of
California.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[229:1](ctdi02.htm#fr_4.md) The primitive houses of
the Luiseños and Diegueños were made of uprights and rafters of solid
timbers, joined by wattled brush, the whole covered with earth, with an
opening in front for a door, and a hole in the roof to permit the egress
of smoke and the entrance of light, the house looking at a distance like
a hillock of sand.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[230:1](ctdi02.htm#fr_5.md) This and the following
songs recall similar incidents in the Cuyahomarr story, which would seem
to be merged with the history of the two gods; or by some omitted
connection, the two stories may both be celebrated in this dance. As the
full recital lasts all night, it was impossible for Hatakek to give more
than a portion of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Awikunchi, A Fair-Weather-Making Ceremony](ctdi03.md)
