[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tbr02)  [Next](tbr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tractate Berakoth*, by , by A. Lukyn Williams, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

# INTRODUCTION

### 1. THE NATURE OF THE TRACTATE IN GENERAL

PRIMITIVE religion, as we know it, consisted almost entirely of
ceremonial, the deeper issues, which affect the soul and spirit, being
only gradually evolved.

This ceremonial, frequently minute to a degree, with each part
considered to be of extreme importance if the favour of the God was to
be ensured, was handed down from father to son—the relationship being
physical or educational—without more than rudimentary assistance in
signs or writing.

The religion of the Hebrews was no exception. But with them in process
of time, chiefly through the revelation to Abraham, and afterwards to
Moses, together with the movement to which the latter gave an impetus,
customs became fixed by written documents, their connexion (certain or
inferred) with historical events was recorded, and ancient practices
became a fresh code likely to maintain religion in a form purified of
abuses and fitted for the new time.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

But the need of oral instruction was felt almost as strongly as ever, if
the concise rules laid down in writing were to be understood, and the
religious life be ordered acceptably to God. For as the inner sense of
religion grew, so was it perceived more clearly that no part of human
life could be unimportant, but that everything should be regulated in
accordance with the Divine will, either expressly declared, or
ascertained by legitimate deduction.

Hence with the final codifying that took place in the time of Ezra and
his immediate successors the task of formal definition and authoritative
application became increasingly urgent, and the more the Written Law was
fixed so did the Oral Law increase. For to human conduct the latter was
no less necessary than the former.

But the day came when the enormous number of practical directions was
too great a burden for the human memory to bear—especially after the
guardians of the tradition had been diminished in number by the crushing
disaster to the Jewish State—and it was found necessary to use written
aids. Yet the historical documents themselves had been canonized for
many years, and could no longer be modified or touched. So fresh
documents were framed, which indeed made no claim to inspiration, but
only embodied the oral teaching of many generations upon the application
of the Law to new circumstances, as they had arisen. We know very little
of the beginnings of this

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

new codification. But it is certain that during the whole of the second
century of our era, if not earlier, attempts were being made in this
direction, and that these were consulted by the compiler of our present
Mishna, and even embodied in his work. He himself was in all probability
the descendant of the two Gamaliels and of Hillel, R. Judah, the Prince
and the Saint, who was born in the year 135 and died about 210 A.D.

This collection, called the Mishna, *i.e.* the *Oral Teaching*—the
Tosephta will be considered later—embraced the practical side of life,
as it was then understood, with divisions well—defined and fairly
rigorously maintained. But the author, following his precedents, gave
not only the directions themselves which were the outcome of
discussions, but, in many cases, also a summary of the discussions which
led up to them, often with the names of the disputants and the reasons
alleged. Thus the Mishna is a compendium of the practices of the Jews,
as ordered by earlier Scholars, and as adopted by the leading
traditionalists of the end of the second century of our era.

All life, it will be noticed, was to be ordered on strictly religious
lines, It is therefore only fitting that the collection should begin
with a series of rules which referred to the conscious service of God by
each faithful Israelite, There is no treatise upon doctrine as such—when
Maimonides in the [twelfth](errata.htm#0) century begins his summary of
practical

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Judaism with a
dissertation on the true doctrine of God, he writes for a different age
in different surroundings—the Mishna is concerned with practice only.
But this was to be religious. Hence it was to be expected that since, of
all their practices, none equalled in primary importance that of their
formal acknowledgement of God, and their recognition of Him in
everything, the first treatise in the Mishna should deal with the
reverent attitude of the believer. God is the Giver of all; let His
people openly confess Him, and gratefully affirm their dependence upon
Him. Hence the title *Berakoth*, Benedictions, which here means the
forms of thanksgiving and acknowledgement proper to various occasions,
together with the rules of their observance.

A Synopsis of the Contents of the Tractate will. be found below ([p.
xx](tbr07.htm#page_xx)). Here it is sufficient to say that the treatise
opens with the consideration of the all—important personal
acknowledgement of God in the Shma‘, "Hear, O Israel, the LORD our God
is one LORD," the exact time when it should be said both in every
evening and in every morning, with the portions of Scripture and the
prayers that belong to it. This is followed by two chapters dealing with
the need for "intention" and attention in reciting it, and with cases in
which the recitation of the Shma‘ is not required (*cc*. i.-iii.).

Next comes Prayer, particularly that form of it embodied in the Eighteen
Benedictions, which follow the Shma‘, including regulations as to the

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

leader of the congregation who repeats it (*cc*. iv., v.). Lastly,
Benedictions over various kinds of food, with rules for inviting one of
those present at a meal to say them, and directions for the proper forms
of words to be used; also Benedictions at seeing beautiful or strange
sights of nature, and the duty of every true Israelite to recognize God
in everything that happens to him (*cc*. vi.-ix.). Christian people, it
is clear, may gain much, spiritually as well as intellectually, from the
careful study of this treatise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Its Relation to the Teaching of the New Testament](tbr04)
