[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th202)  [Next](th204) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### COMMENTARY

##### OF VISION AND APOCALYPSIS

The “Pœmandres” treatise not only belongs to the most important type of
the Trismegistic literature, but is also the most important document
within that type. It constitutes, so to speak, the Ground-Gospel of the
Pœmandres Communities, in the form of a revelation or apocalypse
received by the founder of the tradition,

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

that founder, however, being not a historical personage but the
personification of a teaching-power or grade of spiritual
illumination—in other words, of one who had reached the “Hermes,” or
rather “Thrice-greatest,” state of consciousness or enlightenment.

This stage of enlightenment was characterized by a heightening of the
spiritual intuition which made the mystic capable of receiving the first
touch of cosmic consciousness, and of retaining it in his physical
memory when he returned to the normal state.

The setting forth of the teaching is thus naturally in the form of
apocalyptic, and of apocalyptic of an ordered and logical nature; for it
purports to be a setting forth of the spiritual “Epopteia” of the Inner
Mysteries, the Vision revealed by the Great Initiator or
Master-Hierophant, Mind of all-masterhood.

This Vision, as we are told by many seers and prophets of the time, was
incapable of being set forth by “tongue of flesh” in its own proper
terms, seeing that it transcended the consciousness of normal humanity.
Being in itself a living, potent, intelligible reality, apart from all
forms either material or intellectual in any way known to man, it
pervaded his very being and made his whole nature respond to a new key
of truth, or rather, vibrate in a higher octave, so to say, where all
things, while remaining the same, received a new interpretation and
intensity.

The interpretation of this Vision, however, was conditioned by the
“matter” of each seer; he it was who had to clothe the naked beauty of
the Truth—as the Gnostic Marcus would have phrased it—with the fairest
garment he himself possessed, the highest thoughts, the best science,
the fairest traditions, the most grandiose imagination known to him.
Thus it is that we have so many modes of expression among the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

mystics of the time, so many varieties of spiritual experience—not
because the experience itself was “other,” the experience was the “same”
for all, but the speaking of it forth was conditioned by the religious
and philosophical and scientific heredity of the seer.

This element, then, is the basic fact in all such apocalyptic. It is,
however, seldom that we meet with a document that has come to us
straight from the hand of a seer writing down his own immediate
experience without admixture; for the delight of the Vision was not that
it gave new facts or ideas of the same nature as those already in
circulation, but that it threw light on existing traditions, and showed
them forth as being parts of a whole. Once the man had come into touch
with the Great Synthesis, there rushed into his mind innumerable
passages of scripture, scraps of myths, fragments of cosmogenesis, logoi
and logia, and symbols of all kinds that fitted naturally. These were
not any special writer’s monopoly, there was no copyright in them, they
were all utterances of the same Logos, the Great Instructor of humanity.

Thus the literature that was produced was anonymous or pseudepigraphic.
There was first of all a nucleus of personal vision and direct
illumination, then a grouping of similar matter from various sources
into a whole for didactic purposes. Nor was there any idea among these
mystics and scripture-writers that the form once issued should become
for ever stereotyped as inerrant; there were many recensions and
additions and interpolations. It was left to those without the sense of
illumination to stereotype the forms and claim for them the inerrancy of
verbal dictation by the Deity. Those who wrote the apocalypses from
personal knowledge of vision could not make such claim for their
scriptures, for they *knew*

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

how they were written, and what was the nature of hearing and sight.

We have accordingly to treat all such documents as natural human
compositions, but while doing so, while on the one side analyzing them
with microscopic attention as literary compositions, put together from
other sources, over-written, redacted and interpolated, we have also, on
the other, to bear in mind that this was not done by clever manipulators
and literary charlatans, but by men who regarded such work as a holy and
spiritual task, who endeavoured to arrange all under the inspiration of
a sweet influence for good, who believed themselves under guidance in
their selection of matter, and in recombining the best in other
scriptures into a new whole that might prove still better for the
purpose of further enlightenment suitable to their immediate
environment.

The “Pœmandres” treatise is of this nature—that is to say, though we
have not the original form before us, we have what was intended to be
read as a single document. We shall accordingly endeavour in our
comments not to allow the anomalies of its outer form to detract from
our appreciation of its inner spirit, and yet, on the other hand, not to
permit the beauty of much that is in it to blind us to the fact that the
present form has evolved from simpler beginnings.

##### THE GREAT AND LITTLE MAN

1\. In deep meditation the disciple reaches the consummation of his
efforts, and receives initiation from the Master of the masters, who is
to confer upon him authority (ἐξουσίαν—see § 32) to teach, that is, to
be a master or a Hermes.

2\. That this Grand Master of the Inner Mysteries

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

was Man and Shepherd of men, the Very Self of men, has been amply shown
in the Prolegomena, but the striking parallelism with the very wording
of our text, the Great Man, the “Being more than vast,” who tells the
little man, that though for the first time he now knows his Greater
Self, that Self has ever been “everywhere with thee,” is best shown by
the beautiful *logos* from the *Gospel of Eve* (presumably an Egyptian
gospel), which we have already quoted elsewhere <span
id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71):

“I stood on a lofty mountain, <span id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_72) and
saw a gigantic Man and another, a dwarf; and I heard, as it were, a
voice of thunder, and drew nigh for to hear; and He spake unto me and
said: I am thou, and thou art I; and wheresoever thou mayest be, I am
there. <span id="fr_73"></span>[3](#fn_73) In all am I scattered, and
whencesoever thou willest, thou gatherest Me; and gathering Me, thou
gatherest Thyself.”

##### THE PRESENCE

3\. The conditions of the seeing of the Holy Sight had been fulfilled by
the disciple; he had weaned himself from all lower desires. No longer,
like the theurgist in the Hermes-invocations of the popular cult, does
he pray for wealth and fame and cheerful countenance, and the rest; his
one desire, his only will, is now to “learn the things that are, and
comprehend their nature and know God.” He craves for Gnosis,—Gnosis of
Cosmos and its mysteries, Gnosis

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

of Nature, the Great Mother, and, finally, Gnosis of God, the Father of
the worlds. This is the one question he “holds in his mind,” his whole
nature is concentrated into this one point of interrogation.

It is to be noticed that we are not told, as in the *Gospel of Eve*,
that the seer stood, as it were, apart from himself, and saw his little
self and Greater Self simultaneously. He is conscious of a Presence, of
a Persona in the highest theological meaning of the word, who is not
seen so much as felt, speaking to him Mind to mind; he *hears* this
Presence rather than *sees* it.

##### THE VISION OF CREATION

4\. The first part of his mental question is: How came this cosmos into
being? The answer is the changing of the Boundless Presence into “Light,
sweet joyous Light.” He loses all sight of “all things” in his mind, the
mental image he had formed of cosmos, and is plunged into the infinitude
of Limitless Light and Joy, which transports him out of himself in
highest ecstasy.

But he has craved for Gnosis, not Joy and Light, but Wisdom, the
understanding and reconciliation of the great Opposites, the Cross of
all Manifestation.

Therefore must he know the Mystery of Ignorance as well as that of
Knowledge. Within the Infinitude of Light appears the Shadow of the
Unknown, which translates itself to his consciousness as Darkness,—the
Shadow of the Thrice-unknown Darkness, which, as Damascius tells
us, <span id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74) was the First Principle of the
Egyptians, the Ineffable Mystery, of which they “said nothing,” and of
which our author says nothing.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

This Darkness comes forth from within outwards to the disciple’s
consciousness, it spreads “downwards” in sinuous folds like a Great
Snake, symbolizing, presumably, the unknown, and to him unknowable,
mysteries of the differentiation of the root of matter of the cosmos
that was to be; its motion was spiral, sinuous, unending vibrations, not
yet confined into a sphere; not yet ordered, but chaotic, in unceasing
turmoil, a terrible contrast to the sweet peace of the Light, gradually
changing from Dark Space or Spirit into a Fluid or Flowing Matter, or
Moist Nature; that is, presumably, what the Greek mystics would have
called Rhea, the Primal Mother or Matter of the future universe.

It wails and groans—that is, its motion is as yet unharmonized. In the
terminology of the Sophia-mythus, it is the inchoate birth from the
Sophia Above, in the Fullness, brought forth by herself alone, without
her syzygy or consort. On account of its imperfection she wails and
groans to the Father of All and His Perfections, that her Perfection may
be sent to fashion her child, who is herself in manifestation, into a
world of order, and eventually into a Perfection in its turn. <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75)

The Primal Undifferentiated or Chaotic Sound, from the Darkness of its
first state, gradually manifests itself under the brooding power of the
Boundless Light, into less confused thunderings and murmurings, and
finally reaches a stage symbolized by a “Cry,” a “Voice of Fire,” of
Fire, not Light, expressing a need and want, longing for union with the
Articulate Power or Cosmic Word.

The three most primal stages thus seem to be symbolized by Darkness,
Moist Essence, Fire. These

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

were not our differentiated elements, but the Primal Pre-cosmic
Elements.

The same idea, though in different forms, is met with in a system of the
Gnosis preserved for us by the Old Latin translator of Irenæus, <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76) and also by Theodoret, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77) who ascribes it to the Sēthians, whom he
says are also called Ophianæ or Ophitæ. Now Sēth was Typhon or Darkness,
Dark Light, and this Sēth may very well have been symbolized as the
Great Serpent of Darkness, as it is in our text; hence the name “Those
of the Serpent,” perhaps given them by their theological adversaries
(orthodox Jews and Christians). In this system the Primal Elements are
given as Water, Darkness, Abyss, and Chaos. The Light was the Child of
the supreme Trinity—the First Man, the Second Man, and the Holy Spirit
or First Woman. This Light the Jewish and Christian over-working of the
original tradition called the Cosmic Christ.

Thus the Fire of Desire, or Cry of the Darkness, was to be satisfied or
checked or quenched by the Light’s fashioning its inchoate substance
into the cosmos; and so in another Vision, preserved in a treatise of
the same type, Hermes sees, by gazing “through the Master,” the cosmos
in its finished beauty, when all things in it are full of Light and
nowhere is there Fire. <span id="fr_78"></span>[3](#fn_78)

##### THE DESCENT OF THE LOGOS

5\. Upon this Cry for Light, into the Heart of the
Dark-Moist-Fiery-Nature is dropped a Holy Word, the Seed of the future
Cosmos. This Word is Articulate (its Limbs are perfect), Seasonable and
Ordering. The

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cosmic Animal
Nature is impregnated with the Light of the Supernal Reason, which
pervades its whole being.

This pervading immediately effects an ordering of the Chaotic Elements
into Pure Fire, Pure Air, and Pure Water-Earth. Moreover, it is to be
gathered from the sequel that Nature *saw* the Word and all his Beauty
in her Fire and Air, but as yet only *heard* him in her Water-Earth.

6\. The Shepherd thus explains that Light <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79) is really Mind, and Mind is God,—God prior
to Nature, but not prior to Darkness. The Unity of Light and Darkness is
a still higher Mystery. Light and Mind is the highest concept the
disciple can yet form of God. The Light-Word, or emanation of Supernal
Reason, is Son of God, Son of Great Mind.

##### THE REVELATION OF THE PLĒRŌMA

With the words “What then?” Reitzenstein (p. 37) perceives that the
sequence of the narrative is broken by a second vision, and is only
resumed with § 9. This he regards as an interpolation of another form of
cosmogenesis, into the one which is being described.

It seems to me, however, that the breaking of the main narrative may be
regarded as a necessary digression rather than as an interpolation of
foreign material—necessary in order to bring on to the scene the
hitherto invisible Greatnesses, “within” the Veil of Light, which
constitute the Economy of the Plērōma. More had to be seen by the
disciple before he was in a position to understand what he had so far
seen. He must now unite with the Light, his previous seeing being that
of its reflection, the logos within him. Not that this

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

logos and Light (or Mind) are separate. They are in reality one, the Son
is one with the Father in the state that transcends the opposites. The
Logos apparently comes forth, yet it remains ever with the Father, and
this coming forth and yet remaining constitutes its Life—in other words,
it is an emanation. Thus Hermes is bidden to understand the Light as
Life, and so make friends with it.

7\. Hitherto the Light had been one for him a sameness which his highest
vision could not pierce, the Veil of Light that shut the Beauties,
Perfections and Greatnesses of the Intelligible from the eyes of his
mind. To pierce this veil a still more expanded power of sight had to be
given him by the Master. The little word or light-spark within him is
intensified by the Great Word of the Master, this Word being an
Intelligible Utterance of the Mind, an intensification of being.

He now sees and understands the countless Powers within the Light, which
constitute the Intelligible Archetypal Form or Idea of all worlds.
Between the special sensible cosmos of his prior vision and this
Immensity was a Mighty Power, or Great Boundary (Horos), <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_80) that encircled the elements of the
sensible cosmos and held its Fire in check.

8\. In amazement he asks whence come these apparently disorderly and
untamed elements of the new world in process that have to be subdued and
separated from the Concord of the Perfection of the Powers? And the
answer is that Chaos, too, has its being from God’s Will. Discord and
Concord, Chaos and Cosmos, are both of God. The Primal Elements are, as
it were, the Passions of God’s Will desiring Himself. It is Himself as
Mother or Spouse

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

desiring Himself as Father. In other of the Trismegistic tractates <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81) this “Feminine Aspect” of Deity is called
Wisdom and Nature and Generation and Isis. He is Wisdom as desiring
Himself,—that Desire being the Primal Cause as Mother of the whole
world-process, which is consummated by His Fullness uniting with His
Desire or Wisdom, and so perfecting it.

This is the whole burden of the Gnostic Sophia-mythus, which I have
given very good reasons for believing derived its main element from
Egypt. <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) Curiously enough,
Reitzenstein (pp. 39, 40) quotes the two chapters (liii. and liv.) from
Plutarch on which I base my conclusions, but he does not notice that in
this respect the Christianized Gnosis is distinctly dependent on Egypt.

And so Philo <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83) also tells us that the
Mother of All is Gnosis (ἐπιστήμη), the very same name that Plutarch
gives to Isis.

The Mother, when thought of as without the Plērōma, is impregnated by
the Word, which Basilides would have called the All-seed Potency of the
Plērōma, endowed with all Powers, and sent forth as the seed of the
sensible cosmos that is to be. The Mother in her higher Nature
contemplates the Eternal Cosmos or Order of the Plērōma, and in her
lower Nature copies its Beauties by means of the permutations and
combinations of her elements and the generations and transformations of
her lives or souls.

This form of cosmogenesis Reitzenstein (p. 46) regards as of a
pantheistic nature, while the general narrative he holds to set forth a
world-representation of a dualistic tendency. It is true, as he himself

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

admits, that this blend of contradictory conceptions meets us frequently
in Gnostic systems of a more or less contemporary date; nevertheless he
lays great stress upon this difference, and so insists upon an
interpolation.

In this he is confirmed (p. 39) by the fact that whereas § 9 speaks of
God the Mind being male-female, we are in the second vision face to face
with “*eine* *weibliche Allgottheit*” who stands next to the Highest
God.

I must, however, confess that these contradictions do not make so great
an impression upon my mind as they seem to have done on the critical
faculty of Professor Reitzenstein. There is no system known to me, even
of the most exclusive monotheism, into which dualism does not creep
somehow or other at some stage; it cannot be avoided, for it is in the
nature of things.

The dualism of our text is, however, by no means so very marked, for
though it is not distinctly stated in § 4, it leaves it clearly to be
inferred that the Darkness comes from the Light itself, for previously
there was nothing but Light; “all things” had become Light to the eye of
the seer. It is the mystery of the sad-eyed Serpent of Darkness wrapping
itself round the lower limbs of the Light.

It was, in my opinion, precisely for the sake of removing the thought of
dualism that the seer is shown a still more intimate vision within the
Light Veil, where all ideas of monotheism, dualism, tritheism,
polytheism, and pantheism lose their formal distinctions in a Formless
State, or, at any rate, in a State of Being where all are interblended
with all. In describing it, the “tongue of flesh” has to use the
familiar language of form, but every word employed has a new
significance;

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

for even the “tongue of angels” cannot describe it, or any of the
“tongues” of heaven; He alone who speaks forth the Words of the One
Tongue can express it.

Whence this sublime conception of the Plērōma came, I do not know; it
seems to me impossible to find a geographical origin for such things,
as, indeed, it seems vain to seek a geographical origin for dualism and
the rest. For the writer or writers of our tractate these ideas came
from the nature of things, from the immediate experience of sight.

The form of expression, of course, may be susceptible of a geographical
treatment, but as yet I am not satisfied that any clear heredity has
been made out for this supposed interpolation. The Feminine Divinity,
next the Highest God, is not set over against that God, but is His own
Will. He is in the Plērōma Vision as much and as little male and female
as in the general narrative. He transcends all opposites and contains
all opposites in Himself.

What is clear, however, is that in the combination of both visions we
have before us a simple and early form of the Gnosis which we meet with
later in Christian over-workings, and especially in the very elaborate
expositions of the Basilidian and Valentinian schools, the systems of
which can, in their main elements, be paralleled and compared point by
point with our treatise; but this would be too lengthy a proceeding in
our present study, for it would require a volume to itself in any way
adequately to treat of it. <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

##### THE SECOND EMANATION

9\. We now return to the main narrative. Within the World-Egg, which was
encircled by the Mighty Power (the Gnostic Horos), there had already
been developed three Cosmic Elements (not our mixed elements)—Fire, Air,
and Water-Earth. This had been effected by the descent of the Cosmic
Logos into the Primal Elements of Disorder. As the Logos descended, Fire
and Air ascended, and the Logos remained in Water-Earth. This was the
result of the First Outpouring from the Potency of the Plērōma, the
First Word uttered by Mind.

The Second Outpouring of Mind was of Mind no longer regarded as Light
only, but as Light and Life, Male-Female. This emanation appeared as
Enforming Mind—that is, the Fashioner or Former, Artificer or Demiurge
of lives or souls; it was the ensouling of the Ordered Elements of
Nature with lives, whereby these Elements were drawn together into
forms.

The Great Mind, as Light and Life, reflected itself in the “pure
formation” of Nature—that is to say, in Fire and Spirit (Air), Fire for
Light and Spirit for Life, to further enform things.

The Mighty Power or Self-limitation of Mind, the Boundary that no mortal
can pass, marks off the formative area of the whole cosmos. This area,
however, was by no means only the mixed sensible world (cosmos) which we
perceive with our present physical senses. On the contrary, there are
within it various orders (cosmoi) of the main cosmos. For the Ordering
Mind, as the Enformer or Soul-fashioner, differentiates itself into
seven Ruling Forms or Spheres which “enclose” the mixed sensible cosmos;
these spheres, therefore, must be of a psychic nature—that is to say,

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

of a pure or subtle substance; they are Forms of subtle matter endowed
with reason. They constitute the Cosmic Engine of the fashioning of
souls, or psychic natures, and of their perpetual transforming. Their
energies and activities are those of Fate, or the ordered sequence of
cause and effect, symbolized by spheres perpetually entering into
themselves.

10\. In all the main phases there is to be observed the idea of a
downward tendency followed by an upward. The Darkness descends; it then
transmutes itself and aspires above in a Cry or Yearning for Light. The
Word descends; immediately the Fire and Air ascend. The Formative Mind
descends; immediately the Word ascends from the mixed Water-Earth—and
at-ones itself with its co-essential emanation from the Father—to a
space about the Seven, and thus leaves the still down-tending elements
in the Element Water-Earth deprived of its immediate presence, after
giving physical matter the initial impulse to order. This physical
matter our author calls “pure matter,” meaning thereby matter deprived
of the immediate presence of Reason.

11\. Hereupon from the impulse she has received Nature begins her
physical enformation, develops her physical elements and bodies of
irrational lives. Water-Earth divides into water and earth, and also
air, for this air is clearly something different from the Spirit-Air
that ascended; the lower air is one of the downward elements.

##### THE DESCENT OF MAN

12\. When this had been accomplished, there followed a Third
Outpouring—the descent of Man, the consummation of the whole Enformation
of things, a still

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

more transcendent manifestation of Mind, the One Form that contains all
forms, His Very Image coequal with Himself. He finally comes Himself to
consummate and save the cosmos in the Form of Man—that is, to gather it
to Himself and take it back into the Plērōma.

Nevertheless the Word and the Formative Mind and Man are not three
different Persons; they are all co-essential with each other and one
with the Father. For the Word is co-essential with the Demiurgic Mind (§
10), and the latter is Brother of Man (§ 13), and Man is co-equal with
God (§ 12).

13\. And so Man, the Beloved, descends; and in his descent he is clothed
with all the powers of his Brother’s creative energy, the creative
energy of Life conjoined with rational Light.

Having learned the lesson of the conformations and of the limitations of
the Spheres, he desires to break right through the Great Boundary
itself; but to do this he must descend still further into matter. Before
he can burst through upwards he must break through downwards.

14\. Accordingly he breaks through the Spheres downwards, seeking his
consort Nature below, and shows her his Divine Form radiant with all the
energies bestowed on him by all the Powers above.

And she in her great love wound herself round the image of this Form
mirrored upon her water, and the shadow of it thrown upon her earth;
just as the Darkness wound itself, like a Great Serpent, round the lower
parts of the Light, so does Nature coil herself round the shadow and
reflection of Man. Man is above, yet is he below; man is free, yet is he
bound—bound willingly in love for her who is himself.

Reitzenstein (pp. 47-49) is greatly puzzled with all

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

this, and seeks to distinguish several contradictory elements,
presumably supposing that these elements are woven together into a
literary patchwork from distinct traditions. I cannot myself follow him
here with any clearness. Of course the writer or writers of our treatise
did not discover new ideas or invent new terms; they used what was in
their minds and the minds of their circle. It was, however, the weaving
of it into a whole, not as a literary exercise, but as a setting forth
in the most understandable terms with which they were acquainted of the
“things seen,” that was their main interest. Those who had the “sight”
would understand and appreciate their labours, those who had not would
never understand, no matter what terms or what language were used.

When, then, Reitzenstein (p. 47) says that in § 11, in the bringing
forth by Nature of irrational lives, there is a confusion of
contradictory conceptions, he fails to see that Nature is ever the
World-Soul, the spouse of Mind; though Darkness she is spouse of Light.
Unaided she brings forth things irrational, a phase of that birth of
Nature by herself that is incomplete.

So also in § 13, Reitzenstein detects contradictory elements, which he
ascribes to two different regions of ideas. He does not, however,
perceive that though in one sentence the “formations” are said to be
those of the Father, and in the next those of the Brother, this is no
real confusion, because the Formative Mind is the Father, enforming
Himself in Himself; this self-energizing, when regarded by itself, may
be spoken of as other than the Father, but is not really so.

Nor can I see that there is any real contradiction in the breaking
through of the Spheres as though they were the product of an opposing
Power to that of the Son. The Fate was certainly so regarded by men who

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

were under its sway; but our treatise is endeavouring precisely to give
an insight into the state of things beyond the Fate. The burden of its
teaching is that all these oppositions are really illusory; man can
transcend these limitations and come into the freedom of the Sons of
God. Even the most terrible and fundamental oppositions are not really
so, but all are Self-limitations of God’s Will; and man is Son of God
co-equal with Him.

##### THE FIRST MEN

16\. Our treatise then describes the first appearance of man on earth,
which it regards as a great mystery never before revealed, “the mystery
kept hid until this day.” This I take to mean that it had hitherto never
been written about, but had been kept as a great secret.

This secret was the doctrine that the first men, of which there were
seven types, were hermaphrodites, and not only so, but lived in the air;
their frames were of fire and spirit, and not of the earth-water
elements. The Celestial Man, or type of humanity, was gradually
differentiating himself from his proper nature of Light and Life, and
taking on bodies of fire and air, was changing into mind (Light-fire)
and soul (Life-spirit).

This presumably lasted for long periods of time, the lower animal forms
gradually evolving to greater complexity as Nature strove to copy the
“Form” of Man, and Man devolving gradually until there was a union, and
the human subtle form could find vehicles among the highest animal
shapes.

The first incarnate men appear to have been at first also hermaphrodite;
and it must have been a time when everything was in a far greater state
of flux than things are now.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

##### “INCREASE AND MULTIPLY”

18\. This period of pre-sexual or bi-sexual development having come to
an end, the separation of the sexes took place. The commandment is given
by the Word: “Increase ye in increasing and multiply in multitude”
(αὐξάνεσθε ἐν αὐξήσει καὶ πληθύνεσθε ἐν πλήθει).

It is true that this is reminiscent of the oft-repeated formula in the
Greek Targum of Genesis,—αὐξάνεσθε καὶ πληθύνεσθε, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85)—but it is only slightly reminiscent, the
main injunction being strengthened, and the rest of the *logos* being
quite different from anything found in Genesis. As nothing else in the
whole treatise can be referred to direct Hebrew influence, we must
conclude that the formula was, so to speak, in the air, and has so crept
into our treatise. <span id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86)

It has, however, given rise to a diatribe copied on to the margin of one
MS.—B. (Par. 1220)—by a later hand, and incorporated into the text of M.
(Vat. 951). It is in B. ascribed to Psellus, <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87) who goes out of his way to stigmatize
Hermes as a sorcerer and a plagiarist throughout of Moses; in brief, the
Devil is a thief of the Truth to lead men astray. In this we learn more
about the limitation of the so-called “Prince of Philosophers” <span
id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_88) than of aught else.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

19\. This increasing and multiplying, the perpetual coupling of bodies,
and the birth of new ones, is effected by the Fate, or Harmony of the
Formative Spheres, the Engine of Birth, set under Forethought or
Providence (πρόνοια). This Pronoia can be none else than Nature herself
as the Wisdom or Knowledge of God—in other words, His Will.

##### LOVE

The motive power of all is Love. If this Love manifests itself as Desire
for things of Matter, the Lover stays in Darkness wandering; if it
becomes the Will to know Light, the Lover becomes the Knower of himself,
and so eventually at-one with Good.

20\. But why should love of body merit Death—that is to say, make man
mortal? The disciple attempts an explanation from what he has seen.
Although his answer is approved, the meaning is by no means clear.

The physical body, or body in the sense-world, is composed of the Moist
Nature, which in a subsequent phase remains as Water-Earth, and in a
still subsequent phase divides itself into the elements of physical
earth, water, and air. The dissolution of the combination of these
elements is effected by Death—that is, Darkness, the Drainer of the
Water, the Typhonean Power. Water must thus here symbolize the Osirian
Power of fructification and holding together. The Moist Nature then
seems to be differentiated from the Darkness by the energizing of Light
in its most primitive brooding. But seeing that the Light is also Life,
the Darkness, which is posited as the ultimate opposite, is Death.

##### THE WAY OF DEATHLESSNESS

21\. The Way of Deathlessness is then considered. The disciple repeats
his lesson, and the Master commends

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

him; the Way Up is the Path of Self-knowledge.

Still the disciple cannot believe that this is for him; he cannot
understand that Mind is in him, or rather is himself, in so much as Mind
as Teacher seems to be without him. The play is on Mind and mind; the
one gives the certitude of Immortality, the other is still bound by the
illusion of Death. The disciple has not this certitude; Mind, then, is
not his.

22\. The Master then further explains the mystery. Gnosis must be
preceded by moral purification; there must be a turning-away before the
Re-turn can be accomplished. The whole nature must be changed. Yet every
effort that the little man seems to make of his own striving is really
the energizing of the Great Man.

23\. Those, however, who yield themselves to lower desires, drive the
Mind away, and their appetites are only the more strengthened by the
mind.

The text of this paragraph is very corrupt, so that the exact sense of
the original is not recoverable; and this makes it all the more
difficult to understand what is meant by the Avenging Daimon, the
Counterpart of the Mind. This difficulty is increased by § 24, where we
are told that the “way of life” (τὸ ἦθος) is at death surrendered to the
Daimon.

If, however, the reader will refer to the section on “The Vision of Er”
(in the Miscellanea of the “Prolegomena”), which in my original MS.
followed as a Digression on this passage, he will be put in contact with
the Platonic view of the Daimon and “way of life”; in our treatise,
however, the teaching is of a more intimate character, and must be taken
in conjunction with *C. H.*, x. (xi.) 16 and 21, where we shall comment
on it at further length.

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

##### THE ASCENT OF THE SOUL

24\. The subject of instruction is now the Way Above (ἄνοδος), or ascent
of the soul out of the body at death.

The physical body is left to the work of change and dissolution. The
life of integration and conservation ceases, and the life of
disintegration begins.

The form (εἶδος) thus vanishes, apparently from the man’s consciousness;
that is to say, presumably, he is no longer clothed in the form of his
physical body, but is apparently in some other vehicle; the particular
fixed form, or “way of life,” or “habit,” he wore on earth being handed
over to the Daimon deprived of all energy, so that apparently it becomes
an empty shell.

The next sentence is a great puzzle, and I can only guess at the
meaning. The senses which had previously been united by the mind become
separate—that is, instead of a whole they become parts (μέρη), they
return to the natural animal state of sensation, and the animal part of
man, or his vehicle of passion and desire, begins in its turn to
disintegrate, the mind or reason (*logos*) being gradually separated
from it, or, rather, its true nature showing forth in the man as he
gradually strips off the irrational tendencies of the energies.

25\. Those irrational tendencies have their sources in the Harmony of
the Fate-Sphere of seven subordinate spheres or zones; and in these
zones he leaves his inharmonious propensities, deprived of their energy.
For the Harmony is only evil apparently; it is really the Engine of
Justice and Necessity to readjust the foolish choice of the soul—that
is, to purify its irrational desires, or those propensities in it that
are not under the sway of right reason and philosophy. For a better
understanding of the characteristics ascribed to

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

the “seven spheres,” we must “run off” into another Digression, which
the reader will find relegated to ch. xii. of the “Prolegomena,” under
the title “Concerning the Seven Zones and their Characteristics.” This,
then, having been taken as a direct commentary on § 25, we continue with
the text of our treatise.

##### THE EIGHTH SPHERE

26\. The soul of the initiated strips itself naked of the “garment of
shame,” the selfish energizings, and stands “clothed in its own power.”
This refers probably to the stripping off of the “carapace of selfhood,”
the garments woven by its vices, and the putting on of the “wedding
garment” of its virtues.

This state of existence is called the Eighth, <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) a state of comparative “sameness” as
transcending the zones of “difference.” It is the Ogdoad of the
Gnostics, the Jerusalem Above, the plane of the Ego in its own form, the
natural state of “those-that-are.”

In another sense it may perhaps mean that the man, after passing through
the phases of the lower mind, now enters within into the region of the
pure mind, the Higher Ego, and there is at-oned with all the experiences
of his past lives that are worthy of immortality, his virtuous
energizings,—the “those-that-are,” that perhaps constitute the “crown of
mighty lives” sung of by the Pythian Oracle when celebrating the death
of Plotinus. <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90)

In this state the man, who has freed himself from the necessity of
reincarnation, hears the Song of the Powers above the Ogdoad—that is to
say, in Gnostic terms, the

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hymn of the Æons
of the Plērōma. Such a man would have reached the consummation of his
earthly pilgrimage, and be ready to pass on into the Christ-state, or,
at any rate, the state of super-man. He would be the Victor who had won
the right of investiture with the Robe of Glory, and the dignity of the
crowning with the Kingship of the Heavens. This Final Initiation is most
beautifully set forth in the opening pages of the *Pistis Sophia*, and
especially in the Song of the Powers (pp. 17 ff.) beginning with the
words: “Come unto us, for we are thy fellow-members. We are all one with
thee.”

The consummation of the mystery is that the alter-egos of the Individual
Ego, or the sum total of purified personalities which in that state
constitute its membership, or *taxis*, of their own selves surrender
themselves to a fullness of union or a transcendency of separation, in
which they become the powers or energies of a New Man, the true Son of
Man; they pass into a state where they each blend with all, and yet lose
nothing of themselves, but rather find in this new union the
consummation of all their powers. In this state of Sonship of the Divine
they are no longer limited by bodies, nor even by partial souls or
individual minds; but, becoming Powers, they are not only *in* God, but
one with the Divine Will—nay, in final consummation, God Himself.

27\. Of such a nature was the Shepherd; He, too, was the Christ of God,
the Son of the Father, who could take all forms to carry out the Divine
Will. When the form,—even though that form might for the disciple take
on the appearance of the cosmos itself, as he conceived it,—had served
its purpose, the Shepherd once more “mingled with the Powers.”

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

##### THE THREE “BODIES” OF THE BUDDHA

The Shepherd was a Christ for those who prefer the name of Christian
Tradition, a Buddha for those who are more familiar with Eastern terms.
And that this is so may be clearly seen by considering the so-called
“three bodies” (*trikāyam*) of *a* or *the* Buddha, for Buddhahood is a
state beyond individuality in the separated sense in which we understand
the term.

In the Chinese Version of Ashvaghosha’s now lost Sanskrit treatise,
*Mahāyāna-shraddhotpāda-shāstra*, <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91) we
read:

“It is characteristic of all the Buddhas that they consider all sentient
beings as their own self, and do not cling to their individual forms.
How is this? Because they know truthfully that all sentient beings as
well as their own self come from one and the same Suchness, and no
distinction can be established among them.”

“All Tathāgatas are the Dharinakāya <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92)
itself, are the highest truth (*paramārthasatya*) itself, and have
nothing to do with conditionality (*samvṛittisatya*) and compulsory
actions; *whereas the seeing, hearing, etc., of the sentient being
diversify the Activity* <span id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93) of
Tathāgatas.

“Now this Activity has a twofold aspect.

“The first depends on the phenomena-particularizing consciousness *by
means of which the Activity is conceived* by the minds of all who fall
short of the state of a Bodhisattva in their various degrees. This
aspect is called the Body of Transformation (Nirmānakāya).

“But as the beings of this class do not know that the

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Body of
Transformation is merely *the shadow* \[*or reflection*\] *of their own
evolving consciousness, they imagine it comes from some external
sources, and so they give it a corporeal limitation.* But the Body of
Transformation \[or what amounts to the same thing, the Dharmakāya\] has
nothing to do with Limitation or measurement.”

That is to say, a Buddha can only communicate with such minds by means
of a form, that form being really that of their own most highly evolved
consciousness. There are, however, others who have the consciousness of
the “formless” state, but have not yet reached the Nirvāṇic
Consciousness. These in this system are called Bodhisattvas.

“The second aspect \[of the Dharmakāya\] depends on the
activity-consciousness (*karmavijñāna*), by means of which the Activity
is conceived by the minds of the Bodhisattvas while passing from their
first aspiration (*chittotpāda*) stage up to the height of
Bodhisattva-hood. This is called the Body of Bliss (Sambhogakāya)” (pp.
100, 101).

We have used the term “formless state” in the penultimate paragraph to
signify the states of consciousness in “worlds” called Arūpa; but these
are only “formless” for consciousness which has not reached the
Bodhisattva level—presumably the Buddhic plane of Neo-theosophical
nomenclature.

For “this Body has infinite forms. The form has infinite attributes. The
Attribute has infinite excellencies. And the accompanying reward of
Bodhisattvas—that is, the region where they are predestined to be
born—also has infinite merits and ornamentations. Manifesting itself
everywhere, the Body of Bliss is infinite, boundless, limitless,
unintermittent, directly coming forth from the Mind” (p. 101).

The older Chinese Version says: “It is boundless,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

cannot be exhausted, is free from the signs of limitation. Manifesting
itself wherever it should manifest itself, it always exists by itself
and is never destroyed” (p. 101, n. 2).

In other words, one who has reached the Nirvāṇic Consciousness—that is
to say, a Master—can teach or be active on “planes” that are as yet
unmanifest to us ordinary folk; these “planes,” however, even when the
disciple is conscious of them, are conditioned by the self-limitation of
his own imperfection. The Vehicles of this Activity are called
Dharmakāya, Sambhogakāya and Nirmānakāya; and the limitation of their
Activity is determined on the side of the disciple by the degree of his
ability to function consciously in those states which are known in
Neo-theosophical nomenclature respectively as those of Âtman, Buddhi and
Higher Manas, or, in more general terms, those of the divine, spiritual
and human aspects of the self.

In the first degree of conscious discipleship, then, the Master
communicates with His disciples and teaches them by means of the
Nirmānakāya; that is to say, He quickens the highest form of
consciousness or conception of masterhood they have so far attained
to—taking the form of their greatest love, perhaps, as they have known
Him in the flesh, or as He has been told of as existing in the flesh,
but not His own-form, which would transcend their consciousness.

The next stage is when the disciple learns to transcend his own
“egoity,” in the ordinary sense of the word; this does not mean to say
that his true individuality is destroyed, but instead of being tied down
to one ego-vehicle, he has gained the power of manifesting himself
wherever and however he will, at any moment of time; in brief, the power
of self-generation on the plane of egoity, in that he has reached a
higher

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

state which is free from the limitations of a single line of egoity.

He now begins to *realise* in the very nature of his being that the
“Self is in all and all in the Self.” Such a disciple, or Bodhisattva,
is taught by the Master in this state of being, and the Kāya which he
supplies for the energizing of his beloved Father is perfectly
unintelligible to us, and can only be described as an expanded
consciousness of utmost sympathy and compassion, which not only strives
to blend with the Life of all beings, but also with the One Being in the
world for him, the Beloved. Such a sensing of the Master’s Presence is
called the Sambhogakāya of the Master, His Body of Bliss.

There is a still higher Perfection, the Dharmakāya, or Own-Nature of
Masterhood. But how should the dim mind of one who is Without imagine
the condition of One who is not only Within, but who combines both the
Without and the Within in the Transcendent Unity of the Perfect
Fullness?

##### THE PREACHING OF THE GNOSIS

27\. With the exposition of the Consummation of the Teaching and the
return to earth of the consciousness of the Seer, our treatise breaks
off into a graphic instruction of how the Gnosis is to be utilized. The
Wisdom is no man’s property; he who receives it holds it in trust for
the benefit of the world-folk.

I am, however, inclined to believe that §§ 27 to 29 are a later
interpolation, and that the treatise originally ran straight on after
the conclusion of the Shepherd’s Instruction with the words: “But I
recorded in my heart the Shepherd’s benefaction” (§ 30).

Until the end of § 26 we have moved in the

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

atmosphere of an inner intimate personal instruction, set forth in a
form evidently intended only for the few; indeed, as we find in other
treatises emphatic injunctions to keep the teaching secret, we cannot
but conclude that the oldest and most authoritative document of the
school was guarded with the same secrecy. The general impression created
by the instruction is not only that it itself is the consummation and
reward of a strict and stern probation, and not a sermon to be preached
on the house-tops, but also that those who followed that way were not
propagandists, but rather members of a select philosophic community.

With § 27, however, all is changed; we are introduced to the picture of
a man burning with enthusiasm to communicate, if not the direct teaching
itself, at any rate the knowledge of its existence and saving power to
all without distinction. In a few graphic sentences the history of the
fortunes of this propagandist endeavour is sketched. An appeal is made
of the most uncompromising nature; it is a clarion call to repentance,
and we seem to be moving in an atmosphere that is Hebrew rather than
Greek, prophetical rather than philosophical.

It would seem almost that this propagandist phase had been forced upon
the community rather than that it was natural to it; something seems to
have occurred which obliged it to enter the arena of general life and
proclaim its existence publicly. What this compulsion was we have no
means of determining with any exactitude, for the historical indications
are very obscure. If we were to conjecture that it was the vigorous
preaching of nascent Christianity which wrought this change, we should,
I think, be taking part for whole, for prior to Christianity there was
the most energetic propaganda made by the Jews, the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

intensity of which may be estimated by the phrase “Ye compass sea and
land to make one proselyte,” and the nature of which may be most clearly
seen in the propaganda of the Sibylline writers, with whose diction the
appeals to the “earth-born folk” in our text may be aptly compared,
while the prayer at sunset may be paralleled with the prayers of the
Essenes and Therapeuts.

On the other hand, the tradition of the Gnosis and Saving Faith preached
by our Pœmandrists is distinctly not Hebrew; it is a philosophizing of
other materials—materials which, as we have seen, were also partly used
by Jewish and Christian mystics, and adapted to their own special
traditions.

We thus see that at the time when Christianity came to birth there were
many rival traditions contending for general recognition, all of them
offering instruction in the Gnosis and hopes of Salvation, and I myself
believe that all of them were partial manifestations of the impartial
Quickening of the Spiritual Life which was at that time more abundantly
poured forth than ever before or after in the Western world.

With § 30, if my conjecture of an interpolation is correct, the original
treatise is continued, and we are told the nature of the awakening of
the spiritual consciousness which has come to the new-born disciple.

Henceforth all things are new for him, they all have new meanings. He
has become a *man*, instead of a “procession of fate”; he has reached
the “Plain of Truth.” In Christian terms the Christ has been born in his
heart consciously.

##### A HYMN OF PRAISE AND PRAYER FOR THE GNOSIS

31\. The treatise is concluded with a most noble hymn, in which the
further growth and effort of the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

*man* in spirit is set forth. Henceforth his effort will be to become
like unto the Father Himself, to pass from Sonship into the Perfection
of perfection, Identity or At-one-ment with the Father.

The sentence, “That I may give the Light to those in ignorance of the
Race, my Brethren and Thy Sons,” seems to me to be either an
interpolation, showing the same tendency as that of the propagandist
section, or an indication that the whole hymn was added at the same time
as the propagandist paragraphs, for the treatise proper seems to end
naturally and consistently in the Hellenistic form of the tradition with
the words, “I reached the Plain of Truth.” <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94)

##### THE NAME “POIMANDRES”

Many have already remarked that the name “Poimandres” is formed
irregularly in Greek, and this has led to an interesting speculation by
Granger, who writes:

“While, however, the name Poimandres does not answer to any Greek
original, it is a close transliteration of a Coptic phrase. In the
dialect of Upper Egypt *p<sup>e</sup>m<sup>e</sup>n<sup>e</sup>tre*
means ‘the witness.’ That the Coptic article \[*p<sup>e</sup>*\] should
be treated as part of the name itself is not unusual; compare the name
*Pior.* <span id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95) Such a title corresponds
very closely in style with the titles of other works of this same
period—for example, the *True Word* of Celsus, or the *Perfect Word*,
which is an alternative title of the *Asclepius.* The term Poemandres,
therefore, on this supposition, contains an allusion to

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

the widely spread legend of Hermes as witness, <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) a legend which is verified for us from
several sources. But the writer has adapted the details to his purpose.
Hermes is not himself the witness, but the herald of the witness.” <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97)

Granger then propounds the very strange theory, contradicted by all the
phenomena and opposed to every authority, that the Coptic Gnostic works
of the Askew and Bruce Codices were originally composed in Coptic with
the adoption of Greek technical terms, whereas they are manifestly
translations from the Greek. He, however, continues:

“There seems no adequate reason why such works may not have been
composed in Coptic. The Egyptian Gnostic writings of the third century
exhibit the same qualities of style as the Coptic biographies and
apocalypses of the fourth and following centuries. And so I am prepared
to believe that the *Poemandres* may have been first composed in Coptic.
Or shall we say that the work was current from the first in both
languages?” <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98)

We should say that the last guess is most highly improbable, and only
denotes the indecision of the writer. The *original* “Pœmandres” may
very well have been composed not in Coptic but in Demotic; but the
reasons given by Granger, as based on the phenomena of the Gnostic
Coptic writings, are not to be seriously considered. Nevertheless, the
*name* “Poimandres” may be a Greek transliteration of an Egyptian name,
though we hardly think that “The Witness”

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

will suit the theme. In any case “Man-Shepherd” was certainly the *idea*
conveyed to the Non-Egyptian by the name, however philologically unsound
its form may be in Greek.

##### THE GOOD SHEPHERD

It has been no part of our task to attempt to trace the Hermes-idea
along the line of pure Greek descent, for this would have led us too far
from our immediate subject. There is, however, one element of that
tradition which is of great interest, and to which we may draw the
attention of the reader in passing. The beautiful idea of the Christ as
the “Good Shepherd” is familiar to every Christian child. Why the Christ
is the Shepherd of all men is shown us by this first of our marvellous
treatises. In it we have the universal doctrine apart from any
historical dogma, the eternal truth of an ever-recurring fact, and not
the exaggeration of one instance of it.

The representation of Christ as the Good Shepherd was one of the
earliest efforts of Christian art; but the prototype was far earlier
than Christianity—in fact, it was exceedingly archaic. Statues of Hermes
Kriophoros, or Hermes with a ram or lamb standing beside him, or in his
arms, or on his shoulder, were one of the most favourite subjects for
the chisel in Greece. We have specimens dating to the archaic period of
Greek art. <span id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) Hermes in these archaic
statues has a pointed cap, and not the winged head-dress and sandals of
later art. This type in all probability goes back to Chaldæan symbolic
art, to the bearers of the twelve “signs of the zodiac,” the “sacred
animals.” These were, in one human correspondence, the twelve

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

septs or classes of priests. Here we see that the Greek tradition itself
was not pure Āryan even in its so-called archaic period. Chaldæa had
given of her wisdom to post-diluvian Greece, even as she had perchance
been in relation with Greece before the “flood.” Here, then, we have
another element in the Hermes-idea. In fact, nowhere do we find a pure
line of tradition; in every religion there are blendings and have been
blendings. There was unconscious syncretism (and conscious also) long
before the days of Alexandria, for unconscious syncretism is as old as
race-blendings. Even as all men are kin, so are popular cults related;
and even as the religion of nobler souls is of one paternity, so are the
theosophies of all religions from one source.

One of the greatest secrets of the innermost initiated circles was the
grand fact that all the great religions had their roots in one mother
soil. And it was the spreading of the consciousness of this stupendous
truth which subsequently—after the initial period of scepticism of the
Alexandrian schools—gave rise to the many conscious attempts to
synthesise the various phases of religion, and make “symphonies” of
apparently contradictory philosophical tenets. Modern research, which is
essentially critical and analytical, and rarely synthetical, classifies
all these attempts under the term “syncretism,” a word which it
invariably uses in a depreciatory sense, as characterising the blending
of absolutely incompatible elements in the most uncritical fashion. But
when the pendulum swings once more towards the side of synthesis, as it
must do in the coming years—for we are but repeating to-day in greater
detail what happened in the early centuries—then scholarship will once
more recognise the unity of religion under the diversity of creeds and
return to the old doctrine of the mysteries.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

In connection with the “Good Shepherd” glyph, it will be useful to quote
from Granger’s instructive exposition on the subject, <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) where he writes:

“Since the identification of Jesus with Hermes took place in circles
which formed part of the Christian community, <span
id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101) we shall not be surprised to find that
one of the leading types of Christian art, the Good Shepherd, was
immediately adopted from a current representation of the Greek
Hermes. <span id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102) As we see from Hippolytus
(*Refut.*, v. 7), the Gnostics were especially interested in Hermes as
Hermes Logius, a type which was increasingly frequent in later Greek
art. And this epithet was connected by them with the conception of Jesus
as the Logos. Now another type of Hermes, the Kriophoros, seemed to
bring together Jesus as the Logos and Jesus as the Good Shepherd. These
representations of Jesus begin in the second century; and so they
correspond in order of time with the appearance of the *Gospel according
to the Egyptians*, and of those Gnostic compositions which largely
depend upon it. <span id="fr_103"></span>[4](#fn_103)

“Another fact leads us to think that the figure of

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

the Good Shepherd had its roots in a previous tradition. ‘It is probable
that there were no statues before the age of Constantine, except the
Good Shepherd.’ <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) We must therefore
add Hermes to the list of pagan types which were taken over for its own
purpose by the rising Christian art.

“Moreover, we are enabled to advance one step further the long-standing
controversy as to the portraits of Jesus. Since the figure of the Good
Shepherd is borrowed from Greek sculpture, it cannot be used as evidence
for the earliest conceptions about the appearance of Jesus. And so the
arguments of Farrar and others fall to the ground, in so far as they
take the presence of this type to show that there was no genuine
tradition of Christ’s appearance. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105)

“We are now in a position to throw a little further light upon the
famous inscription of Abercius. The inscription speaks of a
Shepherd—‘Who feedeth on the plains His flock of sheep, and hath great
eyes that gaze forth every way. For He did teach me \[how to understand
and\] scriptures worthy to believe.’ <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106)

“The Shepherd, whose great eyes look in every direction, is no other
than Hermes treated as a symbol of Christ. And so some of the arguments
which may be directed against the Christian character of this
inscription, and to which Harnack <span id="fr_107"></span>[4](#fn_107)
attaches an exaggerated weight, are turned aside.”

With all of this may be compared what we have

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

already written in the Prolegomena on “The Popular Symbolic
Representation of the Shepherd” in the chapter on “‘Hermas’ and
‘Hermes.’”

Compare also the Hymn to Attis in the Naassene tradition, where he is
invoked “as Pan, as Bacchus, as Shepherd of bright stars.” This is the
macrocosmic side of the microcosmic mystery.

We should also not forget the interesting grouping on a Christian
lamp <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108) and gem, <span
id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109) which goes back very probably to the
third century. <span id="fr_110"></span>[3](#fn_110) It represents the
Christ as the Good Shepherd, after the Hermes type, with a lamb on his
shoulder. Above his head are the Seven “Planets,” the Lords of the Fate,
and in addition the Sun and Moon on either side, as is frequently the
case in Mithraic representations. Round his feet seven lambs <span
id="fr_111"></span>[4](#fn_111) crowd, symbolical of the “seven
peoples,” one under each “planet.” Moreover, on the right is Noah’s dove
and ark, and Jonah being swallowed by the whale, while on the left is
Jonah again, vomited on to the land and peacefully resting beneath the
shade of the miraculous gourd-tree.

This seems to me to be a symbol of the mysteries, a glyph of rebirth.
The lambs are the purified lower nature of the man, the purest essence
of which is exalted to the head of the Great Man. This purified “little
man” is swallowed by the Cosmic Fish, the Great Mother, the Womb of the
Almighty, and the man is born again to rest under his own tree in the
Paradise of the Further Shore.

It is also of interest to note that the Hermetic colonies already
planted in Mesopotamia, in the earliest

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Islāmic times of
which the Arabian writers tell us, called their head the
“Shepherd.” <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112)

From all of which we conclude that the Good Shepherd was one of the
leading ideas of Hellenistic theology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[24:1](th203.htm#fr_71) From Epiphanius,
*Hæres.*, xxvi. 3; see note to the first Hermes-Prayer (i. 11).

<span id="fn_72"></span>[24:2](th203.htm#fr_72) Symbolical of a high
state of consciousness, the Mount of Perfection.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[24:3](th203.htm#fr_73) *Cf.* the Oxyrhynchus
*logion* 5: “Jesus saith: Wherever there are \[two\], they are not
without God, and wherever there is one alone, I say, I am with him.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[25:1](th203.htm#fr_74) See note to the fifth
Hermes-Prayer (v. 2).

<span id="fn_75"></span>[26:1](th203.htm#fr_75) *Cf.* *F. F. F.*, 340,
341.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[27:1](th203.htm#fr_76) *Hær.*, I. xxx.
(Stieren, i. 363 ff.).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[27:2](th203.htm#fr_77) *Hær.*, *Fabb.*, i. 14.
See *F. F. F.*, pp. 188 ff.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[27:3](th203.htm#fr_78) “The Mind to Hermes,”
*C. H.*, xi. (xii.) 6, 7.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[28:1](th203.htm#fr_79) That is, the condition
“seeing.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[29:1](th203.htm#fr_80) Not Hōrus.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[30:1](th203.htm#fr_81) For references, see R.
39, n. 1; also 44.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[30:2](th203.htm#fr_82) *Cf.* my note on Plut.,
*De Is. et Os.*, liv. 6, in the Prolegg.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[30:3](th203.htm#fr_83) *De Ebriet.*, § 30.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[32:1](th203.htm#fr_84) The reader, however, may
be referred to the chapters on “The Basilidian Gnosis,” “The Valentinian
Movement,” “Some Outlines of Æonology,” and “The Sophia-Mythus,” in *F.
F. F.*, pp. 253-357.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[38:1](th203.htm#fr_85) *Cf.* Gen. i. 22 and 28,
viii. 17, ix. 7, and xxxv. 11 (in the singular).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[38:2](th203.htm#fr_86) See, however, Frag. XX.,
and R. 126, n. 1. *Cf.* the same formula in *C. H.*, iii. (iv.) 3 (P.
32, 11), and R. 116, n. 2.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[38:3](th203.htm#fr_87) And is printed in
Boissonade’s (V. C.) edition of Michael Psellus, *De Operatione Dæmonum*
(Nürnberg, 1838), pp. 153, 154.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[38:4](th203.htm#fr_88) If, indeed, the Psellus
of our scholion is the Younger Psellus (eleventh century); the *De Op.
Dæm.*, however, is ascribed by many to the Elder Psellus (ninth
century). See, however, the section “The Original MS. of our Corpus” in
ch. i. of the “Prolegomena.”

<span id="fn_89"></span>[42:1](th203.htm#fr_89) *Cf.* Com. on *C. H.*,
xiii. (xiv.) 14.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[42:2](th203.htm#fr_90) *Cf.* Porphyry, *Plotini
Vita*, xxii., ed. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835); also *Theosoph. Rev.* (July
1898), p. 403.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[44:1](th203.htm#fr_91) *Ashvaghosha’s Discourse
on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahāyāna.* Translated for the first
time from the Chinese Version by Teitaro Suzuki (Chicago, 1900).
Mahāyāna means the “Great Vehicle” of Buddhism.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[44:2](th203.htm#fr_92) Lit. Body of the Law.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[44:3](th203.htm#fr_93) The italics are mine
throughout.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[50:1](th203.htm#fr_94) It is to be noticed that
the Hymn is a Song of Holiness. “Holy art thou” is nine times
repeated—most probably intentionally. This was noticed long ago by
Casaubon. See R. 58, n. 3.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[50:2](th203.htm#fr_95) Palladius, *Hist.
Laus.*, 89.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[51:1](th203.htm#fr_96) G. has just referred to
the story of Hermes being witness for Horus when indicted on a charge of
bastardy by Typhon, as related in Plutarch.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[51:2](th203.htm#fr_97) Granger (F.), “The
Poemandres of Hermes Trismegistus,” *J. Th. Stud.*, vol. v., no. 191, p.
400.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[51:3](th203.htm#fr_98) *Ibid.*, p. 401.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[52:1](th203.htm#fr_99) See Reseller’s
*Lexikon*, art. “Hermes.” “Hermes in der Kunst”—“Periode des
Archaïsmus.”

<span id="fn_100"></span>[54:1](th203.htm#fr_100) *Op. cit.*, pp. 408
ff.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[54:2](th203.htm#fr_101) G. seems here to be
referring to the Naassene Document, but without any suspicion apparently
of its composite character.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[54:3](th203.htm#fr_102) See Sittl, *Klassische
Kunstarchäologie*, 777, 809, 819.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[54:4](th203.htm#fr_103) G. here again refers
apparently to the Naassene Documents, which, however, did *not* depend
on the *Gospel according to the Egyptians*, as we have shown; nor have
we any sure ground for dating this widespread mystic gospel of Egypt as
being of the second century rather than of the first. G. (p. 411)
suggests that the scene of the *Gospel of the Egyptians* was on top of
the Mount of Olives after the resurrection, which may very well be the
case, and that the title of *C. H.*, xiii. (xiv.), “The Secret Sermon on
the Mountain,” has reference to this gospel, which is by no means
probable, for our sermon keeps entirely within its own tradition in its
setting.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[55:1](th203.htm#fr_104) Lowrie, *Christian Art
and Archæology*, p. 290.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[55:2](th203.htm#fr_105) Taken in connection
with the above quotation from Lowrie, we should say that it disposes of
the whole contention. And for further corroboration of this view we
would refer the reader to the *Acts of John.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[55:3](th203.htm#fr_106) G. gives the Greek
text only, omitting the first line, which runs: “The disciple of the
Pure Shepherd.” *Cf.* R. 115.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[55:4](th203.htm#fr_107) *Cf.* *Class. Rev.*,
ix. 297.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[56:1](th203.htm#fr_108) Garucci, *Storia della
Arte christiana*, vi. *tav.* 474; Perret, *Catacombes de Rome*, *tab.*
17, no. 5.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[56:2](th203.htm#fr_109) Perret, *ibid.*,
*tab.* 16, no. 80

<span id="fn_110"></span>[56:3](th203.htm#fr_110) R. 113.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[56:4](th203.htm#fr_111) The gem has only six.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[57:1](th203.htm#fr_112) *Cf.* Chwolsohn (D.),
*Die Ssabier und der Ssabismus*, ii. 628. *Cf.* R. 166 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: (II.) The General Sermon](th204)
