[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th205)  [Next](th207.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### COMMENTARY

##### “AN INTRODUCTION TO THE GNOSIS OF THE NATURE OF ALL THINGS”

This treatise has no precise title, for, as we have already seen in
treating of the make-up of the Corpus, the traditional title, “Of Hermes
to Tat, the General Sermon,” found in all the MSS., cannot apply to our

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

tractate, which is addressed to Asclepius, and from which Stobæus quotes
under the general title, “Of Hermes, from the \[Sermons\] to Asclepius.”

The supposition, however, that Sermon (II.) has dropped out from the
parent copy of our Corpus, owing to the loss of one or more quires or
quaternions, explains those phenomena so admirably, that it has only to
be brought forward, as it has been by Reitzenstein, to carry conviction.

It is a curious fact, however, that Stobæus starts his quotations from
this treatise precisely with the same words with which our text begins;
nevertheless these words plunge us so immediately into a secondary
subject, that Reitzenstein thinks there may have been a more general
introduction which Johannes may very well have omitted.

That, however, the lost pages of our Corpus should have contained such
an introduction, broken at precisely the very same point to a word,
would seem to be a coincidence the reverse of probable; nevertheless the
treatise itself purports to be a very formal one, for we learn from the
concluding words (§ 17) that it was intended to be “An Introduction to
the Gnosis (προγνωσία) of the Nature of All Things.”

We are, therefore, driven to conclude that, in spite of a most
improbable coincidence, the beginning may have been lost, and that we
have therefore to regret the loss not only of the whole of the “General
Sermon” to Tat, but also of the introduction to the “Introduction to the
Gnosis” addressed to Asclepius, and therewith, in all probability, some
precious indications of how “Tat” and “Asclepius” are to be precisely
defined.

Parthey’s conflated title (p. 19) from the MSS., and Stobæus, “Of Hermes
the Thrice-greatest, the General Sermon to Asclepius,” must therefore be
definitely

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

abandoned, and, in lieu of the lost general title, we must be content
with the simple heading, “To Asclepius.”

##### SPACE IS A PLENUM

The subject is that of the Fullness of Being or the Plenum of things.
Space is a Plenum,—the fundamental concept of modern scientific
speculation.

Asclepius, however, must guard himself against the confusion of Space
with God; for God is not Space, but Cause thereof,—the True
Transcendency of “that which can contain all things” (§ 6).

“In Him we move.” “All that is moved is moved in what is stable,” or “in
Him who stands” (ἐν ἑστῶτι); where it is to be noticed that the term,
“He who stands,” is found in Philo, and is made much of in Gnostic
tradition, especially in the so-called Simonian Gnosis, for in *The
Great Announcement*, from which Hippolytus has preserved some passages,
the Logos is called “He who stands” or “He who has stood, stands and
will stand.” <span id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) This is the aspect of
the Reason of things that holds and compacts all together, the Stock or
Pillar of Immobility, the opposite aspect being that of the Separator or
Divider; the two together forming the Cross of Manifestation, the
resolution of the Sphere of Sameness.

The World-Soul is in perpetual motion; this perpetual motion is ordered
and reduced to a cosmos and harmony of motion by the introduction into
it, by means of the Reason, of the root-forms of motion (mentioned in
the *Timæus* and elsewhere);—up, down; right, left; front, back; in,
out; round,—and no-motion.

All bodies are essentially inert; it is the soul that moves them, either
immediately or mediately (§ 9).

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

What the precise meaning of § 10 may be I cannot say; the tradition of
the original text was variable, showing that the copyists had difficulty
with it. As, however, the doctrine throughout is that of a Plenum (as,
indeed, it is elsewhere in the Trismegistic writings), I can only
suppose that the instructor of “Asclepius” was endeavouring to clinch
his point by arguing that the only Void was the “is-not” or non-being;
now as nonbeing cannot possibly “exist,” there can *be* no such thing as
Void.

##### THE SPOUSE OF DEITY

That, then, in which “the All doth move,” in which all things “live and
move and have their being,” is the Bodiless; in other words, the Mind or
Reason of God, the Logos,—who, as Philo tells us, is the Place of
God,—that is, Infinite Space itself, the Container of all things, the
very Spouse of Deity. Spouse or Son, it matters not; that in which all
moves and lives and breathes is Wisdom, Good and Truth, the Æon of æons,
Light of light, Life of life, the Archetype of Soul itself (§ 12).

##### GOD IS CAUSE THAT SPIRIT IS

“God, then, is not Spirit,” <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130.md) much
less “a spirit,” <span id="fr_131"></span>[2](#fn_131.md) “but Cause that
Spirit is”; for God is “Good alone.” Therefore: “Call not thou aught
else Good.”

And now let us turn to F. C. Conybeare’s important criticism of Matt.
xix. 17 = Mk. x. 18 = Lk. xviii. 19, in the first number of *The Hibbert
Journal*, <span id="fr_132"></span>[3](#fn_132.md) where he

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

brings forward very strong evidence that the original reading was: “Call
thou me not Good; One only is Good, God the Father,”—a reading known to
Marcion, the *Clementine Homilies*, Athanasius, Didymus, Tatian, and
Origen (the two last inferentially).

If we compare this with our text, “Call not thou, therefore, aught else
Good, for thou would’st impious be; nor any thing at all at any time
call Good but God alone,” and “He is Good alone and nothing else,”—we
cannot fail to be struck with the precise similarity of the phrasing and
blend of ideas.

If, further, we take this in connection with the still more striking
contrast, “God is not Spirit,” with the Johannine “God is Spirit,” we
might at first sight almost persuade ourselves that our treatise had
these Christian declarations immediately in mind. But the general
phenomena of similarity of diction and idea of the Trismegistic
literature with those of the New Testament documents is so much more
satisfactorily explained by the fact that both literatures use mainly
the common Hellenistic theological phrases of the time, that we need not
distress ourselves with any suggestions either of plagiarism or of
direct controversy.

Doubtless the declaration, “God is Spirit,” was a commonplace among the
religio-philosophical circles of the time, and Hermes is here simply
refining on a common idea. The reading, “Call thou not me Good,” which
appears to have been preserved mainly in Gnostic tradition, may also as
easily have come from a similar general idea that the One and Only One
was Good alone.

It is, moreover, of special interest to notice that the second clause of
the Marcionite reading runs: “There is one \[only\] Good, God the
Father,” while in our

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

treatise the two names of God are given as Good and Father; and so we
read (§ 16): “God, then, is Good, and Good is God”; and immediately
after (§ 17): “The other name of God is Father.” <span
id="fr_133"></span>[1](#fn_133.md)

Striking however, as are those coincidences, we are nevertheless wholly
unpersuaded that there was any immediate literary contact between those
two sets of Scripture. All that can be said is that their literary
similarities are due to a common theological language and their many
points of contact in ideas to a generally common atmosphere of
theological conceptions.

##### HE WHO IS WITHOUT A WIFE IS HALF A MAN

Again, the doctrine of the duty to beget children (§ 17) seems at first
sight to be an interpolation by a Jewish editor, the Jews holding that
“he who is without a wife is half a man.” We must, however, remember
that the Egyptian priests were married, and that the rule with them, as
with the Pythagoreans, was that a man should first of all discharge his
duty to society and live the “practical,” “political” or “social” life,
before retiring into the life of contemplation. He must first beget
children, not only that the race might be continued, but also that
bodies might be supplied by parents devoted to the ideal of the
religious or philosophic life, so that advanced souls might find birth
in favourable conditions, and so the Order be continued.

This also is the ancient rule laid down by the Manu of the Āryan Hindus
in the *Mānava Dharma Shāstra.* The duties of the householder station of
life (Gṛihastha āshrama) must first be performed, before the parents can
retire to the contemplative life (Vānaprastha

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

āshrama). In special cases, however, exceptions could be made.

It may then be that Asclepius stands for those pupils who were still
living the married life.

The scribe of the thirteenth century, Codex B. (Parisinus, 1220), has
laconically written on the margin of this paragraph the single word
“nonsense” (φλυαρία); he was presumably a monk.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[70:1](th206.htm#fr_129.md) R., p. 305, also makes
a brief reference to this.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[71:1](th206.htm#fr_130.md) *Cf.* Joh. iv. 24:
“πνεῦμα ὁ Θεός.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[71:2](th206.htm#fr_131.md) As the A.V. has it
erroneously.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[71:3](th206.htm#fr_132.md) See his article,
“Three Early Doctrinal Modifications of the Text of the Gospels,” in
*The Hibbert Journal* (Oct. 1902), pp. 98-113. J. R. Wilkinson’s few
remarks (*H. J.*, Ap. 1903, pp. 575, 576) on Conybeare’s criticism of
this synoptic passage do not seem to me to be of any weight.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[73:1](th206.htm#fr_133.md) *Cf.* the expression,
“God, Father and the Good,” *C. H.*, x. (xi.) 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. (IV.) The Sacred Sermon](th207.md)
