[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th212)  [Next](th214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

#### CORPUS HERMETICUM VI. (VII.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

<span class="small">(Text: P. 48-53; Pat. 14a-15a.)</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">Good</span>, O Asclepius, is in none else
save God alone; nay, rather, Good is God Himself eternally.

If it be so, \[Good\] must be essence, from every kind of motion and
becoming free (though naught is free from It), possessed of stable
energy around Itself, never too little, nor too much, an ever-full
supply. \[Though\] one, yet \[is It\] source of all; for what supplieth
all is Good. When I, moreover, say \[supplieth\] *altogether* \[all\],
it is *for ever* Good. But this belongs to no one else save God alone.

For He stands not in need of any thing, so that desiring it He should be
bad; nor can a single thing of things that are be lost to Him, on losing
which He should be pained; for pain is part of bad.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

Nor is there aught superior to Him, that He should be subdued by it; nor
any peer to Him to do Him wrong, or \[so that\] He should fall in love
on its account; nor aught that gives no ear to Him, whereat He should
grow angry; nor wiser aught, for Him to envy.

2\. Now as all these are non-existent in His being, what is there left
but Good alone?

For just as naught of bad is to be found in such transcendent Being, so
too in no one of the rest will Good be found.

For in them all are all the other things <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_193)—both in the little and the great, both
in each severally and in this living one <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_194) that’s greater than them all and
mightiest \[of them\].

For things subject to birth <span id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_195) abound
in passions, birth in itself being passible. But where there’s passion,
nowhere is there Good; and where is Good, nowhere a single passion. For
where is day, nowhere is night; and where is night, day is nowhere.

Wherefore in genesis the Good can never *be*, but only be in the
ingenerate.

But seeing that the sharing in all things hath been bestowed on matter,
so doth it share in Good.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

In this way is the Cosmos good; that, in so far as it doth make all
things, as far as making goes it’s Good, but in all other things it is
not Good. For it’s both passible and subject unto motion, and maker of
things passible.

3\. Whereas in man by greater or by less of bad is good determined. For
what is not too bad down here, is good; and good down here is the least
part of bad.

It cannot, therefore, be that good down here should be quite clean of
bad, for down here good is fouled with bad; and being fouled, it stays
no longer good, and staying not it changes into bad.

In God alone, is, therefore, Good, or rather Good is God Himself.

So then, Asclepius, the *name* alone of Good is found in men, the thing
itself nowhere \[in them\], for this can never be.

For no material body doth contain It,—a thing <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196) bound on all sides by bad, by labours,
pains, desires and passions, by error and by foolish thoughts.

And greatest ill of all, Asclepius, is that each of these things that
have been said above, is thought down here to be the greatest good.

And what is still an even greater ill, is belly-lust, the error that
doth lead the band of all

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the other ills—the thing that makes us turn down here from Good.

4\. And I, for my own part, give thanks to God, that He hath cast it in
my mind about the Gnosis of the Good, that it can never be It <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_197) should be in the world. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[2](#fn_198) For that the world is “fullness” <span
id="fr_199"></span>[3](#fn_199) of the bad, but God of Good, and Good of
God.

The excellencies of the Beautiful are round the very essence \[of the
Good\]; nay, they do seem too pure, too unalloyed; perchance ’tis they
that are themselves Its essences.

For one may dare to say, Asclepius,—if essence, sooth, He have—God’s
essence is the Beautiful; the Beautiful is further also Good.

There is no Good that can be got from objects in the world. For all the
things that fall beneath the eye are image-things and pictures as it
were; while those that do not meet \[the eye are the realities <span
id="fr_200"></span>[4](#fn_200)\], especially the \[essence\] of the
Beautiful and Good.

Just as the eye cannot see God, so can it not behold the Beautiful and
Good. For that they are integral parts of God, wedded to Him alone,
inseparate familiars, most beloved, with whom God is Himself in love, or
they with God.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

5\. If thou canst God conceive, thou shalt conceive the Beautiful and
Good, transcending Light, made lighter than the Light by God. That
Beauty is beyond compare, inimitate that Good, e’en as God is Himself.

As, then, thou dost conceive of God, conceive the Beautiful and Good.
For they cannot be joined with aught of other things that live, since
they can never be divorced from God.

Seek’st thou for God, thou seekest for the Beautiful. One is the Path
that leadeth unto It—Devotion joined with Gnosis.

6\. And thus it is that they who do not know and do not tread Devotion’s
Path, do dare to call man beautiful and good, though he have ne’er e’en
in his visions seen a whit that’s Good, but is enwrapped with every kind
of bad, and thinks the bad is good, and thus doth make unceasing use of
it, and even feareth that it should be ta’en from him, so straining
every nerve not only to preserve but even to increase it.

Such are the things that men call good and beautiful, Asclepius,—things
which we cannot flee or hate; for hardest thing of all is that we’ve
need of them and cannot live without them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[111:1](th213.htm#fr_193) That is, things not
Good.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[111:2](th213.htm#fr_194) Or animal; that is,
cosmos as a single life or living creature.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[111:3](th213.htm#fr_195) Or genesis.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[112:1](th213.htm#fr_196) *Sc.* the body.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[113:1](th213.htm#fr_197) *Sc.* the Good.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[113:2](th213.htm#fr_198) Cosmos.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[113:3](th213.htm#fr_199) Or plērōma. The
“world” is the plērōma of evil, but ‘God” the plērōma of good.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[113:4](th213.htm#fr_200) A lacuna
unfortunately occurs here in the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary](th214)
