[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th218)  [Next](th220) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

#### CORPUS HERMETICUM IX. (X.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ON THOUGHT AND SENSE

##### THAT THE BEAUTIFUL AND GOOD IS IN GOD ONLY AND ELSEWHERE NOWHERE

<span class="small">(Text: P. 60-67; Pat. 14, 15.)</span>

1\. I <span class="smallcaps">gave</span> the Perfect Sermon (*Logos*)
yesterday, Asclepius; to-day I think it right, as sequel thereunto, to
go through point by point the Sermon about Sense.

Now sense and thought do seem to differ, in that the former has to do
with matter, the latter has to do with substance. But unto me both seem
to be at-one and not to differ—in men I mean. In other lives <span
id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) sense is at-oned with nature, but in men
thought.

Now mind doth differ just as much from thought as God doth from
divinity. For that divinity by God doth come to be, and by mind thought,
the sister of the word (*logos*) <span id="fr_224"></span>[2](#fn_224)
and

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

instruments of one another. For neither doth the word (*logos*) find
utterance without thought, nor is thought manifested without word.

2\. So sense and thought both flow together into man, as though they
were entwined with one another. For neither without sensing can one
think, nor without thinking sense.

But it is possible \[they say\] to think a thing apart from sense, as
those who fancy sights in dreams. But unto me it seems that both of
these activities occur in dream-sight, and sense doth pass out of the
sleeping to the waking state.

For man is separated into soul and body, and only when the two sides of
his sense agree together, does utterance of its thought conceived by
mind take place.

3\. For it is mind that doth conceive all thoughts good thoughts—when it
receives the seeds from God, their contraries when \[it receiveth them\]
from one of the daimonials; no part of Cosmos being free of daimon, who
stealthily doth creep into the daimon who’s illumined by God’s
Light, <span id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) and sow in him the seed of
its own energy.

And mind conceives the seed thus sown,

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

adultery, murder, parricide, \[and\] sacrilege, impiety, \[and\]
strangling, casting down precipices, and all such other deeds as are the
work of evil daimones.

4\. The seeds of God, ’tis true, are few, but vast and fair, and
good—virtue and self-control, devotion. Devotion is God-gnosis; and he
who knoweth God, being filled with all good things, thinks godly
thoughts and not thoughts like the many \[think\].

For this cause they who Gnostic are, <span
id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226) please not the many, nor the many them.
They are thought mad and laughed at <span
id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_227); they’re hated and despised, and
sometimes even put to death.

For we did say <span id="fr_228"></span>[3](#fn_228) that bad must needs
dwell here on earth, where ’tis in its own place. Its place is earth,
and not Cosmos, as some will sometimes say with impious tongue.

But he who is a devotee of God, will bear with all—once he has sensed
the Gnosis. For such an one all things, e’en though they be for others
bad, are for him good; deliberately he doth refer them all unto the
Gnosis. And, thing most marvellous, ’tis he alone who maketh bad things
good.

5\. But I return once more to the Discourse

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (*Logos*) on
Sense. That sense doth share with thought in man, doth constitute him
man. But ’tis not \[every\] man, as I have said, who benefits by
thought; for this man is material, that other one substantial.

For the material man, as I have said, \[consorting\] with the bad, doth
have his seed of thought from daimons; while the substantial men
\[consorting\] with the Good, are saved by God.

Now God is Maker of all things, and in His making, He maketh all \[at
last\] like to Himself; but they, while they’re becoming <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) good by exercise of their activity, are
unproductive things.

It is the working of the Cosmic Course <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230) that maketh their becomings what they
are, befouling some of them with bad and others of them making clean
with good.

For Cosmos, too, Asclepius, possesseth sense-and-thought peculiar to
itself, not like to that of

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

man; ’tis not so manifold, but as it were a better and a simpler one.

6\. The single sense-and-thought of Cosmos is to make all things, and
make them back into itself again, as Organ of the Will of God, so
organised that it, receiving all the seeds into itself from God, and
keeping them within itself, may make all manifest, and \[then\]
dissolving them, make them all new again; and thus, like a Good Gardener
of Life, things that have been dissolved, it taketh to itself, and
giveth them renewal once again.

There is no thing to which it gives not life; but taking all unto itself
it makes them live, and is at the same time the Place of Life and its
Creator.

7\. Now bodies matter \[-made\] are in diversity. Some are of earth, of
water some, some are of air, and some of fire.

But they are all composed; some are more \[composite\], and some are
simpler. The heavier ones are more \[composed\], the lighter less so.

It is the speed of Cosmos’ Course that works the manifoldness of the
kinds of births. For being a most swift Breath, it doth bestow their
qualities on bodies together with the One Pleroma—that of Life.

8\. God, then, is Sire of Cosmos; Cosmos, of \[all\] in Cosmos. And
Cosmos is God’s Son; but things in Cosmos are by Cosmos.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

And properly hath it been called Cosmos \[Order\]; for that it
orders <span id="fr_231"></span>[1](#fn_231) all with their diversity of
birth, with its not leaving aught without its life, with the
unweariedness of its activity, the speed of its necessity, the
composition of its elements, and order of its creatures.

The same, then, of necessity and of propriety should have the name of
Order.

The sense-and-thought, then, of all lives doth come into them from
without, inbreathed by what contains \[them all\]; whereas Cosmos
receives them once for all together with its coming into being, and
keeps them as a gift from God.

9\. But God is not, as some suppose, beyond the reach of
sense-and-thought. It is through superstition men thus impiously speak.

For all the things that are, Asclepius, all are in God, are brought by
God to be, and do depend on Him—both things that act through bodies, and
things that through soul-substance make \[other things\] to move, and
things that make things live by means of spirit, and things that take
unto themselves the things that are worn out.

And rightly so; nay, I would rather say, He doth not *have* these
things; but I speak forth the truth, He *is* them all Himself. He

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

doth not *get* them from without, but *gives* them out \[from Him\].

This is God’s sense-and-thought, ever to move all things. And never time
shall be when e’en a whit of things that are shall cease; and when I say
“a whit of things that are,” I mean a whit of God. For things that are,
God hath; nor aught \[is there\] without Him, nor \[is\] He without
aught.

10\. These things should seem to thee, Asclepius, if thou dost
understand them, true; but if thou dost not understand, things not to be
believed.

To understand is to believe, to not believe is not to understand.

My word (*logos*) doth go before \[thee\] <span
id="fr_232"></span>[1](#fn_232) to the truth. But mighty is the mind,
and when it hath been led by word up to a certain point, it hath the
power to come before \[thee <span id="fr_233"></span>[2](#fn_233)\] to
the truth.

And having thought o’er all these things, and found them consonant with
those which have already been translated by the reason, it <span
id="fr_234"></span>[3](#fn_234) hath \[e’en now\] believed, and found
its rest in that Fair Faith.

To those, then, who by God\[’s good aid\] do understand the things that
have been said \[by

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

us\] above, they’re credible; but unto those who understand them not,
incredible.

Let so much, then, suffice on thought-and-sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[129:1](th219.htm#fr_223) Or animals.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[129:2](th219.htm#fr_224) There is here the
usual play on the meanings, reason, word, sermon or sacred discourse.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[130:1](th219.htm#fr_225) That is to say man,
or rather the ego in man. The translators seem to make nonsense of this
passage through rejecting the original reading.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[131:1](th219.htm#fr_226) οἱ ἐν γνώσει ὄντες,
lit. they who are in Gnosis.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[131:2](th219.htm#fr_227) *Cf.* Plat.,
*Phædr.*, 249 D: The wisdom-lover “is admonished, by the many as though
he were beside himself.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[131:3](th219.htm#fr_228) *Sc.* in some other
sermon.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[132:1](th219.htm#fr_229) Or being made.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[132:2](th219.htm#fr_230) It is difficult to
bring out the full delicacy of wording of the original in translation.
First God’s ultimate intention is stated to be the making all things
like (ὅμοια) Himself; this is the great sameness of union with Him. But
meantime while this making, creating or becoming, is going on, these
imperfections cannot produce—that is, become creators in their turn;
they are unproductive (ἄφορα). That which is the instrument of God’s
making is the cosmic course (φορά). We are finally (§ 7) told that it is
bodies which are the cause of difference or diversity (ἐν διαφορᾷ), the
opposite pole, so to speak, to the likeness (ὅμοια) with God.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[134:1](th219.htm#fr_231) Or adorns.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[135:1](th219.htm#fr_232) *Cf.* *C. H.*, iv.
(v.) 11; vii. (viii.) 2; x. (xi.) 21; R. 23, n. 5.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[135:2](th219.htm#fr_233) That is, presumably,
before the pupil of the Gnosis is conscious of it in his physical brain.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[135:3](th219.htm#fr_234) *Sc.* the mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary](th220)
