[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th221)  [Next](th223.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### COMMENTARY

##### THE CONSUMMATION OF THE “GENERAL SERMONS”

What “yesterday’s sermon,” which Hermes addressed to Asclepius, may have
been, we have no means of deciding. The similarity of the phrase with
the opening words of *C. H.*, ix. (x.) is noticeable, and points,
perhaps, to a collection of Sermons to Asclepius and Tat strung together
in some chronological order, as delivered day by day. If this be the
fact, however, we must assume that such introductions were prefixed by
the editor of that collection.

“The Key of Thrice-greatest Hermes” must have been considered one of the
most remarkable documents of the school, for, as we have already
mentioned in the case of “The Cup” treatise, the apocryphal “Books of
Moses” plagiarize the title. <span id="fr_302"></span>[4](#fn_302.md)

That it was an important treatise may also be seen from the fact that
Stobæus reproduces no less than five extracts from it under the title,
“From the \[Sermons\] of Hermes to Tat,” or simply “Of Hermes.”
Strangely enough in *two* cases (xxxix. 8 and xl. 3) Stobæus makes

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the persons of the dialogue Asclepius and Tat; this, however, must be a
mistake, for it contradicts his own headings, it contradicts the nature
of the sermon, it contradicts the supposed introduction of the editor of
the collection from whom the redactor of our Corpus has taken his text,
and it contradicts Chalcidius, who quotes from our treatise as a
treatise of Hermes. <span id="fr_303"></span>[1](#fn_303.md)

Nevertheless, in spite of the importance of the treatise, it purports to
be an epitome, <span id="fr_304"></span>[2](#fn_304.md) an abridgment of
the “General Sermons” (οἱ γενικοὶ λόγοι) <span
id="fr_305"></span>[3](#fn_305.md) addressed to Tat.

The sermon itself, however, has by no means the appearance of being an
abridgment; on the contrary, it is one of the most complete and
fundamental expositions that we have.

I would, therefore, suggest that the general reference in the words, “as
we have shown in treating of the rest” (§ 1), and the precise reference
to “The General Sermons,” in § 7, have originated this wording of the
introduction with the editor of the collection of Asclepius and Tat
Sermons which I have previously supposed. It is a gloss of the editor
and no part of the original text.

If this argument holds good, “The Key,” instead of

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

being an epitome, is a further teaching that presupposes a prior
instruction already given in “The General Sermons,” and so stands out as
a more intimate exposition of the inward doctrine of the higher grades
of the school.

Reitzenstein (p. 461) would have it that the doctrine of Sermons, ix.
(x.) and x. (xi.), is a mediate one between the dualism of vi. (vii.)
and the pronounced pantheistic mysticism of v. (vi.) and xi. (xii.); but
I should fancy that these labels, even if they are correctly attached,
would not represent such overwhelming contradictions to the Trismegistic
doctors as they appear to do to their modern critics. There were
different points of view; there were different grades of instruction;
every doctrine had more truth in it at the proper time and in the right
place. In any case this sermon is one of the most beautiful tractates
preserved to us.

##### THE WILL OF GOD

1\. Our treatise begins with the statement that the universe and all
therein is due to the Energy or Effective Working of God—that is to say,
His Will. This Will is immutable and constant—the Law of the universe.

How subtly these philosophers in their most intimate circles used these
terms may be seen from the Gnostic Doctor, Basilides, who writes:

“Naught was,—neither matter, nor substance, nor voidness of substance,
nor simplicity, nor impossibility of composition, nor inconceptibility,
nor imperceptibility, neither man, nor angel \[Hermeticè, daimon\], nor
God; in fine, neither anything at all for which man has ever found a
name, nor any operation which falls within the range either of his
perception or conception.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

“Such, or rather far more removed from the power of man’s comprehension,
was the state of Non-Being, when the Deity beyond Being, without
thinking, or feeling, or determining, or choosing, or being compelled,
or desiring, willed to create universality.”

“When I use the term will,” writes Basilides, “I do so merely to suggest
the idea of an operation transcending all volition, thought, or sensible
action.” <span id="fr_306"></span>[1](#fn_306.md)

2\. God’s Energy, or Self-realization, is, then, His Will (θέλησις); His
Essence (οὐσία) or Substance is “to will the being of all things”; in
brief, He is the Very Subsistence (ὕπαρξις) of all—a term which
subsequently came into great prominence in the later Platonic
philosophy.

3\. In § 3 we have a clear distinction drawn between the transcendent
idea of God as Creator or Willer, and the ordinary conception of God as
Maker or Fabricator or Demiurge—a distinction that meets us in almost
every Gnostic system. In our treatise, however, there is no setting of
the one idea over against the other in any sense of antagonism. It is
only stated that the self-operation of Deity transcends all such limited
conceptions as that of a Maker or Fabricator.

##### OF GNOSIS AND ECSTASIS

4\. The distinctive feature of God as the Good, or the Desirable, the
Supreme Consummation, is “that He should be known” (τὸ γνωρίζεσθαι); in
other words, the science of all sciences is the Gnosis of God.

5\. The Vision Glorious, the One Sight, is next spoken of under the
simile of the shining of a Ray of the Light

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

and Life of the Spiritual Sun into the mind. This consummation of
Ecstasis, <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_307.md) we are told, was a
transcending of the limitations of body, and was a faculty possessed by
the forebears (πρόγονοι) of the “race” into which Hermes and now Tat are
being born; these ancestors are mentioned under symbolic Greek names,
evidently a substitute for Egyptian ones, for the reference is clearly
to the priesthood of some past civilization of the Nile Land. At the
same time, it can be referred to certain grades of super-men, regarded
as gods, who had reached to certain stages of celestial dignity. <span
id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_308.md)

To this idea of ancient Masters of the Gnosis in Egypt, Lactantius
refers as follows:

“And so it appears that he \[Cronus\] was not born from Heaven (which is
impossible), but from that man who was called Uranus; and that this is
so, Trismegistus bears witness, when, in stating that there have been
very few in whom the perfect science has been found, he mentioned in
their number Uranus, Cronus, and Hermes his kinsfolk.” <span
id="fr_309"></span>[3](#fn_309.md)

Lactantius seems to be somewhat under the fascination of the theory of
Euhemerus, and has no credence in the Heaven-born, in spite of the
Christ Birth. We, however, learn from him that he knew of a statement by
Hermes in this connection in which, besides Uranus and Cronus, an
ancient Hermes was mentioned. Now in our treatise this is not the case,
and Tat and not Hermes is the speaker; whereas in *P. S. A.*, xxxvii.,
where Hermes speaks of his progenitor Hermes, no

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

mention is made of Uranus and Cronus. Therefore Lactantius refers to a
lost treatise of Hermes.

##### OF APOTHEOSIS

6\. The nature of Ecstasy is then further explained; it is the fruit of
meditation or contemplation, the consummation of the Theoretic Life.

“The Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving holiday (καταργία)
to every sense.”

The Holy Silence reminds us of the Sigē of the Christian Gnostics; here,
however, instead of the Mother-Æon of Cosmos, it is used in the sense of
the pure mother-nature of the little cosmos of man, the divine womb that
brings to birth the true man.

With this may be compared *C. H.*, xiii. (xiv.) 2:

“Wisdom conceived by mind in silence, such is the matter and the womb
from out which *man* is born, and the true Good the seed.”

It is hardly necessary to add that this is the Yoga of the Upaniṣhads.
Indeed, the first part of § 6 might be taken word for word from those
sublime treatises of Vaidik theosophy, and shows how identical is the
thought of those who have first-hand experience of the higher
consciousness.

“For it is possible, my son, that a man’s soul should be made like to
God (ἀποθεωθῆναι), e’en while it still is in a body, if it doth
contemplate the Beauty of the Good.”

This is the “deification” (ἀποθέωσις), or “apotheōsis” of a man; he
becomes like unto God, in that he becomes a god. The Beauty of the Good
is the Cosmic Order; and the mode of this meditation was to bring the
soul into sympathy with the Cosmic Soul.

##### THE METAMORPHOSES OF THE SOUL

7\. The secret of this divine operation (or theurgy) is based upon the
fact that the soul can be transformed

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

into every likeness. The Great Likeness of God is the Cosmic Order, the
making oneself into this Likeness is the supreme transformation or
transfiguration of the soul.

The separated or individual soul is in perpetual pilgrimage, revolving
on the wheel of transformation. This doctrine was shared in by many
other faiths, and it was also Egyptian.

In this connection we may refer instructively to Hippolytus’ quotations
from the Naassene Document (§ 3 S.):

“And they <span id="fr_310"></span>[1](#fn_310.md) say that the soul is
very difficult to discover, and hard to understand; for it never remains
of the same appearance, or form, or in the same state, so that we can
describe it by a general type, or comprehend it by an essential
quality.”

On this Hippolytus comments:

“These variegated metamorphoses they <span
id="fr_311"></span>[2](#fn_311.md) have laid down in the Gospel
superscribed ‘According to the Egyptians.’”

The *Gospel according to the Egyptians* is lost, with the exception of a
few fragments. We, however, here learn that it described the
metamorphoses of the soul. It was a Gospel having its origin in Egypt
and suited to Egyptian modes of thought. It follows, therefore, that the
doctrine of the soul’s transformation was Egyptian. <span
id="fr_312"></span>[3](#fn_312.md)

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

##### THE LADDER OF BEING

The Hermetic doctrine of the evolution of the soul, by means of
multitudinous transformations, is characterised by certain main moments,
for in the course of it it passes through definite stages of existence
designated as animal, human, daimonic, and god-like; there being,
further, two grades of being within the choir of gods—the errant and
inerrant. The final stage is the most perfect glory (δόξα) or power of
the soul.

With all of this there is a strikingly exact parallel of ideas in the
Pauline Letters.

“But some one will say: How do the dead rise, and with what body do they
come \[? back\]?

“Thou foolish one! That which thou sowest is not made quick unless it
die.

“And that which thou sowest—’tis not the body that shall be thou sowest,
but a naked grain of wheat or of one of the other seeds. <span
id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313.md)

“’Tis God that gives to it <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314.md) a body
as he will,—yea to every one of the seeds its proper body.

“Not every flesh is the same flesh; but there is one of men, another
flesh of beasts, another flesh of birds, and another of fishes.

“There are also bodies celestial, as well as bodies terrestrial. But the
glory of the celestial \[bodies\] is one, and the glory of the
terrestrial is another.

“\[And of the former\] the glory of the sun is one, and the glory of the
moon is another, and \[yet\] another is the glory of the stars; for star
differeth from star in glory.

“So also is the resurrection of the dead.” <span
id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315.md)

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

And by “resurrection of the dead,” I believe that Paul meant what all
the instructed of the time meant—namely, the “reaching the first step of
deathlessness,” as Hermes has it in our treatise. The death or vice of
the soul is ignorance, the virtue or life of the soul is Gnosis.

“For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth,
divine.”

##### CONCERNING TRANSMIGRATION

8\. With § 8, however, we are confronted with what appears to be a great
difficulty. Hermes here seems to teach distinctly that a vicious (that
is, an ignorant) soul, one who has not attained to Gnosis, goes back to
attachment to animal bodies, while in §§ 19 ff., he at great length
denies that a human soul can possibly do so. Is there any solution of
this apparently complete self-contradiction in one and the same
treatise?

Far as I am from desiring to play the apologist for any scripture, I am
prevented from appending an impatient “No” to this query, for the
following considerations:

In the first place, Hermes in § 8 is speaking of the vicious or ignorant
soul, while in § 19 he is speaking not only of the “human” soul, but of
the human soul that hath the Good Mind (§ 23); whereas the ignorant soul
“doth not have Mind, and, therefore, such an one should not be called a
*man*” (§ 24). Here, then, we have a fundamental distinction in souls
incarnated into the “body of a man” (§ 8); they are of two classes.

The doctrine of § 8 applies to one class, the doctrine of § 19 to
another.

Metempsychosis, in the sense of continued revolution on the wheel of
life and death, is only for him who “persisteth in his vice”—that is to
say, is

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

still ignorant. Gnosis thus means the freedom from *saṁsāra*, to use a
common Brāhmanical and Buddhistic term.

The ignorant soul does not see the Light, being “blinded by the body’s
passions, and tossed about”; this is the “turmoil” of which Plato speaks
in the *Timæus.*

And here I must refer the reader to “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,”
in the “Prolegomena,” a chapter which I have written mainly in
elucidation of the problems raised by our treatise.

##### GNOSIS THE VIRTUE OF THE SOUL

9\. So much, then, for the soul which persisteth in its vice or
ignorance; but the virtue of the soul is Gnosis.

“For he who knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth,
divine.”

This is precisely the same idea as that of the Jīvanmukta in Indian
theosophy—namely, the man who has reached Mukti or Liberation while
still living in the body.

Hermes thus proceeds to distinguish Gnosis, the end of human science,
from sense or opinion. Gnosis is the apotheosis of the mind, its
immediate perception of the things-that-are—namely, the Intelligible
Cosmos.

11\. The Sensible or Hylic Cosmos is then explained, and also the nature
of man, and his relationship to the Cosmos and God.

##### THE VEHICLES OF THE SOUL

13\. The vehicles of man’s “Soul” are then categorized (ψυχὴ δὲ ἀνθρώπου
ὀχεῖται τὸν τρόπον τοῦτον), the Soul being here used in the sense of the
Self, and as distinguished from the “soul” in the category. They are

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

as follows, one within the other, in the sense of being respectively
more intimate to the true nature of man:

Mind (νοῦς); reason (λόγος); soul (ψυχή); spirit (πνεῦμα); body (σῶμα).

The remarkable similarity of this category with the psychology of the
Upaniṣhads cannot fail to strike the student of those mother-treatises
of Vaidik theosophy. Thus we read in the *Kaṭhopaniṣhad*, I. iii. 10,
11:

“Beyond the senses are the rudiments <span
id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_316.md); beyond the rudiments impulsive mind;
beyond the mind, the reason; beyond the reason, the Great Self.

“Beyond the Great, the Increate <span id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_317.md);
beyond the Increate, the Man <span id="fr_318"></span>[3](#fn_318.md);
beyond the Man, not any thing; That is the goal; That is the final end.”

The analogy is striking. Body = gross elements; spirit = subtle
elements; soul = impulsive mind (*manas*); reason = reason
(*buddhi* <span id="fr_319"></span>[4](#fn_319).md); Mind = the Great
(*Mahat*); Source (ἀχρή) = the Increate; the One and Only (τὸ ἕν καὶ
μόνον) = the Man.

These so-called “vehicles,” “envelopes,” or “sheaths” (*koshas*), are
elsewhere given in the Upaniṣhads as: *anna-maya-kosha*—that is, the
*kosha* composed of, or resulting from, food (body); *prāṇa-maya-k.*, of
life (spirit); *mano-maya-k.*, of impulse (soul); *vijñāna-maya-k.*, of
discrimination (reason); *ānanda-maya-k.*, of bliss (Mind).

“Spirit” is thus seen to correspond to life (*prāna*); it is that which
“bestows upon the living creature motion, and, as it were, doth bear it”
(*i.e.* support it) “in a way” (§ 13). It is not Life, but
individualized

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

life, and in the Aupaniṣhad literature is differentiated into five
modes, which may be almost translated as etheric currents or modes of
motion in the body. <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_320.md)

The quotation from Proclus in “Plato Concerning Metempsychosis,” will
have sufficiently shown that this “life” is of the same nature as the
animal life. It is that principle of soul which man shares with the
animals.

##### THE DUAL SOUL

And here we may refer to Jamblichus (*De Myst.*, viii. 6), when
referring to the “Hermaic writings” he says:

“Man has two souls, as these writings say. The one is from the first
Mind, and partakes also of the power of the Creator, while the other,
the soul under constraint, comes from the revolution of the celestial
\[spheres\]; into the latter the former, the soul that is the seer of
God, <span id="fr_321"></span>[2](#fn_321.md) insinuates itself at a later
period.

“This being so, the soul that descends into us from the worlds \[or
spheres\] keeps time with the circuit of these worlds, while the soul
from the Mind existing in us in an intelligible fashion is free from the
whirl of genesis; by this the bonds of Destiny are burst asunder; by
this the Path up to the Gods whom mind alone can see is brought to
birth; by such a life as this is that Great Art Divine, which leads us
up to That beyond the spheres of genesis, brought to its consummation.”

Hermes in our treatise is, however, more precise as to the so-called
“vehicles” or “souls,” for he writes (§ 17):

“Mind taketh, then, the soul for, as it were, an

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

envelope. And soul itself being, too, a thing divine, <span
id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_322.md) doth use the spirit as *its* envelope,
while spirit doth pervade the living creature.” <span
id="fr_323"></span>[2](#fn_323.md)

##### “HE WHO STANDS”

The Supreme Principle of all, the One and Only One, who “standeth
perpetually” (§ 14), is the Intelligible Logos (ἡ νοητὴ στάσις, *cf.* §
11), the ὁ ἑστὼς of the Christianized Gnosis, as seen especially in the
Simonian *Great Announcement.* He is the Cause of the perpetual motion
of the Hylic Cosmos. Compare this with the following passage of
Numenius:

“Now there are two modes of life, the first of the First and the second
of the Second God. For it is evident that the First God should be
standing (ἑστὼς), and the Second, on the contrary, moved. The First,
then, is occupied about things intelligible, and the Second about things
intelligible and sensible.

“Marvel not that I say this; for thou shalt hear what is still more
marvellous. For I say that it is not the motion that appertains to the
Second, but the rest that pertains to the First, which is the innate
‘motion’ from which both their cosmic order and their eternal community
and their preservation \[or salvation\] is poured forth on things
universal.” <span id="fr_324"></span>[3](#fn_324.md)

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

##### THE OLYMPIAN PATH

15\. In § 15 the Gnosis is again declared to be the only Path of
Salvation or Safety. <span id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_325.md) It is the Way
Up to the Mount, <span id="fr_326"></span>[2](#fn_326.md) the Olympian
Path.

The term Eleusis was also interpreted as Anabasis, or the Way Up. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[3](#fn_327.md) Compare the Jewish commentator in the
Naassene Document (§ 27):

“First is the Mystery called ‘Eleusis’ and ‘Anaktoreion’—Eleusis because
we come from Above, <span id="fr_328"></span>[4](#fn_328.md) streaming down
from Adamas, <span id="fr_329"></span>[5](#fn_329.md) . . . and Anaktoreion
from ‘Returning Above.’”

##### “WHEN MIND BECOMES A DAIMON”

16\. The next main doctrine touched on is one of immense importance, for
it gives us the inner teaching which illuminates the “dark saying” in
the “Pœmandres” (§ 24), when treating of the Way Up (ἄνοδος):

“And thou surrenderest thy way of life unto the daimon.”

For in our treatise Hermes tells us that at death:

“The mind stript of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto
itself a fiery body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the
soul unto its judgment and whatever chastisement it hath deserved.”

The key to this is the sentence (§ 21):

“When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a
fiery body to execute the services of God.”

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

At death, the mind, of its own nature, perforce becomes a “servant of
God,” a Therapeut <span id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_330.md); the man is his
own judge and his own chastizer.

The “fire of hell” is then but the reflection of the light of the mind;
it is the burning remorse of a mind that now sees the inevitable results
of every selfish action—thought, word, and deed; that each of these
comes inevitably back on the sender forth of it.

The soul, thus, lives out (and that too in the most realistic fashion,
it *realizes* the actuality of the law in all its most minute details)
the inevitable consequences of its past vicious deeds in body.

Here we have the hint of a psychology and of an inner teaching that
persuades us there was a profound wisdom at the back of the intermediate
instruction of these schools.

Compare this most reasonable theory of after-death “illumination” with
the crudities of the eternal torment idea of popular religion with which
we are so familiar, and reflect on what a “falling off” there has been
from the Gnosis of the early days.

And what is the “fiery body” of the mind but the ray-like or starry
vehicle of the man, the αὐγοειδὲς ἢ ἀστροειδὲς of Philoponus? <span
id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_331.md)

This is the true “Astral Body” of a man, and not the “watery vesture”
which is referred to under the term in modern nomenclature.

This is the true Body of Purification, that burns up all impurities, and
in the light of the conflagration burns into man the memory of the
Gnosis.

The soul is thus “chastised by its own self”; and if Hermes had taught
us nothing else, he would have amply deserved the gratitude of humanity,
and the title

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

of Thrice-greatest. Yet is “Hermes” no single man, but a mind
illuminated by the Mind.

##### THE “SCOURGE” OF THE CHRIST

21\. So then “the impious soul, scourged with its own sins, is plunged
in murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the
other things whereby mankind is wronged.”

This is the “scourge” by which the Christ drives the unworthy out of His
Temple. It does not mean that the soul is driven into *doing* these
things, but that it is made to realize or *suffer* them—the consequences
of its prior misdeeds. Whatever wrong it has done to its fellows, such
it suffers, in the realization of its true nature, whereby the Light of
Gnosis brings into amazing contrast the darkness or ignorance of its
past actions. <span id="fr_332"></span>[1](#fn_332.md)

##### THE DISPENSATION OF THE UNIVERSE

22\. And so Hermes explains the nature of “the dispensation of the
universe”—the interlinking of the grades of being from God downwards the
intercourse or communion of souls.

God, Cosmos and Man are grades of being. Each is a sun, as it were, in
their operations, or powers or rays. God’s rays are His energies or
self-realizing operations; those of Cosmos are the natures of things,
those of Man are the arts and sciences.

This communion or intercourse of higher with lower natures is to be
realized on the side of man by the consummation of the sacred marriage,
whereby man becomes a god, and finally God.

He only is blessed who is filled with God—that is to

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

say, the true Gnostic who has received the consecration of the Fullness
or Plērōma. <span id="fr_333"></span>[1](#fn_333.md)

Whereas the soul that is empty of God is deprived of that Fullness, cut
off from it, and so empty of the Mind. This is the state of Emptiness
(κένωμα) or Insufficiency (ὑστέρημα).

24\. Such souls, says Hermes, should not be called *men.* For a true
*man* is not only equal to a god, but even higher than the gods. Such a
man we should, in Christian nomenclature, call a Christ—one animated or
illuminated by the Mind or Spirit of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_302"></span>[158:4](th222.htm#fr_302.md) R. 182, 3; 190, 2.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[159:1](th222.htm#fr_303.md) Chalcid., *Comment.
in Timæum* (ed. Fabric.), p. 350.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[159:2](th222.htm#fr_304.md) Compare also the
introduction to *C. H.*, xvi. (see R. 191, 1); and also Ex. i. 16 and
Comment.

<span id="fn_305"></span>[159:3](th222.htm#fr_305.md) *Cf.* § 7, below; *C.
H.*, xiii. (xiv.) 1; and Exs. ix. 1 and xviii. 1. The title must be so
translated, I think, in spite of the fact that in the introductory words
of the above treatise the term is immediately followed by the antithesis
“rebirth” (παλιγγενεσία), as though the Sermons were on birth or genesis
(γένεσις),—which, as we know from the Naassene Document, was the subject
of the Lesser Mysteries, whereas Rebirth was that of the Greater.
Everard gives “in the general speeches”; Parthey, “*in communibus*”;
Ménard, “*dans les discours généraux*”; Chambers, “in the Generalities.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[161:1](th222.htm#fr_306.md) Hipp., *Philos.*,
vii. 21 (ed. D. and S., p. 358); *F. F. F.*, pp. 257, 258.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[162:1](th222.htm#fr_307.md) *Cf.* § 25, where
ecstasis is explained as an extension of consciousness,—a certain
“greatness” (μέγεθος).

<span id="fn_308"></span>[162:2](th222.htm#fr_308.md) See the “Chart of
Orphic Cosmogony,” facing p. 87 of my Orpheus (London, 1896), where
Uranus and Cronus are referred to the two lower of the three Noëtic
“planes” transcending the Sensible Universe.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[162:3](th222.htm#fr_309.md) *Div. Institt.*, i.
11 (ed. Fritz., i. 29, 30).

<span id="fn_310"></span>[164:1](th222.htm#fr_310.md) The quotation is from
the text of the Hellenistic Commentator, who is referring to the
Chaldæans.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[164:2](th222.htm#fr_311.md) The Gnostics
Hippolytus calls the Naassenes.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[164:3](th222.htm#fr_312.md) Reitzenstein (p. 22,
2) says that it was in error that the Greeks stated the Egyptians
believed in metempsychosis; in this I believe that Reitzenstein is
himself in error. The Egyptians at any rate demonstrably believed in
soul metamorphosis; and when we find people who lived in Egypt teaching
this metamorphosis in connection with metempsychosis, it is but natural
to conclude that the Greeks, who were in touch with the living tradition
of Egypt, knew more about the matter than modern scepticism.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[165:1](th222.htm#fr_313.md) The “grain of mustard
seed”—“wheat” if a good body comes therefrom, “tares” if an imperfect
growth results.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[165:2](th222.htm#fr_314.md) *Sc.* the soul as
grain.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[165:3](th222.htm#fr_315.md) 1 Cor. xv. 35-42.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[168:1](th222.htm#fr_316.md) The subtler elements.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[168:2](th222.htm#fr_317.md) *Avyakta*,
undifferentiated cosmic substance.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[168:3](th222.htm#fr_318.md) *Purusha*, the True
Man.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[168:4](th222.htm#fr_319.md) The *manas* and
*buddhi* of the Upaniṣhads are not to be confounded with these terms as
at present employed in modern Theosophical literature.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[169:1](th222.htm#fr_320.md) *Cf.* *K. K.*, 44,
45, Comment.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[169:2](th222.htm#fr_321.md) *Cf.* *C. H.*, ix.
(x.) 3: “The daimon who’s illumined by God’s Light.”

<span id="fn_322"></span>[170:1](th222.htm#fr_322.md) That is, being
*logos*, as from the Creator or Second Mind.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[170:2](th222.htm#fr_323.md) *Cf.* Exx. iv. 2; xv.
2; xix. 3; and Frag. xviii.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[170:3](th222.htm#fr_324.md) Quoted by Eusebius,
*Præp. Evang.*, XI. xviii. 20, 21 (539 B), ed. Dindorf (Leipzig, 1867),
ii. 41. We do not know Numenius’ date, but it was probably about the
first half of the first century A.D. Though Numenius is almost
invariably designated as a Pythagorean, he was rather a universalist,
for his object was not only to trace the doctrines of Plato up to
Pythagoras, but to show that they were not at variance with the
doctrines and mysteries of the Brāhmans, Jews, Magi and Egyptians.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[171:1](th222.htm#fr_325.md) *Cf.* the passage
from Jamblichus quoted above.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[171:2](th222.htm#fr_326.md) *Cf.* *C. H.*, xiii.
(xiv.) 1: “The Passing o’er the Mount.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[171:3](th222.htm#fr_327.md) *Cf.* *C. H.*, i. 24.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[171:4](th222.htm#fr_328.md) Eleusis meaning
Coming, Advent.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[171:5](th222.htm#fr_329.md) The Man or Mind.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[172:1](th222.htm#fr_330.md) *Cf.* 23: “The mind
in service.”

<span id="fn_331"></span>[172:2](th222.htm#fr_331.md) See my *Orpheus*, pp.
292 ff.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[173:1](th222.htm#fr_332.md) With this compare the
function of the Mind on the soul in incarnation, as described in *C.
H.*, xii. (xiii.) 4.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[174:1](th222.htm#fr_333.md) *Cf.* John i. 16: “Of
His Fullness have we all received.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. (XII.) Mind Unto Hermes](th223.md)
