[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th223)  [Next](th225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

#### COMMENTARY

##### TITLE AND FORM

The title in the MSS. is simply “Mind to Hermes.” When, therefore,
Cyril, in quoting the first three paragraphs of § 22 of our treatise,
says that Hermes wrote these words “to his own mind,” <span
id="fr_395"></span>[1](#fn_395) he is evidently either a very careless
reader, <span id="fr_396"></span>[2](#fn_396) or had not seen at first
hand the treatise from which he quotes.

From its contents, moreover, it is very evident that our treatise, as
far as its form is concerned, looks back to the “Pœmandres” as the type
of instruction to Hermes (or to *a* Hermes).

This highly authoritative form of enunciating doctrine was evidently
chosen because it was desired to impart a more intimate instruction than
that of the “General Sermons” and the like,—to wit, the inculcation of
the Æon-doctrine, in connection with the marvellous doctrine of
At-one-ment with all things which constitutes the Path of the Good. The
doctrine is no longer “Become (or make thyself like) Cosmos,” but
“Become Æon” (§ 20).

Now it is remarkable that the instruction given in our treatise by the
Mind to Hermes is, almost point for point, the “esoteric” teaching of
which the Sermon of Hermes to Tat, entitled the “Cup or Monad”—*C. H.*,
iv. (v.)—is the “exoteric” form.

That the instruction in these Trismegistic schools of initiation was
divided into grades is manifest on all sides; and, therefore, nothing is
more natural than to find these two sermons standing in such intimate
relations to one another as to doctrine, the one containing

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

the more intimate and advanced explanation of the more general
instruction of the other.

And that this inner instruction on the “Cup” doctrine must have been
thought to be of very great value, is evident when we reflect that “The
Cup” sermon was one of the most famous of all the treatises of Hermes,
for, as we have seen, its title was worth being plagiarized, and the
Baptism of the Cup, of which it treated, constituted the goal of the
endeavour of the disciples of the School, as Zosimus tells us.

Mystically, then, the main interest of our treatise centres in the
doctrine of the At-one-ment (as the inner consummation of the Baptism in
the Cup or Monad), to which the Æon-idea is but a formal introduction;
historically, however, the introduction of the Æon-idea presents itself
as a critical problem, for the term is not found in the ‘‘Pœmandres,”
and, therefore, presumably was not used in the earliest documents of the
School.

##### THE ÆON-LORE

When, then, did this Æon-idea impose itself upon the older form of
tradition of the Trismegistic schools? This is a most important
question; for if we can in any way answer it, we shall be in a position
to assign a *terminus ad quem* for the earlier forms of Hermetic
doctrine.

The answer to the question seems to me to be involved in the supposition
that the Æon-doctrine must have influenced “Hermeticism” at more or less
the same date as that at which it influenced “Gnosticism.”

Now “Gnosticism,” in its Christianized forms, is practically never found
without the Æon-lore.

The earliest forms of Christian Gnosis referred to

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

by the later Patristic hæresiologists are bound up with Æonology. Not
only so, but the very earliest reference to Gnosticism by any Christian
writer presupposes the Æon-doctrine, and uses it in illustration of the
spiritual state of the writer. <span id="fr_397"></span>[1](#fn_397)

The widespread influence of the Æon-doctrine can thus be traced back to
at least the origins of Christianity.

Now as the Gnosis existed before any Christian form of it was developed,
the question of the date when the Æon-doctrine was introduced into it
must be referred to pre-Christian times.

And, indeed, the very simple character of the Æon-lore in our
treatise, <span id="fr_398"></span>[2](#fn_398) as compared with the
mind-bewildering complexity and transcendency of first and second
century Christian Gnosticism, is all in favour of an early date for its
introduction into “Hermeticism,” which is only another name for
“Gnosticism” of a preponderatingly Hellenic form.

If this line of reasoning holds good, we have in it a very strong
presumption that the older forms of the Trismegistic treatises were
pre-Christian.

And that this is so may be seen by the absolute identity of the teaching
of our treatise (§ 2) with that of Philo, when he writes:

“But God is the Artificer of Time as well. For He is Father of its
Father; and Time’s Father is the Cosmos, which manifests its motion in
the genesis of Time. . . .

“This \[Cosmos\] then, the Younger Son, the Sensible, being set
a-moving, has caused Time’s nature to appear

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

and disappear; so that there nothing is which future is with God, who
has the very Bounds of Time subject to Him. For ’tis not Time, but
Time’s Archetype and Paradigm, Eternity (or Æon), which is His
Life. <span id="fr_399"></span>[1](#fn_399) But in Eternity naught is
past, and naught is future, but all is present only.” <span
id="fr_400"></span>[2](#fn_400)

This passage of Philo is of the utmost importance for estimating the
date of our treatises; for not only does it prove that the oldest forms
of the Trismegistic literature were pre-Christian, but it further
persuades us that our treatise, which belongs to a later type of this
literature, may be dated as contemporary with Philo.

Chapter xi. in the Prolegomena, “Concerning the Æon-Doctrine,” should be
taken in close connection with this treatise, for it is not only
introductory to it, but frequently refers directly to it.

For the rest, it is not necessary to attempt any detailed comments,
since the instruction of the writer is clear enough for any careful
reader to follow with ease after making himself acquainted with the
general ideas in the preceding treatises. One or two notes on special
points, however, may be attempted.

##### THE ROOT OF FORM

Thus in § 16, the sentence: “The Cosmos is all-formed (παντόμορφος),—not
having forms external to itself, but changing them itself within
itself,”—reminds us of *P. S. A.*, xix. 3: “The ‘Thirty-six’ who have
the name of Horoscopes are in the self-same space as the fixed stars; of
these the essence-chief, or prince,

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

is he whom they call Pantomorph, or Omniform (παντόμορφος, *vel
omniformis*),who fashioneth the various forms for various species”; and
also of *P. S. A.*, xxxv.: “But they are changed as many times as there
are moments in the hour of that revolving circle in which abides that
God whom we have called All-form.”

Compare also *C. H.*, xiii. (xiv.) 12, where, speaking of the “Circle of
the types of life,” Hermes says it is “composed of elements, twelve in
number, but of one nature, an omniform idea.”

With this compare Hermes-Prayer iv., addressed to Thoth as the Logos:

“Thee I invoke alone, thou who alone in all the Cosmos dost impose order
on gods and men, who dost transform thyself in holy forms, making to be
from things that are not, and from the things that are, making the not
to be.”

But the main interest of our treatise is not that the Intelligible
Cosmos or Logos can create and destroy and transmute all forms at will,
but that man as the microcosm has potential in him this great magic
power.

##### “BECOME ALL THINGS”

The daring instruction given to Hermes in §§ 19 and 20 is distinctly a
discipline of the Egyptian Wisdom; for though it is here set forth
plainly and without circumlocution, as a straightforward intimate
instruction, stripped of all mysterious hints or hesitating
subterfuges, <span id="fr_401"></span>[1](#fn_401) it is clearly in the
same circle of ideas of which popular Egyptian theurgy had some inkling.
But whereas the philosopher-mystic was bidden to do this for himself of
his own volition and achievement, the theurgist had to beg some god to
do it for him.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

Thus in the same Prayer, to which we have already referred, we read (§§
2, 3):

“O holy Thoth, the true sight of whose face none of the gods endures!
Make me to be in every creature’s name \[or ‘true form’\],—wolf, dog, or
lion, fire, tree, or vulture, wall, or water, or what thou will’st, for
thou art able so to do.”

So also in *P. S. A.*, vii., we have the same idea, for certainly the
phrasing of the sentences suggests something beyond the ordinary powers
of the mind or imagination.

“He mingles with the elements by reason of the swiftness of his mind. He
plunges into the sea’s depths by means of its profundity. He puts his
values on all things.

“Heaven does not seem too high for him; for it is measured by the wisdom
of his mind as though it were quite near.

“No darkness of the air obstructs the penetration of his mind. No
density of earth impedes his work. No depth of water blunts his sight.

“Though still the same, yet is he all, and everywhere is he the same.”

It is indeed a marvellous “yoga” system that is sketched for us in our
treatise. There is no question here of abstraction or negation, but a
courageous identification or At-one-ment of oneself with all that lives
and breathes. This is the Path of the Gnosis, the Way to Know God.

In other words, man is to copy his prototype, the Mind, and just as the
Mind or Man, in the “Pœmandres” treatise, “had a mind to break right
through the Boundary of the spheres” (§ 13), so is our philosopher
bidden to “soar up to the Last Body of them all” (§ 19), that Last Body
being the One Element of Cosmos itself.

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

“And shouldst thou will to break through this as well, and contemplate
what is beyond—if there be aught beyond the Cosmos; it is permitted
thee.”

That the hard and fast distinctions which modern commentators would draw
between words, in considering these mystical treatises, would have been
laughed at by the writers of them, is amply manifested when the writer
with enthusiastic fervour bursts forth:

“Then in this way know God, as having in Himself as thoughts the whole
Cosmos itself.

“If, then, thou dost not make thyself like unto God, <span
id="fr_402"></span>[1](#fn_402) thou canst not know Him. <span
id="fr_403"></span>[2](#fn_403) For like is knowable to like \[alone\].
Make, then, thyself to grow to the same stature as the Greatness which
transcends all measure; leap forth from every body; transcend all time;
become Eternity; and thus shalt thou know God.”

Every body or space must be transcended, even the Body of Cosmos itself;
for the man must grow into the “stature of the Greatness that transcends
all measure,” that is, the intelligible superspatial Plērōma, the Æon as
the Logos and Paradigm of Cosmos. And every time and all Time must also
be transcended; for the man must become Eternity—that is, the Æon as the
Paradigm of Time.

##### THE GOOD’S OWN PATH

In no scripture that I know is this Path more admirably set forth—the
Good’s own Path. All things, all spaces, and all times have to be
realized as being within oneself *simultaneously*; if this is realized
or known, not only imagined, then a man becomes a true Knower of God, a
Gnostic.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Nor has ever a truer sentence been written than the wonderful words
concerning this Path to the Supreme:

“If thou but sett’st thy foot thereon, ’twill meet thee everywhere,
’twill everywhere be seen, both where and when thou dost expect it
not—waking, sleeping, sailing, journeying, by night, by day, speaking,
and saying naught. For there is naught that is not image of the Good.”

##### CONCERNING INDIA

In conclusion, I would only point out that if for the hopeless reading
in the first sentence of § 19 we were to take Patrizzi’s emendation,
which has been adopted by Parthey, we should have the interesting
sentence:

“And, thus, think from thyself, and bid thy soul go unto India.”

If this should be the original reading, it is remarkable that India
should have been selected of all places. We know, however, from a study
of what is known of the life of Apollonius of Tyana, that this “Gnostic”
philosopher made an enormous propaganda of Indian ideas among the
philosophic and mystic communities and schools of the first century.
Apollonius must have known something, perhaps a great deal, concerning
the *siddhis* acquired by *yoga*-practices. At any rate, we find his
biographer Philostratus making him write the following letter to his
Eastern hosts on his return from India:

“I came to you by land and ye have given me the sea; nay, rather, by
sharing with me your wisdom ye have given me power to travel through
heaven. These things will I bring back to the mind of the Greeks, and I
will hold converse with you as though ye were

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

present, if it be that I have not drunk of the Cup of Tantalus in
vain.” <span id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_404)

That an intensely great interest was taken in Indian ideas at Alexandria
is shown by the fact that we find Plotinus himself in 242 starting off
with the expedition of Gordian to the East in the hope of coming in
contact with the Indian Wisdom.

But all these considerations, though interesting in themselves, do not
immediately concern us, unless we are subjectively persuaded that the
emendation of Patrizzi is firmly established. Should, however, this
reading in any way be confirmed by objective evidence, we should have to
reconsider the question of date by the light of it, though, I fear, with
little chance of any definite result. For though the propaganda of
Indian ideas by Apollonius could not have begun prior to the middle of
the first century, we have in this fact no very sure criterion, for
“India” must have been in the air, and strongly in the air, even prior
to Apollonius’ visit to India, or why should he have been induced to
make so long and dangerous a journey? Indeed, “India” had been in the
air ever since the expedition of Alexander—that is, from the beginning
of the Alexandrian period—the second quarter of the fourth century B.C.
onwards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_395"></span>[190:1](th224.htm#fr_395) *C. Jul.*, ii. 52;
ed. Migne, col. 580 B.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[190:2](th224.htm#fr_396) *Cf.* R. 128, i.;
196, 3.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[192:1](th224.htm#fr_397) Namely, Paul in his
Letters, which are the earliest of all Christian documents. See my
article, “Some Notes on the Gnostics,” in *The Nineteenth Century and
After* (Nov. 1902), pp. 822-835; and *D. J. L.*, pp. 353 ff.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[192:2](th224.htm#fr_398) Perhaps the clearest
exposition is to be found in *P. S. A.*, xxx. and xxxi.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[193:1](th224.htm#fr_399) *Cf.* *C. H.*, i. 6;
the Union of the Logos and Mind—or First-Born Son and Father—is Life;
they are united in Æon.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[193:2](th224.htm#fr_400) *Quod Deus Im.*, § 6;
M. i. 277; P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).

<span id="fn_401"></span>[194:1](th224.htm#fr_401) Or, as the writer of
the *Pistis Sophia* would say, ἐν παρρησίᾳ, “face to face without a
parable.”

<span id="fn_402"></span>[196:1](th224.htm#fr_402) *Sc.* as Cosmos.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[196:2](th224.htm#fr_403) *Sc.* as Father of
this Only Son.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[198:1](th224.htm#fr_404) Philos*.*, *Vit.
Ap.*, iii. 51. *Cf.* my *Apollonius of Tyana*, *the Philosopher Reformer
of the First Century A.D.* (London, 1901), p. 88.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. (XIII.) About the Common Mind](th225)
