[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th227)  [Next](th229) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

#### COMMENTARY

##### CONCERNING THE TITLE

“The Secret Sermon on the Mountain” is the main title given in all the
MSS., with the exception of A; the subsidiary contents-title is
evidently derived from the same edition to which we owe the other
contents-titles preserved in our Corpus. Reitzenstein (p. 193), however,
thinks that the main title has arisen by mistake. What the mistake is he
does not tell us; perhaps he means that in our Sermon there is no
mention of “*On* a Mountain,” but rather, as in § 1, if we accept his
reading, of “*Down* a Mountain.” But in this we cannot follow him; for
the whole teaching is precisely “On the Mount”—to the top of which Tat
has now come. For the “Mountain” was symbolic of stages of inner
development, and in § 9 we are told precisely: “This *step* (the fifth)
is Righteousness’ firm seat,”—showing that the Mountain was conceived as
an ascent or stair of steps as is so often seen in Egyptian frescoes.

##### THE TERM APOCRYPHON

Again, with regard to the title, the term “Secret”
(ἀπόκρυφος—apocryphal) is used in its original sense of hidden away,
meaning esoteric or not put into circulation, as applied to a *logos* or
sermon, or a collection of *logoi* or sayings.

A *logos* in this sense had very much the same meaning for our Ancients
as the Sanskrit *mahā-vākyam* (“great saying”) has to-day for an Indian
theosophist who applies the term to the great mystical utterances of the
Upaniṣhads; such as: “That art thou” (*Tat tvam asi*), etc.

In classical antiquity these *logoi* or *logia* were

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

regarded as words of wisdom, and were the most sacred legacies of the
sages to humanity. These oracular utterances were frequently collected
together, and even prior to the days of syncretism formed the most
sacred “deposits” (διαθῆκαι) of various nations; the same term being
subsequently given to the Christian Bible.

Thus Herodotus calls Onomacritus, the first collector of the archaic
Orphic Hymns, a “depository of oracles” (διαθέτην χρησμῶν),—the word
carrying the meaning of “one who arranges,” corresponding exactly to the
term Vyāsa in Sanskrit, the supposed “author” of the *Mahābhārata.*

Such collections of *logoi* or *logia* were then generally called
“deposits,” the word also sometimes bearing the meaning of “testaments”
as containing the expression of the Divine will or dispensation. The
same term is used by Strabo (x. 482) of the Laws of Lycurgus; it was
also applied by the Orphics and Pythagoreans to such sacred laws <span
id="fr_506"></span>[1](#fn_506); while Ecclesiastical writers
subsequently used it in reference to the Canonical Books. <span
id="fr_507"></span>[2](#fn_507)

The Orphics and Pythagoreans also called these collections “sacred
utterances” (ἱεροὶ λόγοι); and even Clement of Alexandria refers to such
a saying of Orpheus as “that truly sacred utterance” (τὸν ὄντως ἱερὸν
λόγον).

That such collections were kept secret is not surprising; indeed, such
must have been the case from time immemorial. But even on the ground of
purely Greek and Roman history, we are not without information of
collections of oracles carefully guarded as the secret scriptures or
bibles of nations.

Cicero <span id="fr_508"></span>[3](#fn_508) speaks of such a bible of
the Veii. The Athenians, in the time of the Kings, possessed a similar

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

bible of *logia* <span id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_509); and
Dinarchus <span id="fr_510"></span>[2](#fn_510) tells us that the safety
of the State depended on this secret scripture (ἀπορρήτους διαθῆκας)
These occult sayings (ἀπόθεντα ἔπη) are further called by Suidas
(*s.v.*) “withdrawn volumes” (βιβλία ἀνακεχωρηκότα)—that is to say,
books withdrawn from public perusal, or, in other words, apocryphal,
hidden or secret (ἀπόκρυφα).

And not only was this the case with the ancient writings themselves, but
also with the commentaries upon them, and by degrees with everything
referring to them, until finally we find Themistius the rhetorician, in
the fourth century, speaking of that “mass of Archaic wisdom not open to
the public or in general circulation, but scarce and occult.” <span
id="fr_511"></span>[3](#fn_511)

We have, therefore, translated the term by “secret” as conveying the
proper meaning of the epithet in the title, and not by “apocryphal,” a
word that nowadays connotes the judgment of a theological canon.

##### THE THREE STAGES OF PROBATION

1\. In the first paragraph Tat definitely refers to *three* Stages of
Probation, before he is deemed fit to hear the Sermon on Rebirth.

\(i\) First there is the General or Preliminary Instruction contained in
a collection of discourses called the General Sermons (Γενικοὶ Λόγοι).

\(ii\) Next is the Stage where Tat becomes the Suppliant of Hermes, a
stage characterized by Conversation or Dialogue (διαλεχθῆναι); that is
to say, Tat was allowed to ask questions. This is further

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

symbolically described by a phrase, ἐπὶ τῆς τοῦ ὄρους μεταβάσεως, which
is difficult to translate, but which seems to mean either Passing up, or
Wending up, the Mountain, or Wending over the Mountain. That is to say,
that Hermes was gradually leading Tat to the top of the Mountain, in
plain words, as far as his normal intellect could carry him; the Top of
the Mountain representing the highest point of unaided mental faculty.

This stage was, I believe, represented by the collection of Sermons to
Tat, or Dialogues with Tat, known as the Διεξοδικοὶ Λόγοι—a term
somewhat difficult to translate precisely.

The fundamental meaning of διέξοδος is a “way through and out,” a
“pathway” or “passage,” or “means of escape.” It thus comes to mean the
course of a narrative, or a detailed narrative, exposition, discussion.
Hence also a “passage” of Scripture. As set over against γενικὸς
(General), therefore, διεξοδικὸς would mean Detailed or Expository; but
at the same time it would to the Greek ear suggest the meaning of the
Means of Escape or the Way out of Ignorance.

\(iii\) The third Stage is that of Moral and Mental Purification.
“Wherefore I got me ready and made the thought (τὸ φρόνημα) in me a
stranger to the world-illusion” (τῆς τοῦ κόσμου ἀπάτης)—the Error that
in § 7 sums up the first six vices, and is in § 9 driven out by Truth.

Stage ii. may have been technically known as that of the Suppliant,
though, of course, of this we cannot be sure. In any case the term must
be considered in close connection with Philo’s treatise *On the
Contemplative Life*, which, as Conybeare tells us, most probably formed
Book IV. of Philo’s voluminous work, or rather apology, *De Legatione.*
The alternative title of this

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

work was *The Suppliants.* By “Suppliant” Philo tells us he means “one
who has fled to God and taken refuge with Him.” <span
id="fr_512"></span>[1](#fn_512)

Here, however, the term is used in a narrower sense, as adapted to the
personal relationship of disciple to master, who, during the time of
probation, stands to him as the representative of God. The master is his
spiritual father, the image of God the Father. <span
id="fr_513"></span>[2](#fn_513)

##### THE HOLY MOUNT OF INITIATION

As to the symbolic use of the term Mountain, I need hardly remind my
readers that it was perhaps the most common figure employed in the
apocalypses of the time. Instances come immediately crowding into the
mind, such as the “Mount of Galilee” in the Askew and Bruce Gnostic
Codices, on which all the great initiations and rites are performed by
the Risen Lord; or the Mount Tabor <span id="fr_514"></span>[3](#fn_514)
of *The Gospel according to the Hebrews*, “My Mother the Holy Spirit
took me by one of the hairs of the head and carried me unto Mount
Tabor”; or in the *Acts of John*, where the Vision of the Spiritual
Crucifixion is shown to John on the Mount; or in *The Gospel of Eve*,
where the Vision of the Great and Little Man is seen on the Mount; or in
*The Shepherd of Hermas*, where the Angel of Repentance bears off Hermas
to the Mount of Arcadia, etc. In every case the Mountain is no physical
mountain, but the height of contemplation, an interior state of
spiritual consciousness.

Stage iii., again, is of interest because of the terms in

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

which it is described; they may be compared with the same teaching in
the Behnesa *logos*:

Jesus saith: “Except ye fast to the world, ye shall in nowise find the
Kingdom of God.”

Again, in Tat’s prayer for the consummation of his probation: “And now
do thou fill up the things that fall short in me” (τὰ ὑστερήματα
ἀναπλήρωσον), it should be noticed that we have the well-known technical
terms of the Christianized Gnosis, the Plērōma and Hysterēma, or
Fullness and Insufficiency.

##### THE BIRTH FROM ABOVE

The time has come for Tat to receive, through his master, the touch of
the true Mind-consciousness, the Christ is to be born in his heart, the
light of the Plērōma is to shine into his inmost being. It is to be a
New Birth, a Regeneration (παλιγγένεσις), or Re-birth (ἀναγέννησις), in
the sense of being born from Above (ἄνωθεν).

Compare John iii. 3: “Amen, Amen, I say unto thee; Except a man be born
from Above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.” And also 7: “Marvel not
that I said unto thee, Ye (*pl.*) must be born from Above,”—where the
comment on a prior saying, “*Ye* must be born from Above,” formally
unsuited to the scheme of a dialogue between Jeschu and Rabbi Nakdimon,
reveals the work of the Haggadist.

So also in 1 Pet. i. 22, 23: “Having made your souls holy by hearkening
to the Truth <span id="fr_515"></span>[1](#fn_515) . . . being Re-born
(ἀναγεγεννημένοι) not from the seed of destruction, but from the Seed
that cannot be destroyed, through the Word <span
id="fr_516"></span>[2](#fn_516) (*Logos*) of God, who lives and
endures.” <span id="fr_517"></span>[3](#fn_517)

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

These passages from the New Testament Scriptures are not, of course,
cited to show any dependence of our Hermetic authors on the New
Testament writers; but simply to show how they mutually explain one
another. For indeed the doctrine of the New Birth and of the Sacred
Marriage was beyond all else the crowning mystery of the Spiritual Way
for all the mystic schools of the time. <span
id="fr_518"></span>[1](#fn_518)

##### THE VIRGIN BIRTH

2\. The secret that Tat would learn is the Mystery of the Birth from the
Virgin Womb—the Birth of Man, the Great Mystery of Regeneration. Many
illustrations of the meaning of this pivot-doctrine of the Christian
teaching might be quoted from Gnostic writings, but it will be
sufficient to remind the reader of what the Jewish Commentator in the
Naassene Document (§ 28) has written in contrasting the Great Mysteries
(or the heavenly ones) with the Little Mysteries (those of fleshly
generation). Speaking of the Mysteries of Regeneration, he writes:

“For this is the Gate of Heaven, and this is the House of God, where the
Good God dwells alone; into which no impure \[man\] shall come, but it
is kept under guard for the spiritual alone,—where when they come, they
must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms, obtaining
their true manhood, through the Virginal Spirit. For this is the Virgin
big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son.”

And to this the Christian Commentator adds:—“not psychic, not fleshly,
but a blessed Æon of Æons.”

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

The Jewish Commentator uses the language of Philo, who, as we have
shown, centred his ideas round the conception of the Sacred Marriage and
the Virginal Spirit.

So, too, does our treatise. The Womb is Silence, the silence of
contemplation, the image of the Great Silence the Mother of the Æons in
many a Christianized Gnostic System; the Matter is Wisdom; the Æon’s
coming to consciousness in man is the Birth of Man the Son of God; and
the Seed is the Good or Logos sown by the Will of the Father. This is
the Birth of the Christ in man, the Great Mystery that awaits us when we
have made ourselves strangers to the world-illusion.

Is this Son then, asks Tat, other than God? No, answers Hermes; it is
the Mystery of Sameness, not of Difference; it is the Plērōma, not the
Insufficiency,—“All in all, out of all powers composed,” the Common
Fruit of the Plērōma, as the Valentinians would have expressed it.

##### THE RACE OF THE LOGOS

It is a Race, not an individual; it is We and no longer I. <span
id="fr_519"></span>[1](#fn_519) This is the Race of the Logos; the
Self-taught Race of Philo; or, as Hermes says: “This Race, my son, is
never taught, but when He willeth it, its memory is restored by God.”

This is the ἀνάμνησις of Pythagoras and Plato,—the regaining of the
consciousness of the Divine State; it must be self-perceived. And so
Philo tells us:

“But as for the Race of Devotees who are taught ever more and more to
see, let them strive for the intuition of That-which-is; let them
transcend the sun which men perceive \[and gaze upon the Light beyond,
the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> True Sun or
Logos\], nor ever leave this rank which leads to Perfect Blessedness.
Now they who betake themselves to the \[Divine\] Service, \[do so\] not
because of any custom, or *some one’s advice or appeal*, but are carried
away by Heavenly Love.” <span id="fr_520"></span>[1](#fn_520)

They are of the Race of Elxai, the Hidden Power or Holy Spirit, the
Spouse of Iexai, the Hidden Lord or Logos. <span
id="fr_521"></span>[2](#fn_521)

##### THE SELF-TAUGHT

3\. Hermes cannot teach to Tat this Birth in words, even as Isis is not
permitted to declare it openly to Horus (*K. K.*, 36):

“I may not tell the story of this Birth; for it is not permitted to
describe the origin of thy descent, O Horus, son of mighty power, lest
afterward the Way-of-Birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto
men”—that is, the Mystery of the Birth of Horus.

Hermes can only guide Tat towards the realisation of the Blessed Sight,
by putting himself into that sublime state of consciousness, so that
Tat, so to speak, bathes, or is baptized in, his master’s spiritual
presence, the Cup of the Mind. This, as we have seen already from
several treatises, was the way of transmission of the Power of the
powers, the true Laying-on of Hands.

Hermes describes the change that takes place in himself when he passes
into the higher spiritual consciousness. He seems to “pass through
himself”—to “involve” himself, as it is said somewhere in the
*Mahābhārata* of the Ṛiṣhis—“into a Body that can never die,” that is,
into a, or rather *the*, Essential or Cosmic Body, <span
id="fr_522"></span>[3](#fn_522) that embraces the cosmos within it. The

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

way to do this is not taught, for it cannot be understood from any
sensible experience, the outer physical form of the adept remaining as
it was before. It is an inner change. The Birth of a Christ is the
striking of a new keynote; everything remains apparently as it was
before, but all things receive a new interpretation.

No physical sight, even of the greatest intensity, can penetrate the
Veil of this Mystery.

“Thou seest me with eyes, my son; but what I am thou dost not
understand.”

With this compare the marvellous Ritual of Initiation in *The Acts of
John*:

“Who I am thou shalt know when I depart. <span
id="fr_523"></span>[1](#fn_523) What I am seen to be, that am I not; but
what I am, thou shalt see when thou comest.” <span
id="fr_524"></span>[2](#fn_524)

None but those who have reached the Christ-state can know it; no
teaching will avail to explain its manner and its mysteries. It must be
realized.

##### THE NEW CREATION

4\. But Tat, who has “made himself ready,” is becoming quickened by the
power of his master. His spiritual senses are being born; already he is
losing touch with the physical; he no longer sees himself. But this is
not enough; he must not only be able to lose consciousness of his
physical body, and see and hear as though with the mind alone, but he
must “invert” himself, pass right through himself, and no longer see
things as without him, but all things as within him.

All this is a New Creation to be accomplished in the man himself. The
Author or Genesiurge of Re-birth, as

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

contrasted with the Maker or Demiurge of Birth, is the One Man, the
Logos, the Energic Reason and Will of God; the one is the Creator of the
Immortal Body, the other is the Maker of the mortal frame.

##### THE WAY OF BIRTH IN GOD

5\. The reading of the next sentence is faulty, and it is impossible to
extract the correct meaning. The “Greatness” (τὸ μέγεθος) and
“distinctive form” (χαρακτήρ) are terms familiar enough to us in
Christian Gnostic writings. <span id="fr_525"></span>[1](#fn_525)
Greatness connotes the same idea as Æon; “character” or “distinctive
form” or “rank” is generally the impression from a typical original, and
here stands for the form by which a man is recognised.

6\. Hermes then proceeds to describe the nature of this Greatness or
Æon, or Sameness, manifested in difference. It is, alchemically
speaking, the One Element, which can only be comprehended by one Born in
God—that is, by a God.

7\. The way of this Birth is then described as a de-energizing, or
throwing out of work of the body’s senses, with a corresponding
energizing of the One Sense, the Æonic Consciousness; or as a purging
out of

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the tendencies of the lower nature, and replacing them by the energies
of the Divine Powers.

This is the Mystery of Repentance (μετανοῖα), not a change of mind only,
but a change throughout the whole nature; all things in the man turn
towards God.

The forces or energies of the soul have no direction in themselves; it
is the will of man that can turn them “downwards” or “upwards,” so that
they become vices or virtues.

##### OF THE TEN AND THE TWELVE

8., But not only does Hermes set forth a formal exposition of this
Repentance in terms of the conquest and driving out of the Horde of
Vices by the Company of Virtues, but at the same time he performs an
efficacious theurgic rite of invocation whereby he enables Tat to
realize the instruction in immediate experience.

The Virtues that Hermes invokes are not abstractions, but definite
substantial powers; they are, in fact, the “filling up” of Tat’s
“insufficiency”; in other words, they are what the Christian Gnostics
would have called the Æons of the Plērōma.

Behind all there is a definite scheme of numbering. There is a Twelve
and a Ten and a Seven and a Three and a One.

The Torments of the Darkness are the Twelve; they are not torments in
themselves, but only for him who is in Error. They are Twelve yet are
they one, for though they are “pantomorph” or “omniform,” yet are they
of one nature; the Twelve are thus conditioned by the main irrational
“types of life,” or animal natures,—the so-called zodiac.

These divisions are not, however, fundamental, they are solely for man’s
delusion or error; in action they

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

are one—that is, they keep man in Error or Ignorance. Thus they can be
regarded as one, or two, or three, or four, or six; and so combined and
recombined.

Twelve, then, is the nature of the “animal soul” in man—the number of
his going-forth into externality. This out-going is arrested when man
repents, and turns himself to return, to go within; the cosmogonical is
transformed by the soteriological; the “enformation according to
substance” gives place to the “enformation according to gnosis.” As
Ignorance characterized the Twelve, so does Gnosis characterize the Ten,
the Perfect Number or Number of Perfection.

The Going-forth was that of the multiplication of species—Twelve (3 × 4
or 2 × 6); the Return is Ten, that is the Seven and the Three; and Seven
is addition (3 + 4) and not multiplication.

Multiplication seems here to mean the generation, by two parents, of
things of the same kind and power; while addition signifies the
intensification of the same nature to a higher power.

The Ten is “that which giveth birth to souls”—that is, human souls; and
not only human souls, but, in its consummation, to divine souls.

It may, perhaps, be of interest here to set down simple lists of the
vices and virtues as given in our treatise, and to append to them the
list of vices in *C. H.*, i. 24 and 26.

|                      |                       |
|----------------------|-----------------------|
| 1\. Not-knowing.     | 1\. Gnosis.           |
| 2\. Grief.           | 2\. Joy.              |
| 3\. Intemperance.    | 3\. Self-control.     |
| 4\. Concupiscence.   | 4\. Continence.       |
| 5\. Unrighteousness. | 5\. Righteousness.    |
| 6\. Avarice.         | 6\. Sharing-with-all. |
| 7\. Error.           | 7\. Truth.            |
| 8\. Envy.            |                       |

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

|                           |               |
|---------------------------|---------------|
| 9\. Guile.                | 8\. The Good. |
| 10\. Anger.               | 9\. Life.     |
| 11\. Rashness.            | 10\. Light.   |
| 12\. Malice.              |               |
|                           |               |
| 1\. Growth and Waning.    | First Zone.   |
| 2\. Device of Evils.      | Second Zone.  |
| 3\. Guile of the Desires. | Third Zone.   |
| 4\. Arrogance.            | Fourth Zone.  |
| 5\. Daring and Rashness.  | Fifth Zone.   |
| 6\. Getting Wealth.       | Sixth Zone.   |
| 7\. Falsehood.            | Seventh Zone. |
|                           |               |
| 8\. Those-that-are.       | Eighth.       |
| 9\. The Powers in a band. | Ninth.        |
| 10\. The Father.          | Tenth.        |

It is at once seen that the first seven virtues are arranged so as to be
the direct antitheses of the first seven vices. The root of the Twelve
is Ignorance; indeed, all the Twelve are permutations of Ignorance. They
seem to be twelve, whereas they are but one in nature; again, not only
are they twelve, but manifold (§ 12).

Thus, for instance, Rashness and Wrath or Anger are but one, and so of
the rest; the permutations are infinite. This may be seen from the
septenary classification in “The Shepherd” treatise, where we have:
Guile of the Desires (3), a combination of Guile (9) and Desire or
Concupiscence (4); Device of Evils (2), a combination of Guile (9) and
Malice (12); Unholy Daring and Rashness (5), a combination of
Unrighteousness (5) and Rashness (11); Getting Wealth by evil means (6),
a combination of Guile (9) and Avarice (6). So also just as Anger (10)
and Rashness (11) are one, so are Envy (8) and Avarice (6) but aspects
of the same

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

thing; and so again Intemperance (3) and Concupiscence or Desire (4),
Grief (2) and Ignorance (1), etc.

All are summed up in Ignorance, or Error, just as the seven virtues are
summed up in Gnosis or Truth. <span id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_526) And
just as Ignorance is the source of vice, so is Knowledge or Gnosis the
beginning of Truth. Gnosis is not the end but the beginning of the Path,
the end of it is God or the Good.

The difference between the “Pœmandres” arrangement and the categories of
our treatise is conditioned by the fact that in the former the process
of transformation in the case of a good man *after death* is described,
whereas in the latter the Way of Rebirth in a living man is set forth.

That the Virtues (and Vices, therefore) were categorized according to
the fundamental numbers of the Gnosis may be seen in most systems of
Christian Gnostic æonology; indeed, it was a common plan of the general
Gnostic theosophy of the time. In our treatise we have set forth the
manner of the immediate practical ethical realization of what might be
taken by a superficial student of Gnostic æonology as an empty
schematology of purely metaphysical abstractions. <span
id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_527) These things, however, meant
*everything* to the Gnostic; they were fullnesses—no abstractions, but
transcendent realities.

So also in the *Shepherd of Hermas* (Vis. iii. 8, 7), just as in our
treatise, we are presented with the Vision of a Band of seven Women,
each the mother of the next, seven Virtues, called: Faith, Continence,
Simplicity, Freedom-from-malice, Seriousness, Gnosis (ἐπιστήμη), Love.

And not only do we have the Seven, but also the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Twelve, twelve
Maidens (Sim. xv. 1-3): Faith, Continence, Power, Long-suffering,
Simplicity, Freedom-from-malice, Chastity, Joyfulness, Truth,
Understanding, Concord, Love.

To these are opposed twelve Women in dark robes: Infidelity,
Incontinence, Disobedience, Error, Grief, Depravity, Wantonness,
Quickness-to-wrath, Falsehood, Folly, Slander, Hate.

Zosimus also speaks of the Twelve Fates (Μοῖραι) of Death, and
associates them with the Passions. <span id="fr_528"></span>[1](#fn_528)

But, indeed, the subject is infinite, for it is the consummation of all
right endeavour and all true progress in humanity. We must, then, leave
it for the present, to avoid running to too great length in these
comments. Sufficient for the moment to point to the fact that the Ten is
not only the Wedding Garment of Purity, but also the Robe of Power or
Glory. In its consummation also it is the Garment of the Christ, the One
Robe without seam throughout, for the Ten contains the One, and the One
contains the Ten.

##### THE DAWN OF COSMIC CONSCIOUSNESS

13\. The result of this Potent Invocation of the Powers,—that is to say,
the realization of the full meaning of the sacred rite which consummates
itself in the consciousness of Hermes, and so communicates itself in
some measure to Tat, <span id="fr_529"></span>[2](#fn_529)—is that Tat
begins to “see”; “I see the All, I see myself in Mind.”

“In heaven am I, in earth, in water, air; I am in animals, in plants;
I’m in the womb, before the womb, after the womb,—I’m everywhere” (§
11).

Compare this with *C. H.*, xi. (xii.) 22, where Hermes is himself being
taught by Mind:

“Collect into thyself all senses of all creatures,—of

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

fire, and water, dry and moist. Think that thou art at the same time in
every place, in earth, in sea, in sky; not yet begotten, in the womb,
young, old and dead, in after-death conditions.”

This is, as we have seen, a pure Egyptian formula, and connotes the
opening of the “cosmic consciousness.”

This consciousness, whatever else it may be, is a transcending of our
three-dimensional limitation of consciousness,—that of the “body’s
view-point,—a thing three ways in space extended.”

##### THE VOW OF SILENCE

The mystery of this New Birth in consciousness is to be kept secret;
therefore Hermes has not commented on it, presumably in the Expository
Sermons; moreover, it must even now be kept secret (§ 22), and therefore
is the treatise a Secret Sermon. The reason for this is given both here
and in § 22: “That we may not be thought to be calumniators” (διάβολοι),
by the Many or Unknowing. What may be the precise meaning of this phrase
I do not know, and can only speculate.

Those who had reached the full grade of Hermes are to keep silence on
their “virtue” or power (§ 22); they were never to boast of their
Gnosis. If they did, it would only bring the Gnosis into contempt; for
they would still appear as ordinary men, would probably often say and do
things, when they were not in the higher state of consciousness, which
fell below the standard of their high ideals, and so they would be
slanderers or calumniators of the Gnosis before the world.

14\. The New Birth is further characterized as the Essential Birth (ἡ
οὐσιώδης γένεσις); it was the birth of

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

the Essential Man, the God, Son of the One, to which other treatises
refer. <span id="fr_530"></span>[1](#fn_530)

##### OF THE OGDOAD

15\. Tat now desires to hear the Praise-giving of the Powers, which only
those can sing who have reached the stage called Eighth, or the Ogdoad;
this is the state above the Harmony or the Hebdomad of Fate (*C. H.*, i.
26). The man is now free and no longer a slave. It is the power of
prophetic hymnody, for the man now hears the True Harmony of things and
is above the Concatenation of Difference; it is the state “that keeps
the soul in tune.” He who has reached this height can ever sing in tune;
it is the state of the Hearer of the Eternal Praise-giving, and those
who reach it can express it infinitely, each in his own fashion.

The idea of the Ogdoad is represented in many a Christian Gnostic
system, especially in the Valentinian tradition, which has many Egyptian
elements in it.

So we read in the *Excerpts from Theodotus* appended to the writings of
Clement of Alexandria:

“Him whom the Mother <span id="fr_531"></span>[2](#fn_531) brings to
birth, she leadeth unto Death and to the world; but him whom Christ
brings to rebirth, He changeth into Life, unto the Ogdoad.” <span
id="fr_532"></span>[3](#fn_532)

Many were the names given to the Ogdoad by the Christian Gnostics,—such
as the Jerusalem Above, Wisdom, the Land flowing with milk and honey,
the Holy Spirit, the Land of the Lord, the Mesotes.

These terms were, however, with the exception of the last, Jewish
synonyms; the term Ogdoad itself

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

was in all probability Egyptian. Thus in one of the Magic Papyri we
read:

“Having known the power of the book, thou shalt hide it, my son. For in
it there is stored the Authentic Name, which is the Name Ogdoad,—He who
doth order and doth regulate all things.” <span
id="fr_533"></span>[1](#fn_533)

##### A HYMN FOR MORNING AND FOR EVENING PRAYER

16\. The Hymn that follows is to be kept secret—that is to say, it is to
be taken by Tat as an example of the form of prayer he is now to use in
his private devotions, and is therefore probably intended to replace
some other form of prayer which he had hitherto been using, as was the
custom in such communities.

The instruction to use it at sunset and sunrise, in the open air,
reminds us of the appended passages to “The Shepherd” treatise, where we
read (§ 29):

“And when even was come and all sun’s beams began to set, I bade them
all give thanks to God.” <span id="fr_534"></span>[2](#fn_534)

Compare also what Philo tells us of the Therapeuts:

“Twice a day, at dawn and even, they are accustomed to offer up prayers;
as the sun rises praying for the sunshine, the real Sunshine, that their
minds may be filled with Heavenly Light, and as it sets praying that
their soul, completely lightened of the lust of the senses and
sensations, may withdraw to its own Congregation and Council-chamber,
there to track out Truth.” <span id="fr_535"></span>[3](#fn_535)

So also Apollonius of Tyana is said to have prayed and meditated three
times a day: at daybreak (Phil., *V. A.*, vi. 10, 18; vii. 31), at
mid-day (vii. 10), and at

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

sundown (viii. 13); and with regard to “keeping silence on their
virtue,” we are told of the Later Pythagoreans, of whom he was so
conspicuous an example:

“In particular they kept the rule of silence regarding the Divine
Service \[that is, the Gnosis\]. For they heard within them many Divine
and unspeakable things on which it would have been difficult for them to
keep silence, had they not first learned that it was just this Silence
which spoke to them” (i. 1). <span id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_536)

And so the Hymn has to be heard in silence; all earthly sounds must be
stilled for the Heavenly Harmony to be heard.

17\. It is to be noticed that in four out of the five MSS. the title
“Secret Hymnody” is followed by the indication “Logos IV.”

Reitzenstein (p. 345, n. 21) thinks that the three prior “Logoi” were:

I. “Holy art Thou, O God”—*C. H.*, i. 31, 32.

II\. “The Glory of all things is God”—*C. H.*, iii. (iv.).

III\. “Whither stumble ye, sots?”—*C. H.*, vii. (viii.).

The latter two, however, are not hymns; the only other hymn in our
Corpus being:

“Who then may sing Thee praise of Thee?”—*C. H.*, v. (vi.) 10, 11.

Our Hymn is a Hymn to the Sun, it is true, but to the Spiritual Sun, not
the physical orb of day. It is to the Eye of Mind that these orisons are
addressed—to the All-seeing Light.

Nor is this Eulogy a formal *Te Deum*, but a potent theurgic
Praise-giving. All nature is to thrill with the joy of this
thankfulness.

Most beautiful is this Song of Praise, all of it, but we would specially
call attention to the words:

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

“Thy Reason sings through me Thy praises. Take back through me the All
into Thy Reason—my reasonable oblation <span
id="fr_537"></span>[1](#fn_537)! *From* Thee Thy Will; *to* Thee the
All!”

The Outbreathing of the Universe through the Reason or Logos <span
id="fr_538"></span>[2](#fn_538) is the manifestation or realisation of
the Will of God. The Logos is Son, Will is Mother and God Father.

The Inbreathing of the Universe is through Man (“Thy Man thus cries to
Thee,” § 20): “Take back through Me the All.” This is accomplished in
the first instance by the sacrifice of the reason, of man’s small
limited reason, to the Great Reason of things.

And yet the All, the Universe itself, is not something other than God;
it is *all* God.

“*From Thee* Thy Will”; Thou art the Source of all. “*To Thee* the All”;
Thou art the End of all, the Desirable One, The Good.

Compare with this the Hymn in the Jewish deposit of the Naassene
Document:

“*From Thee* is Father, and *Through Thee* Mother,—the two Immortal
Names, Parents of Æons, O Thou who hast the Heaven for thy City, O Man
of Mighty Names!”

Also notice: “The All that is in us, O Life, preserve; O Light, illumine
it; O God, in-spirit it!” And compare it with § 12, where we are told:
“While Life and Light are unified there, where the One hath being from
the Spirit.”

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

The Prayer is for the Baptism of Light—Illumination by the Gnosis <span
id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_539); this was the Dowsing in the Mind of
“The Cup” treatise, even as true Baptism in primitive Christianity was
called Illumination or φωτισμός.

##### “THROUGH THE WORD”

21\. Tat now feels himself impelled to utter praises himself. He says
what he feels. His master has given him the impulse, has made the
conditions for him whereby he is conceived as a Child of God, a Prophet.
But as yet he is not grown into the stature of a true Seer. His higher
nature has received the germ, but this must have time to develop, and
only gradually will its power descend into his lower mind.

At present his thankfulness is poured forth to his master, who has
performed the theurgic rite of initiation (“All things have been
perfected”) for him.

But Hermes restrains him; it is not to the master that his thanks are
due, but to God. And if he cannot as yet give thanks direct to God, then
let him send those thanks—“acceptable oblations”—to God “Through the
Word.”

And that this was and is the practice of universal Christendom requires
no pointing out;—the most striking parallel to the wording of our
treatise being 1 Pet. ii. 5: “Spiritual oblations acceptable to God
through Jesus Christ.”

Tat has now passed from the rank of Hearer to that of Knower; he is now
a true Gnostic: “Thou hast become a Knower of thyself, and of our Sire.”

Compare *logos* 2 of the latest found Sayings at Oxyrhynchus:

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

“(Strive therefore?) to know yourselves, and ye shall know ye are Sons
of the (almighty?) Father; (and?) ye shall know that ye are in (the City
of God? <span id="fr_540"></span>[1](#fn_540)), and ye are (the
City? <span id="fr_541"></span>[2](#fn_541)).”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_506"></span>[235:1](th228.htm#fr_506) Grotius, *ap.*
Jablonski, ii. 397; Lobeck, *Aglaoph.*, p. 714.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[235:2](th228.htm#fr_507) Euseb., *Chron.*, 99
A.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[235:3](th228.htm#fr_508) *De Div.*, i. 44.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[236:1](th228.htm#fr_509) Herod., v. 90.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[236:2](th228.htm#fr_510) *Or. c. Demos.*, 91,
20.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[236:3](th228.htm#fr_511) *Or.*, IV. 60:
“στῖφος ἀρχαιας σοφίας, οὐ κοινῆς οὐδε ἐν μέσῳ κυλινδουμένης ἀλλὰ
σπανίου καὶ ἀποθέτου.”

<span id="fn_512"></span>[238:1](th228.htm#fr_512) *De Sac. Ab. et C.*,
i. 186, 33.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[238:2](th228.htm#fr_513) See the praise-giving
of Tat, § 21.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[238:3](th228.htm#fr_514) “The Mountain of
Light,” the traditional scene of the Transfiguration.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[239:1](th228.htm#fr_515) Precisely as did Tat.

<span id="fn_516"></span>[239:2](th228.htm#fr_516) *Cf.* precisely the
same formula in our treatise, § 21.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[239:3](th228.htm#fr_517) That is, of God as
Æon and God as Life, which is the union of God as Mind and Logos.

<span id="fn_518"></span>[240:1](th228.htm#fr_518) The antiquity of the
ideas connected with this spiritual mystery may be seen from what
Reitzenstein (pp. 227 ff.) has to say concerning mystic συνουσία or
congress; of it, as perhaps of nothing so much in the world, may it be
said *corruptio optimi pessima.*

<span id="fn_519"></span>[241:1](th228.htm#fr_519) Compare the Song of
the Powers in *Pistis Sophia* (pp. 16, 17), where the “We” alternates
with the “I.”

<span id="fn_520"></span>[242:1](th228.htm#fr_520) *D. V. C.*, M. 473,
10; P. 891.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[242:2](th228.htm#fr_521) See *D. J. L.*, pp.
374, 375.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[242:3](th228.htm#fr_522) *Cf.* R. 52. But
compare especially § 6, and *C. H.*, iv. (v.) 1.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[243:1](th228.htm#fr_523) That is, when the
Presence is withdrawn,—by contrast.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[243:2](th228.htm#fr_524) *Texts and Studies*,
V. i. 14.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[244:1](th228.htm#fr_525) The term “Greatness,”
however, is probably of Egyptian derivation. In the *Papyrus Insinger*,
written somewhere during the last half of the first century B.C. and
first half of the first century A.D., according to Spiegelberg, God’s
Wisdom and Providence are praised (coll. xxxv., xxxvi.). The
superscription of this section runs: “The Four-and-Twentieth Teaching:
The Instruction: Learn the Greatness of God, that thou mayest let it
come into thine heart” (xxxv. 17); and later on: “He knoweth the
Blasphemer who thinketh wickedness, He knoweth the Pious with the
Greatness of God in his heart. The tongue, before even it is
questioned—its words God knoweth” (xxxvi. 3-5). This is further
explained by the sentence: “Thoth is heart and tongue of the Pious; lo!
his house is God!” (xxxv. 19). R. 237.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[248:1](th228.htm#fr_526) *Cf.* *P. S. A.*,
xxix. 2.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[248:2](th228.htm#fr_527) The usual way,
indeed, in which it is taken.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[249:1](th228.htm#fr_528) Berthelot, 244; R.
214.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[249:2](th228.htm#fr_529) *Cf.* *C. H.*, i. 7;
xi. (ixi.) 6.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[251:1](th228.htm#fr_530) *Cf.* *P. S. A.*,
vii. 2.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[251:2](th228.htm#fr_531) *Sc.* the Lower
Mother, Nature.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[251:3](th228.htm#fr_532) *Exx. ex Theodot.*, §
80 (ed. Dindorf, iii. 453).

<span id="fn_533"></span>[252:1](th228.htm#fr_533) *Leyden Papyrus W.
S.*, 139, 45 (Leemans); *cf.* also *ibid.*, 141, 5; R. 54. For further
comments on the Ogdoad, see Commentary on *C. H.*, i. 26.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[252:2](th228.htm#fr_534) *Cf.* also *P. S.
A.*, xli. 1.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[252:3](th228.htm#fr_535) *D. V. C.*, M. ii.
475; P. 893.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[253:1](th228.htm#fr_536) See my *Apollonius of
Tyana*, pp. 123 and 120.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[254:1](th228.htm#fr_537) *Cf.* 1 Pet. ii. 5:
“Ye also as living stones are built up, a spiritual house for holy
service, to offer up spiritual oblations acceptable to God through Jesus
Christ,” And also Rom. xii. 1: “I beseech you, therefore, brethren, to
present your bodies as a living oblation, holy, well-pleasing unto
God,—your reasonable service.”

<span id="fn_538"></span>[254:2](th228.htm#fr_538) Hesychius in his
Lexicon defines Logos as the “Cause of Activity,” or that which
underlies action,—ἡ τοῦ δράματος ὑπόθεσις.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[255:1](th228.htm#fr_539) Compare γνῶσις ἁγία,
φωτισθεὶς ἀπὸ σοῦ (§ 18); φῶτιζε φώς (§ 19); ἐπιφώτισταί μου ὁ νοῦς (§
21).

<span id="fn_540"></span>[256:1](th228.htm#fr_540) *Sc.* the Ogdoad.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[256:2](th228.htm#fr_541) *Cf.* 1. Pet. ii. 5:
“Ye are built up as living stones, a spiritual house for service.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. (XV.) A Letter to Asclepius](th229)
