[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th241)  [Next](th243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126137/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 2*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

2\. \[VI. M.\] The Lord of the Eternity <span
id="fr_736"></span>[3](#fn_735) is the first God; the second’s Cosmos;
man is the third. <span id="fr_737"></span>[4](#fn_736)

God is the Maker of the Cosmos and of all the things therein; at the
same time He ruleth <span id="fr_738"></span>[5](#fn_737) all, with man
himself, \[who is\] the ruler of the compound thing <span
id="fr_739"></span>[6](#fn_738); the whole of which man taking on
himself, doth make of it the proper care of his own love, in order that
the two of them, himself and Cosmos, may be an ornament each unto other;
so that from this divine compost of man, “World” seems most fitly called
“Cosmos” <span id="fr_740"></span>[7](#fn_739) in Greek.

3\. He knows himself; he knows the World as

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

well. <span id="fr_741"></span>[1](#fn_740) So that he recollects,
indeed, what is convenient to his own parts. He calls to mind what he
must use, that they may be of service to himself; giving the greatest
praise and thanks to God, His Image <span
id="fr_742"></span>[2](#fn_741) reverencing,—not ignorant that he is,
too, God’s image the second \[one\]; for that there are two images of
God—Cosmos and man. <span id="fr_743"></span>[3](#fn_742)

4\. So that it comes to pass that, since man’s is a single structure,—in
that part \[of him\] which doth consist of Soul, and Sense, of Spirit,
and of Reason, he’s divine; so that he seems to have the power to mount
from as it were the higher elements into the Heaven.

But in his cosmic part, which is composed of fire, and water, and of
air, he stayeth mortal on the Earth,—lest he should leave all things
committed to his care forsaken and bereft.

Thus human kind is made in one part deathless, and in the other part
subject to death while in a body.

#### XI

1\. Now of that dual nature,—that is to say of man,—there is a chief
capacity. \[And that is\] piety, which goodness follows after.

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

\[And\] this \[capacity\] then, and then only, seems to be perfected, if
it be fortified with virtue of despising all desires for alien things.

For alien from every part of kinship with the Gods <span
id="fr_744"></span>[1](#fn_743) are all things on the Earth, whatever
are possessed from bodily desires,—to which we rightly give the name
“possessions,” in that they are not born with us, but later on begin to
be possessed by us; wherefore we call them by the name
possessions. <span id="fr_745"></span>[2](#fn_744)

2\. All such things, then, are alien from man,—even his body. So that we
can despise not only what we long for, but also that from which the vice
of longing comes to us.

For just as far as the increase of reason leads our <span
id="fr_746"></span>[3](#fn_745) soul, so far one should be man; in order
that by contemplating the divine, one should look down upon, and
disregard the mortal part, which hath been joined to him, through the
necessity of helping on the lower <span id="fr_747"></span>[4](#fn_746)
world.

3\. For that, in order that a man should be complete in either part,
observe that he hath

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

been composed of elements of either part in sets of four;—with hands,
and feet, both of them pairs, and with the other <span
id="fr_748"></span>[1](#fn_747) members of his body, by means of which
he may do service to the lower (that is to say the terrene) world.

And to these parts \[are added other\] four;—of sense, and soul, of
memory, and foresight, by means of which he may become acquainted with
the rest of things divine, and judge of them.

Hence it is brought about that man investigates the differences and
qualities, effects and quantities of things, with critical research;
yet, as he is held back with the too heavy weight of body’s
imperfection, he cannot properly descry the causes of the nature of
\[all\] things which \[really\] are the true ones.

4\. Man, then, being thus created and composed, and to such ministry and
service set by Highest God,—man, by his keeping suitably the world in
proper order, \[and\] by his piously adoring God, in both becomingly and
suitably obeying God’s Good Will,—\[man being\] such as this, with what
reward think’st thou he should be recompensed?

If that, indeed,—since Cosmos is God’s work,—he who preserves and adds
on to its beauty

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

by his love, joins his own work unto God’s Will; when he with toil and
care doth fashion out the species <span id="fr_749"></span>[1](#fn_748)
(which He hath made \[already\] with His Divine Intent), with help of
his own body;—with what reward think’st thou he should be recompensed,
unless it be with that with which our forebears <span
id="fr_750"></span>[2](#fn_749) have been blest?

5\. That this may be the pleasure of God’s Love, such is our prayer for
you, devoted ones.

In other words, may He, when ye have served your time, and have put off
the world’s restraint, and freed yourselves from deathly bonds, restore
you pure and holy to the nature of your higher self, <span
id="fr_751"></span>[3](#fn_750) that is of the Divine!

#### XII

1\. *Asc.* Rightly and truly, O Thrice-greatest one, thou speakest. This
is the prize for those who piously subordinate their lives to God and
live to help the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tris.* \[To those\], however, who have lived in other fashion
impiously,—\[to them\] both is return to Heaven denied, and there’s
appointed them migration into other bodies <span
id="fr_752"></span>[4](#fn_751) unworthy of a holy soul and base; so
that, as this discourse

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

of ours will show, <span id="fr_753"></span>[1](#fn_752) souls in their
life on earth run risk of losing hope of future immortality.

2\. But \[all of this\] doth seem to some beyond belief; a tale to
others; to others \[yet again\], perchance, a subject for their
mirth. <span id="fr_754"></span>[2](#fn_753)

For in this life in body, it is a pleasant thing—the pleasure that one
gets from one’s possessions. <span id="fr_755"></span>[3](#fn_754) ’Tis
for this cause that spite, in envy of its \[hope of\] immortality, doth
clap the soul in prison, <span id="fr_756"></span>[4](#fn_755) as they
say, and keep it down, so that it stays in that part of itself in which
it’s mortal, nor suffers it to know the part of its divinity.

3\. For I will tell thee, as though it were prophetic-ly, <span
id="fr_757"></span>[5](#fn_756) that no one after us <span
id="fr_758"></span>[6](#fn_757) shall have the Single Love, the Love of
wisdom-loving, <span id="fr_759"></span>[7](#fn_758) which consists in
Gnosis of Divinity alone,—\[the practice of\] perpetual contemplation
and of holy piety. For that the many do confound philosophy with
multifarious reasoning. <span id="fr_760"></span>[8](#fn_759)

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

*Asc.* Why is it, then, the many make philosophy so hard to grasp; or
wherefore is it they confound this thing with multifarious reasoning?

#### XIII

1\. *Tris.* ’Tis in this way, Asclepius;—by mixing it, by means of
subtle expositions, with divers sciences not easy to be grasped,—such as
arithmetic, and music, and geometry.

But Pure Philosophy, which doth depend on godly piety alone, should only
so far occupy itself with other arts, that it may \[know how to\]
appreciate the working out in numbers of the fore-appointed stations of
the stars when they return, and of the course of their procession.

Let her, moreover, know how to appreciate the Earth’s dimensions, its
qualities and quantities, the Water’s depths, the strength of Fire, and
the effects and nature of all these. \[And so\] let her give worship and
give praise unto the Art and Mind of God.

2\. As for \[true\] Music,—to know this is naught else than to have
knowledge of the order of all things, and whatsoe’er God’s Reason hath
decreed.

For that the order of each several thing when set together in one
\[key\] for all, by means of skilful reason, will make, as ’twere,

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

the sweetest and the truest harmony with God’s \[own\] Song. <span
id="fr_761"></span>[1](#fn_760)

#### XIV

1\. *Asc.* Who, therefore, will the men be after us <span
id="fr_762"></span>[2](#fn_761)?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Tris.* They will be led astray by sophists’ cleverness, and turned from
True Philosophy,—the Pure and Holy \[Love\].

For that to worship God with single mind and soul, and reverence the
things that He hath made, and to give thanks unto His Will, which is the
only thing quite full of Good,—this is Philosophy unsullied by the
soul’s rough curiousness.

But of this subject let what has been said so far suffice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_735"></span>[325:3](th242.htm#fr_736) That is, the Æon.
*Cf.* xxx. 1 below.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[325:4](th242.htm#fr_737) *Cf.* Ex. i. 8.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[325:5](th242.htm#fr_738) Reading *gubernat*
for *gubernando.*

<span id="fn_738"></span>[325:6](th242.htm#fr_739) That is, the compost,
or “cosmic” part of himself, apparently, of v. 2.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[325:7](th242.htm#fr_740) The original Greek
κόσμος is here retained in the Latin; it means “order, adornment,
ornament,” as well as “world.”

<span id="fn_740"></span>[326:1](th242.htm#fr_741) The idea is that man
is a microcosm; he is, as to his bodies, “cosmic” (“*mundanus homo*”),
for his vehicles are made of the elements; he is thus in these an image
or seed (microcosm) of the universe, the macrocosm.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[326:2](th242.htm#fr_742) *Sc.* Cosmos. *Cf.*
xxxi. 1 below.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[326:3](th242.htm#fr_743) *Cf.* *C. H.*, x.
(xi.) 25, last sentence.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[327:1](th242.htm#fr_744) *Ab omnibus divinæ
cognationis partibus.*

<span id="fn_744"></span>[327:2](th242.htm#fr_745) This seems somewhat
tautological. The first clause runs: “*quæcunque terrena corporali
cupiditate* possidentur; *quæ merito* possessionem *nomine
nuncupantur.*” This *Latin* word-play seems almost to suggest that we
are dealing with an embellishment of the translator; it may, however,
have stood in the original. *Cf.* xii. 2 below.

<span id="fn_745"></span>[327:3](th242.htm#fr_746) Lit. my.

<span id="fn_746"></span>[327:4](th242.htm#fr_747) Reading *inferioris*
for *interioris*, as immediately below in § 3. *Cf.* vi. 3, last
sentence.

<span id="fn_747"></span>[328:1](th242.htm#fr_748) This seems very loose
indeed; the text or the Latin translation is probably at fault, unless
the “other members” are supposed to be grouped in sets of double pairs.

<span id="fn_748"></span>[329:1](th242.htm#fr_749) Singular—that is, the
species in the Cosmos, according to the type in the Divine Mind.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[329:2](th242.htm#fr_750) *Cf.* *C. H.*, x.
(xi.) 5; Lact., *D. I.*, i. 11; and xxxvii. 3 below.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[329:3](th242.htm#fr_751) Lit. part.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[329:4](th242.htm#fr_752) *In corporalia . . .
migratio.*

<span id="fn_752"></span>[330:1](th242.htm#fr_753) The Latin here does
not construe.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[330:2](th242.htm#fr_754) *Cf.* *C. H.*, i. 29;
also xxv. 3 below.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[330:3](th242.htm#fr_755) *Cf.* xi. 1 above.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[330:4](th242.htm#fr_756) *Obtorto . . .
collo.*

<span id="fn_756"></span>[330:5](th242.htm#fr_757) *Ego enim tibi quasi
prædivinans dixero.* Notice the *dixero*,—the “prophetic” tense, if we
may be permitted to coin a term to characterize this use, which reminds
us so strongly of the “Sibylline” literature and the allied prophetic
centonism of the time.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[330:6](th242.htm#fr_758) *Cf.* Ex. ix. 8, and
xiv. 1 below.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[330:7](th242.htm#fr_759) Lit. philosophy.
*Cf.* in Philo, *D. V. C.*, the “Heavenly Love” with which the
Therapeuts were “afire with God.” *Cf.* xiv. 1, and Ex. i. 3.

<span id="fn_759"></span>[330:8](th242.htm#fr_760) *Cf.* *C. H.*, xvi.
2.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[332:1](th242.htm#fr_761) *Cf.* “Heaven’s
harmonious song” in xxviii. 11 below.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[332:2](th242.htm#fr_762) *Cf.* xii. 3 above,
and notes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part VII](th243)
