<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Baha'i](../index.md)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sog07.md) 
[Next](sog09.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Splendour of God*, by Eric Hammond, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

### THE SEVEN VALLEYS

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> written word of Baha‘u‘llah is
possessed of much direct instruction, conveyed very beautifully, having
always a helpful and inspiring note.

Let us wander, if you will, for a little time, with him in "The Seven
Valleys," seven stations, so to speak, on the Divine Way. We shall find
these stations in a veritable Garden of the Soul. They are described in
the form of answers to questions put by a mystic Sufi, a Mohammedan
named Sheik Abdur Rahman. Our gleanings from these answers, or tablets,
will be gathered from Ali Kuli Khan's translation, issued by the Bahai
Publishing Society in 1906. We will note that these answers are further
described as "revealed"; that, naturally they are presented with a
glowing and ornate Oriental wealth of imagery. Much of this we must
leave ungarnered, contenting ourselves with enough of the real fineness
of the work to give us a clear conception of the thought behind it.

It begins thus

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"*In the Name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful*.

Praise be unto God, who caused existence to appear from non-existence,
inscribed the mysteries of the existence on the tablet of Man and taught
him the explanation of that which he knoweth not. . . . I mention unto
thee holy, brilliant allusions from the Stations of Glory; so that they
may attract thee unto the court of holiness, nearness, and beauty, and
draw thee unto a state wherein thou shalt see naught in existence but
the countenance of His Highness thy Beloved One. . . . That is the
station of which the nightingale of unity hath sung, viz., 'And there
shall appear upon the tablet of thine heart the traces of the subtle
mysteries of 'fear God and God will instruct you.' . . . May it do good
unto me, unto thee, unto whomsoever may ascend to the heaven of
knowledge, and to him whose heart is fascinated by the zephyr of
assurance wafting upon the garden of his innate heart, from the Sheba of
the Merciful.

*Peace be unto those who follow guidanc*e."

</div>

It must be remarked that "the stages of the journey of travellers from
the earthly dwelling to the Divine House have been designated to be
Seven; some have spoken of these as 'Seven

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Valleys' . . . and
they have said, 'Not until the traveller migrates from self and
accomplishes these journeys, will he arrive at the sea of nearness and
union.'

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The First Valley: The Valley of Search](sog09.md)

</div>
