<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Baha'i](../index.md)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sog17.md) 
[Next](sog19.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Splendour of God*, by Eric Hammond, \[1909\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Those souls (mystic Sufis) have affirmed, concerning the stages of
Divine Unity, that which is the greatest cause of idleness and
superstition. They have, indeed, removed the distinction and have
imagined themselves to be God. The True One is sanctified above all;
(but) His Signs are manifest in all things. The Signs are *from* Him—not
He Himself.

Consider the rays of the sun; its lights have encompassed the world, but
these splendours are *from it*, and from its manifestations; they are
through itself, but are not itself.

Schools must first train the children in the principles of Religion, so
that the Promise and the Threat recorded in the Books of God may prevent
them from the things forbidden and adorn them with the mantle of the
Commandments; but this in such a measure that it may not injure the
children by resulting in ignorant fanaticism and bigotry.

The trustees (members) of the House of Justice must consult upon the
ordinances as they are outwardly revealed in the Book, and then enforce
of these whatever prove agreeable to them.

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

Moderation is desirable in every affair.

Consider the civilisation of the people of the Occident—how it has
occasioned commotion and agitation. . . . There has appeared an infernal
instrument, and atrocity is displayed in the destruction of life. It is
impossible to reform these violent evils, except the peoples of the
world become united in affairs, or in one Religion.

Praise be to God. A wonderful thing is perceived; the lightning
(electricity) and similar forces are subdued by a conductor and act by
his command. Exalted is the Mighty One who hath made manifest that which
He desired, through His absolute Invincible Command.

Each one of the revealed Commands is a strong fortress for the
(protection of the) world.

A solitary life and severe discipline do not meet God's approval. The
possessors of perception and knowledge should look to the means which
are conducive to joy and fragrance.

Deprive not yourselves of that which is created for you.

Charity is beloved and acceptable before God, and is accounted the chief
among all good deeds.

The Reflective Faculty (or the Mind) is the depository of crafts, arts
and sciences. Exert

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

yourselves, so that the gems of knowledge and wisdom may proceed from
this ideal mine, and conduce to the tranquillity and union of the
different nations of the world.

Under all circumstances, whether in adversity or comfort, in glory or
affliction . . . show forth love and affection, compassion and union.

*Words of Paradise*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tablet of Tajalleyat](sog19.md)

</div>
