[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ktl10)  [Next](ktl12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  The Philosophy of Denial Chapter 9 

A GREAT NUMBER of things that you look on as realities are simply
transient shadows that can be dissipated into nothingness by your
telling them the truth as to their unreality.

The one cause, the unmanifest mind, from which springs all
manifestation, is Principle whose inherencies are potentially perfect.
Like the principle of mathematics or of music, it enters not into error
or discord. "Thou . . . art of purer eyes than to behold evil." That is,
Principle is supreme good, absolute substance, mind, life, love,
intelligence. Its ideals are like it, perfect. The Christ man or true
man is the perfect ideal, and humanity is that ideal on the way to
realization. The ideal man, the perfect man of Divine Mind thus appears
in the process of manifestation as subject to the conditions produced by
his conscious thinking.

Although potentially perfect and incapable of producing a single
condition of permanent consciousness out of harmony with divine
Principle, many persons are impregnated with a belief of limitation, and
they need the dissolving power of denial to set them free. By and
through the imaging power of thought man can produce illusions that
confuse him. This occurs only when he fails to look to Divine Mind for
the source and nature of his ideals. Obviously,

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

many are deceived into thinking that they are indeed bound, and the
unhappy conditions claimed do show forth in them. This is only
consciousness entangled in its own effects. We know that pure mind
cannot be subject to lack in any form, and that which so appears must in
some way be a departure from creative Mind.

It is an axiom in physics that action and reaction are equal. Thought is
the working power of mind; it is mind in action. Your ancestors thought
that which was not in harmony with the All-Good, and their thought
showed forth in their bodies and affairs. You have admitted the error,
and you must deny it in order that your consciousness may be restored to
its clear, spiritual perception.

Denials may be made in many ways. It is not always necessary to say
specifically, "I deny so and so." The conscious acknowledgment that you
have been incorrect in your conclusion is denial. Refusing to entertain
longer any thoughts of a sensual nature is denial. Withdrawing mental
sustenance from low ideals is denial.

There is but one Mind, and we can deny away error conditions for one
another. For instance, you have a patient who is in the consciousness of
fever. You acknowledge to the mind of perfect serenity that there has
been a departure therefrom, and that peace is now restored. The
acknowledgment by you that there is but one universal Mind, and that
your clear consciousness of this frees everybody and

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

everything from sin and sickness, will release you, or another you hold
in thought, from any belief you may have reflected. Jesus said, "Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do."

If you are not at all times conscious that God is the source of your
being, and that He is universal justice, purity, peace, wisdom, and
love, you wander from your course and are aware of danger, you are
dashed upon the rock of selfish personality. Then you give way to a fit
of anger or jealousy; you lust after the flesh, or envy your neighbor
his possessions. "We have sinned \[gone into error, fallen short\],
because we have forsaken Jehovah."

You cannot have consciousness without thinking. It is the nature of mind
to think; your every thought, no matter how trivial, causes vibrations
in the universal ether that ultimate in the forms of visibility. You
know that the working power of mind is thought and that through thought
all the conditions that seem to encompass you were formed.

If consciousness departed from Principle and formed images that were
manifested as disease, discord, any limitation of the perfect, is it not
possible for that same consciousness to undo its faulty work and build
anew according to wisdom's plan? It certainly is, and we know by
experience that when guided by the Spirit of truth, or Christ within,
our consciousness rebuilds the weak and tottering structures of
materiality and vivifies them with an undying energy and life.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

You have been deceived into believing that you were born of fleshly
parents, and that you are subject to the peculiar mental and moral
trials and physical ills of your ancestors. The Spirit of truth, which
is, yesterday, today, and forever, pure perfection, and which is now
present in you, sets you free from this delusion.

You have been deceived into believing that mind is subject to matter.
You have been told that the brain produces thought, and that mind is
evolved from matter. You have not taken these claims right home to your
own innermost intelligence and thought about them logically. Now that
your identity as mind, as invisible unconditioned spiritual substance,
is made clear to you, these surrounding delusions are cleared away. You
now say daily and hourly, "All authority hath been given unto me in
heaven and on earth."

You have been deceived into believing that there are those among your
associates who are your mental, moral, or social superiors; that they
have by acquired or conferred authority the right to dictate to and to
influence you in matters religious, social, or moral. But the meek and
lowly yet dignified and all-wise Spirit within you now burns with its
own clear light, and you henceforth understand that you are one with the
supreme mind that knows only original thought--that is influenced by
nothing outside of itself. This is Truth, and the Spirit of truth in you
now flames forth in acknowledgment.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

You have been deceived into believing that you have certain traits of
character to which you are bound by nature, and through them are
confined or hampered in life. You may suppose, for instance, that you
are naturally timid and fearful, therefore nervous and unfitted to face
the world; or that you are cold and unsympathetic; or that you lack
language or expression for your ideas; or that your memory is poor; or
that you lack perfection in some other way.

Now these illusions crumble into nothingness, and your clear
consciousness recognizes its own. At the center of the mind of every man
is the light, the white light of Spirit. Fan to a flame this white light
at the center of your being by proclaiming your identity with Christ.
The salvation of the world rests with those who join Him and thereby
bring peace and good will to all men. When the light of Christ comes to
any man, it does not confine its rays to his consciousness alone but
those who sit in darkness and negation see and feel its power.

You now know the law of righteous thinking that will bring you into a
consciousness of your perfect dominion. Life is worth living because you
can surround yourself with your highest ideals. Henceforth you are to
keep in mind the consciousness of your spiritual origin. Now that you
know your being is pure transparent mind, you can intelligently deny any
undesirable trait and center your consciousness on the perfect Spirit
within.

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

We have been burdened too long with the rubbish of antiquity. Cast it
out of your consciousness and assume the mental dominion that was yours
before the worlds were formed and you were one with the consciousness of
the Father.

The same Holy Spirit that glorified Jesus, and through which He overcame
the world, is now right here with us. It is here awaiting our
recognition. It will cleanse our mind of all beliefs of heredity if we
acknowledge its presence and power. Bathe yourself in this boundless
ocean of wisdom, love, and light by holding for a few moments in the
silence the thought:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thy Spirit sets me free:  
Thou, only, healest me."  
</span>

</div>

You are not afraid when your consciousness is centered in the principle
of good. You know that God is all; that there can be no opposing power.
The plague and pestilence do not then reach you, for you have nothing in
common with the cause that brings them about.

Man ought never to show forth sickness, poverty, discord, or death, and
he never would have done so had his consciousness remained in its
primitive relation to cause.

It is now dawning on the consciousness of those who in these latter days
listen attentively to Spirit, that, when understood in its right
relation, even the form symbol or body will take on the appearance of
immortality. Consciousness will become

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

so intensely alive and so thoroughly at one with the supreme life that
the form idea, which is potential in mind, will reflect bodies whose
perfection will be divine. Many are now coming into an understanding of
the law that will ultimate in their physical translation, like Elijah,
in chariots of fire. This does not come under the head of the
miraculous, for if history is to be credited, many in the past went
through this change; and as God is Principle and "no respecter of
persons," we should expect at any time a recurrence of that which has
been. Progressive men in the ranks of physical science are being led by
analogy to the conclusion that this is a possibility. Edison said that
his investigations had convinced him that atoms are centers of
intelligence; that the human body being composed of atoms (each of which
is an intelligent entity), a man could, by getting control of these
atoms through the will, live forever.

This is the legitimate outworking of perfect Principle--the steady
onward march of mind from stage to stage in the unfoldment of its
infinite possibilities. In the harmonious working of life's problems
according to Principle, there are no backward steps.

"God is not the God of the dead, but of the living," said the illumined
Jesus. The God of the living is always present with you, awaiting your
conscious recognition. Let the divine life substance flow into your
mind, and it will cleanse you of all

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

false race beliefs. You will become renewed in thought and in action;
your face will again show forth the freshness of youth, and immortal
life will be written upon your brow.

When your consciousness rests in Spirit, your dominion is sure and
certain; then you do not come under the law of denial. You can simply
conform to the command, "Be still, and know that I am God," and the work
is done.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](ktl12)
