[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Unity](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ktl19)  [Next](ktl21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/uni_t.jpg)](index)  
*Keep a True Lent*, by Charles Fillmore, \[1953\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

###  5th Day, Monday. Read John 14:1-12. 

Man's body temple is the outer expression of the Garden of Eden, which
God gave him to keep and to trim. Man's primary work in the earthly
consciousness (the Garden) is to use his creative power to preserve
harmony and order in his world, and to conserve his powers for divine
direction.

The Garden of Eden represents a region of being within, in which are
provided all primal ideas for the production of the beautiful. It
represents the elemental life and intelligence placed at the disposal of
man, through which he is to evolve a spiritual mind and a spiritual
body.

The Garden is the spiritual body in which man dwells when he brings
forth thoughts after the pattern of the original divine ideas. The
Garden is the substance of God.

God's greatest gift to man is the power of thought, through which he can
incorporate into his consciousness the Mind of God.

There are twelve gates which open into this wonderful Garden of Eden.
These gates are the twelve faculties of mind: faith, strength, wisdom,
love, power, imagination, understanding, will, law or order, zeal,
renunciation, life. Each faculty, through the most accelerated mind
action, as in prayer, has been purified and therefore opens into the
very heart of the Holy City within.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

I affirm: "My body is the temple of God, cleansed, purified, undefiled,
made perfect. Praise God!"

Faith

6th Day, Tuesday. Read Hebrews 11:1-12.

Faith is the perceiving power of the mind linked with a power to shape
substance. It is spiritual assurance, the power to do the seemingly
impossible. It is a force that draws to us our heart's desire right out
of the invisible spiritual substance. It is a deep inner knowing that
that which is sought is already ours for the taking, the "assurance of
things hoped for."

Faith working in spiritual substance accomplishes all things. This is
the faith that co-operates with creative law. Exercised in spiritual
consciousness, it finds its abode, and without variation or
disappointment it brings results that are seemingly miraculous.

Faith in the reality of things spiritual develops the faith center in
man's brain. When the mental eye is illumined with faith, it sheds a
radiance that hovers like a halo around the head and extends in
lessening degree throughout the whole body. "When thine eye is single,
thy whole body also is full of light."

The halo that the early artists painted around the heads of the saints
was not imaginary, but real. This illuminating power of faith covers the
whole

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

constitution of man, making him master of all the forces centering about
spiritual consciousness.

I realize that my faith in the invisible is building a real abiding
substance in my mind and in my body. Spiritual ideas grow quickly when
planted in the rich soil of my mind, and my body temple changes
accordingly.

I affirm: "I have faith in the glorious infusion of the more abundant
life of Christ vitalizing me. I am lifted up and healed."

Strength

7th Day, Wednesday. Read Matthew 4:1-11.

Strength is freedom from weakness; stability of character, power to
withstand temptation. It is the force or power to do, capacity to
accomplish. "The name of Jehovah is a strong tower; the righteous
runneth into it, and is safe." Strength originates in Spirit; the
thought and the word spiritually expressed bring the manifestation.

Jesus is the greatest teacher. He is the type that I am striving to
follow, not only in spiritual culture and in mind culture, but in body
culture. By faithfully studying and using the methods of Jesus I am
bringing forth the very best that is in me.

Through Christ the mind and the body of man have the power of using
strength on various planes of consciousness. I affirm that I am
steadfast and strong in thought and in deed, and thus I am

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

establishing strength in soul and in body. I refuse to let the thought
of weakness enter my consciousness, but always ignore the suggestion and
affirm myself to be a tower of strength within and without.

Supreme strength as demonstrated by Jesus can be attained by one who
trusts in Spirit and conserves his vital substance. The strength of
Spirit is necessary to the perpetuation of soul and body and to the
overcoming of death.

As I relax more and more and lift my consciousness to harmonize with the
ever-present perfect Mind, I am invigorated and restored to stabilizing
power. No harm can befall me. I am made strong through Spirit.

I affirm: "The joy of the Lord is a wellspring within me, and I am
established in divine strength."

Wisdom

8th Day, Thursday. Read Matthew 7:1-12.

Wisdom is of Spirit. One can get flashes of understanding at any time,
but the clear light of the Supreme shines steadily on us as we become
obedient and receptive to the Supreme's monitions. Jesus always listened
for the "inner voice," and was obedient to it in His meek and lowly work
among the humblest class of men.

Spiritual discernment always places wisdom above the other faculties of
mind. It is pure knowing, and comes by kindling the inner light. "The
wisdom

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

that is from above is first pure, then peaceable."

This means that as I call the righteous judge into action I may find my
standards of right and wrong undergoing rapid changes, but if I hold
steadily to the Lord as my supreme guide, I shall be led into all
righteousness.

As I dwell upon this all-knowing faculty within, I become conscious of
the Christ radiance lighting my mind, and my whole being is illumined.
My thoughts are quickened through their conscious relationship to
Spirit. I am flooded with new life, which raises my organism above the
disintegrating thought currents of the earth; and thus I am not only
redeeming my mind, but am also saving the flesh from corruption.

Spiritual understanding reveals that the resurrection of the body from
death is not to be confined to Jesus, but is for all men who comprehend
Truth and apply it as Jesus applied it.

Realizing that I am awakening to the reality of my higher self, I
affirm: "Christ within me is my glory. The brightness of His presence
wipes out all darkness, and I am filled with life and light."

Love

9th Day, Friday. Read I John 4:7-21.

Love, in Divine Mind, is the idea of universal unity. In expression, it
is the power that joins and binds together the universe and everything
in it. Love is a harmonizing, constructive power. When it

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

is made active in consciousness, it conserves substance and
reconstructs, rebuilds, and restores man and his world.

As I make a perfect union between my mind and the loving mind of the
Father, I realize a goodness everlasting and joy beyond expression. The
point of contact is a willingness and a seeking on my part. "Seek, and
ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you."

Love is that mighty power, that divine quality of God that is expressing
through all mankind, and cannot be suppressed by any outside force. I
now firmly declare that it is expressing through me, and that no
environment or external condition can hinder it. Any unloving condition
of the world is no bar to my exercise of love; in fact, it is an
incentive.

I am not afraid to pour out my love on all the so-called evil of the
world. I deny the appearance of evil, and affirm the omnipotence of love
and goodness.

The word love overcomes hate, resistance, opposition, obstinacy, anger,
jealousy, and all other error states where there is mental or physical
friction. As divine love enters into the thought process, every cell of
my body is poised and balanced in space, in right mathematical order as
to weight and relative distance.

In quietness and confidence, I affirm: "God, in His love, fills me with
new life. In His name I am cleansed, strengthened, and healed."

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

Power

10th Day, Saturday. Read Luke 4:31-44.

Man controls his thoughts and his feelings by the use of his innate
power. A quickening from on high must precede his realization of
dominion. "Ye shall receive power, when the Holy Spirit is come upon
you."

Man is the power of God in action. The power to control his thinking is
the highest gift given to man. There is a universal, creative force that
urges man forward to the recognition of the creative power of individual
thought.

The word Jehovah (Christ) is charged with spiritual power far above and
beyond any other word in human language.

The power center in the throat is the open door between the formless and
the formed worlds of vibration pertaining to the expression of sound.
When the voice has united with the life of the soul, it takes on a
sweetness and a depth that one feels and remembers. But sweeter and
deeper still is the voice of one who has made union with Spirit and can
say with Jesus, "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away."

I cultivate a loving attitude of mind toward everybody, and my voice is
rich, warm, and mellow. As I pray and realize spiritual dominion, I feel
vital and energetic and my voice is strong and vibrant and brilliant.
Through these vibrations I feel

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

the power of unity with the higher self more quickly than in any other
way. "All power is given unto me in heaven \[mind\] and in earth
\[body\]."

In His name I affirm: "All the issues of my life are stirred to action
by the quickening Christ power, and I have dominion over my thoughts and
my feelings."

Imagination

2d Sunday. Read Acts 10:9-35.

The imagination is that faculty of mind which images and forms.
Everything that is manifest was first a mental picture and was brought
into expression by this forming power. Man accumulates a mass of ideas
about substance and life, and with his imagination he molds them into
shape.

Those who look to the Holy Spirit for guidance find that its instruction
is given to all who believe in Christ, and the command is to make all
things after the pattern shown Moses on the Mount as found in Exodus
25:40.

The Spirit of truth projects into the chamber of imagery pictures that,
rightly understood, will be a sure guide for all people who believe in
the omnipresence of mind. The imagination will carry out any idea or set
of ideas that the I AM reflects into it, hence theories are not to be
trusted. There must be evidence in works. This is accomplished by the
working power of the world.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

With my imagination I lay hold of perfect ideas and clothe them with
substance. My body is the product of my mind. In my communication with
God, the imagining power of my mind is playing an important part. It
receives divine ideas, and in dreams and visions reflects their
character in the consciousness. According to the Scriptures this is the
opening of the heavens and the seeing the "angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man."

With my imagination fixed on Spirit, I affirm: "In the quietness and
confidence of Spirit, I see myself as God sees me, His perfect image and
likeness."

Understanding

11th Day, Monday. Read Luke 2:40:52.

Spiritual understanding is the ability of the mind to apprehend and
realize the laws of thought and the relation of ideas one to another. It
is that something through which we understand God and ourselves.

Understanding reveals that love and wisdom should work together, that
power should be expressed through love, and zeal should be tempered with
wisdom.

Intellectual understanding comes first in the soul's development, then a
deeper understanding of Principle follows, until the whole man ripens
into wisdom.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Those who are being educated in Truth through the power of the word will
finally arrive at the place where the true light from Spirit will dawn
on them, and they will see with spiritual understanding and have proof
of the reality of the Christ Mind.

I realize that God is supreme knowing. That in me which comprehends is
understanding; it knows and compares in wisdom. Its comparisons are not
made in the realm of form, but in the realm of ideas. Understanding is
that in me which knows how to accomplish things. I claim my Christ
understanding at all times.

If willfulness of the mortal tries to take over, I gently deny it power,
and affirm for spiritual understanding. At all times I hold for absolute
freedom in the Lord. God is the one principle; we are all as free to use
God as we are free to use the principle of mathematics or music. The
principle never interferes, but if it is to be rightly applied, I must
develop understanding.

I affirm: "Divine understanding in me unites with the Holy Spirit, and I
always know what to do."

Will

12th Day, Tuesday. Read John 1:1-18.

The will is the executive power of the mind. The commandments of Jesus
teach the Father's will. Those who keep them are therefore at one with
the will of God.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

It is possible to get very close to the kingdom of heaven by doing good
works and surrendering to Spirit the various faculties of the mind, but
we can never fully enter into and abide in heaven, or divine harmony,
without surrendering all that makes up the personality, of which the
will is the center.

The will may be said to be the man, because it is the directive power
that determines character formation. When man wills the will of God to
be done, he forms spiritual character. The use of the regenerate will is
for the sole purpose of spiritual unfoldment.

When the will of man adheres to wisdom faithfully, and carries out in
its work the plans that are idealized in wisdom, it creates in man a
consciousness of harmony and peace. Spirit breathes into such an
individual continually the necessary inspiration and knowledge to give
him superior understanding.

I bring the divine will to bear in my consciousness by understanding, by
appropriating universal wisdom, by affirming, "Not my will, but thine,
be done." God is potential, unformed will; man is manifest God will. I
now link my will with the principle of divine force in order to develop
superior executive capacity. After this manner I am swiftly bringing
forth faculties that under the slow action of mortality would take ages
to develop.

I affirm: "The will of God is uppermost in my consciousness, and I am
glorified in my understanding."

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

Law

13th Day, Wednesday. Read Galatians 6:1-10, 16.

Divine law is the logical process by which divine principle, or God,
manifests. The inner spirit of the law is the spiritual way of life that
Jesus taught and lived.

Divine law is the universal something in us of which we all are
conscious, and tells us when we are doing right and when we are doing
wrong. It may be defined as the innate knowing of right and wrong, and
this knowing may be quickened. The quickening does not come by the study
of material things, but by concentrating the mind on the Christ. Man
does not make the law; the law is, and it was established for our
benefit before the world was formed.

There is a law of spiritual and mental growth constantly at work in the
mind, raising man from sense consciousness to spiritual consciousness.
The nature of the universe is purity and goodness. Abiding in the Christ
consciousness, man aligns himself with divine law. He becomes "the light
of the world."

Today I find I am one with the infinite law of expansion--one with the
principle of never-ceasing growth and development toward the fulfillment
of God's perfect idea that is firmly infixed in all creation.

Divine law cannot be broken. It holds man responsible for the result of
his labors. "The law of

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus" is the action of true ideas working
in my mind and in my body.

I affirm: "My house is set in order, and I press forward toward the goal
of perfection."

Zeal

14th Day, Thursday. Read Luke 10:30-42; 11:1-4.

Zeal is the affirmative impulse of existence; its command is, "Go
forward!" Zeal is the mighty force that incites all things to action;
the eternal urge behind all things. To be without zeal is to be without
the zest of living. Zeal and enthusiasm incite to glorious achievement
in every ideal that the mind conceives.

Zeal should be tempered with wisdom. Some persons get so fired with zeal
when they first tackle a job, that they quickly grow tired, and fail to
carry it through to completion. The need is for control, equalization.

Watch the pull of a giant locomotive; note how it slowly but steadily
moves forward, almost by inches at first but gradually increasing until
its mile-long train swiftly disappears in the distance.

"The zeal of thy house hath eaten me up" means that the zeal faculty has
become so active intellectually that it has consumed the vitality and
left nothing for spiritual growth. Excessive zeal in religious forms of
worship eats up the purely spiritual. When we become very zealous in
observing the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

rites of the church we are prone to forget the church itself, which is
Christ.

The divine command is, "Take time to be holy." I am quick to do the
bidding of Spirit and use a portion of my zeal in establishing God's
kingdom within me. I do not put all my enthusiasm into helping others;
my own unfoldment is of great importance to me. I love to aid my
brother, but I do not allow that idea to rob me of the power to
demonstrate Truth for myself.

I affirm: "My zeal is tempered with wisdom, and I maintain a perfect
balance within and without."

Renunciation

l5th Day, Friday. Read Matthew 18:21-35.

The accumulated effects of sins of past lives, is a burden that those
who accept it expect to carry for ages, or until they work out of it.
They are weary treadmill travelers from birth to death. There is no such
hopeless note in the doctrine of Jesus. He came to bring a full
consciousness of abundant life, complete forgiveness, redemption from
all sin, and victory over death and the grave.

The law is Truth, and the truth is that all is good. There is no power
and no reality in sin. If sin were real and enduring, like goodness and
Truth, it could not be forgiven but would hold its victim forever. As I
enter into the understanding of the real and the unreal, a great light
dawns on me, and

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

I see what Jesus meant when He said, "The Son of man hath authority on
earth to forgive sins."

The Son of man is that in me which discerns the difference between Truth
and error. As I get this understanding, I am in position to free my soul
from sin and my body from disease, which is the effect of sin. In
spiritual understanding the I AM of man forgives or "gives" Truth "for"
error; the mind is set in order, and the body healed. The moment man
realizes this he puts himself in harmony with the Truth of Being, and
the law wipes out all his transgressions.

In His name I affirm: "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus
makes me free from the law of sin and of death."

Life

16th Day, Saturday. Read John 4:1-26.

Life is a phase of Being, the expression of which manifests as
animation, activity, and vigor. The consciousness of eternal life places
one in the stream of life that never fails.

The whole race needs a spiritual quickening of the life principle; its
origin is in Divine Mind. Life is the gift of God. "Stir up the gift of
God, which is in thee." To think intently about life is to quicken it
into action. To talk about energy, force, power, life, will make the
life currents flow swiftly throughout the whole being.

To Jesus the God presence was an abiding flame

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

--a flame of life everlasting that He felt in every cell of His body
making Him more and more alive, cleansing and purifying Him until He
became every whit perfect.

By mastering carnality Jesus opened the way for all men to attain
eternal life. During our higher realizations of Truth we are often
conscious of this abiding flame working in and through us.

I now make alive all the cells in my organism by mentally infusing into
them the Christ consciousness. This is the new birth, which is
transforming my body and raising it to electrical energy. This was
carried to its fulfillment by Jesus in the resurrection of His body. The
next step in divine evolution is the spiritualization of the body, or
the Ascension.

The quickening life in me is now brought into expression by my holding
and repeating this statement of Truth:

"I have the Mind of Christ. My words are spiritually quickened and they
are alive forevermore. I am filled with the vitality and vigor and
health of Jesus Christ."

Conservation

3d Sunday. Read Isaiah 55:1-13.

We should ever remember that our youth, which we love so well, never
really dies; it merely falls asleep in the realm of the subconscious.
People grow old because they let the youth idea fall asleep. By using
spiritual understanding they can awaken it.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

The awakening of youthful energies is necessary to one in the
regeneration. The body cannot be refined and made, like its Creator,
eternal before all the thoughts necessary to its perpetuation are
revived in it.

Jesus represents man in the regeneration; that is, man in the process of
restoring his body to its pristine purity where it will live on
perpetually without old age, disease, or death. A necessary step in this
process of body restoration is the quickening of the vitalizing energies
in the subconsciousness that feed the body and give it the life force
that renews its youth. Eternal youth is one of the God-given ideas that
man loves.

Waste of substance is the great sin that results in body disintegration.
It is the sense mind that causes all waste, whether in the organism or
in the more external realm called the world. Jesus came to save men from
sin and to make them ready for an abundant entrance into the glorious
kingdom of Christ, which is to be established on the earth.

We can get at the subject of conservation definitely by considering the
life "hid with Christ in God," for the hidden protected life is the
conserved life.

I now make conscious union with the substance of all spiritual
attributes as I affirm:

"Through Christ the divine economy is active in me, and I conserve the
spiritual essences in all phases of my life."

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

Jesus Christ Our Helper

17th Day, Monday. Read Romans 8:1-11.

If God had not planned to make Jesus a continuous working factor in our
civilization there would be no good purpose for His having been sent,
and for the great sacrifice that He made. He came to show us "the way,
and the truth, and the life," and He promised "Lo, I am with you
always." He also promised that He would be with us as a teacher. "When
he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he shall guide you into all the
truth."

No one is overlooked. The helpful hand of Jesus is extended to all.
Whoever you are, wherever you are, Jesus in His spiritual consciousness
is waiting for your mental recognition. Whatever your object, He will
show you how to attain it. "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, that
will I do."

Jesus developed the innate powers of mind and body and thereby became a
citizen of the heavens or realms where dwell the sons of God. He did
this by the power of His word--by releasing the imprisoned electrons of
His body and raising them to spiritual consciousness.

Why do we not see Jesus? Optics show that man's eyes are limited in
sight. They are aware of rays of light within a very narrow range. The
microscope reveals a world of living things to which the natural eye is
utterly oblivious. Both below and above the range of human vision living
entities exist. We

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

sometimes feel the presence of what we cannot see.

Affirm: "I rejoice in the restorative power of Jesus Christ now working
mightily in a new consciousness of life in my soul and body."

Evolution

18th Day, Tuesday. Read Romans 8:18-39.

In every man the Christ, or the Word of God, is infolded; it is an idea
that contains ideas.

Evolution is the result of the development of ideas in mind. What we are
is the result of the evolution of our consciousness, and our
consciousness is the result of the seed ideas sown in our mind.
Therefore spiritual evolution is the unfolding of the Spirit of God into
expression. It is the development achieved by man working under
spiritual law. Humanity is the garden of God, of which the soil is the
omnipresent thought substance.

The Christ, or Word (Son) of God evolution of man is plainly taught in
the New Testament as the supreme attainment of every man. "For the
earnest expectation of the creation waiteth for the revealing of the
sons of God."

Without some evidence in us of the Christ man we are little better than
animals. When through faith in the reality of things spiritual we begin
soul evolution there is great rejoicing; "we rejoice in hope of the
glory of God."

Christianity teaches the complete law of evolution.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

"God said," and thus God created that which was to appear, God planned
man and the universe, and through His word projected them into creation
as ideal principles and immanent energies acting behind and within all
visibility.

I affirm: "I am one with the ever unfolding, ever increasing Spirit of
divine understanding. My whole consciousness is ripening into
perfection."

The Blood of Jesus

19th Day, Wednesday. Read John 6:41-65.

Through the power of His word Jesus purified and spiritualized the
natural blood in His body until it became a spiritual life stream, into
which all may enter and be cleansed.

Through the power of His word Jesus broadcast the spiritual electrons of
His body into the race thought atmosphere, that they may be apprehended
by all who believe in Him.

This Lenten season I realize that I am baptized in His spiritual life
stream, and am purified and cleansed. The electrons of His blood, which
I appropriate, are centers of energy and life within, and they uplift
and strengthen me.

Jesus called the bread He had blessed His body and the wine His blood.
As I appropriate words of Truth, "eat them" so to speak, I partake of
the substance and life of Spirit and build the Christ body. Thus I
partake of the body and blood of Jesus, the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

true sacrament that vitalizes the body by renewing the mind.

The blood of Jesus in me is the life contained in God. The crown of life
is attained by living eternally in the presence of God. Attainment
depends on the understanding of the science of right thinking. My way to
eternal life lies in my acknowledgment of my oneness with the Christ of
God.

In His name I am gradually transforming and regenerating my blood and my
body. Thus I am saved by Jesus Christ.

Realizing victory over every limited belief of the mortal, I affirm: "I
rejoice in the restorative power of Jesus' blood now working mightily in
me to renew, to restore, and to make every whit whole."

The Body Temple

20th Day, Thursday. Read Matthew 6:16-34.

God created the idea of the body as a self-perpetuating, self-renewing
organism, which man reconstructs into his personal body. God created the
body idea, and man, by his thinking manifests.

I realize that I shall have a perfect body and a perfect world when I
understand and use the perfect word, the word that contains all the
attributes of God. Therefore, I declare that my words are being charged
with a full understanding of Divine Mind and its inhering ideas, and
that I consciously apply this understanding in all of my feeling,
thinking,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

speaking, and living and am therefore steadily putting on the Christ in
mind and body.

Overcoming step by step the limitations of material thought, my body
becomes more refined and increasingly radiant.

The law is that my body is transformed by the renewing of the mind. By
affirmation the mind lays hold of living words of Truth and builds them
into the body. As I enter into and abide in the Son of God consciousness
I have eternal life and my body is transformed into pure flesh
manifesting the perfection of Spirit.

To bless is to invoke good on that which is blessed. It is to confer
God's good on something or someone. Therefore I bless my body temple,
and declare its purity and strength and beauty. I pour out upon my body
temple the oil of love and clothe it in garments of praise.

Realizing that the body of Christ in me is the result of my spiritual
thought that maintains its unity with Spirit even in manifestation, I
affirm:

"The Word of God in me quickens my mind, and my body is transformed into
the likeness of His glorious body."

The Grace of God

21st Day, Friday. Read Matthew 5:17-20, 38-48. "As far as the east is
from the west,

So far hath he removed our transgressions from us."

Grace means good will, favor, disposition to

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

show mercy. Therefore, we do not hold ourselves as bond servants of the
law, but as recipients of the grace of God, as sons of the Most High.

The grace of God extends to all people, not alone to one sect or creed.
All men are equal in favor with God.

The grace of God is greater than the laws of man. We may make certain
laws and restrictions for ourselves and "his servants ye are whom ye
obey." If we are servants of the law, our obedience is unto death; if we
are servants of righteousness, our obedience is unto life. To become
recipients of that which the Father would bestow, we should take the
element of grace into consideration; that even beyond what we ask, seek,
earn, or deserve under the law, God is more than willing to give.

God, as the great creative principle of the universe, will always meet
us more than half way. By becoming receptive to the "grace of God," we
receive the measure of God's provision, which exceeds any of our
imaginings.

I realize that "grace and truth came through Jesus Christ"; that is, the
real saving, redeeming, transforming power comes to me through the work
that Jesus did in establishing for the race a new and higher
consciousness in the earth. I enter into that consciousness by faith in
Him and by means of the inner spirit of the law that He taught and
practiced.

I affirm: "Through the grace of God I am forgiven and healed."

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

Fourth Dimension

22d Day, Saturday. Read John 21:1-17.

The fourth dimension is that which embraces and encompasses the other
three; it is realization, the doing away with time and space and all
conditions. It is the process in which forms lose their apartness and
become one under divine law. The human mind, with its limited reasoning
faculties, is bound by time, space, and conditions. By itself it can get
no further into the spiritual realm than reason will take it; but when
we invoke the aid of the Christ in us we go beyond reason into the realm
of pure realization; then we have attained the consciousness of pure
be-ing, the fourth dimension of the being.

The one way to enter the realm of the fourth dimension, or of
realization, is through scientific prayer, commonly named "the silence."
First, I take with me the word Jehovah and go within and hold it
steadily in mind, until the word illumines the whole inner
consciousness. I am now functioning in the fourth dimension, and the way
is open for concentrating on the prayer I have in mind for the special
demonstration.

I fix my attention powerfully on the consummation of an idea until the
idea has nucleated a certain amount of thought substance, and I am
assured that it will be followed by that silent power of thought which,
working throughout my whole being, is bringing forth the thing desired.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

When my thoughts radiate with the speed of spiritual light, they blend
with creative Mind (called by Jesus "heaven"), and that which I ask for
is done.

I affirm: "The illuminating power of Truth awakens and quickens my
consciousness, and I discern clearly."

The Sabbath

4th Sunday. Read Mark 2:23-28; 3:1-6.

The true Sabbath is the consciousness that we have fulfilled the divine
law in both thought and act.

The sabbath is a very certain, definite thing. It is a state of mind
that man enters or acquires when he goes into the silence, into the
realm of Spirit. There he finds true rest and peace. The seventh day
means the seventh or perfect stage of one's spiritual unfoldment. Man
had become so lost in the darkness of sense consciousness that he could
not save himself, so the Saviour came. When man lays hold of the
indwelling Christ, the Saviour, he is raised out of the Adam
consciousness into the Christ consciousness. He then enters the seventh
stage of his unfoldment, where he finds sweet rest and peace.

The Sabbath as an institution was established by man. God does not rest
from His work every seventh day, and there is no evidence that there has
ever been a moment's cessation in the activity of the universe. We do
not quarrel with our brother over the observance

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

of the Sabbath. If he says we should worship God on the seventh day, or
on the first day, in either case we acquiesce. Not only do we do God's
service in praise, song, and thanksgiving on the seventh day and the
first day, but every day. In the true Sabbath our mind is turned to God
every moment, and we are ever ready to acknowledge His holy presence in
our heart and life. "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the
sabbath."

I affirm: "I rest in the consciousness of the true Sabbath, and my heart
is filled with joy and satisfaction."

The Idea

23d Day, Monday. Read Luke 5:141.

In the Scriptures ideas are symbolized by fish. An idea is the original,
primary, or unlimited thought of Being: in God-Mind, the eternal Word or
Logos. In the idea are involved all the potentialities of that which is
to be evolved through man. The idea itself becomes the evolving power
through which it makes itself manifest.

Ideas are catching. We are all heavily charged with ideas. When ideas
are released they spring forth and pass from mind to mind, being
"recorded" as they fly; when they are expressed the whole race is lifted
up--because true ideas are charged with the uplifting Spirit. We bring
divine ideas into manifestation by making ourselves one with them,
becoming

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

conscious of our indwelling Christ Mind and our oneness with the Father.

As the son is to the father, so is the idea to the mind. Mind is one
with its ideas, so the Father--God-Mind--is one with its offspring, the
idea--the Son. Mind is coexistent with its ideas, and there is continual
interaction and communion. The Father and the Son are one--are
coexisting, interacting, and intercommuning in will and purpose. It was
from the grand idea of divine life that Jesus healed the sick and raised
the dead.

Spiritual inspiration in me is an inflow of divine ideas; activity of a
spiritual character; understanding that comes from God. It is the
inbreathing of Spirit. The breath of God infused into me has endowed me
with super-life. "He breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye
the Holy Spirit."

I affirm: "In the presence and power of the Christ idea in me, I
proclaim my perfection."

Healing

24th Day, Tuesday. Read Matthew 9:14-38.

Health, real health, is from within and does not have to be manufactured
in the without. It is the normal condition of man, a condition true to
the reality of his being.

The first step in all spiritual healing is the using of faith, and the
next step is to become open and receptive to the stream of healing life.
Spiritual

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

healing restores to perpetual health because it erases the error thought
and cleanses the mind.

Through the exercise of faith and our word, our spiritual quality is
fused into unity with the power of Christ, and the healing is
marvelously accomplished.

It is said that the early Christians, before going forth to do their
mighty works, commanded the new life in Christ to come forth and to
imbue their consciousness with its healing potency to such an extent
that it would flow through them and heal all those to whom they
ministered.

They discovered that when they repeated over and over the most powerful
prayer Jesus ever uttered, the Lord's Prayer, the hidden Christ within
each one of them was called into action. They further discovered that
the fifteenth time they realized the prayer the waters of tribulation as
well as all manner of diseases began to subside, and that their
realization lifted the consciousness of those who were asking their
help. All tribulation and disease dropped away.

Experience proves the power of words to bring health. In healing myself,
I talk to my body, repeating necessary denials and affirmations. This
raises my consciousness to spiritual reality where all healing power
originates.

I faithfully affirm: "Through Jesus Christ, God's vitalizing energy
floods my whole being, and I am healed."

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

Peace

25th Day, Wednesday. Read Matthew 5:14-40.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Still in thy right hand carry gentle peace,  
To silence envious tongues. Be just, and fear not: Let all  
the ends thou aim'st at be thy country's Thy God's and  
truth's."  
--Shakespeare  
</span>

</div>

The great thought waves that move the world are set into action by deep
thinkers.

Peace and understanding of spiritual realities arise in the mind when it
has made the inner contact. When we know the work of Spirit in
transforming mind and body, we shall see that the crushing of personal
ambitions releases spiritual ideas of far-reaching influence.

Jesus went back to the very source of all discord, and showed how all
resistance and antagonism must cease. He did not stop to argue whether
the cause was just or not, but He said, "Agree with thine adversary
quickly"; "If any man would go to law with thee, and take away thy coat,
let him have thy cloak also." To the mortal mind this seems like
foolishness, but Jesus spoke out of the inner wisdom that knows that it
is dangerous to allow any kind of opposing thoughts to form in
consciousness. He knew that the universal law of justice would adjust
all matters, if men would trust it and cease fighting mentally for their
rights. This is accomplished by bringing the Christ, the Prince of
Peace, to bear

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

in all our affairs. "My peace I give unto you."

I praise God for the peace of my own higher self. I rejoice and am glad
in the possession of the Holy City within. With my inner vision I see
the gates open wide, and holy peace pervades my consciousness.

I affirm: "My mind is stayed on Thee, and I rest in Thy peace and
power."

Heaven

26th Day, Thursday. Read Matthew 13:24-53.

God idealized two universal planes of consciousness, the heaven and the
earth, or more properly, "the heavens and the earth." One is the realm
of pure ideals; the other, of thought forms. God does not create the
visible universe directly, as man makes cement pavement, but He creates
the ideas that are used by His intelligent "image" and "likeness" to
make the universe. Thus God's creations are always spiritual. Man's
creations are both material and spiritual, according to his
understanding.

Jesus, of all those claiming intimate acquaintance with spiritual
things, gave heaven definite location. "The kingdom of God is within
you." This kingdom is now ready. "The fields . . . are white already
unto harvest." The conditions are ripe. But only those come in who are
willing to exchange for it their ideas of earthly possessions. Every
earthly link must be broken, every mortal love crucified. This is

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

the way Jesus entered this kingdom, and His way is the way we must all
employ.

Heaven is everywhere present. It is the orderly, lawful adjustment of
God's kingdom in man's mind, body, and affairs; it is the Christ
consciousness, the realm of divine ideas, a state of consciousness in
harmony with the thoughts of God. Heaven is within every one of us; a
place, a conscious sphere of mind, having all the attractions described
or imagined as belonging to heaven.

I realize that faith in Spirit and the ultimate dominance of the good in
me will restore me to the heavenly consciousness from which I descended.

I affirm: "Heaven within is one perfect harmonious life, substance, and
intelligence, and I rejoice."

Principle

27th Day, Friday. Read John 5:19-47.

Principle and Truth are one. Divine Principle is Truth in a universal
sense, or as it pertains to Elohim God. Satisfaction comes to us as we
live according to Principle.

Universal Principle, the oversoul of this planet, was working its way
into expression through Jesus. The same work that Jesus accomplished is
being accomplished by all men--though perhaps very slowly.

To demonstrate Principle keep establishing yourself in certain
statements (affirmations) of the law.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

The more often you present to your mind a logical and true proposition,
the stronger become the inner feeling of realization.

As the principle of music moves through tones, so does the principle of
mind move through ideas. Therefore God, as Principle, moves through the
expressed thought of Divine Mind.

The mind of each individual may be consciously unified with Divine Mind
through the indwelling Christ. By affirming at-one-ment with God-Mind,
we eventually realize the perfect mind which was in Christ Jesus.

"Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: who, existing in
the form of God, counted not the being on an equality with God a thing
to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being
made in the likeness of men."

I affirm: "Principle is Truth. I know the Truth, and the Truth makes me
free."

Miracles

28th Day, Saturday. Read Matthew 14:15-36.

The first miracle in our consciousness is the transforming of the water
of thought into the wine of thought, through introducing into the
consciousness some of the "angels of God," or true ideas.

In reality miracles are events that take place as a result of the
application of a higher law to certain conditions.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

God never performs miracles, if by miracle is meant a departure from
universal law. Whatever the prophets did was done by the operation of
laws inherent in Being and open to the discovery of every

man.

By the power of his thought Elijah penetrated the atoms and precipitated
an abundance of rain. Jesus used the same dynamic power of thought to
break the bonds of the atoms composing the few loaves and fishes of a
little lad's lunch--and five thousand persons were fed.

Science is discovering the miracle-working dynamics of religion, but
science has not yet comprehended the dynamic directive power of man's
thought. All so-called miracle workers claim that they do not of
themselves produce the marvelous results; that they are only the
instruments of a superior entity.

Jesus said, "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do
also." As I go on in the exercise of spiritual faculties I shall
strengthen them and understand them better and I shall cease to talk
about anything as miraculous.

I affirm: "The clear unclouded mind of Jesus Christ dominates all my
thinking, and I discern the omnipresent laws of Spirit."

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

The Overcomer

5th (Passion) Sunday. Read John 20:19-31.

An overcomer is one who recognizes the Truth of his being and is
renewing his mind and body and affairs by changing his thoughts from the
old mortal beliefs to the new as he sees them in Divine Mind. He is one
who demonstrates the divine law, not only in surface life but in
innermost consciousness. Spiritual power, mastery, and dominion are
attained by the overcomer. "He that overcometh, I will give to him to
sit down with me in my throne."

The way of overcoming is, first, to place one's self by faith in the
realization of sonship, and secondly, to demonstrate it faithfully in
every thought and act. One of the laws of mind is that man becomes like
that with which he identifies himself. Christ is the one perfect
pattern. Everyone desires to overcome all errors. Each should,
therefore, be wise and identify himself with the Christ.

No external condition or circumstance can hold man in bondage when he
makes mental contact with God.

It was to the overcomer that Jehovah spoke when, through one of the old
prophets, He said, "I will restore to you the years that the locust hath
eaten."

We have many blessings. Begin to praise God for the abundance of all
things; your words will crack the omnipresent ethers, and good will flow
to you from every direction.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

The work that I have to do as an overcomer for the world is to help
establish a new race consciousness, a new heaven and a new earth,
"wherein dwelleth righteousness." By being true to my highest
understanding of Truth, I never swerve to the right nor left for any
reason.

I affirm: "I am an overcomer, through Jesus Christ and I rest in the
realization of His grace and power."

Patience

29th Day, Monday. Read Hebrews 11:17-40; 12:

1-6.

Patience is a state of mind that beholds the world from the harmony of
the Christ Mind, a freedom from personal thinking. It is an attitude of
mind characterized by poise, calmness, and a quiet restful trust,
especially in the face of trying conditions. It has its foundation in
love. "Great peace have they that love thy law; and they have no
occasion of stumbling."

The first requisite in the development of patience is spiritual
understanding. The larger our vision of life, the more freedom we feel,
and we are spared the friction and frettings that come to those who are
centered in personality.

Whether one is patient or not depends on his view of life. If he is
selfish and self-centered and lives in a material world, bound by his
own interests,

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

he lacks the qualities that go to make up patience.

We may take the gift of patience and make use of it. We may receive it
by faith, and then work it out in every department of our being by daily
practice of Truth.

Patience gives self-control. We unfold the capacity to direct our
behavior in right ways, a result of spirituality.

I realize that I am feeding my consciousness on divine patience. When my
thoughts are in harmony with divine law, they develop my body into God's
beautiful, indestructible temple. "Let us run with patience the race
that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and perfecter of
our faith."

I affirm: "The serene, calm, trustful Spirit now accomplishes all the
desires of my heart. I rest in peace."

Divine Judgment

30th Day, Tuesday. Read Luke 6:37-49.

Human judgment is the mental act of evaluation through comparison or
contrast. Intellectual man always judges his fellow man. Divine judgment
is of spiritual consciousness. When we awaken to the reality of our
divinity, the light begins to break on us from within, and we know the
Truth; this is the quickening of our judgment faculty. This faculty may
be exercised in two ways: from sense perception or spiritual
understanding. If its action be based

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

on sense, its conclusions are fallible and often condemnatory; if on
spiritual understanding, they are safe.

The judgment faculty discerns Truth and balances the faculties in
righteousness. In the Scriptures judgment is often applied to the action
of Divine Mind in its work of judging, especially to the experiences
that come to man through the working of the law of justice. Man redeems
this faculty by placing it in the Absolute, by declaring and realizing
that its origin is in God and all its conclusions are based on Truth.
This gives a working center from which the I AM begins to set our
thought world in order.

I do not judge others as regards their guilt or innocence. I consider
myself and how I stand in the sight of the Father. I begin reform with
myself. The judgment seat of Christ is within me, and a judging, or
discerning between the true and the false is going on daily in me as an
overcomer; I am daily reaping the results of my thoughts and my deed.

I affirm: "My judgment is just, because I seek not my own will, but the
will of the Father."

Spiritual Substance

31st Day, Wednesday. Read Matthew 13: 3-9, 18-23.

There is a kingdom of abundance of all things, and it may be found by
those who seek it and are

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

willing to comply with its laws. Substance exists in a realm of ideas
and is powerful when handled by one who is familiar with its
characteristics.

Spiritual substance is the source of all material wealth and cannot
suffer loss or destruction by human thought. It is always with us, ready
to be used and to make the consciousness potent and fertile. In this
connection Jesus said, "I have meat to eat that ye know not."

Just as the earth is the universal matrix in which all vegetation
develops, so this invisible Spirit substance is the universal matrix in
which ideas of prosperity germinate and grow and bring forth according
to our faith and trust.

I know that any seed words that are planted in omnipresent Spirit
substance will germinate and grow and bring forth fruit "after their
kind." Just as the farmer selects the best seed for planting, so I must
choose the words that will bring forth the rich harvest of plenty.

To gain control of Spirit substance I grasp it with my mind; that is,
lay hold of the idea back of it. Right thinking is necessary in using my
mind constructively to bring about right results.

I affirm: "Divine substance flows in all its fullness into my
consciousness and through me as prosperity into all my affairs."

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

The Atonement

32d Day, Thursday. Read John 17:1-26.

Jesus played a most important part in opening the way for mankind into
the Father's kingdom. This was accomplished by His overcoming the belief
in death.

Atonement means the reconciliation between God and men through Christ.
Jesus became the way by which all who accept Him may "pass over" to the
higher consciousness. We have atonement through Him.

"Christ . . . who his own self bare our sins in his body upon the tree,
that we, having died unto sins, might live unto righteousness; by whose
stripes ye were healed."

The whole race was caught in the meshes of its own thought and, through
drowsy ignorance, would have remained there had not a break been made in
the structure, and the light of a higher way let in.

If you were held in the meshes of a great spider web, and someone made a
hole through which you could pass, you would go where the hole was and
would make your escape that way. Jesus made this aperture in the race
thought and thus threw open wide the door into the spiritual realm.

His Christianity had a living God in it, a God that lived in Him and
spoke through Him. It is a religion of life, as well as purity. Men are
to be alive; not merely exist half dead for a few years and

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

then go out with a sputter, like a tallow dip. Christ's men are to be
lights that glow with a perpetual current from the one omnipresent
energy.

Declaring my unity with this power, I affirm: "The redeeming word of
Jesus Christ, 'I am the resurrection, and the life,' makes me whole and
perfect."

Mount of Transfiguration

33d Day, Friday. Read Matthew 17:1-13.

Transfiguration is always preceded by a change of mind. In
transfiguration, ideals are lifted from the material to the spiritual.

Going up into the mountain to pray means an elevation of thought and
aspiration from the mortal to the spiritual viewpoint. When the mind is
exalted in prayer the rapid radiation of mental energy causes a dazzling
light radiation from all parts of the body, and especially the head.

Even our so-called physical body reveals a radiant body, (which Jesus
referred to as sitting on the throne of His glory), which interlaces the
trillions of cells of the organism and burns brightly. Jesus gave His
disciples a glimpse of His radiant body when He was transfigured before
them. "His face did shine as the sun, and his garments became white as
the light."

He was very advanced in spiritual consciousness and was developed to a
larger degree than anyone else in our race. But we all have that body of
light,

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

and its development is in proportion to our spiritual culture. Jesus did
not go down to corruption but, by the intensity of His spiritual
devotions, transformed every cell into its innate divine light and
power. When John was in the spirit of devotion Jesus appeared to him and
"his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto burnished
brass." Jesus lives today in that body of glorified light in a kingdom
that interpenetrates the earth and its environment.

Jesus is my Way-Shower. In His name I affirm: "My mind and body are
radiant with the light of Spirit, and I am triumphant, glorious,
splendid."

Transmutation

34th Day, Saturday. Read John 2:1-11.

Transmutation--"The conversion of one element into another."--Webster.

In consciousness transmutation is a changing in action and character to
conform to spiritual standards. It is well said that the mind is the
crucible in which the ideal is transmuted into the real.

Jesus said that all power was given to Him in heaven and in earth. He
manifested His power in a small way by multiplying a few loaves and
fishes to feed more than five thousand persons. In various other
instances He demonstrated that He had an understanding of the
transmutation of substance. He raised His flesh body to an energy level
far higher

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

in potential life and substance than any reached before. We see that not
only the mind but also the body is affected in the process of developing
out of the natural into the spiritual.

The leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod (Mark 8:15) represents limited
thoughts. When we attempt to confine the divine law to the customary
avenues of expression and scoff at anything beyond, we are letting the
leaven of the Pharisees work in us. When the mind is raised up through
affirmation to God's omnipresent substance and life, we are not only
fed, but there is a surplus. This is the teaching of Jesus, and it has
always been exemplified by His faithful followers.

I realize that through the law of transmutation every error thought in
my consciousness is transmuted into its spiritual correspondence.

I affirm: "Spirit in me is transmuting my body into pure spiritual
substance, and my soul rejoices."

Palm Sunday

Palm Sunday. Read John 12:12-50.

Palm Sunday is the Sunday preceding Easter. Jerusalem, the Holy City,
symbolizes within us the habitation of peace, possession of peace,
vision of peace, abode of prosperity within us.

In man Jerusalem is the abiding consciousness of spiritual peace, which
is the result of continuous realizations of spiritual power tempered
with spiritual

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

poise and confidence. Jerusalem symbolizes the great nerve center just
back of the heart. From this point Spirit sends its radiance to all
parts of the body.

Jesus symbolizes our I AM identity. His going up to Jerusalem means our
taking the last step in unfoldment preparatory to the final step, when
the personality is entirely crucified and the Christ triumphs.

Jesus riding the ass into Jerusalem means the fulfillment of the time
when the spiritual I AM within us takes control and lifts all the animal
forces up to the spiritual plane of mastery, purity, and peace.

When the I AM takes charge of the body a new order of things is
inaugurated. The vitality is no longer wasted. Through high and pure
ideals the whole consciousness is raised to a higher standard.

The hosannas of the rejoicing multitude and the spreading of their
garments and branches of trees before Jesus, represent joyful obedience
and homage that all the thoughts in one's consciousness give when an
error state of mind is overcome. "Blessed is he that cometh in the name
of the Lord."

In the name of Jesus Christ I affirm: "The Spirit of Him that raised up
Jesus dwells in me, and I am made perfect."

The New Race

35th Day, Monday. Read Revelation 21:1-7; 22:

1-7.

"These things shall be! a loftier race

Than e'er the world hath known shall rise

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

With flame of freedom in their souls,

And light of knowledge in their eyes.

\* \* \*

"Nation with nation, land with land,

Unarmed shall live as comrades free:

In every heart and brain shall throb

The pulse of one fraternity."

The time is ripe for the advent of a new race, the advent of the
spiritualized man. This will be brought about, not by a miracle or the
fiat of God, but by the gradual refinement of the man of the flesh into
the man of Spirit.

The true overcomer is qualifying himself to become a member of this
superrace. It is well for such a one to cultivate the childlike spirit
and let go of all tense striving, even for spiritual things. In the
realization of protecting, providing love, all the strain of fear and
anxiety will be removed and life in abundance will then find easy
entrance into the consciousness, bringing strength and health and
eternal youth and life.

Spiritual harmony in man depends largely on the right relation of the
inner and the outer realms of his consciousness. Expression is the law
of life. Whatever is expressed becomes manifest. I realize that as an
overcomer, I am working also for the whole world, establishing a new
race consciousness, "new heavens and a new earth."

I affirm: "The redeeming law of God is awakening with me, and I am a new
man in Christ Jesus."

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

The Fire of God

36th Day, Tuesday. Read Acts 2:1-21.

Fire represents the positive, affirmative state of mind, as opposed to
the negative or watery state.

The fire of God (Holy Spirit) is the Word of God in action. It burns out
the dross of negation in consciousness, and reveals Christ. Tongues of
fire represent the illumination of thought, in demonstration of Spirit's
presence and power. The flame of fire symbolizes the light of intuition
that burns in our heart.

While the light of intuition (flame of fire) burns in our heart, there
is no loss of substance. In thinking there is a vibratory process that
uses up nerve tissue, but in the wisdom that comes from the heart this
"bush" or tissue is not consumed. This is "holy ground," or substance in
Divine Mind. When man approaches this he must take off from his
understanding all limited thoughts of the Absolute ("put off thy shoes
from off thy feet").

Spiritual fire is a symbol of the destruction of evil and error. The
fire of Spirit never ceases its life-giving, purifying glow. In it all
error is burned up in consciousness and the purified man then manifests
this "fire" as eternal life.

I have the assurance that I shall not be left partially cleansed, that
the purifying work will be complete. "Our God is a consuming fire," also
He is life, love, substance, power, intelligence, Truth.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

In the name of Jesus Christ, I affirm: "The Holy Spirit flares its
cleansing, purifying flames throughout soul and body, and I am made
whole and perfect."

Holy Communion

37th Day, Wednesday. Read Luke 22:1-23.

"And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake it;
and he gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body, And
he took a cup, and gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, Drink ye all
of it; for this is my blood of the covenant."

The first step in drinking of the blood and eating of the body of Jesus
is to resolve this whole Scripture back into the primal ideas. The only
way to appropriate these ideas is through the very highest activity of
mind as in prayer.

The benefit of taking Holy Communion is the establishing of our
acceptance of the Christ whose coming we celebrate within our mind and
heart. The bread used in the churches symbolizes substance, which we
consider the Lord's body, a body of spiritual ideas; and the wine used
symbolizes His blood, which we consider life, or the circulation of
divine ideas in our consciousness that will purify our mind and heart
and renew our strength, freeing us from all corruption, sin, and evil,
and bringing forth in us the abundant, unlimited life of God. Through

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

the appropriation and assimilation of the substance and life in our own
consciousness, we blend our minds with the Father-Mind and there is a
harmonizing of every fiber of our body with the Christ body, which is
life and light. As our mind and heart are cleansed of untrue thoughts
and beliefs, and as we feed on living ideas, our body takes on the life
and light of our divinity, and eventually will become living light.

I affirm: "God's pure life and substance are constantly renewing and
rebuilding His holy temple, my body."

Gethsemane

38th Day, Thursday. Read Mark 14:32-42.

Gethsemane is symbolic of the struggle that takes place within the
consciousness when Truth is realized as the one reality. It is a
condition that man works through when he recognizes that God is all and
that he must be willing to sacrifice all for God.

There are always deeply rooted error thoughts stored away in the
subconsciousness, and on their own account they come forward to crucify
the new unknown power, the so-called imposter, the in-dwelling Christ.
The Christ is presumably captured by these thoughts, which try to carry
out their aims in the darkness of the subconscious mind. But error can
kill out only error. The Christ itself may be held in obscurity for a
while, but it cannot be done away

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

with. That which died on the Cross when Jesus was crucified was the
personality; the Christ resurrects itself from the very depths of the
subconsciousness, and error is hanged on the gallows it prepared for the
doing away of the newborn spiritual ego.

This breaking up and passing away of old error states of mind and making
ready for the new is a process in soul evolution of all those who are
faithfully following Jesus. In all systems of thought concentration and
spiritual attainment, the will, the executive faculty, plays the leading
part. Therefore I prepare my consciousness for the reception of these
new ideas. I say with Jesus, "Not my will, but thine, be done." I
realize that new inspiration is flowing steadily into my consciousness
as I affirm: "Old error thoughts are passed away. I am a new creature in
Christ."

Crucifixion

39th Day, Good Friday. Read John 19:1-42.

Jesus' crucifixion on Calvary was a final step in a work that had been
going on in Him for thirty-three years, and when He arose He was
entirely free from the carnal mind with all its limitations. He had
overcome all the carnal tendencies which He had taken on that He might
free the race from its bondage.

The word crucifixion means the crossing out in consciousness of certain
errors that have become

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

fixed states of mind; it is the enactment by a master of the final
extinction of carnal mind, the giving up of the whole personality in
order that the Christ Mind may be expressed in all its fullness. This is
represented by the crucifixion of Jesus.

Calvary means "the place of a skull." The carnal mind has appropriated
the brain and its skull and it is here that the final battle is fought.
Every time we give up error there is a crucifixion.

The three days Jesus was in the tomb represent the three steps in
overcoming error. First, nonresistance; second, the taking on of divine
activity, or receiving the will of God; third, the assimilation and
fulfillment of the divine will.

I deny the self that I may unite with the selfless. I give up the mortal
that I may attain the immortal. I dissolve the thought of the physical
body that I may realize the spiritual body. This is a mental process
with a physical effect.

I affirm: "Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death,
I will fear no evil; for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff, they
comfort

me."

Resting in God

40th Day, Saturday. Read Isaiah 11:1-10; 12:1-6.

After Jesus' crucifixion He was laid to rest in the tomb of Joseph of
Arimathea. Jesus represents the expression of the I AM identity.
Arimathea represents

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

an aggregation of thoughts of lofty character, a high state of
consciousness in man. Joseph represents a state of consciousness in
which we improve in character along all lines. We not only grow into a
broader understanding but also we increase in vitality and substance. We
are resting in God, and at the same time gathering strength for the
power of greater demonstrations to follow.

A degree of cleansing, a wiping out of sense consciousness has been
accomplished. By mentally reviewing our experiences, we recognize that
nothing is really destroyed, but rather transmuted. Through faith we
take stock of the progress we have made and find that we are getting a
consciousness of radiant substance and of a higher life. Nothing is
lost. When sense consciousness is raised to a higher plane all that
belongs to it is saved with it.

In reality the invisible cannot be seen, touched, or comprehended by the
outer senses, yet in this realm a great and mighty work is being
accomplished.

Today I realize that the leaven that "leaveneth the whole lump" is the
Truth. The word of Truth within me is not idle, but quietly spreading
from point to point. This process will continue until my whole
consciousness is vitalized by the Holy Spirit.

I affirm: "I rest in the consciousness of eternal life and strength, and
I am made perfect."

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

The Resurrection

Easter Sunday. Read John 20:1-18.

Easter is the celebration of the resurrection of Jesus. Its inner
meaning and spiritual significance is the awakening and raising to
spiritual consciousness of the I AM in man, which has been dead in
trespass and sin and buried in the tomb of materiality.

"I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly." The
resurrection is the raising up of the whole man--spirit, soul, and
body--into the Christ consciousness of life and wholeness. This Jesus
did. The tomb could not hold His redeemed perfected body temple.
Resurrection is accomplished by the quickening power of the Holy Spirit.

Every time we rise to the realization of eternal, indwelling life,
making union with the Father-Mind, the resurrection of Jesus takes place
within us. All thoughts of limitation and inevitable obedience to
material law are left in the tomb of materiality.

Jesus was born into the race thought so that He might reconstruct it in
conformity with the divine law. He thus became our Way-Shower, our
Saviour, our Helper.

Today the light of Truth is illumining my mind, and I rise up in the
majesty of my divine sonship and proclaim myself to be the child of the
Most High, free from all belief in sin, sickness, and death.

I affirm: "In unity with Christ I realize that I am resurrected into the
life, light, and power of God."

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

INDEX

abundance, [101](ktl15.htm#page_101), [183](#page_183)

Adam, all included in his sin,

[98](ktl15.htm#page_98); ejected from Eden, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74)

Adam consciousness, [61](ktl10.htm#page_61), [171](#page_171)

Adamic race, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130)

Adam method of generation, [93](ktl14.htm#page_93)

affirmations, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71), [142](ktl19.htm#page_142); used
in transforming body, [168](#page_168)

altar, [145](ktl19.htm#page_145); as place in consciousness,
[16](ktl04.htm#page_16); of Jacob, [83](ktl13.htm#page_83)

Andrew, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117)

angels, [155](#page_155)

animal nature, of man, [60](ktl10.htm#page_60)

Aorist, first, [109](ktl16.htm#page_109)

Apollo, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38)

apostles, [113](ktl17.htm#page_113)

Arimathea, represents thoughts of lofty character, [195](#page_195)

Ascension, the, [162](#page_162)

Ash Wednesday, [138](ktl19.htm#page_138), [141](ktl19.htm#page_141)

atoms, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38), [69](ktl11.htm#page_69),
[132](ktl19.htm#page_132)

atonement, [185](#page_185)

at-one-ment, [53](ktl09.htm#page_53)

authority, of Jesus, [29](ktl06.htm#page_29)

Aven, Hebrew word, [115](ktl17.htm#page_115)

baptism, source of power, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73)

beholding state of mind, [44](ktl09.htm#page_44)

being, equilibrium of, [43](ktl08.htm#page_43); inherencies of,
[58](ktl10.htm#page_58); in miniature, [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); powers
of, [55](ktl10.htm#page_55); pure, [170](#page_170); two-in-one of,
[58](ktl10.htm#page_58); where there is evidence of life,
[132](ktl19.htm#page_132)

Bible, [97](ktl15.htm#page_97)

blessing, importance of, [80](ktl13.htm#page_80); of body temple,
[168](#page_168)

blood of Jesus, [166](#page_166); salvation through,
[134](ktl19.htm#page_134); saving power of, [28](ktl06.htm#page_28)

body, as spiritual, [22](ktl05.htm#page_22); as temple of God,
[10](ktl03.htm#page_10), [22](ktl05.htm#page_22),
[146](ktl19.htm#page_146), [167](#page_167); attainment of perfection
in, [168](#page_168); cells in mathematical order, [152](#page_152);
fruit of the mind, [125](ktl18.htm#page_125); healing of,
[21](ktl05.htm#page_21); layers of consciousness in,
[52](ktl09.htm#page_52); man's cognizance of, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59);
of man, in relation to Divine Mind, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19); outer
expression of Garden of Eden, [147](ktl19.htm#page_147); perfect in
mind, [20](ktl05.htm#page_20), [69](ktl11.htm#page_69); product of the
mind, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10), [155](#page_155); recognition of
importance, [82](ktl13.htm#page_82); reveals radiant body,
[186](#page_186); renewal of, through thought, [98](ktl15.htm#page_98);
requires spiritual quickening, [125](ktl18.htm#page_125); robbers of,
[123](ktl18.htm#page_123); symbols of, in story of Jacob and Esau,
[81](ktl13.htm#page_81); thoughts on conditions of,
[118](ktl17.htm#page_118); translated in chariots of fire,
[69](ktl11.htm#page_69)

body of Christ, [134](ktl19.htm#page_134)

bread, [192](#page_192)

Calvary, "place of a skull," [195](#page_195)

Cana, "place of reeds," [75](ktl12.htm#page_75)

cardiac plexus, as love center, [34](ktl07.htm#page_34)

carnal mind, [195](#page_195)

cause and effect, [46](ktl09.htm#page_46)

cells, of body, [39](ktl08.htm#page_39)

change, [39](ktl08.htm#page_39)

character, delusions concerning, [67](ktl11.htm#page_67); spiritual,
[145](ktl19.htm#page_145)

children, relation to the kingdom, [107](ktl16.htm#page_107)

Christ, as atonement, [185](#page_185); as God's divine idea of man,
[10](ktl03.htm#page_10), [15](ktl04.htm#page_15),
[53](ktl09.htm#page_53), [63](ktl10.htm#page_63); as living principle,
[10](ktl03.htm#page_10), [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); as perfect body,
[12](ktl03.htm#page_12), [21](ktl05.htm#page_21),
[26](ktl06.htm#page_26); as point of contact with race life,
[133](ktl19.htm#page_133); as the one great Teacher,
[140](ktl19.htm#page_140); as the one perfect pattern, [180](#page_180);
as universal man, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110); atoms of,

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

[133](ktl19.htm#page_133); began series of physical incarnations,
[131](ktl19.htm#page_131); body of, [134](ktl19.htm#page_134); declares
power of binding and loosing, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117); individuality
of, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16); radiance, [151](#page_151)

Christian, mental attitude of, [76](ktl12.htm#page_76)

Christianity, progressive nature

of, [37](ktl08.htm#page_37)

Christians (early), experiences in healing, [174](#page_174)

Christ Mind, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71), [77](ktl12.htm#page_77)

Christ Spirit, [28](ktl06.htm#page_28)

church of Christ, [115](ktl17.htm#page_115), [160](#page_160)

Colorado River, [40](ktl08.htm#page_40)

Comforter, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16), [17](ktl04.htm#page_17),
[28](ktl06.htm#page_28)

concentration, necessity for, [120](ktl17.htm#page_120)

conscience, [43](ktl08.htm#page_43); how to heed,
[50](ktl09.htm#page_50)

consciousness, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11), [12](ktl03.htm#page_12),
[15](ktl04.htm#page_15); affirmations for realization of,
[77](ktl12.htm#page_77), [78](ktl13.htm#page_78); altar the center of,
[145](ktl19.htm#page_145); as result of seed ideas, [165](#page_165);
attainment during Lent, [140](ktl19.htm#page_140); carnal,
[58](ktl10.htm#page_58); control over, in mind, [77](ktl12.htm#page_77);
danger when lost, [65](ktl11.htm#page_65); foundation of,
[115](ktl17.htm#page_115); God's power incorporated in,
[124](ktl18.htm#page_124); layers of, in body, [52](ktl09.htm#page_52);
makes heaven and hell, [116](ktl17.htm#page_116); of spiritual origin,
[67](ktl11.htm#page_67); primitive relation to cause,
[68](ktl11.htm#page_68); resting in Spirit, [70](ktl11.htm#page_70);
satanic, [107](ktl16.htm#page_107); through righteous thinking,
[141](ktl19.htm#page_141); two planes of, [176](#page_176)

conservation, [162](#page_162)

courage, [36](ktl07.htm#page_36)

covenant, of Jacob, [84](ktl13.htm#page_84)

creation, of God and man, difference between, [176](#page_176); man most
important factor in, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110); steps in,
[19](ktl04.htm#page_19), [61](ktl10.htm#page_61)

creative center, faith-thinking faculty, [114](ktl17.htm#page_114)

creative source, right conception of, [25](ktl06.htm#page_25)

crucifixion, [194](#page_194)

current(s), of universal life, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73); that animate
body, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74)

David, [31](ktl07.htm#page_31)

death, brought on by man, [94](ktl15.htm#page_94); cause of,
[19](ktl04.htm#page_19); error of belief in, [96](ktl15.htm#page_96);
how to save our body from, [21](ktl05.htm#page_21); when it came into
the world, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131)

degeneration, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131)

Deity, foundation of, [61](ktl10.htm#page_61)

demonstration, example of, [146](ktl19.htm#page_146); hindrances to,
[18](ktl04.htm#page_18); how to make, [18](ktl04.htm#page_18)

denial, [63](ktl10.htm#page_63), [141](ktl19.htm#page_141); as
repentance, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141); dissolving power of,
[63](ktl10.htm#page_63); how to make, [64](ktl11.htm#page_64); of self,
[53](ktl09.htm#page_53), [195](#page_195)

Descartes, [121](ktl17.htm#page_121)

desire, as form of prayer, [146](ktl19.htm#page_146)

Devil, [61](ktl10.htm#page_61)

disease, [22](ktl05.htm#page_22)

Divine Mind, how to express in body, [21](ktl05.htm#page_21)

dreams, [155](#page_155)

earth, universal matrix, [184](#page_184)

Easter, [139](ktl19.htm#page_139), [197](#page_197)

Eden, Garden of, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130), [147](ktl19.htm#page_147)

Edenic state, [115](ktl17.htm#page_115)

Edison, on atoms, [69](ktl11.htm#page_69)

ego, [55](ktl10.htm#page_55)

Egypt, [56](ktl10.htm#page_56)

electrons, spiritual, [166](#page_166)

electricity, metaphor for mind action,
[47](ktl09.htm#page_47)-[48](ktl09.htm#page_48); modern scientific view,
[132](ktl19.htm#page_132)

Elijah, [3](ktl00.htm#page_3), [69](ktl11.htm#page_69); example of
penitence, [138](ktl19.htm#page_138); penetrated atoms by power of
thought, [179](#page_179)

Elohim God, [132](ktl19.htm#page_132), [177](#page_177)

end of the age (world), [26](ktl06.htm#page_26),
[40](ktl08.htm#page_40)-[42](ktl08.htm#page_42)

energy, as life source, [125](ktl18.htm#page_125);

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

omnipresent in atoms, [132](ktl19.htm#page_132); radiated by minds,
[80](ktl13.htm#page_80); re-

lease of, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71)

error, abstinence from, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141);

deeply rooted in subconscious, [193](#page_193); denial of,
[141](ktl19.htm#page_141); depth of our bondage to,
[127](ktl18.htm#page_127); destruction of, [191](#page_191); has no
power in itself, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141); joy in overcoming,
[189](#page_189); necessity for denial of, [64](ktl11.htm#page_64);
three steps in overcoming, [195](#page_195)

Esau, [78](ktl13.htm#page_78), [79](ktl13.htm#page_79)

ethers, spiritual, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11)

evil, denial of, [152](#page_152); destruction of, [191](#page_191)

evolution, race, [23](ktl05.htm#page_23), [130](ktl19.htm#page_130),
[134](ktl19.htm#page_134); spiritual, [165](#page_165)

experience, "school of fools," [45](ktl09.htm#page_45)

eye, limited in sight, [164](#page_164); mental, [148](#page_148)

Ezekiel, [91](ktl14.htm#page_91)

faculties, of mind, [147](ktl19.htm#page_147); swift development of,
[157](#page_157)

faith, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110), [148](#page_148); as result of many
affirmations, [143](ktl19.htm#page_143); center in man's brain,
[148](#page_148); how to develop, [72](ktl12.htm#page_72)

faith-thinking, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110); food of,
[119](ktl17.htm#page_119); most important power of man,
[113](ktl17.htm#page_113); nature of, [119](ktl17.htm#page_119) fasting,
[4](ktl01.htm#page_4), [5](ktl01.htm#page_5), [140](ktl19.htm#page_140)

Fenton, Ferrar, translation of Lord's Prayer, [108](ktl16.htm#page_108)

financier, Jacob, [84](ktl13.htm#page_84)

fire of God, [191](#page_191)

flesh, saving from corruption, [151](#page_151); symbols of, in story of
Jacob and Esau, [81](ktl13.htm#page_81)

fountain, of pure life, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123)

forty, symbolic number, [3](ktl00.htm#page_3)

fourth dimension, how to enter, [170](#page_170)

future, [45](ktl09.htm#page_45), [46](ktl09.htm#page_46)

Galilee, "rolling energy," [75](ktl12.htm#page_75)

Gethsemane, [134](ktl19.htm#page_134), [193](#page_193)

gift, [104](ktl16.htm#page_104)

God, as absolute good, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9), [25](ktl06.htm#page_25),
[68](ktl11.htm#page_68); as creative principle, [169](#page_169); as
Creator and ruler of universe, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9); as consuming fire,
[191](#page_191); as intelligence, [61](ktl10.htm#page_61); as
life-giving atom, [132](ktl19.htm#page_132); as mind, first in Trinity,
[14](ktl03.htm#page_14); as partner in man's prosperity,
[105](ktl16.htm#page_105); as potential, unformed will,
[157](#page_157); as principle, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9),
[14](ktl03.htm#page_14), [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); as substance,
[14](ktl03.htm#page_14), [61](ktl10.htm#page_61); as supreme knowing,
[156](#page_156); created ideas of body, [167](#page_167); does not
rest, [171](#page_171); falsely conceived of as a person,
[25](ktl06.htm#page_25), [28](ktl06.htm#page_28); false impressions of
character of, [24](ktl05.htm#page_24); grace of, [168](#page_168); how
to worship, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123), [143](ktl19.htm#page_143);
idealized two planes of consciousness, [176](#page_176); loves cheerful
giver, [103](ktl16.htm#page_103); man's oneness with,
[53](ktl09.htm#page_53); metaphysical understanding of,
[29](ktl06.htm#page_29); never performs miracles, [179](#page_179); not
an angry Being, [25](ktl06.htm#page_25); of the living,
[69](ktl11.htm#page_69); omnipresence of, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11);
omniscience and omnipotence of, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9),
[14](ktl03.htm#page_14); real body of, [22](ktl05.htm#page_22); soul of,
[126](ktl18.htm#page_126); transcendent, [144](ktl19.htm#page_144); why
resorts to limitations of law, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131)

Godhead, [112](ktl17.htm#page_112)

God's idea of man, [15](ktl04.htm#page_15)

God-image, [49](ktl09.htm#page_49)

God-men, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130)

God-Mind, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12), [17](ktl04.htm#page_17),
[25](ktl06.htm#page_25)

Good Friday, [139](ktl19.htm#page_139)

goodness, divine, [43](ktl08.htm#page_43)

grace of God, [168](#page_168)

Grand Canyon, [40](ktl08.htm#page_40)

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

Grand Man, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110)

halo, [148](#page_148)

harmony, [111](ktl17.htm#page_111), [190](#page_190)

healing, [173](#page_173); power of, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117); power of
nature, [22](ktl05.htm#page_22); secret of, [21](ktl05.htm#page_21);
steps in, [173](#page_173); through right thinking,
[22](ktl05.htm#page_22)

health, [173](#page_173)

heart, [91](ktl14.htm#page_91), [113](ktl17.htm#page_113)

heaven, as creative Mind, [171](#page_171); definite location of,
[176](#page_176); definition of, [177](#page_177); entering into,
[157](#page_157); here on earth, [145](ktl19.htm#page_145)

Herod, represents limited thoughts, [188](#page_188); symbol of
domineering will, [50](ktl09.htm#page_50)

Holy City, [147](ktl19.htm#page_147), [176](#page_176), [188](#page_188)

Holy Communion, [192](#page_192)

Holy Spirit, as "breath" of God, [17](ktl04.htm#page_17); as fire of
God, [191](#page_191); as teacher, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16); as third in
Trinity, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16); as Word of God in action,
[144](ktl19.htm#page_144); cleansing power of, [68](ktl11.htm#page_68);
function of, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16); here now, [68](ktl11.htm#page_68);
inspiration of, [140](ktl19.htm#page_140); reveals lack in making
demonstration, [18](ktl04.htm#page_18)

Holy Trinity, [14](ktl03.htm#page_14)

Holy Week, [138](ktl19.htm#page_138)

humanity, garden of God, [165](#page_165)

I, as potentiality and all-comprehensive, [58](ktl10.htm#page_58); as
summation of powers of Being, [55](ktl10.htm#page_55); mystery of,
[56](ktl10.htm#page_56)

I AM, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12), [15](ktl04.htm#page_15),
[20](ktl05.htm#page_20), [121](ktl17.htm#page_121),
[124](ktl18.htm#page_124), [144](ktl19.htm#page_144); as gate,
[144](ktl19.htm#page_144); as link with Father,
[144](ktl19.htm#page_144); body obedient to, [21](ktl05.htm#page_21);
forgives error, [161](#page_161); symbolized by Jesus, [189](#page_189);
symbolized in Isaac, [82](ktl13.htm#page_82); without limit in capacity,
[56](ktl10.htm#page_56)

ideal(s), [172](#page_172); as food of faith-thinking faculty,
[119](ktl17.htm#page_119); as

source of substance, [184](#page_184); catching, [172](#page_172);
character of, [47](ktl09.htm#page_47); development of, [165](#page_165);
of God, [53](ktl09.htm#page_53); of health, [48](ktl09.htm#page_48);
power of, [80](ktl13.htm#page_80); realm of, [49](ktl09.htm#page_49);

symbolized by fish, [172](#page_172)

identity, formed by Christ's attributes, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110)

ignorance, keeps man from his own, [55](ktl10.htm#page_55)

illusion, world of, [89](ktl14.htm#page_89)

imagination, [154](#page_154)

immortality, appearance of, [68](ktl11.htm#page_68)

imperfection, of man, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59)

incarnation(s), [26](ktl06.htm#page_26); of Christ,
[131](ktl19.htm#page_131)

increase, [101](ktl15.htm#page_101)

individuality, [145](ktl19.htm#page_145)

Ingersoll, Robert, [24](ktl05.htm#page_24)

inheritance, from God, [144](ktl19.htm#page_144)

inner eye, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12)

inspiration spiritual, [173](#page_173)

intellect, [77](ktl12.htm#page_77); rules today, [82](ktl13.htm#page_82)

intuition, [191](#page_191)

Isaac, [78](ktl13.htm#page_78), [82](ktl13.htm#page_82)

Isaiah, [39](ktl08.htm#page_39), [40](ktl08.htm#page_40)

Israelites, [37](ktl08.htm#page_37)

Jacob, experiences after receiving blessing, [83](ktl13.htm#page_83);
experiences with tithing, [85](ktl13.htm#page_85),
[104](ktl16.htm#page_104); represents the mind, [79](ktl13.htm#page_79);
story of receiving Isaac's blessing, [78](ktl13.htm#page_78)

Jacob's ladder, evidence of omnipresence, [83](ktl13.htm#page_83)

James, instruction to purify heart, [92](ktl14.htm#page_92); symbol of
power of justice, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117)

Jehovah, as Christ, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130); as God's idea of man,
[15](ktl04.htm#page_15); as word charged with power, [153](#page_153);
as word held in silence, [170](#page_170); promise to overcomer,
[180](#page_180)

Jerusalem, as symbol of love

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

center, [34](ktl07.htm#page_34); as symbol of peace and prosperity,
[188](#page_188); symbolizes great nerve center, [189](#page_189)

Jesus, as channel for grace and truth, [169](#page_169); as continuous
working factor in civilization, [164](#page_164); as joint heir to
kingdom, [27](ktl06.htm#page_27); as light of the world,
[128](ktl19.htm#page_128); as one of God-men, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130);
as our helper, [164](#page_164); as psychologist,
[76](ktl12.htm#page_76); as Word of God, [20](ktl05.htm#page_20);
authority given to, [15](ktl04.htm#page_15), [29](ktl06.htm#page_29),
[55](ktl10.htm#page_55), [72](ktl12.htm#page_72); available to all,
[164](#page_164); blood of, [27](ktl06.htm#page_27); body offered as
life transformer, [133](ktl19.htm#page_133); born to be Way-Shower,
[197](#page_197); brought good news of salvation from death,
[96](ktl15.htm#page_96); came to give life, [132](ktl19.htm#page_132);
came to save man from sin, [163](#page_163); changed water to wine,
[75](ktl12.htm#page_75); claimed human race as His flock,
[129](ktl19.htm#page_129); developed innate powers, [164](#page_164);
dissolution of false will, [62](ktl10.htm#page_62); elements of His
teaching, [36](ktl07.htm#page_36); entrance into Jerusalem,
[139](ktl19.htm#page_139); healed sick and raised dead,
[173](#page_173); laid claim to prior existence,
[129](ktl19.htm#page_129); mastering carnality, [162](#page_162);
mastery of two currents in body, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74); mission of,
[17](ktl04.htm#page_17); misunderstood by contemporaries,
[129](ktl19.htm#page_129); on end of the age, [26](ktl06.htm#page_26),
[40](ktl08.htm#page_40); oneness with Father, [18](ktl04.htm#page_18);
on fasting, [4](ktl01.htm#page_4); on God as Spirit,
[29](ktl06.htm#page_29); on God of the living, [69](ktl11.htm#page_69);
on greatest commandments, [34](ktl07.htm#page_34),
[41](ktl08.htm#page_41); on physical resurrection,
[21](ktl05.htm#page_21); on reincarnation, [94](ktl15.htm#page_94); on
resistance and antagonism, [175](#page_175); on single eye,
[21](ktl05.htm#page_21); passion of, [138](ktl19.htm#page_138); prayers
of, [65](ktl11.htm#page_65), [72](ktl12.htm#page_72); raised up whole
man, [197](#page_197); real character of, [128](ktl19.htm#page_128);
recognition of sonship and brotherhood, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32);
redemptive work of, [26](ktl06.htm#page_26); refers to Holy Spirit as
Comforter, [16](ktl04.htm#page_16); relationship to human family,
[129](ktl19.htm#page_129); represents man in regeneration,
[163](#page_163); resurrection of, in us, [13](ktl03.htm#page_13),
[162](#page_162); second coming of, [26](ktl06.htm#page_26); taught use
of affirmative, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73); three days in tomb,
[195](#page_195); very God or ideal man?, [128](ktl19.htm#page_128); way
to do His works, [57](ktl10.htm#page_57); went all the way from human to
divine, [127](ktl18.htm#page_127)

Jews, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32), [104](ktl16.htm#page_104)

John the Baptist, [50](ktl09.htm#page_50), [141](ktl19.htm#page_141)

John the Mystic, as symbol of love faculty, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117);
his vision of Jesus, [187](#page_187); on mystery of Jesus,
[130](ktl19.htm#page_130); presiding genius of love,
[34](ktl07.htm#page_34)

Joseph of Arimathea, [195](#page_195)

joy, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30)

judgment, [182](#page_182)

justice, universal law of, [175](#page_175)

kingdom, attainment through thought, [142](ktl19.htm#page_142); how
developed within man, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30); how entered,
[177](#page_177); keys to, [117](ktl17.htm#page_117); relation to
children, [107](ktl16.htm#page_107); to be established here on earth,
[163](#page_163)

labor, [107](ktl16.htm#page_107)

Lamb of God, [124](ktl18.htm#page_124)

larynx, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74)

Last Supper, [133](ktl19.htm#page_133), [139](ktl19.htm#page_139),
[192](#page_192)

law, active in all of nature, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131); cannot be
broken, [158](#page_158); definition of, [158](#page_158); of action,
[47](ktl09.htm#page_47); of the All-Good, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30); of
Being, [88](ktl14.htm#page_88); of denial, [70](ktl11.htm#page_70); of

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

evolution, [165](#page_165); of expression, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10); of
man less than grace of God, [169](#page_169); of righteous thinking,
[67](ktl11.htm#page_67); of universal balance, [43](ktl08.htm#page_43);
recognition of power of, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32); transgression of and
punishment, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32); wipes out all transgressions,
[161](#page_161); works within man for re-embodiment,
[93](ktl14.htm#page_93)

Lent, [3](ktl00.htm#page_3)-[5](ktl01.htm#page_5),
[138](ktl19.htm#page_138), [140](ktl19.htm#page_140)

life, as abiding flame in us, [162](#page_162); as gift of God,
[161](#page_161); center of, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123); conserved,
[163](#page_163); continuity of, [94](ktl15.htm#page_94); difference
between essence and living, [60](ktl10.htm#page_60); first step in
realization of, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123); higher,
[126](ktl18.htm#page_126); how to appropriate more of,
[123](ktl18.htm#page_123); precious in God's sight,

[125](ktl18.htm#page_125); source of, [20](ktl05.htm#page_20)

life current, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123), [131](ktl19.htm#page_131); how

changed, [126](ktl18.htm#page_126); how to make flow, [161](#page_161);
subject to word of man, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73)

life, eternal, [122](ktl17.htm#page_122); crown of, [167](#page_167);
hindrance to attainment of, [122](ktl17.htm#page_122); man's enmity
with, [122](ktl17.htm#page_122); secret of inheriting,
[122](ktl17.htm#page_122)

light, of Divine within, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141); of Spirit,
[67](ktl11.htm#page_67)

limitation, false belief in, [63](ktl10.htm#page_63)

locomotive (illustration of controlled zeal), [159](#page_159)

logic, argues against end of world, [41](ktl08.htm#page_41); of Truth,
[19](ktl04.htm#page_19)

Logos, [15](ktl04.htm#page_15), [172](#page_172)

Lord's Prayer, [72](ktl12.htm#page_72); Fenton version,
[108](ktl16.htm#page_108); most powerful prayer Jesus uttered,
[174](#page_174); praying fifteen times, [174](#page_174)

love, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30), [151](#page_151); as builder of mind
substance, [34](ktl07.htm#page_34); as divine ordinance,
[35](ktl07.htm#page_35); as great force, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30); as
idea of universal unity, [151](#page_151); as Principle,
[33](ktl07.htm#page_33); as servant, [35](ktl07.htm#page_35); definition
of, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32); directed by wisdom,
[31](ktl07.htm#page_31); distinction between divine and human,
[31](ktl07.htm#page_31); dominant thoughts about,
[34](ktl07.htm#page_34); obstacles to fellowship of,
[35](ktl07.htm#page_35); of fellow men, [35](ktl07.htm#page_35); purity
of, [33](ktl07.htm#page_33); unselfish qualities of,
[31](ktl07.htm#page_31); value of affirming it, [34](ktl07.htm#page_34);
why not quickly developed, [33](ktl07.htm#page_33)

magnet, spiritual, [133](ktl19.htm#page_133)

man, [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); aligns self with law, [158](#page_158);
and conscience, [44](ktl09.htm#page_44); animal nature of,
[60](ktl10.htm#page_60); as architect, [46](ktl09.htm#page_46); as Being
in miniature, [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); as transformer of all things,
[55](ktl10.htm#page_55); as manifest God will, [157](#page_157); as
power of God in action, [153](#page_153); as will of God externalized,
[61](ktl10.htm#page_61); fall of, [54](ktl09.htm#page_54); foolish
beliefs about God, [44](ktl09.htm#page_44); gives way to Christ man,
[95](ktl15.htm#page_95); great privileges of, [58](ktl10.htm#page_58);
imperfection in, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59); made in image of God,
[60](ktl10.htm#page_60); of Christ, [185](#page_185); office of,
[119](ktl17.htm#page_119); on way to perfect expression,
[54](ktl09.htm#page_54); open to God, [51](ktl09.htm#page_51); place in
God's planning, [61](ktl10.htm#page_61); potentialities of,
[54](ktl09.htm#page_54); primary work of, [147](ktl19.htm#page_147);
real, [56](ktl10.htm#page_56); true estate of, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59)

materiality, [20](ktl05.htm#page_20), [118](ktl17.htm#page_118)

matter, [14](ktl03.htm#page_14), [66](ktl11.htm#page_66)

Maundy Thursday, [139](ktl19.htm#page_139)

meditation, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12), [15](ktl04.htm#page_15)

memory, [89](ktl14.htm#page_89); in connection with reincarnation,
[99](ktl15.htm#page_99)

mental conceptions, [24](ktl05.htm#page_24)

mental dominion, [68](ktl11.htm#page_68)

mental pictures, [52](ktl09.htm#page_52), [154](#page_154)

mental renewal, [13](ktl03.htm#page_13), [17](ktl04.htm#page_17),
[51](ktl09.htm#page_51)

metaphysicians, logic of, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19);

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

modern beliefs of, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38)

mind, conscious, [87](ktl13.htm#page_87); as crucible for ideas,
[39](ktl08.htm#page_39); as meeting ground between God and man,
[10](ktl03.htm#page_10); bound by time, [170](#page_170); control of
consciousness in, [77](ktl12.htm#page_77); dominates the body,
[80](ktl13.htm#page_80); has own law of dynamics,
[47](ktl09.htm#page_47); illusions created by, [88](ktl14.htm#page_88);
man's cognizance of, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59); subdivisions of,
[17](ktl04.htm#page_17); unified with Divine Mind in daily worship,
[77](ktl12.htm#page_77), [178](#page_178); use of,
[87](ktl13.htm#page_87)

mind, subconscious, [87](ktl13.htm#page_87); release of light and energy
in, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71); spoken of as "heart,"
[91](ktl14.htm#page_91); spoken of as "memory," [89](ktl14.htm#page_89);
true office of, [87](ktl13.htm#page_87)

mind, superconscious, [88](ktl14.htm#page_88); as Principle,
[63](ktl10.htm#page_63); instrument of regeneration,
[89](ktl14.htm#page_89); laboratory of, [116](ktl17.htm#page_116); not
subject to lack, [64](ktl11.htm#page_64); opposition from mind of the
flesh, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131); ready to pour forth blessing,
[88](ktl14.htm#page_88); wider horizons of, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110)

miracle, definition of, [178](#page_178); changing water to wine,
[75](ktl12.htm#page_75)

money, how to think about,

[102](ktl16.htm#page_102); power of, [106](ktl16.htm#page_106); unjustly
deferred to, [105](ktl16.htm#page_105)

Moses, [3](ktl00.htm#page_3), [106](ktl16.htm#page_106),
[138](ktl19.htm#page_138), [154](#page_154)

movement, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38)

music, principle of, [111](ktl17.htm#page_111)

Napoleon, [47](ktl09.htm#page_47)

negation, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141)

Nehemiah, [37](ktl08.htm#page_37)

new birth, [162](#page_162)

Newman, Cardinal, [87](ktl13.htm#page_87)

nonresistance, [30](ktl06.htm#page_30), [195](#page_195)

obedience, spirit of, [35](ktl07.htm#page_35)

omnipresence, [83](ktl13.htm#page_83)

omnipresent intelligence, [45](ktl09.htm#page_45)

oneness, with life, [123](ktl18.htm#page_123)

overcomer, [180](#page_180), [190](#page_190)

overcoming, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38), [180](#page_180)

Palm Sunday, [139](ktl19.htm#page_139), [188](#page_188)

patience, [181](#page_181)

Paul, on all-sufficiency, [103](ktl16.htm#page_103); on cause of
weakness, sickness, and death, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19); on condemnation,
[98](ktl15.htm#page_98); on law of thought in finances,
[102](ktl16.htm#page_102); on Mind of Christ in men,
[111](ktl17.htm#page_111); on mystery of Christ,
[27](ktl06.htm#page_27); on peace, [6](ktl01.htm#page_6); on realization
of oneness, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11); on resurrection,
[21](ktl05.htm#page_21); on scientific religion,
[76](ktl12.htm#page_76); on Sonship of man, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130);
on subjects for thought, [135](ktl19.htm#page_135)

peace, [175](#page_175); of knowing God, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9); our
influence for, [5](ktl01.htm#page_5)

perfection, attainment of, [18](ktl04.htm#page_18); divine idea of,
[22](ktl05.htm#page_22); entering through affirmation,
[142](ktl19.htm#page_142); not out of reach, [144](ktl19.htm#page_144);
of body, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19); processes to, [59](ktl10.htm#page_59)

Peter, [116](ktl17.htm#page_116)-[120](ktl17.htm#page_120)

Pharisees, [188](#page_188)

physical translation, [69](ktl11.htm#page_69)

poverty, causes of, [101](ktl15.htm#page_101)

power, [153](#page_153); available to man, [54](ktl09.htm#page_54);
center in throat, [155](#page_155); declared by Jesus,
[73](ktl12.htm#page_73); destructive, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73); new
source of, [143](ktl19.htm#page_143); of the I AM,
[145](ktl19.htm#page_145); twelve powers of Christ,
[113](ktl17.htm#page_113)

prayer, as language of spirituality, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10); as mind
action, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10); does not change God,
[146](ktl19.htm#page_146); how to pray, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71); of
Jesus, [72](ktl12.htm#page_72); scientific, [170](#page_170); why not
always effective, [72](ktl12.htm#page_72)

Principle, [177](#page_177); Christ the idea of,
[54](ktl09.htm#page_54); how to demonstrate, [177](#page_177);
legitimate outworking of, [69](ktl11.htm#page_69); of good and evil,
[60](ktl10.htm#page_60);

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

of mathematics or music, [14](ktl03.htm#page_14),
[63](ktl10.htm#page_63), [156](#page_156); of music,
[111](ktl17.htm#page_111)

prodigal son, [88](ktl14.htm#page_88), [133](ktl19.htm#page_133)

promised land, [56](ktl10.htm#page_56), [57](ktl10.htm#page_57)

prosperity, [101](ktl15.htm#page_101); key to achieving,
[85](ktl13.htm#page_85); result of work, [37](ktl08.htm#page_37); why
Jews have been noted for, [104](ktl16.htm#page_104)

psychology, place in religion today, [76](ktl12.htm#page_76)

race beliefs, [72](ktl12.htm#page_72)

race consciousness, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131), [181](#page_181)

race, new, [189](#page_189)

realization, [170](#page_170)

Rebekah, [78](ktl13.htm#page_78)

redemption, [71](ktl11.htm#page_71), [124](ktl18.htm#page_124)

re-embodiment (see reincarnation)

regeneration, by superconscious mind, [89](ktl14.htm#page_89); only safe
way to eternal life, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74); through appropriating
Christ atoms, [133](ktl19.htm#page_133)

reincarnation, [93](ktl14.htm#page_93); a temporary remedy,
[94](ktl15.htm#page_94); partly to be speculated on,
[99](ktl15.htm#page_99); when no longer necessary,
[28](ktl06.htm#page_28)

renunciation, [160](#page_160)

repentance, [141](ktl19.htm#page_141)

resurrection, [197](#page_197); of body, importance of,
[21](ktl05.htm#page_21); of "damnation," [98](ktl15.htm#page_98); of
Jesus in us, [13](ktl03.htm#page_13); not confined to Jesus,
[151](#page_151)

Sabbath, [171](#page_171); as institution, [171](#page_171); made for
man, [172](#page_172)

sacrament, [167](#page_167)

sacrifice, privilege of, [95](ktl15.htm#page_95)

salvation, dependent on consciousness, [115](ktl17.htm#page_115);
mystery of, clarified, [134](ktl19.htm#page_134); not yet fully
understood, [127](ktl18.htm#page_127); of all men,
[93](ktl14.htm#page_93); of world, [67](ktl11.htm#page_67)

Satan, [131](ktl19.htm#page_131)

security, [33](ktl07.htm#page_33)

self, denial of, [53](ktl09.htm#page_53), [145](ktl19.htm#page_145)

self-control, [182](#page_182)

selfhood, [55](ktl10.htm#page_55)

selflessness, day of, [52](ktl09.htm#page_52)

sense, center of will, [62](ktl10.htm#page_62); delusions of,
[27](ktl06.htm#page_27), [61](ktl10.htm#page_61),
[114](ktl17.htm#page_114); gratification of, [50](ktl09.htm#page_50);
surrender to, [32](ktl07.htm#page_32); transmutation of,
[196](#page_196); when began to rule, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130)

Shakespeare, [40](ktl08.htm#page_40), [175](#page_175)

sickness, cause of, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19)

silence, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10), [16](ktl04.htm#page_16),
[170](#page_170)

sin, [160](#page_160)

Son of God, [14](ktl03.htm#page_14), [114](ktl17.htm#page_114),
[115](ktl17.htm#page_115)

Son of man, [114](ktl17.htm#page_114)

Spirit, as dominating mind force, [9](ktl02.htm#page_9); as guide
(conscience), [44](ktl09.htm#page_44); as leveler,
[43](ktl08.htm#page_43); frees from delusions, [66](ktl11.htm#page_66);
light of, [67](ktl11.htm#page_67); of wisdom, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12);
oneness with, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11), [18](ktl04.htm#page_18);
prerogative to know future, [46](ktl09.htm#page_46); science of,
[42](ktl08.htm#page_42) spiritual center, in man,
[115](ktl17.htm#page_115)

spiritual energy, [125](ktl18.htm#page_125)

spiritual history, of man, [79](ktl13.htm#page_79)

strength, [149](#page_149)

substance, mental, drawn from Christ, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110);
nucleated by idea, [170](#page_170); part of God substance,
[84](ktl13.htm#page_84); represented by money,
[106](ktl16.htm#page_106); sensitive to man's thoughts,
[102](ktl16.htm#page_102)

substance, physical, part of God

substance, [84](ktl13.htm#page_84); waste of, [163](#page_163)

substance, spiritual, [11](ktl03.htm#page_11), [14](ktl03.htm#page_14),
[184](#page_184); everywhere present, [126](ktl18.htm#page_126); race
starving for, [133](ktl19.htm#page_133); represented by Garden of Eden,
[147](ktl19.htm#page_147); source of incorruptible body,
[95](ktl15.htm#page_95)

superiority, false thought of, [33](ktl07.htm#page_33),
[66](ktl11.htm#page_66)

talents, hindrances to expresssion

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

of, [112](ktl17.htm#page_112)

talk, [47](ktl09.htm#page_47)

temptation, [134](ktl19.htm#page_134)

Tennyson, [144](ktl19.htm#page_144)

thinking, [191](#page_191)

thought(s), about money, [102](ktl16.htm#page_102); as greatest gift of
God to man, [147](ktl19.htm#page_147); as working power of mind,
[64](ktl11.htm#page_64); control of, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74),
[77](ktl12.htm#page_77), [116](ktl17.htm#page_116), [153](#page_153);
silent power of, [170](#page_170); thinking faculty in the head,
[113](ktl17.htm#page_113); waves of, [175](#page_175)

throat, center of power, [153](#page_153)

tithing, [84](ktl13.htm#page_84), [104](ktl16.htm#page_104)

transfiguration, [186](#page_186)

transmutation, [187](#page_187)

tree of knowledge, [73](ktl12.htm#page_73)

Truth, as leaven, [196](#page_196); discerned by judgment faculty,
[182](#page_182); dissolving error, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12),
[66](ktl11.htm#page_66); established in consciousness through
affirmations, [143](ktl19.htm#page_143); man cut away from,
[114](ktl17.htm#page_114);

meditation on, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12); of Being,
[125](ktl18.htm#page_125); worked into body through thought,
[125](ktl18.htm#page_125)

twelve powers of Christ, [113](ktl17.htm#page_113)

typewriting, use of subconscious mind in learning,
[90](ktl14.htm#page_90)

understanding, [155](#page_155); first requisite for patience,
[181](#page_181); fruit of Spirit's inspiration and knowledge,
[157](#page_157); light of, [127](ktl18.htm#page_127); two ways to get,
[45](ktl09.htm#page_45)

unfoldment, [171](#page_171)

unity, idea of, [151](#page_151); with the Father,
[27](ktl06.htm#page_27), [29](ktl06.htm#page_29)

universal man, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110)

universe, existed billions of years in past, [130](ktl19.htm#page_130);
nature of, [158](#page_158)

unknown God, altar to, [146](ktl19.htm#page_146)

Vanderbilt, [47](ktl09.htm#page_47)

vibrations, [38](ktl08.htm#page_38), [65](ktl11.htm#page_65)

visions, [155](#page_155)

voice, [74](ktl12.htm#page_74), [153](#page_153)

Voltaire, [24](ktl05.htm#page_24)

water of life, [124](ktl18.htm#page_124)

weakness, cause of, [19](ktl04.htm#page_19); denial of, [150](#page_150)

will, [156](#page_156); difference between seeming and pure,
[62](ktl10.htm#page_62); domineering, symbolized in Herod,
[50](ktl09.htm#page_50); executive power of mind, [156](#page_156),
[194](#page_194); freedom of, [29](ktl06.htm#page_29),
[55](ktl10.htm#page_55); highest aspect of, [145](ktl19.htm#page_145);
man, the will of Christ, [110](ktl16.htm#page_110)

wine, [43](ktl08.htm#page_43)

wisdom, [57](ktl10.htm#page_57), [150](#page_150)

word, as creative agency, [36](ktl07.htm#page_36); as creative idea in
Divine Mind, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10); as second in Trinity,
[15](ktl04.htm#page_15); how to keep, [10](ktl03.htm#page_10); man
judged by, [75](ktl12.htm#page_75); of Christ, [12](ktl03.htm#page_12);
of God, as revelation to man, [15](ktl04.htm#page_15); power of,
[71](ktl11.htm#page_71); power to bring health, [174](#page_174);
relation to ideas, [49](ktl09.htm#page_49), [154](#page_154); working
power of God, [15](ktl04.htm#page_15), [17](ktl04.htm#page_17),
[142](ktl19.htm#page_142)

work, [107](ktl16.htm#page_107)

world, visible and invisible, [102](ktl16.htm#page_102)

worldly fortune, [44](ktl09.htm#page_44)

Yeve, Hebrew word, [111](ktl17.htm#page_111)

youth, renewal of, [13](ktl03.htm#page_13), [70](ktl11.htm#page_70),
[163](#page_163)

zeal, [159](#page_159)

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Unity Lenten Guide](ktl21)
