[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110010)  [Next](1110012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi"></span> <span id="vi.vi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="vi.vi-p2"></span>[Acts II.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span id="vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p3"></span>“Ye men of Israel, hear these my words.”

<span id="vi.vi-p4"></span>\[“<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> men of Israel”\]: it is not for
flattery that he uses this term; but, as he has borne hard upon them, he
relaxes a little, and puts them in mind of their great ancestor <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149) \[Israel\]. Here again he begins with
an introduction, that they may not become excited, now that he is going
to make express mention to them of Jesus: for in what preceded, there
was no reason why they should be excited, while the Prophet was the
subject of discourse: but the name of Jesus would have given offence at
the very outset.—And he does not say, “Do as I bid you,” but, *Hear;* as
being not at all exacting. And observe how he forbears to speak of the
high matters, and begins with the very low: “Jesus,” he says: and then
straightway mentions the place He belonged to, being one which was held
in mean estimation: “Jesus of Nazareth”: and does not say anything great
about Him, nor even such as one would say about a Prophet, so far:
“Jesus,” he says, “of Nazareth, a man proved (to be) from God among
you.” Observe; what great matter was this, to say that He was sent from
God? <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150) For this was the point
which on all occasions both He and John and the Apostles were studious
to show. Thus hear John saying: “The same said unto me On whom thou
shalt see the Spirit descending, and abiding on him, this is He.” ([John
i. 33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033)<span id="vi.vi-p6.8"></span>.)
But Christ Himself does this to an extreme; Of Myself I am not come, He
sent Me. ([John 7.28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028)<span
id="vi.vi-p6.9"></span>.) And everywhere in the Scriptures this seems
the point most studiously insisted upon. Therefore also this holy leader
of the blessed company, the lover of Christ, the good shepherd, the man
put in trust with the keys of heaven, the man who received the Spiritual
Wisdom, when he has first subdued the Jews by fear; and has shown what
great things have been vouchsafed to the disciples, and what a right
they have to be believed, then first proceeds to speak concerning Him.
Only think what boldness it was to say it, in the midst of the
murderers—that He is risen! And yet he does not all at once say, He is
risen; but what?—“He came,” says he, “from God: this is manifest by the
signs which”—he does not yet say, Jesus Himself wrought: but
what?—“which God wrought by Him in the midst of you.” He calls
themselves as witnesses. “A man proved (to be sent) from God among you,
by miracles and wonders and signs, which God wrought by him in the midst
of you, as also ye yourselves know.” Then, having fallen upon the
mention of that their sacrilegious outrage, observe how he endeavors to
quit them of the crime: “Him,” he says, “being by the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God delivered up”: ([Acts
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi-p6.10"></span>)
\[adding however,\] “ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified
and slain:” for though it was predetermined, still they were
murderers. <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151) \[“By the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God:”\] all but using the same words as
Joseph did; just as he said to his brethren; “Be not angry one with
another by the way: God sent me hither.” (<span
id="vi.vi-p7.6"></span>[Gen. 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi-p7.7"></span>.) It
is God’s doing. “What of us, then?” (it might be said,) “it was even
well done on our part.” That they may not say this, therefore it is that
he adds, “By wicked hands ye have crucified and slain.” <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) Here then he hints at Judas; while at
the same time he shows them that it was not from any strength of theirs,
and would not have been, if He had not Himself permitted it: it was God
that delivered Him up. He has transferred the evil entire upon the head
of Judas, now already parted from them; for he it was that delivered Him
over to them by the kiss. Or, “By wicked hands,” refers to the soldiers:
for neither is it simply, “Ye have slain,” but, By wicked men ye have
done this. <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) And observe how
everywhere they make it of great importance that the Passion should
first be confessed. <span class="c14"><span id="vi.vi-p9.12"></span>Whom
God Raised Up</span> ([Acts 2.24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span
id="vi.vi-p9.13"></span>), says he. This was the great thing; and
observe how he sets it in the middle of his discourse: for the former
matters had been confessed; both the miracles and the signs and the
slaying—“Whom God,” says he, “raised up, having loosed the pains of
death, because it was not possible that He should be kept in its power.”
It is something great and sublime that he has hinted at here. For the
expression, “It was not possible,” even itself is that of one assigning
something. <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) It shows that death
itself in holding Him had pangs as in travail, and was sore
bestead: <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) whereas, by *pains,*
or, travail-pangs, *of death,* the Old Testament means danger and
disaster: and that He so rose as never more to die. For the assertion,
“Seeing that it was not possible that He should be holden of it,” means
this, that *His* rising was not common to the rest. Then, however,
before their thoughts can enter at all into his meaning, he brings David
upon them, an authority which sets aside all human reasoning. “For David
saith (with reference) to Him.” ([Acts
2.25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025)<span id="vi.vi-p11.8"></span>.)
And observe how, once more, the testimony is lowly. For therefore he
begins the citation further up, with the matters of lowlier import:
therefore <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) was death not in the
number of grievous things \[because\], says he, “I foresaw the Lord
always before my face, that He is on my right hand that I should not be
moved:” ([Acts 2.25-27](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025)<span
id="vi.vi-p12.9"></span>) and, “that Thou wilt not leave my soul in
hell.” Then, having finished the citation from the Prophet, he adds;
“Men and brethren.” ([Acts 2.29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)<span
id="vi.vi-p12.10"></span>.) When he is about to say anything great, he
uses this opening address, to rouse and to conciliate them. “Let me be
allowed,” he says, “to speak freely to you of the patriarch David.”
Remarkable lowliness, in a case where he was giving no hurt, nor was
there any reason why the hearers should be angry. For he did not say,
This is not said concerning David, but concerning the Christ. But in
another point of view: by his reverential expression towards the blessed
David, he awed them; speaking of an acknowledged fact as if it were a
bold thing to say, and therefore begging them to pardon him for saying
it. And thereupon his expression is not simply “concerning David,” but
“concerning the patriarch David, that he is both dead and buried:” he
does not also say, “and is not risen again,” but in another way (though
this too would have been no great thing to say), “And his sepulchre is
with us unto this day,” he has said what comes to the same thing.
Then—and even so he does not come to the mention of Christ, but what
next?—he goes on with his encomium upon David, “Being therefore a
prophet, and knowing that with an oath God had sworn unto him.” ([Acts
2.30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030)<span id="vi.vi-p12.11"></span>.)
But this he says, that were it but on account of the honor shown to
David, and the descent from him, they may accept what is said concerning
Christ’s resurrection, as seeing that it would be an injury to the
prophecy, and a derogating from (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p12.12"></span>τἥς εἰς αὐτοὺς τιμἥς</span>) their honor, if
this were not the fact. “And knowing,” he says, “that with an oath God
had sworn unto him”—he does not say simply “promised”—“of the fruit of
his loins after the flesh to raise up Christ, to seat Him upon his
throne.” Observe how he has again only hinted at what is sublime. For
now that he has soothed them with his expression, he confidently adds
this: The prophet \[saith it\] “of His resurrection, that neither was
His soul left in hell, nor did His flesh see corruption.” ([Acts
2.31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi-p12.13"></span>.)
This again is wonderful: it shows that His resurrection was not like
that of other men. For though death laid hold on Him, yet it did not its
own work then.—And, as regards the sin, he has spoken of that, covertly
and darkly; of the punishment, he forbore to add anything; but that they
had slain Him, this he has spoken out; for the rest he now comes to the
sign given by God. And when it is once proved, that He, the slain, was
just, was dear to God, then, though thou be silent of the punishment, be
sure that he which did the sin will condemn himself more than ever thou
canst condemn him. So then, that he refers all to the Father, is in
order that they may receive what is said: and that assertion, “Not
possible,” he fetches in from the prophecy. Well then, let us again look
over what has been said.

<span id="vi.vi-p13"></span>“Jesus of Nazareth, a man proved (to be
sent) from God unto you.” (Recapitulation of [Acts
2.22-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#022)<span
id="vi.vi-p13.1"></span>): one, of whom, by reason of His works, there
can be no doubt; but who, on the contrary, is demonstrated. Thus also
Nicodemus said, “No man can do these miracles which Thou doest—By
miracles, and wonders, and signs which God wrought by Him in the midst
of you” (<span id="vi.vi-p13.2"></span>[John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002)<span id="vi.vi-p13.3"></span>): not
secretly. Setting out from facts notorious to those whom he was
addressing, he then comes to things hidden. Thereupon \[in saying, “By
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God,”\] ([Acts
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi-p13.4"></span>) he
shows that it was not because they had the power to do it, and that
there was a wisdom and a Divine arrangement in the event, seeing it was
from God. He rapidly passes over the unpleasant part, \[adding, “Whom
God raised up,” etc.\] ([Acts
2.24](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#024)<span id="vi.vi-p13.5"></span>).
For it is always a point of great importance with them to show that He
was once dead. Though ye should deny it, says he, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p13.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p13.7"></span>κεῖνοι</span>) those
(present) will bear witness to the fact. \[“Having loosed the pangs of
death.”\] He that gives Death trouble, may much more give trouble to
them that crucified Him: however, nothing of the kind is here said, as
that He had power to slay you. Meanwhile, <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) let us also learn thus to hold. For
one that is in pain like a woman in travail, does not hold the thing
held, and is not active but passive; and makes haste to cast it off. And
it is well said: “For David saith in reference to him” (<span
id="vi.vi-p14.8"></span>v. 25); that you may not refer that saying to
the Prophet.—\[“Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing,” etc.\] ([Acts
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi-p14.9"></span>.) Do
you observe how he now interprets the prophecy, and does not <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) give it bare of comment? How did He
“seat Him upon” David’s “throne?” For the kingdom after the Spirit is in
heaven. Observe how, along with the resurrection, he has also declared
the kingdom in the fact of His rising again. He shows that the Prophet
was under constraint: for the prophecy was concerning Him. Why does he
say, not, Concerning His kingdom (it was a great matter), but
“Concerning His resurrection?” And how did He seat Him upon his
(David’s) throne? Why, He reigns as King over Jews also, yea, what is
much more, over them that crucified Him. “For His flesh saw no
corruption.” This seems to be less than resurrection, but it is the same
thing.

<span id="vi.vi-p16"></span>“This Jesus”—observe how he does not call
Him otherwise—“hath God raised up; whereof all we are witnesses. Being
therefore by the right hand of God exalted” ([Acts
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi-p16.1"></span>):
again he takes refuge with the Father, and yet it had been enough to say
what precedes: but he knows what a great point this is. Here he has
hinted at the Ascension also, and that Christ is in heaven: but neither
does he say this openly. “And having received,” says he, “the promise of
the Holy Ghost.” Observe how, in the beginning of his discourse, he does
not say that Jesus Himself had sent It, but the Father: now, however,
that he has mentioned His signs and the things done to Him by the Jews,
and has spoken of His resurrection, he boldly introduces what he has to
say about these matters, again adducing themselves as witnesses by both
senses: \[“He hath shed forth this, which ye do see and hear.”\] And of
the resurrection he has made continual mention, but of their outrageous
deed he has spoken once for all. “And having received the promise of the
Holy Ghost.” This again is great. “The promise,” he says; because
\[promised\] before His Passion. Observe how he now makes it all His
\[“He hath poured forth this”\], covertly making a great point. For if
it was He that poured it forth, it is of Him that the Prophet has spoken
above, “In the last days I will pour forth of My Spirit on My Servants,
and on Mine handmaids, and I will do wonders in the heaven above.
(*supra,* [Acts 2.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017)<span
id="vi.vi-p16.2"></span>.) Observe what he secretly puts into it! But
then, because it was a great thing, he again veils it with the
expression of “His having received of the Father.” He has spoken of the
good things fulfilled, of the signs; has said, that He is king, the
point that touched them; has said, that it is He that gives the Spirit.
(*Arist. Rhet.* 1. 3.) (For, however much a person may say, if it does
not issue in something advantageous, he speaks to no purpose.) Just as
John: “The same,” says he, “shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost.”
([Matt. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span
id="vi.vi-p16.3"></span>.) And it shows that the Cross not only did not
make Him less, but rendered Him even more illustrious, seeing that of
old God promised it to Him, but now has given it. Or \[it may be\], “the
promise” which He promised to us. He so foreknew it about to be, and has
given it to us greater after the resurrection. And, “hath poured it
out,” he says; not <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) requiring
worthiness: and not simply gave, but with abundance. Whence <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) does this appear? Henceforth after the
mention of His giving the Spirit, he confidently speaks also of His
ascension into heaven; and not only so, but again adducing the witness,
and reminding them of that Person concerning Whom Christ once spake.
([Matt. xxii. 43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)<span
id="vi.vi-p18.2"></span>) “For not David,” says he “ascended into the
heavens. ([Acts 2.34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034)<span
id="vi.vi-p18.3"></span>.) Here he no longer speaks in lowly
phrase, <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) having the confidence
which results from the things said; nor does he say, “Be it permitted me
to speak,” or the like: “But he saith himself; The Lord said unto my
Lord, Sit Thou on My right hand, until I make Thine enemies Thy
footstool.” Now if He be David’s Lord, much more shall they not disdain
Him. “Sit thou on My right hand;” he has set the whole matter here;
“until I make Thine enemies Thy footstool:” here also he has brought
upon them a great terror, just as in the beginning he showed what He
does to His friends, what to his enemies. And again, as to the act of
subjugation, not to provoke unbelief, he ascribes it to the Father.
Since then these are great things that he has uttered, he again brings
his discourse down to lowly matters. “Let therefore,” he says, “the
whole house of Israel know assuredly: i.e. question ye not, nor doubt
ye: then also in the tone of command it follows; “that God hath made Him
both Lord”—this he says from David—“and Christ,” ([Acts
2.36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span id="vi.vi-p19.4"></span>),
this from the Psalm: <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) For when it
would have been rightly concluded, “Let therefore the whole house of
Israel know assuredly that” He sitteth on the right hand of God, this,
which would have been great, he forbears, and brings in a different
matter which is much more humble, and the expression “Hath made;” i.e.
hath ordained: so that there is nothing about (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p20.2"></span>οὐσίωσις</span>) communication of substance
here, but the expression relates to this which has been mentioned. “Even
this Jesus, Whom ye crucified.” He does well to end with this, thereby
agitating their minds. For when he has shown how great it is, he has
then exposed their daring deed, so as to show it to be greater, and to
possess them with terror. For men are not so much attracted by benefits
as they are chastened by fear. <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163)

<span id="vi.vi-p22"></span>But the admirable and great ones, and
beloved of God, need none of these motives: men, such as was Paul: not
of the kingdom, not of hell, made he account. For this is indeed to love
Christ, this to be no hireling, nor to reckon it a matter of trafficking
and trading, but to be indeed virtuous, and to do all for the love of
God. ([Rom. ix. 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span
id="vi.vi-p22.1"></span>.) Then what tears does it not deserve, when,
owing so large a measure, we do not even like traders seek the kingdom
of heaven! He promises us so great things, and not even so is He worthy
to be heard? What can come up to this enmity! <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) And yet, they are mad after
money-making, though it be with enemies, though it be with slaves,
though it be with persons most hostile to them, that they come in
contact, though it be with persons utterly evil, if only they expect
that they shall be enabled by their means to make money, they will do
everything, will flatter, and be obsequious, and make themselves slaves,
and will esteem them more to be revered than all men, to get some
advantage out of them: for the hope of money does not allow them to give
a thought to any such considerations as these. But the Kingdom is not so
powerful as money is; nay, rather, not in the smallest proportion as
powerful. For <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) it is no ordinary
Being that promises: but this is greater than even the Kingdom itself
that we receive it from such a Giver! But now the case is the same as if
a king, wishing, after ten thousand other benefits, to make us his heirs
and coheirs with his son \[should be despised\]: while some captain of a
band of robbers, who has done ten thousand wrongs to us and to our
parents, and is himself fraught with ten thousand wickednesses, and has
utterly marred our honor and our welfare, should, on presenting a single
penny, receive our worship. God promises a Kingdom, and is despised: the
Devil helps us to hell, and he is honored! Here God, there Devil. But
let us see the difference of the tasks enjoined. For if there were none
of these considerations in the case: if it were not, here God, there
Devil; not, here one helping to a kingdom, there to a hell: the nature
itself of the tasks enjoined were sufficient to induce us to comply with
the former. For what does each enjoin? The one, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) the things which make glorious; the
other the things which put to shame: one, the things which involve in
ten thousand calamities and disgraces; the other, the things which have
with them abundant refreshment. For look: the one saith, “Learn ye of
Me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest unto your
souls.” ([Matt. xi. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)<span
id="vi.vi-p25.14"></span>): the other saith, Be thou savage, and
ungentle, and passionate, and wrathful, and more a wild beast than a
man. Let us see which is more useful, which, I pray you, more
profitable. “Speak not of this,” say you. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) \* \* \* But consider that he is the
devil: above all indeed, if that be shown: there is need also to undergo
toils, and, on the other hand, the prize of victory will be greater. For
not he that enjoins easy tasks is the kind (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.17"></span>κηδεμὼν</span>) benefactor, but he that enjoins
what is for our good. Since fathers also enjoin disagreeable tasks; but
for this <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) they are fathers: and
so again do masters to slaves: but kidnappers and destroyers (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p27.7"></span>λυμεὥνες</span>) on the
other hand, do just the reverse. And <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) yet that the commands of Christ are
attended with a pleasure, is manifest from that saying. For to what sort
do you take the passionate man to belong, and to what the forbearing and
meek? Does not the soul of the (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p28.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p28.7"></span>κείνου</span>) one <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) seem to be in a kind of solitary
retreat, enjoying exceeding quiet; while that of (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p29.4"></span>τούτου</span>) the other is
like a market-place and tumult and the midst of cities, where great is
the clamor of those going out, the noise of camels, mules, asses: of men
shouting loud to those that meet them, that they may not be trodden
under foot: and again, of silver-beaters, of braziers, of men thrusting
and pushing this way and that and some overborne, some overbearing? But
the soul of (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p29.5"></span>τούτου</span>) the former is like some
mountain-top, with its delicate air, its pure sunshine, its limpid
gushing fountains, its multitude of charming flowers, while the vernal
meads and gardens put on their plumage of shrubs and flowers, and glance
with rifling waters: and if any sound is heard there, it is sweet, and
calculated to affect the ear with a sense of much delight. For either
the warbling birds perch on the outermost spray of the branching trees,
and cicadas, nightingales and swallows, blended in one harmony, perform
a kind of concerted music; or the zephyr gently stirring the leaves,
draws whistling tones from pines and firs, resembling oft the notes of
the swan: and roses, violets, and other flowers, gently swayed, and
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p29.6"></span>κυανίζοντα</span>)
dark-dimpling, show like a sea just rippled over with gentle
undulations. Nay, many are the images one might find. Thus, when one
looks at the roses, one shall fancy that he beholds in them the rainbow;
in the violets a waving sea; in the lilies, the sky. But <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) not by the spectacle alone, and the
beholding, does such an one then cause delight: but also in the very
body of him that looks to the meadow, rather it refreshes him, and
causes him to breathe freely, so that he thinks himself more in heaven
than on earth. There is withal a sound of a different kind, when water
from the mountain-steep, borne by its own force through ravines gently
plashes over its pebbly bed with lulling noise, and so relaxes our frame
with the pleasurable sensations, as quickly to draw over our eyes the
soft languor of slumber. You have heard the description with pleasure:
perhaps also it has made you enamored of solitude. But sweeter far than
this solitude is the soul \* \* of the long-suffering. For it was not
for the sake of describing a meadow, nor for the sake of making a
display of language, that we have broached this similitude: but the
object was, that, seeing how great is the delight of the long suffering,
and how, by converse with a long suffering man, one would be far more
both delighted and benefited, than by frequenting such spots, ye may
follow after such men. For when not even a breath of violence proceeds
from such a soul, but mild and engaging words, then indeed does that
gentle softness of the zephyr find its counterpart: entreaties also,
devoid of all arrogance, but forming the resemblance to those winged
warblers,—how is not this far better? For not the body is fanned by the
soft breeze of speech; no, it refreshes our souls <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) heated and glowing. A physician, by
ever so great attention, could not so speedily rid a man of the fever,
as a patient man would cool, by the breath of his own words, a person
who was passionate and burning with wrath. And why do I speak of a
physician? Not even iron, made red-hot and dipped into water, so quickly
parts with its heat, as does the passionate man when he comes in contact
with the soul of the long-suffering. But as, if it chance that singing
birds find their way into the market, they go for nothing there, just so
is it with our precepts when they light upon souls addicted to wrathful
passions. Assuredly, sweeter is gentleness than bitterness and
frowardness.—Well, but the one was God’s bidding, the other the devil’s.
Do you see that it was not for nothing that I said, even if there were
no devil or God in the case, the things enjoined would be enough in
themselves to (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.6"></span>ποστἥσαι</span>) revolt us? For the one is both
agreeable to himself, and serviceable to others, the other displeasing
to himself, and hurtful to others. Nothing is more unpleasant than a man
in a passion, nothing more noisome, more odious, more shocking, as also
nothing more pleasing than one who knows not what it is to be in a
passion. Better dwell with a wild beast than with a passionate man. For
the beast, when once tamed, abides by its law; but the man, no matter
how often you have tamed him, again turns wild, unless <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) however he should of himself settle
down into some such habit (of gentleness).

<span id="vi.vi-p33"></span>For as a bright sunny day and winter with
all its gloom, so are the soul of the angry and that of the gentle.
However, let us at present look not to the mischievous consequences
resulting to others, but to those which affect the persons themselves:
though indeed it is also no slight mischief (to one’s self) to cause ill
to another, for the present, however, let that be the consideration.
What executioner with his lash can so lacerate the ribs, what red-hot
lancets (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p33.1"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p33.2"></span>βελίσκοι</span>) ever so
pierced the body, what madness can so dispossess a man of his natural
reason, as anger and rage do? I know many instances of persons
engendering diseases by giving loose to anger: and the worst of fevers
are precisely these. But if they so injure the body, think of the soul.
For do not argue that you do not see the mischief, but rather consider,
if that which is the recipient of the malignant passion is so hurt, what
must be the hurt sustained by that which engenders it! Many have lost
their eyes, many have fallen into most grievous disease. Yet he that
bears bravely, shall endure all things easily. But, however, both such
are the troublesome tasks the devil enjoins, and the wages he assigns us
for these is hell. He is both devil and foe to our salvation, and we
rather do his bidding than Christ’s, Saviour as He is, and Benefactor
and Defender, and speaking as He does such words, which are both
sweeter, and more reverend, and more profitable and beneficial, and are
both to ourselves and to those who live in our company the greatest of
blessings. Nothing worse than anger, my beloved, nothing worse than
unseasonable wrath. It will not have any long delay; it is a quick,
sharp passion. Many a time has a mere word been blurted out in anger,
which needs for its curing a whole lifetime, and a deed been done which
was the ruin of the man for life. For the worst of it is this, that in a
little moment, and by one act, and by a single word, full oft has it
cast us out from the possession of eternal good, and brought to nought a
world of pains. Wherefore I beseech you to do all you can to curb this
savage beast. Thus far, however, I have spoken concerning meekness and
wrath; if one should take in hand to treat of other opposites, as
covetousness and the mad passion for glory, contrasted with contempt of
wealth and of glory; intemperance with sobriety; envy with benevolence;
and to marshal them each against its opposite, then one would know how
great the difference. Behold how from the very things enjoined it is
plainly shown, that the one master is God, the other the devil! Why
then, let us do God’s bidding, and not cast ourselves into bottomless
pits; but while there is time, let us wash off all that defiles the
soul, that we may attain unto the eternal blessings, through the grace
and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and Holy
Ghost together be glory, power, honor, now and ever, and world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[i:150](1110011.htm#fr_149) <span
id="vi.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p5.1"></span>τοῦ προπάτορος</span>, A. C. F. D. and Cat. but
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p5.2"></span>τοῦ Δαυὶδ
εὐκαίρως</span>, B. E. Edd. Œcumenius fell into the same mistake and has
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p5.3"></span>τοῦ προπάτορος
Δαυίδ</span>. But it is evident that Chrys. is commenting on the address
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p5.4"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p5.5"></span>Ανδρες ᾽Ισραηλῖται</span>.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[i:151](1110011.htm#fr_150) <span
id="vi.vi-p5.6"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p6.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p6.2"></span>Ορα, ποῖον ἦν τοῦτο μέγα, τὸ εἰπεῖν κ. τ.
λ</span>. i.e. “He says as yet <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p6.3"></span>οὐδὲν μέγα</span>, nothing great, concerning
Christ: nothing even that would be great if said of an ordinary Prophet.
For, observe: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p6.4"></span>ποῖον
μέγα</span>, what sort of great thing was it, to say that Christ was
sent from God?” In the following sentences Chrys. seems to have been
scarcely understood by his reporter. His meaning may be thus
represented: “And yet, so it is: everywhere in the Scriptures we find
examples of this remarkable <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p6.5"></span>μείωσις</span>: “Christ was sent from God,” seems
to be the point most studiously inculcated (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p6.6"></span>τὸ σπουδαζόμενον</span>): nay, we find it carried
to the utmost (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p6.7"></span>μεθ᾽
ὑπερβολῆς</span>) in some of Christ’s own expressions. And so here: when
Peter stands up—he, the leader of the Apostles, the lover of Christ, the
good shepherd, the man entrusted with the keys of the kingdom of heaven,
the man who has received the deposit of the Wisdom of the Spirit—after
he has subdued the audience by the terrors of the coming judgments, has
shown that he and his company have received wonderful gifts as foretold
by the Prophet, and has made it felt that they have a right to be
believed: you may well expect after all this that his first word about
Christ will be something great; that he will certainly launch out boldly
into the declaration, He is risen! Only think, though, what boldness to
say this in the midst of the murderers!—Nothing of the kind. He begins
with, “Jesus the Nazarene, a man proved to be from God unto you by
signs, etc. which—(He did? no, but) God did by Him, etc. Wait awhile,
however: the Orator will say all that needs to be said in due time.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[i:152](1110011.htm#fr_151) <span
id="vi.vi-p6.11"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p7.1"></span>Εἰ γὰρ καὶ ὡρισμένον ἦν, φησὶν, ὅμως ἀνδροφόνοι
ἦσαν</span>. B. C. after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p7.3"></span>παλλ. τοῦ ἐγκλήματος</span>, and before the text.
As the sentence so placed seemed to make Chrys. contradict himself, the
other <span class="c14"><span id="vi.vi-p7.4"></span>mss.</span> and
Edd. before Ben. omit it. Something is wanting, which perhaps may be
supplied from Œcumen. ᾽<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p7.5"></span>Αλλὰ καὶ ἀπαλλάσσων οὐκ ἀφίησιν αὐτοὺς πάντη τοῦ
ἐγκλήματος. ᾽Επάγει γὰρ, ὅτι διὰ χειρῶν ἀνόμων ἀνείλετε</span>.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[i:153](1110011.htm#fr_152) <span
id="vi.vi-p7.8"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p8"></span> In [Acts
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023)<span id="vi.vi-p8.1"></span>, the
preferable reading is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p8.2"></span>διὰ χειρὸς ἀνόμων</span>, “through the hand of
lawless men,” instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p8.3"></span>διὰ χειρῶν ἀνόμων</span> of the Text. Recep. So
A, B, C, D, Tisch. W. and H., Lach. Treg. R.V. This reading is also to
be preferred in accordance with Bengel’s first rule of
text-criticism—*Lectio difficilior principatum tenet.*—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[i:154](1110011.htm#fr_153) <span
id="vi.vi-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p9"></span> The confusion may be cleared up by supposing
that Chrys. here commented upon the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.1"></span>διὰ χειρῶν ἀνόμων</span> as admitting of a double
connection: viz.: with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.3"></span>κδοτον λαβόντες</span> and with <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.4"></span>προσπ. ἀνείλετε</span>. In
the former, it refers to Judas: while at the same time, it is shown that
of themselves they had no power against Him. He was delivered up by the
predestination and will of God, by means of the wicked hands of Judas;
upon whom (already gone to his doom) the evil is shifted entire. But
again, as <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.5"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.6"></span>κδοτον</span>is not put
simply and without addition (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.7"></span>ἁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p9.8"></span>πλῶς</span>), so neither (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.9"></span>οὐδὲ</span>) is <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p9.11"></span>νείλετε</span>: but “by
wicked hands ye slew,” i.e. by the soldiers.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[i:155](1110011.htm#fr_154) <span
id="vi.vi-p9.14"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p10"></span> The text seems to be corrupt: <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.1"></span>καὶ αὐτὸ διδόντος ἔστιν
τίδείκνυσιν ὅτι</span>. B. omits <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.3"></span>στιν τί</span>. Perhaps <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.4"></span>καὶ αὐτὸ</span> is derived
from an abbreviation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.5"></span>κρατεῖσθαι αὐτόν</span>: and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.6"></span>διδόντος ἔστιν τι·</span>
may be, “is (the expression) of one assigning something, i.e. some
special prerogative to Him:” or, possibly, “For the expression, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.7"></span>Καθότι οὐκ ἦν δυνατὸν</span>
even of itself implies the granting of something (in His case):” viz. as
a postulate. E. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.8"></span>καὶ
αὐτὸν διδόντα ἐμφαίνει κατασχεῖν· καὶ ὅτι</span>, i.e. “that it was even
He that gave death the power to hold Him:” this, which is adopted by
Edd. is, however, not a various reading, but only an attempt to restore
the passage. Œcumen. gives no assistance: he has only, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.9"></span>διὰ δὲ τοῦ, καθότι οὐκ ἦν
δυν. αὐτὸν κρατ., τὸ μεγαλεῖον αὐτοῦ παρίστησι, καὶ ὅτι οὐκέτι
ἀποθνήσκει</span>. In the next sentence E. and Edd. have: “For by ‘pains
of death’ Scripture is everywhere wont to express ‘danger:’” but Œcumen.
and Cat. agree with the old reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.10"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.11"></span>Παλαία</span>. Possibly the meaning of the
whole passage may be somewhat as follows. “It is something great and
sublime that Peter has darkly hinted in saying, ‘it was not possible
that <span class="c14"><span id="vi.vi-p10.12"></span>He</span> should
be holden of it.’ And the very expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.13"></span>καθότι</span> implies that there is something
to be thought of (comp. Caten. in 1). Then, in the Old. Test., the
expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.14"></span>ὠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p10.15"></span>δῖνες θανάτου</span> means pains in which death
is the agent; but here they are the pangs inflicted upon death itself,
travailing in birth with Christ ‘the first-begotten from the dead.’ It
shows then both that death could not endure to hold Him, and, that
Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more. For the assertion, etc.
But then, without giving them time to ponder upon the meaning of what he
has darkly hinted, he goes off to the Prophet,” etc.—On the expression
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.16"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p10.17"></span>δῖνας λύειν</span> Mr.
Field, *Index to Hom. in Matt.* s. v., remarks, that “it is said
sometimes of the childbearing woman herself, as p. 118. B., sometimes of
the child born, as p. 375. A., sometimes of the person aiding in the
delivery, as [Job 39.2](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#002)<span
id="vi.vi-p10.18"></span>. Hence the obscure passage [Acts
2.34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034)<span id="vi.vi-p10.19"></span> is
to be explained. See Theophylact in 1.”

<span id="fn_155"></span>[i:156](1110011.htm#fr_155) <span
id="vi.vi-p10.20"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p11"></span> It is noteworthy that this interpretation
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p11.1"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p11.2"></span>δῖνας τοῦ θανάτου</span>
(24) is exactly that of Meyer who explains thus: “Death travailed in
birth-throes even until the dead was raised again. With this event these
pangs ceased, *they were loosed;* and because *God* had made Christ
alive, *God* has loosed the pangs of death.” Other interpretations are:
(1) The *snares* or *bands* of death, on the ground that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p11.3"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p11.4"></span>δῖνες</span> is used in the
lxx. to translate the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="vi.vi-p11.5"></span>iחבל</span> (e.g. <span
id="vi.vi-p11.6"></span>[Ps. xviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005)<span id="vi.vi-p11.7"></span>),
which has this meaning. So Olsh. (2) That the pains *of Jesus* connected
with the whole experience of death are meant. He is popularly conceived
as enduring these pains until the resurrection when God loosed them, the
conception being that he was under their power and constraint. We prefer
this view. So Lechler, Gloag, Hackett.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[i:157](1110011.htm#fr_156) <span
id="vi.vi-p11.9"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p12"></span> i.e. The former part of the passage cited,
down to, “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell,” as far as the words go,
is no more than David might say in reference to himself, or any other
saint: viz. he set God always before his face, etc. therefore (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p12.1"></span>διὰ τοῦτο</span>, referring
to [Acts 2.26](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#026)<span
id="vi.vi-p12.2"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p12.3"></span>διὰ τοῦτο εὐφρ</span>.) death was not in the
number of things that cause grief. And St. Peter instead of going at
once to that in the prophecy which is peculiar to Christ, with wise
management begins with what is less exalted, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p12.4"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p12.5"></span>τε εἰσαγωγικωτέρων λόγων δεομένοις</span>,
Œcumen.—For <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p12.6"></span>διὰ τοῦτο
οὐ τῶν λυπούντων ὁ θάνατος</span>, E. and Edd. have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p12.7"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p12.8"></span>να δείξη, ὅτι οὐ</span>…“to
show that death,” etc.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[i:158](1110011.htm#fr_157) <span
id="vi.vi-p13.8"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.1"></span>τέως μανθάνωμεν καὶ ἡμεῖς οὕτω κατέχειν</span>.
As the text stands, this can only mean, “And here by the bye let us also
learn how to hold fast Christ; not to hold Him with pain, like one in
travail-pangs, who therefore cannot hold fast, but is in haste to be
delivered,” etc. But this can hardly have been St. Chrysostom’s meaning.
Something seems to be omitted after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.2"></span>καὶ ἡμεῖς</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.3"></span>οὕτω</span>.—Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.4"></span>τέως δὲ μανθάνομεν καὶ ἡμεῖς διὰ τῶν εἰρημένων
τί ἐστι τὸ κατέχειν</span>. If this is: “What is the meaning of the
expression <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.5"></span>κατέχειν</span>, the emphatic <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p14.6"></span>καὶ ἡμεῖς</span> is
superfluous; and besides, the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p14.7"></span>κατέχειν</span> does not occur in the text
commented upon. Œcum. and the Catena give no help.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[i:159](1110011.htm#fr_158) <span
id="vi.vi-p14.10"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p15"></span> Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p15.1"></span>καὶ γυμνήν τίθησι δηλῶν πῶς</span>. “And gives
it bare (of comment), showing.” Montf. mistranslates <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p15.2"></span>γυμνὴν τιθ</span>, *nudam
exponat,* and notices the old reading (A. B. C ) with the remark, *Unus
Codex* <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p15.3"></span>προφ. οὐ
γυμνήν</span>. *Minus recte.* But Chrys. is now commenting on [Acts
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#031)<span id="vi.vi-p15.4"></span>.
“Above, St. Peter gave the prophecy by itself: now he adds his own
exposition and reasoning, “Being therefore a Prophet.” etc.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[i:160](1110011.htm#fr_159) <span
id="vi.vi-p16.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p17.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p17.2"></span>Εξέχεε, φησὶν, οὐκ ἀξίωμα ζητῶν, καὶ οὐχ
ἁπλῶς</span>. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p17.3"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p17.4"></span>Εξ., φ. ᾽Ενταῦθα τὸ ἀξίωμα ἐμφαίνει, καὶ ὅτι οὐχ
ἅπλως</span>. “Here he intimates the dignity: and that,” etc. But the
meaning is, “He poured it forth, not requiring merit: i.e. not giving
here and there to the most deserving, but as the phrase implies, with
unsparing liberality.” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p17.5"></span>μετὰ δαψιλείας</span>. N. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p17.6"></span>μεθ᾽ ὑπερβολῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[i:161](1110011.htm#fr_160) <span
id="vi.vi-p17.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p18.1"></span>πόθεν τοῦτο</span>; Edd. “Wherefore also to
prove this very thing, he adds what follows.” The connection is, “He has
shed forth. How so? It must be He; for not David ascended,” etc.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[i:162](1110011.htm#fr_161) <span
id="vi.vi-p18.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p19"></span> Here five of our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p19.1"></span>mss.</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p19.2"></span>μεθ᾽ ὑπερβολῆς</span>, “hyperbolically:” but the
reading of E. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p19.3"></span>μεθ᾽
ὑποστολῆς</span> is attested by Œcumen. and the Catena.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[i:163](1110011.htm#fr_162) <span
id="vi.vi-p19.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p20"></span> i.e. the expression “Lord” is derived from
David’s, “My Lord:” the expression “Christ,” or rather <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p20.1"></span>καὶ Χριστὸν ὁ Θεὸς ἐποίησ
εν</span>, is from the Psalm: meaning perhaps the second Psalm. Edd.
have, “this he says from David and from the Psalm,” after the text.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[i:164](1110011.htm#fr_163) <span
id="vi.vi-p20.3"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p21"></span> The two Old Test. pp. (<span
id="vi.vi-p21.1"></span>[Joel ii.
28-32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span id="vi.vi-p21.2"></span>;
[Ps. xvi. 8-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008)<span
id="vi.vi-p21.3"></span>) which occur in this chapter are quoted from
the lxx., the former freely, the latter with great exactness. The
following peculiarities of phraseology are noticeable in the first
passage. (1) “In the last days,” more definite expression for the Heb.
and lxx. “afterward.” (2) The partitive expression: “I will pour out
*of* my Spirit,” is after the lxx. vs. the original which reads: “I will
pour out my spirit.” (3) The phrases: “saith God” and “they shall
prophesy” ([Acts 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#018)<span id="vi.vi-p21.4"></span>) are
added to both Heb. and lxx. (4) “Vapor” is from lxx. for Heb. “columns.”
(5) If we read <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p21.5"></span>καὶ
ἐπιφάνη</span> at the end of [Acts
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#020)<span id="vi.vi-p21.6"></span> (as
Mey., W. and H.) it is from the lxx. an inaccurate trans. of Hebrew for
“fearful,” occasioned by misunderstanding on the part of the Seventy of
the derivation of the Heb. word. The second pp. follows the lxx. exactly
and in several deviations from the original.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[i:165](1110011.htm#fr_164) <span
id="vi.vi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p23"></span> Alluding to the Psalm above cited, “Until I
make Thine enemies Thy footstool.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[i:166](1110011.htm#fr_165) <span
id="vi.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p24"></span> In the modern text the connection is
supplied, and the thought expanded. “And yet neither is it any ordinary
being that promises it: but One who is beyond comparison greater than
the Kingdom itself. Now when the promise is a Kingdom, and God the Giver
thereof, it is a great thing, the very receiving from such a Giver.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[i:167](1110011.htm#fr_166) <span
id="vi.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p25"></span> In the original the pronouns are <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.2"></span>κεῖνος</span> (God), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.3"></span>οὗτος</span> (the Devil; for
which however our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.4"></span>mss.</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.5"></span>οὐ τὰ</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.6"></span>αὐτὰ</span>): then inversely, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.8"></span>κεῖνος</span> (the Devil),
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p25.9"></span>οὗτος</span> (God).
The modern text reduces the antithesis to regularity by transposing the
first and second clause, with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.10"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.11"></span>κεῖνος</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.12"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p25.13"></span>οὗτος</span>, in each member. Mr. Field,
however, *Hom. in Matt.* 709 B. not. has remarked, that St. Chrys. is
negligent in his use of these pronouns, and this passage may be added to
those cited.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[i:168](1110011.htm#fr_167) <span
id="vi.vi-p25.15"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p26"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.2"></span>Ιδωμεν τί χρησιμώτερον, τί δαὶ</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.3"></span>δὲ</span>, A. N.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.4"></span>ὠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.5"></span>φελιμώτερον</span>. (Here N.
adds: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.6"></span>Μὴ τοῦτο δῶμεν
τί χρησιμώτερον· τὶ δὲ ὠφελιμώτερον</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.7"></span>̀)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.8"></span>Μὴ τοῦτο φησὶν εἴπῃς· ἀλλ᾽ ἐννόησον ὅτι διάβολός
ἐστιν· μάλιστα μὲν ἂν ἐκεῖνο δειχθῇ· δεῖ καὶ πόνους ὑποστῆναι καὶ πάλιν,
κ. τ. λ</span>. The addition in N. is perhaps the result of
unintentional repetition. If meant for emendation, it supposes an
antithesis of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.9"></span>χρησ</span>. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.10"></span>ὠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.11"></span>φελιμώτερον</span>: “let us grant which is more
serviceable (to others): but (the question is) which is more profitable
(to one’s self).” This, however, is not what the context requires.
Rather it seems that something is omitted after <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.12"></span>εἴπῃς</span>: e.g. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.13"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.14"></span>λλ᾽ ἴδωμεν τί
εὐκολώτερον</span>, “But let us see which is more easy.” In the
following sentence, it is not clear whether <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p26.15"></span>μάλιστα μὲν</span> belongs to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p26.16"></span>δεῖ καὶ π. ὑ</span>. “of
course, if the former appear to be the case, it is necessary,” etc. or,
to the preceding clause, as in the translation: “above all (consider
that it is the devil who gives the bidding), if that appear to be the
case (i.e. that it is the easier of the two): it is needful,” etc.—Edd.
“But not only this, but bethink you that he indeed is the devil: for
above all if that be shown, again the prize of victory shall be
greater.”

<span id="fn_168"></span>[i:169](1110011.htm#fr_168) <span
id="vi.vi-p26.18"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p27.1"></span>διὰ τοῦτο</span>, i. e. by enjoining <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p27.2"></span>τὰ συμφέροντα</span>,
although <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p27.3"></span>φορτικὰ</span>, are fathers and masters shown to
be truly such, whereas kidnappers who steal away children, seduce them
by promising pleasure, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p27.4"></span>λυμεῶνες</span>, masters who ruin their
servants, let them have their own way.—Morel. Ben. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p27.5"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p27.6"></span>Εκεῖνοι δὲ ἀνδραπ. καὶ λυμ.
καὶ πάντα τὰ ἐνάντια</span>: “but the others are kidnappers and
destroyers, and all that is contrary (to fathers and masters).” Savil.
as above.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[i:170](1110011.htm#fr_169) <span
id="vi.vi-p27.8"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p28.1"></span>Πλὴν ὅτι καὶ ἡδονὴν ἔχει, δῆλον ἐκεῖθεν</span>.
We have supplied the interpretation in the translation. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p28.2"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p28.3"></span>Εκεῖθεν</span>, i.e. from
that saying, “Come unto Me,” etc. D. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p28.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p28.5"></span>ντεῦθεν</span>: i.e. “is manifest from the
following consideration.”

<span id="fn_170"></span>[i:171](1110011.htm#fr_170) <span
id="vi.vi-p28.8"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p29"></span> Here is another instance of the negligent
use of the pronouns <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p29.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p29.2"></span>κεῖνος</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p29.3"></span>οὗτος</span> noticed above (note 1). In the
modern text this is altered, besides other changes intended as
improvements upon the ornate description following. We have retained the
original text throughout.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[i:172](1110011.htm#fr_171) <span
id="vi.vi-p29.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.1"></span>Οὐ τῇ θέ& 139· δὲ μόνον οὐδὲ τῇ ὄψει
τέρπει</span> (Sav. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.2"></span>τέρποιτο ἄν</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.3"></span>τότε ὁ τοιοῦτος, ἀλλὰ καὶ</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.5"></span>ν</span> B. C ) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.6"></span>τῷ σώματι αὐτῷ τοῦ πρὸς τὸν
λειμῶνα ὁρῶντος</span>, (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.7"></span>τοῦ π. τ. λ. ὁ</span>. om. Sav. with full stop
at <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.8"></span>αὐτῷ.,
ἐκεινον</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.9"></span>γὰρ</span> add. B. Sav.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.10"></span>μᾶλλον ἀνίησι κ. τ.
λ</span>. Savile’s reading, adopted by Ben. rests on the sole authority
of the New College <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.11"></span>ms.</span> and is manifestly a correction, as
the Paris Editor remarks. (This <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.12"></span>ms.</span> has the clause <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.13"></span>τοῦ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.14"></span>….</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.15"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vi-p30.16"></span>ρῶντος</span>, but dotted
for correction or omission, and the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p30.17"></span>γὰρ</span> is added by a later hand.) But the
passage seems to be incurably corrupt and only so much of the sense can
be guessed at, that the delight is said not only to affect the eye, but
to be felt through the whole frame of the beholder.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[i:173](1110011.htm#fr_172) <span
id="vi.vi-p30.18"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p31"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.2"></span>λλὰ ψυχὰς ἀνίησιν θερμαινομένη καὶ
ζέουσα</span>. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.3"></span>θέουσα</span> A.) The latter words, “heated and
glowing,” as manifestly unsuitable to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p31.4"></span>αὔρα</span> are omitted in the modern text. They
seem to be a fragment of a sentence, describing the heat of fever, or of
passion.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[i:174](1110011.htm#fr_173) <span
id="vi.vi-p31.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vi-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.1"></span>πλὴν εἰ μὴ εἰς ἕξιν ἑαυτόν τινα τοιαύτην
καταστήσειε</span>. Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.2"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.3"></span>παξ εἰς ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.4"></span>xin.…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.5"></span>καταστήσας</span>: “having settled himself down
into some such habit.” But the old reading is preferable. “You may
pacify him again and again, but the fit is subdued for the time, not the
temper changed. There will be a fresh outbreak by and bye, unless indeed
by self-discipline (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.6"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vi-p32.7"></span>αυτὸν κατ</span>.) he bring himself into a
habit,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VII on Acts ii. 37.](1110012)
