[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110053)  [Next](1110055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xlix"></span> <span id="vi.xlix-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xlix-p1.1"></span>Homily XLIX. <span
id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) </span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p3"></span>[Acts XXIII.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)<span id="vi.xlix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p4"></span>“But when Paul perceived that the one part
were Sadducees, and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council,
Men and brethren, I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee: of the hope
and resurrection of the dead I am called in question. And when he had so
said, there arose a dissension between the Pharisees and the Sadducees:
and the multitude was divided. For the Sadducees say that there is no
resurrection, neither angel, nor spirit: but the Pharisees confess
both.”

<span id="vi.xlix-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xlix-p5.1"></span>Again</span> he discourses simply as man, and
he does not on all occasions alike enjoy the benefit of supernatural
aid. “I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee:” <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) both in this, and in what comes
after it, he wished to divide the multitude, which had an evil unanimity
against him. And he does not speak a falsehood here either: for he was a
Pharisee by descent from his ancestors. “Of the hope and resurrection of
the dead I am called in question.” For since they would not say for what
reason they arraigned him, he is compelled therefore to declare it
himself. “But the Pharisees,” it says, “confess both.” And yet there are
three things: how then does he say both? “Spirit and Angel” is put as
one. <span id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098) When he is on their
side, then they plead for him. “And there arose a great cry: and the
scribes that were of the Pharisees’ part arose, and strove, saying, We
find no evil in this man: but” (what) “if a spirit has spoken to him, or
an angel?” <span id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099)  <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) ([Acts
23.9](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#009)<span id="vi.xlix-p9.1"></span>.)
Why did they not plead for him before this? Do you observe, how, when
the passions give way, the truth is discovered? Where is the crime, say
they, if an angel has spoken to him, or a spirit? Paul gives them no
handle against him. “And when there arose a great dissension, the
tribune, fearing lest Paul should have been pulled in pieces of them,
commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among
them, and to bring him into the castle.” ([Acts
23.10](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#010)<span id="vi.xlix-p9.2"></span>.)
The tribune is afraid of his being pulled in pieces, now that he has
said that he is a Roman: and the matter was not without danger. Do you
observe that Paul had a right to profess himself a Roman? Else, neither
would (the tribune) have been afraid now. So it remains that the
soldiers must bear him off by force. But when the wretches saw all to be
without avail, they take the whole matter into their own hands, as they
would fain have done before, but were prevented: and their wickedness
stops nowhere, though it received so many checks: and yet how many
things were providentially ordered, on purpose that they might settle
down from their rage, and learn those things through which they might
possibly recover themselves! But none the less do they set upon him.
Sufficient for proof of his innocence was even this, that the man was
saved when at the point to be pulled in pieces, and that with these so
great dangers about him, he escaped them all. “And the night following
the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good cheer, Paul: for as thou
hast testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at
Rome. And when it was day, certain of the Jews banded together, and
bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor
drink till they had killed Paul. And they were more than forty which had
made this conspiracy.” ([Acts
23.11-13](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xlix-p9.3"></span>.) “They bound themselves under a curse,” it
says. See how vehement and revengeful they are in their malice! What
means, “bound under a curse?” <span id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101)
Why then those men are accused forever, seeing they did not kill Paul.
And forty together. For such is the nature of that nation: when there
needs concerting together for a good object, not even two concur with
each other: but when it is for an evil object, the entire people does
it. And they admit the rulers also as accomplices. “And they came to the
chief priests and elders, and said, We have bound ourselves under a
great curse that we will eat nothing until we have slain Paul. Now
therefore ye with the council signify to the tribune that he bring him
down unto you to-morrow, as though ye would enquire something more
perfectly concerning him: and we, or ever he come near, are ready to
kill him. And when Paul’s sister’s son heard of their lying in wait, he
went and entered into the castle, and told Paul. Then Paul called one of
the centurions unto him, and said, Bring this young man unto the
tribune: For he hath a certain thing to tell him. So he took him, and
brought him to the tribune, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto
him, and prayed me to bring this young man unto thee, who hath something
to say unto thee. Then the tribune took him by the hand, and went with
him aside privately, and asked him, What is that thou hast to tell me?
And he said, the Jews have agreed to desire thee that thou wouldest
bring down Paul to-morrow into the council, as though they would enquire
somewhat of him more perfectly. But do not thou yield unto them for
there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have bound
themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they
have killed him: and now are they ready, looking for a promise from
thee. So the tribune then let the young man depart, and charged him, See
thou tell no man that thou hast showed these things to me.” ([Acts
23.14-22](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xlix-p10.1"></span>). Again he is saved by man’s forethought. And
observe: Paul lets no man learn this, not even the centurion, that the
matter might not become known. And the centurion having come, reported
to the tribune. And it is well done of the tribune also, that he bids
him keep it secret, that it might not become known: moreover he gives
his orders to the centurions only, at the time when the thing was to be
done: and so Paul is sent into Cæsarea, that there too he might
discourse in a greater theatre and before a more splendid audience: that
so the Jews may not be able to say, “If we had seen Paul, we would have
believed—if we had heard him teaching.” Therefore this excuse too is cut
off from them. “And the Lord,” it said, “stood by him, and said, Be of
good cheer: for as thou hast testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must thou
bear witness also at Rome.” (Yet) even after He has appeared to him, He
again suffers him to be saved by man’s means. And one may well be
astonished at Paul; <span id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) he was
not taken aback, neither said, “Why, what is this? Have I then been
deceived by Christ?” but he believed: yet, because he believed, he did
not therefore sleep: no; what was in his own power by means of human
wisdom, he did not abandon. “Bound themselves by a curse:” it was a kind
of necessity that those men fastened on themselves by the curse. “That
they would neither eat nor drink.” Behold fasting the mother of murder!
Just as Herod imposed on himself that necessity by his oath, so also do
these. For such are the devil’s (ways): under the pretext forsooth of
piety he sets his traps. “And they came to the chief priests,” etc. And
yet they ought to have come (to the tribune), ought to have laid a
charge, and assembled a court of justice: for these are not the doings
for priests, but for captains of banditti, these are not the doings for
rulers, but for ruffians. They endeavor also to corrupt the ruler: but
it was providentially ordered, to the intent that he also should learn
of their plot. For not (only) by their having nothing to say, but also
by their secret attempt, they convicted themselves that they were
naught. It is likely too that after (Paul was gone) the chief priests
came to (the tribune) making their request, and were put to shame.
For <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) of course he would not
have liked either to deny or to grant their request. How came he to
believe (the young man’s tale)? He did so in consequence of what had
already taken place; because it was likely they would do this also. And
observe their wickedness: they as good as laid a necessity on the chief
priests also: for if they undertook so great a thing themselves, and
engaged themselves in the whole risk, much more ought those to do thus
much. Do you observe, how Paul is held innocent by those that are
without, as was also Christ by Pilate? See their malice brought to
naught: they delivered him up, to kill and condemn him: but the result
is just the contrary; he is both saved, and held innocent. For had it
not been so, <span id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) he would have
been pulled in pieces: had it not been so, he would have perished, he
would have been condemned. And not only does (the tribune) rescue him
from the rush (made upon him), but also from much other <span
id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) (violence): see how he becomes a
minister to him, insomuch that without risk he is carried off safe with
so large a force. “And he called unto him two centurions, saying, Make
ready two hundred soldiers to go to Cæsarea, and horsemen threescore and
ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the night; and
provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe unto
Felix the governor. And he wrote a letter after this manner: Claudius
Lysias unto the most excellent governor Felix sendeth greeting. This man
was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them: then came I
with an army, and rescued him, having understood that he was a Roman.
And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I
brought him forth into their council: whom I perceived to be accused of
questions of their law, but to have nothing laid to his charge worthy of
death or of bonds. And when it was told me how that the Jews laid wait
for the man, I sent straightway to thee, and gave commandment to his
accusers also to say before thee what they had against him. Fare ye
well.” ([Acts 23.23-30](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xlix-p14.3"></span>). See how the letter speaks for him as a
defence—for it says, “I found nothing worthy of death,” but as
accusation against them (rather) than against him. “About to have been
killed of them:” so set upon his death were they. First, “I came with
the army, and rescued him:” then also “I brought him down unto them:”
and not even so did they find anything to lay to his charge: and when
they ought to have been stricken with fear and shame for the former act,
they again attempt to kill him, insomuch that again his cause became all
the more clear. “And his accusers,” he says, “I have sent unto thee:”
that at the tribunal where these things are more strictly examined, he
may be proved guiltless.

<span id="vi.xlix-p15"></span>(Recapitulation.) Let us look then to what
has been said above. “I,” he says, “am a Pharisee:” then, that he may
not seem to pay court, he adds, “Of the hope and resurrection of the
dead it is, that I am called in question.” ([Acts
23.6](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#006)<span id="vi.xlix-p15.1"></span>.)
From this charge and calumny he commends himself. “For the Sadducees
indeed,” etc. The Sadducees have no knowledge of anything incorporeal,
perhaps not even God; so gross (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p15.2"></span>παχεἵς</span>) are they: whence neither do
they choose to believe that there is a Resurrection. “And the scribes,”
etc. Look; the tribune also hears that the Pharisees have acquitted him
of the charges, and have given sentence (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xlix-p15.3"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p15.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p15.5"></span>ψηφίσατο</span>, “he gave sentence”) in his
favor, and with greater confidence carries him off by force. Moreover
all that was spoken (by Paul) was full of right-mindedness (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p15.6"></span>φιλοσοφίας</span>). “And
the night following the Lord stood by him,” etc. See what strong
consolation! First he praises him, “As thou hast testified to My cause
in Jerusalem;” then He does not leave him to be afraid for the uncertain
issue of his journey to Rome: for thither also, He saith, thou shalt not
depart alone (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p15.7"></span>μόνος</span>, Cat. and Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p15.8"></span>μόνον</span>), but thou
shalt also have all this boldness of speech. Hereby it was made
manifest, not (only) that he should be saved, but that (he should be so)
in order to great crowns in the great city. But why did He not appear to
him before he fell into the danger? Because it is evermore in the
afflictions that God comforts us; for He appears more wished-for, while
even in the dangers He exercises and trains us. Besides, he was then at
ease, when free from bonds; but now great perils were awaiting him. “We
have bound ourselves,” they say, “under a curse, that we will not eat
nor drink.” ([Acts 23.14](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xlix-p15.9"></span>.) What is all this zeal? “That he may bring
him down,” it says, “unto you, as though ye would enquire into his case
more perfectly.” ([Acts 23.15](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xlix-p15.10"></span>.) Has he not twice made a speech unto you?
has he not said that he is a Pharisee? What (would ye have) over and
above this? So reckless were they and afraid of nothing, not tribunals,
not laws: such their hardihood which shrunk from nothing. They both
declare their purpose, and announce the way of carrying it into effect.
“Paul’s sister’s son heard of it.” ([Acts
23.16](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#016)<span
id="vi.xlix-p15.11"></span>.) This was of God’s providence, their not
perceiving that it would be heard. What then did Paul? he was not
alarmed, but perceived that this was God’s doing: and casting all upon
Him, so he acquits himself (from further concern about it:) “having
called one of the centurions,” etc. ([Acts
23.17](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xlix-p15.12"></span>.) He told of the plot, he was believed; he
is saved. If he was acquitted of the charge, why did (the tribune) send
the accusers? That the enquiry might be more strict: that the man might
be the more entirely cleared.

<span id="vi.xlix-p16"></span>Such are God’s ways of ordering: the very
things by which we are hurt, by these same are we benefited. Thus it was
with Joseph: his mistress sought to ruin him: and she seemed indeed to
be contriving his ruin, but by her contriving she placed him in a state
of safety: for the house where that wild beast (of a woman) was kept was
a den in comparison with which the prison was gentle. (<span
id="vi.xlix-p16.1"></span>[Gen. xxxix.
1-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001)<span id="vi.xlix-p16.2"></span>.)
For while he was there, although he was looked up to and courted, he was
in constant fear, lest his mistress should set upon him, and worse than
any prison was the fear that lay upon him: but after the accusation he
was in security and peace, well rid of that beast, of her lewdness and
her machinations for his destruction: for it was better for him to keep
company with human creatures in miserable plight, than with a maddened
mistress. Here he comforted himself, that for chastity’s sake he had
fallen into it: there he had been in dread, lest he should receive a
death-blow to his soul: for nothing in the world is more annoying than a
woman in love can be to a young man who will not (meet her advances):
nothing more detestable (than a woman in such case), nothing more fell:
all the bonds in the world are light to this. So that the fact was not
that he got into prison, but that he got out of prison. She made his
master his foe, but she made God his friend: brought him into closer
relation to Him Who is indeed the true Master; she cast him out of his
stewardship in the family, but made him a familiar friend to that
Master. Again, his brethren sold him (<span
id="vi.xlix-p16.3"></span>[Gen. xxxvii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#018)<span id="vi.xlix-p16.4"></span>);
but they freed him from having enemies dwelling in the same house with
him, from envy and much ill will, and from daily machinations for his
ruin: they placed him far aloof from them that hated him. For what can
be worse than this, to be compelled to dwell in the same house with
brethren that envy one; to be an object of suspicion, to be a mark for
evil designs? So that while they and she were severally seeking to
compass their own ends, far other were the mighty consequences working
out by the Providence of God for that just man. When he was in honor,
then was he in danger; when he was in dishonor, then was he in safety.
The eunuchs did not remember him, and right well it was that they did
not, that the occasion of his deliverance might be more glorious: that
the whole might be ascribed, not to man’s favor, but to God’s Providence
(<span id="vi.xlix-p16.5"></span>[Gen. xl.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#023)<span id="vi.xlix-p16.6"></span>):
that at the right moment, Pharaoh, reduced to need, might bring him out;
that not as conferring but as receiving a benefit, the king might
release him from the prison. ([Gen.
41.40](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#040)<span
id="vi.xlix-p16.7"></span>.) It behooved to be no servile gift, but that
the king should be reduced to a necessity of doing this: it behooved
that it should be made manifest what wisdom was in him. Therefore it is
that the eunuch forgets him, that Egypt might not forget him, that the
king might not be ignorant of him. Had he been delivered at that time,
it is likely he would have desired to depart to his own country:
therefore he is kept back by numberless constraints, first by subjection
to a master, secondly by being in prison, thirdly by being over the
kingdom, to the end that all this might be brought about by the
Providence of God. Like a spirited steed that is eager to bound off to
his fellows, did God keep him back there, for causes full of glory. For
that he longed to see his father, and free him from his distress, is
evident from his calling him thither. ([Gen. xlv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#009)<span id="vi.xlix-p16.8"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xlix-p17"></span>Shall we look at other instances of evil
designing, how they turn out to our good, not only by having their
reward, but also by their working at the very time precisely what is for
our good? This (Joseph’s) uncle (Esau) had ill designs against his
father (Jacob), and drove him out of his native land: what then? ([Gen.
xxvii. 41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041)<span
id="vi.xlix-p17.1"></span>.) He too set him (thereby) aloof from the
danger; for he too got (thereby) to be in safety. He made him a wiser
and a better man (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p17.2"></span>φιλοσοφώτερον</span>); he was the means of his
having that dream (<span id="vi.xlix-p17.3"></span>[Gen. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span id="vi.xlix-p17.4"></span>.)
But, you will say, he was a slave in a foreign land? Yes, but he arrives
among his own kindred, and receives a bride, and appears worthy to his
father-in-law. ([Gen. 29.23](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xlix-p17.5"></span>.) But he too cheated him? Yes, but this also
turned out to his good, that he might be the father of many children.
But it was in his mind to design evil against him? True, but even this
was for his good, that he might thereupon return to his own country; for
if he had been in good circumstances, he would not have so longed for
home. But he defrauded him of his hire? Aye, but he got more by the
means. ([Gen. 31.7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007)<span
id="vi.xlix-p17.6"></span>.) Thus, in every point of these men’s
history, the more people designed their hurt, the more their affairs
flourished. If (Jacob) had not received the elder daughter, he would not
soon have been the father of so many children; he would have dragged out
a long period in childlessness, he would have mourned as his wife did.
For she indeed had reason to mourn, as not having become a mother ([Gen.
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#002)<span id="vi.xlix-p17.7"></span>.);
but he had his consolation: whence also he gives her a repulse. Again,
had not (Laban) defrauded him of his hire, he would not have longed to
see his own country; the higher points (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p17.8"></span>φιλοσοφία</span>) of the man’s character would
not have come to light, (his wives) would not have become more closely
attached to him. For see what they say: “With devouring hath he devoured
us and our money.” ([Gen. xxxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#015)<span id="vi.xlix-p17.9"></span>.)
So that this became the means of riveting their love to him. After this
he had in them not merely wives, but (devoted) slaves; he was beloved by
them: a thing that no possession can equal: for nothing, nothing
whatever, is more precious than to be thus loved by a wife and to love
her. “And a wife,” Scripture says, “that agrees with her husband.”
([Ecclesiasticus 25.1](../../../bib/apo/sir025.htm#001)<span
id="vi.xlix-p17.10"></span>) “A man and a wife that agree together.”
E.V.) One thing this, as the Wise Man puts it, of the things for which a
man is to be counted happy; for where this is, there all wealth, all
prosperity abounds: as also, where it is not, there all besides profits
nothing, but all goes wrong, all is mere unpleasantness and confusion.
Then let us seek this before all things. He that seeks money, seeks not
this. Let us seek those things which can remain fixed. Let us not seek a
wife from among the rich, lest the excess of wealth on her side produce
arrogance, lest that arrogance be the means of marring all. See you not
what God did? how He put the woman in subjection? ([Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span id="vi.xlix-p17.11"></span>.)
Why art thou ungrateful, why without perception? The very benefit God
has given thee by nature, do not thou mar the help it was meant to be.
So that it is not for her wealth that we ought to seek a wife: it is
that we may receive a partner of our life, for the appointed order of
the procreation of children. It was not that she should bring money,
that God gave the woman; it was that she might be an helpmate. But she
that brings money, becomes, instead of a wife, a setter up of her own
will (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p17.12"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p17.13"></span>πίβουλος</span>), a
mistress—it may be a wild beast instead of a wife—while she thinks she
has a right to give herself airs upon her wealth. Nothing more shameful
than a man who lays himself out to get riches in this way. If wealth
itself is full of temptations, what shall we say to wealth so gotten?
For you must not look to this, that one or another as a rare and unusual
case, and contrary to the reason of the thing, has succeeded: as neither
ought we in other matters to fix our regards upon the good which people
may enjoy, or their chance successes, out of the common course: but let
us look to the reason of the thing as it is in itself, and see whether
this thing be not fraught with endless annoyance. Not only you bring
yourself into a disreputable position; you also disgrace your children
by leaving them poor, if it chance that you depart this life before the
wife: and you give her incomparably more occasions for connecting
herself with a second bridegroom. Or do you not see that many women make
this the excuse for a second marriage—that they may not be despised;
that they want to have some man to take the management of their
property? Then let us not bring about so great evils for the sake of
money; but let us dismiss all (such aims), and seek a beautiful soul,
that we may also succeed in obtaining love. This is the exceeding
wealth, this the great treasure, this the endless good things: whereunto
may we all attain by the grace and loving kindness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory,
dominion, honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[i:1097](1110054.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="vi.xlix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p2"></span> This Homily is wanting in C. The mod. text
swarms with interpolations.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[i:1098](1110054.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="vi.xlix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p6.1"></span>καὶ ἐν τούτῳ</span>, viz. in saying “I am a
Pharisee,” <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p6.2"></span>καὶ ἐν τῷ
μετὰ ταῦτα</span>, i.e. “Of the hope of resurrection,” etc. Mod. text
“but is also permitted to contribute somewhat of himself, which also he
does and <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p6.3"></span>καὶ ἐν τ.,
καὶ ἐν τῷ μ. τ</span>. both on this occasion and on that which followed
(?) he pleads for himself, wishing,” etc.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[i:1099](1110054.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="vi.xlix-p6.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p7"></span> Mod. text “Either because spirit and angel
is one, or because the term <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p7.2"></span>μφότερα</span> is taken not only of two but of
three.” (This is taken from Ammonius in the Catena. The innovator adds):
“the writer therefore uses it <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p7.3"></span>καταχρηστικῶς</span>, and not according to
strict propriety.”

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[i:1100](1110054.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="vi.xlix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p8"></span> The last clause in the Vulgate text, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p8.1"></span>μὴ θεομαχῶμεν</span>, is
unknown to St. Chrys., being in fact quite a modern addition. Chrys.
interprets it as an aposiopesis—viz. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.2"></span>ποῖον ἔγκλημα</span>; St. Isidore of Pelusium
in the Cat. <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p8.3"></span>τὸ γὰρ εἰ
ἤ ἐστι· τοῦτ᾽ ἐστιν, ἢ πν. ἐλάλησεν αὐτῷ ἢ ἄγγελος</span>. Ammonius
ibid. “Either the sentence is left incomplete, viz. but whether a spirit
or an angel has spoken to him…is not certain: or, it is to be spoken as
on the part of the Pharisees, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.4"></span>Εἴδε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.5"></span>(?)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.6"></span>πν. κ. τ. λ</span>. that is, Behold, he is
manifestly asserting the resurrection, taught (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.7"></span>κατηχηθείς</span>) either by the Holy Ghost or
by an angel the doctrine of the resurrection.” Mod. text using the
latter: “Where is the crime, if an angel has spoken to him, if a spirit,
and taught (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p8.8"></span>κατηχηθείς</span>) by him, he thus teaches the
doctrine of the resurrection?” (and then, adopting the modern addition
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p8.9"></span>μὴ θεομ</span>.),
“then let us not stand off from him, lest warring with him, we be found
also fighting against God.”

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[i:1101](1110054.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="vi.xlix-p8.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p9"></span> The Pharisees were uniformly more
favorably inclined to Christianity than the rival sect of the Sadducees.
The latter, as disbelieving in the resurrection and the spirit-world,
would be especially prejudiced against a system which made these tenets
so central. The Pharisees, on the other hand, agreed on these points
with Christianity. It is evident that in his defence here before the
Sanhedrin Paul wishes to conciliate the Pharasaic party so far as can be
done by emphasizing his own agreement with them respecting the
resurrection. They, as believers in this doctrine, would have less
prejudice against Paul’s teaching concerning Christ’s resurrection. In
asserting his Pharasaic ancestry, Paul wishes to establish a point of
connection with them and thus gain a foothold for the defence of his
central truth of Christ’s resurrection, which justifies him in being His
disciple and servant.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[i:1102](1110054.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="vi.xlix-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p10"></span> To this question mod. text interpolates
for answer from Ammonius in the Catena, “that is, they declared
themselves to be out of the pale of the faith to Godward, if they should
not do that which was determined against Paul.”

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[i:1103](1110054.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="vi.xlix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p11.1"></span>Καὶ ἄξιον ἐκπλαγῆναι τὸν Παῦλον·</span> (A.
and Cat. omit this) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p11.2"></span>τί δὴ τοῦτο</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p11.3"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p11.4"></span>οὐκ ἐθορυβήθη, οὐδὲ εἶπε</span>. Here mod.
text rightly transposes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p11.5"></span>τί δὴ τοῦτο</span>.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[i:1104](1110054.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="vi.xlix-p11.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p12"></span> Mod. text “And with reason the tribune
does this (i.e. sends Paul away): for of course he did not wish either
to gratify (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p12.1"></span>χαρίσασθαι</span>) or to assent.” But the
meaning is: “If he had not been informed of their plot, he would have
been embarrassed by the request, not liking to refuse, nor yet to grant
it.”

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[i:1105](1110054.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="vi.xlix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p13.1"></span>εἰ γὰρ μὴ οὕτω</span>. Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xlix-p13.2"></span>οὗτος</span>: “but for
this man (the tribune.)”

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[i:1106](1110054.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="vi.xlix-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xlix-p14"></span> Mod. text omits <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p14.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xlix-p14.2"></span>λλὰ καὶ ἄλλης πολλῆς· ὅρα πῶς</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily L on Acts xxiii. 31-33.](1110055)
