[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110008)  [Next](1110010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iv"></span> <span id="vi.iv-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Homily IV.</span>

<span id="vi.iv-p2"></span>[Acts 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p3"></span>“And when the day of Pentecost was fully
come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there
came a sound from heaven.”

<span id="vi.iv-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.iv-p4.1"></span>Dost</span> thou perceive the type? What is this
Pentecost? The time when the sickle was to be put to the harvest, and
the ingathering was made. See now the reality, when the time was come to
put in the sickle of the word: for here, as the sickle, keen-edged, came
the Spirit down. For hear the words of Christ: “Lift up your eyes,” He
said, “and look on the fields, for they are white already to harvest.”
(<span id="vi.iv-p4.2"></span>[John iv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035)<span id="vi.iv-p4.3"></span>.) And
again, “The harvest truly is great, but the laborers are few.” ([Matt.
ix. 38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038)<span id="vi.iv-p4.4"></span>.)
But as the first-fruits of this harvest, He himself took \[our nature\],
and bore it up on high. Himself first put in the sickle. Therefore <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91) also He calls the Word the Seed. “When,”
it says, “the day of Pentecost was fully come” (<span
id="vi.iv-p5.1"></span>[Luke 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#005),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv-p5.2"></span>):
that is, when at the Pentecost, while about it, in short. <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) For it was essential that the present
events likewise should take place during the feast, that those who had
witnessed the crucifixion of Christ, might also behold these. “And
suddenly there came a sound from heaven.” ([Acts
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p6.14"></span>.)
Why did this not come to pass without sensible tokens? For this reason.
If even when the fact was such, men said, “They are full of new wine,”
what would they not have said, had it been otherwise? And it is not
merely, “there came a sound,” but, “from heaven.” And the suddenness
also startled them, and <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) brought all
together to the spot. “As of a rushing mighty wind:” this betokens the
exceeding vehemence of the Spirit. “And it filled all the house:”
insomuch that those present both believed, and (Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p7.4"></span>τούτους</span>) in this
manner were shown to be worthy. Nor is this all; but what is more awful
still, “And there appeared unto them,” it says, “cloven tongues like as
of fire.” ([Acts 2.3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span
id="vi.iv-p7.5"></span>.) Observe how it is always, “like as;” and
rightly: that you may have no gross sensible notions of the Spirit.
Also, “as it were of a blast:” therefore it was not a wind. “Like as of
fire.” For when the Spirit was to be made known to John, then it came
upon the head of Christ as in the form of a dove: but now, when a whole
multitude was to be converted, it is “like as of fire. And it sat upon
each of them.” This means, that it remained and rested upon them.” For
the sitting is significant of settledness and continuance.

<span id="vi.iv-p8"></span>Was it upon the twelve that it came? Not so;
but upon the hundred and twenty. For Peter would not have quoted to no
purpose the testimony of the prophet, saying, “And it shall come to pass
in the last days, saith the Lord God, I will pour out of My spirit upon
all flesh: and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and your
young men shall see visions, and your old men shall dream dreams.”
([Joel ii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="vi.iv-p8.1"></span>.) “And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.” ([Acts 2.4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)<span
id="vi.iv-p8.2"></span>.) For, that the effect may not be to frighten
only, therefore is it both “with the Holy Ghost, and with fire. And
began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.”
([Matt. iii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span
id="vi.iv-p8.3"></span>.) They receive no other sign, but this first;
for it was new to them, and there was no need of any other sign. “And it
sat upon each of them,” says the writer. Observe now, how there is no
longer any occasion for that person to grieve, who was not elected as
was Matthias, “And they were all filled,” he says; not merely received
the grace of the Spirit, but “were filled. And began to speak with other
tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.” It would not have been
said, *All,* the Apostles also being there present, unless the rest also
were partakers. For were it not so, having above made mention of the
Apostles distinctively and by name, he would not now have put them all
in one with the rest. For if, where it was only to be mentioned that
they were present, he makes mention of the Apostles apart, much more
would he have done so in the case here supposed. <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) Observe, how when one is *continuing in
prayer,* when one is in charity, then it is that the Spirit draws near.
It put them in mind also of another vision: for as fire did He appear
also in the bush. “As the Spirit gave them utterance, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p9.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p9.2"></span>ποφθέγγεσθαι</span> ([Exod.
iii. 2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p9.3"></span>.)
For the things spoken by them were <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p9.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p9.5"></span>ποφθέγματα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p9.6"></span>,</span> profound utterances. “And,” it says,
“there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men.” ([Acts
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005)<span id="vi.iv-p9.7"></span>.) The
fact of their dwelling there was a sign of piety: that being of so many
nations they should have left country, and home, and relations, and be
abiding there. For, it says, “There were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews,
devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Now when this was noised
abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded. ([Acts
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p9.8"></span>.)
Since the event had taken place in a house, of course they came together
from without. The multitude *was confounded:* was all in commotion. They
marvelled; “Because that every man heard them speak in his own language.
And they were amazed,” it says, “and marvelled, saying one to another,
Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans?” ([Acts
2.7-13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#007)<span id="vi.iv-p9.9"></span>.)
They immediately turned their eyes towards the Apostles. “And how” (it
follows) “hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?
Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and
in Judea, and Cappadocia, in Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia,
in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene:” mark how they run
from east to west: <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) “and strangers
of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak
in our tongues the wonderful works of God. And, they were all amazed,
and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this? Others
mocking said, These men are full of new wine.” O the excessive folly! O
the excessive malignity! Why it was not even the season for that; for it
was Pentecost. For this was what made it worse: that when those were
confessing—men that were Jews, that were Romans, that were proselytes,
yea perhaps that had crucified Him—yet these, after so great signs, say,
“They are full of new wine!”

<span id="vi.iv-p11"></span>But let us look over what has been said from
the beginning. (Recapitulation.) “And when the day of Pentecost,” etc.
“It filled,” he says, “the house.” That wind <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p11.1"></span>πνοὴ</span> was a very pool of water. This
betokened the copiousness, as the fire did the vehemence. This nowhere
happened in the case of the Prophets: for to uninebriated souls such
accesses are not attended with much disturbance; but “when they have
well drunken,” then indeed it is as here, but with the Prophets it is
otherwise. <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) (<span
id="vi.iv-p12.7"></span>[Ez. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv-p12.8"></span>.) The
roll of a book <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) is given him, and
Ezekiel ate what he was about to utter. “And it became in his mouth,” it
is said, “as honey for sweetness.” (And <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) again the hand of God touches the tongue
of another Prophet; but here it is the Holy Ghost Himself: (<span
id="vi.iv-p14.5"></span>[Jer. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009)<span id="vi.iv-p14.6"></span>) so
equal is He in honor with the Father and the Son.) And again, on the
other hand, Ezekiel calls it “Lamentations, and mourning, and woe.”
(<span id="vi.iv-p14.7"></span>[Ez. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p14.8"></span>.) To
them it might well be in the form of a book; for they still needed
similitudes. Those had to deal with only one nation, and with their own
people; but these with the whole world, and with men whom they never
knew. Also Elisha receives the grace through the medium of a mantle ([2
Kings xiii](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv-p14.9"></span>.); another by oil, as David (<span
id="vi.iv-p14.10"></span>[1 Sam. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013)<span id="vi.iv-p14.11"></span>);
and Moses by fire, as we read of him at the bush. ([Exod. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span id="vi.iv-p14.12"></span>.) But
in the present case it is not so; for the fire itself sat upon them.
(But wherefore did the fire not appear so as to fill the house? Because
they would have been terrified.) But the story shows, that it is the
same here as there. <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) For you are
not to stop at this, that “there appeared unto them cloven tongues,” but
note that they were “of fire.” Such a fire as this is able to kindle
infinite fuel. Also, it is well said, *Cloven,* for they were from one
root; that you may learn, that it was an operation sent from the
Comforter. <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100)

<span id="vi.iv-p17"></span>But observe how those men also were first
shown to be worthy, and then received the Spirit as worthy. Thus, for
instance, David: <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) what he did
among the sheepfolds, the same he did after his victory and trophy; that
it might be shown how simple and absolute was his faith. Again, see
Moses despising royalty, and forsaking all, and after forty years taking
the lead of the people ([Exod. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011)<span id="vi.iv-p18.7"></span>); and
Samuel occupied there in the temple ([1 Sam. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv-p18.8"></span>);
Elisha leaving all (<span id="vi.iv-p18.9"></span>[1 Kings xix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#021)<span id="vi.iv-p18.10"></span>);
Ezekiel again, made manifest by what happened thereafter. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) In this manner, you see, did these
also leave all that they had. They learnt also what human infirmity is,
by what they suffered; they learnt that it was not in vain they had done
these good works. ([1 Sam. 9:0](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#000), [1
Sam. 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#006)<span
id="vi.iv-p19.4"></span>[1 Sam.
ix.](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#000)<span id="vi.iv-p19.5"></span> and
xi. 6.) Even Saul, having first obtained witness that he was good,
thereafter received the Spirit. But in the same manner as here did none
of them receive. Thus Moses was the greatest of the Prophets, yet he,
when others were to receive the Spirit, himself suffered
diminution. <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) But here it is not
so; but just as fire kindles as many flames as it will, so here the
largeness of the Spirit was shown, in that each one received a fountain
of the Spirit; as indeed He Himself had foretold, that those who believe
in Him, should have “a well of water springing up into everlasting
life.” (<span id="vi.iv-p20.5"></span>[John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv-p20.6"></span>.) And
good reason that it should be so. For they did not go forth to argue
with Pharaoh, but to wrestle with the devil. But the wonder is this,
that when sent they made no objections; they said not, they were “weak
in voice, and of a slow tongue.” ([Exod. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p20.7"></span>.) For
Moses had taught them better. They said not, they were too young. (<span
id="vi.iv-p20.8"></span>[Jer. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006)<span id="vi.iv-p20.9"></span>.)
Jeremiah had made them wise. And yet they had heard of many fearful
things, and much greater than were theirs of old time; but they feared
to object.—And because they were angels of light, and ministers of
things above \[“Suddenly there came from heaven,” etc.\] To them of old,
no one “from heaven” appears, while they as yet follow after a vocation
on earth; but now that Man has gone up on high, the Spirit also descends
mightily from on high. “As it were a rushing mighty wind;” making it
manifest by this, that nothing shall be able to withstand them, but they
shall blow away all adversaries like a heap of dust. “And it filled all
the house.” The house also was a symbol of the world. “And it sat upon
each of them,” \[etc.\] and “the multitude came together, and were
confounded.” Observe their piety; they pronounce no hasty judgment, but
are perplexed: whereas those reckless ones pronounce at once, saying,
“These men are full of new wine.” Now it was in order that they might
have it in their power, <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) in
compliance with the Law, to appear thrice in the year in the Temple,
that they dwelt there, these “devout men from all nations.” Observe
here, the writer has no intention of flattering them. For he does not
say that they pronounced any opinion: but what? “Now when this was
noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded.” And
well they might be; for they supposed the matter was now coming to an
issue against them, on account of the outrage committed against Christ.
Conscience also agitated their souls, the very blood being yet upon
their hands, and every thing alarmed them. “Behold, are not all these
which speak Galileans?” For indeed this was confessed. \[“And how hear
we”\] so much did the sound alarm them. \[“Every man in our own tongue,”
etc.\] for it found the greater part of the world assembled there.
\[“Parthians and Medes,” etc.\] This nerved the Apostles: for, what it
was to speak in the Parthian tongue, they knew not but now learnt from
what those said. Here is mention made of nations that were hostile to
them, Cretans, Arabians, Egyptians, Persians: and that they would
conquer them all was here made manifest. But as to their being in those
countries, they were there in captivity, many of them: or else, the
doctrines of the Law had become disseminated \[among\] the Gentiles in
those countries. <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105) So then the
testimony comes from all quarters: from citizens, from foreigners, from
proselytes. “We do hear them speak in our tongues the wonderful works of
God.” For it was not only that they spoke (in their tongues), but the
things they spoke were wonderful. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) Well then might they be in doubt: for
never had the like occurred. Observe the ingenuousness of these men.
They were amazed and were in doubt, saying, “What meaneth this?” But
“others mocking said, ‘These men are full of new wine’” (<span
id="vi.iv-p23.9"></span>[John viii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048)<span id="vi.iv-p23.10"></span>),
and therefore mocked. O the effrontery! And what wonder is it? Since
even of the Lord Himself, when casting out devils, they said that He had
a devil! For so it is; wherever impudent assurance exists, it has but
one object in view, to speak at all hazards, it cares not what; not that
the man should say something real and relevant to the matter of
discourse, but that he should speak no matter what. \[“They are full of
new wine.”\] Quite a thing of course (is not it?), <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) that men in the midst of such dangers,
and dreading the worst, and in such despondency, have the courage to
utter such things! And observe: since this was unlikely; because they
would not have been drinking much \[at that early hour\], they ascribe
the whole matter to the quality (of the wine), and say, “They are full”
of it. “But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and
said unto them.” In a former place <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) you saw his provident forethought,
here you see his manly courage. For if they were astonished and amazed,
was it not as wonderful that he should be able in the midst of such a
multitude to find language, he, an unlettered and ignorant man? If a man
is troubled when he speaks among friends, much more might he be troubled
among enemies and bloodthirsty men. That they are not drunken, he shows
immediately by his very voice, that they are not beside themselves, as
the soothsayers: and this too, that they were not constrained by some
compulsory force. What is meant by, “with the eleven?” They expressed
themselves through one common voice, and he was the mouth of all. The
eleven stood by as witnesses to what he said. “He lifted up his voice,”
it is said. That is, he spoke with great confidence, that they might
perceive the grace of the Spirit. He who had not endured the questioning
of a poor girl, now in the midst of the people, all breathing murder,
discourses with such confidence, that this very thing becomes an
unquestionable proof of the Resurrection: in the midst of men who could
deride and make a joke of such things as these! What effrontery, think
you, must go to that! what impiety, what shamelessness! <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) For wherever the Holy Spirit is
present, He makes men of gold out of men of clay. Look, I pray you, at
Peter now: examine well that timid one, and devoid of understanding; as
Christ said, “Are ye also yet without understanding?” ([Matt. xv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#016)<span id="vi.iv-p26.1"></span>) the
man, who after that marvellous confession was called “Satan.” ([Matt.
16.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="vi.iv-p26.2"></span>.)
Consider also the unanimity of the Apostles. They themselves ceded to
him the office of speaking; for it was not necessary that all should
speak. “And he lifted up his voice,” and spoke out to them with great
boldness. Such a thing it is to be a spiritual man! Only let us also
bring ourselves into a state meet for the grace from above, and all
becomes easy. For as a man of fire falling into the midst of straw would
take no harm, but do it to others: not he could take any harm, but they,
in assailing him, destroy themselves. For the case here was just as if
one carrying hay should attack one bearing fire: even so did the
Apostles encounter these their adversaries with great boldness.

<span id="vi.iv-p27"></span>For what did it harm them, though they were
so great a multitude? Did they not spend all their rage? did they not
turn the distress upon themselves? Of all mankind were ever any so
possessed with both rage and terror, as those became possessed? Were
they not in an agony, and were dismayed, and trembled? For hear what
they say, “Do ye wish to bring this man’s blood upon us?” ([Acts v.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span id="vi.iv-p27.1"></span>.) Did
they <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) (the Apostles) not fight
against poverty and hunger: against ignominy and infamy (for they were
accounted deceivers): did they not fight <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) against ridicule and wrath and
mockery?—for in their case the contraries met: some laughed at them,
others punished them;—were they not made a mark for the wrathful
passions, and for the merriment, <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)
of whole cities? exposed to factions and conspiracies: to fire, and
sword, and wild beasts? Did not war beset them from every quarter, in
ten thousand forms? And were they any more affected in their minds by
all these things, than they would have been at seeing them in a dream or
in a picture? <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) With bare body
they took the field against all the armed, though against them all men
had arbitrary power \[against them, were\]: terrors of rulers, force of
arms, in cities and strong walls: <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) without experience, without skill of
the tongue, and in the condition of quite ordinary men, matched against
juggling conjurors, against impostors, against the whole throng of
sophists, of rhetoricians, of philosophers grown mouldy in the Academy
and the walks of the Peripatetics, against all these they fought the
battle out. And the man whose occupation had been about lakes, so
mastered them, as if it cost him not so much ado as even a contest with
dumb fishes: for just as if the opponents he had to outwit were indeed
more mute than fishes, so easily did he get the better of them! And
Plato, that talked a deal of nonsense in his day, is silent now, while
this man utters his voice everywhere; not among his own countrymen
alone, but also among Parthians, and Medes, and Elamites, and in India,
and in every part of the earth, and to the extremities of the world.
Where now is Greece, with her big pretentions? Where the name of Athens?
Where the ravings of the philosophers? He of Galilee, he of Bethsaida,
he, the uncouth rustic, has overcome them all. Are you not
ashamed—confess it—at the very name of the country of him who has
defeated you? But if you hear his own name too, and learn that he was
called Cephas, much more will you hide your faces. This, this has undone
you quite; because you esteem this a reproach, and account glibness of
tongue a praise, and want of glibness a disgrace. You have not followed
the road you ought to have chosen, but leaving the royal road, so easy,
so smooth, you have trodden one rough, and steep, and laborious. And
therefore you have not attained unto the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="vi.iv-p33"></span>Why then, it is asked, did not Christ
exercise His influence upon Plato, and upon Pythagoras? Because the mind
of Peter was much more philosophical <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) than their minds. They were in truth
children shifted about on all sides by vain glory; but this man was a
philosopher, one apt to receive grace. If you laugh at these words, it
is no wonder; for those aforetime laughed, and said, the men were full
of new wine. But afterwards, when they suffered those bitter calamities,
exceeding all others in misery; when they saw their city falling in
ruins, and the fire blazing, and the walls hurled to the ground, and
those manifold frantic horrors, which no one can find words to express,
they did not laugh then. And you will laugh then, if you have the mind
to laugh, when the time of hell is close at hand, when the fire is
kindled for your souls. But why do I speak of the future? Shall I show
you what Peter is, and what Plato, the philosopher? Let us for the
present examine their respective habits, let us see what were the
pursuits of each. The one wasted his time about a set of idle and
useless dogmas, and philosophical, as he says, <span
id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) that we may learn that the soul of our
philosopher becomes a fly. <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) Most
truly said, a fly! not indeed changed into one, but a fly must have
entered upon possession of the soul which dwelt in Plato; for what but a
fly is worthy of such ideas! The man was full of irony, and of jealous
feelings against every one else, as if he made it his ambition to
introduce nothing useful, either out of his own head or other people’s.
Thus he adopted the metempsychosis from another, and from himself
produced the Republic, in which he enacted those laws full of gross
turpitude. Let the women, he says, be in common, and let the virgins go
naked, and let them wrestle before the eyes of their lovers, and let
there also be common fathers, and let the children begotten be common.
But with us, not nature makes common fathers, but the philosophy of
Peter does this; as for that other, it made away with all
paternity. <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) For Plato’s system
only tended to make the real father next to unknown, while the false one
was introduced. It plunged the soul into a kind of intoxication and
filthy wallowing. Let all, he says, have intercourse with the women
without fear. The reason why I do not examine the maxims of poets, is,
that I may not be charged with ripping up fables. And yet I am speaking
of fables much more ridiculous than even those. Where have the poets
devised aught so portentous as this? But (not to enter into the
discussion of his other maxims), what say you to these—when he equips
the females with arms, and helmets, and greaves, and says that the human
race has no occasion to differ from the canine! Since dogs, he says, the
female and the male, do just the same things in common, so let the women
do the same works as the men, and let all be turned upside down. For the
devil has always endeavored by their means <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) to show that our race is not more
honorable than that of brutes; and, in fact, some have gone to such a
pitch of (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p38.5"></span>κενοδοξίας</span>) absurdity, as to affirm that
the irrational creatures are endued with reason. And see in how many
various ways he has run riot in the minds of those men! For whereas
their leading men affirmed that our soul passes into flies, and dogs,
and brute creatures; those who came after them, being ashamed of this,
fell into another kind of turpitude, and invested the brute creatures
with all rational science, and made out that the creatures—which were
called into existence on our account—are in all respects more honorable
than we! They even attribute to them foreknowledge and piety. The crow,
they say, knows God, and the raven likewise, and they possess gifts of
prophecy, and foretell the future; there is justice among them, and
polity, and laws. Perhaps you do not credit the things I am telling you.
And well may you not, nurtured as you have been with sound doctrine;
since also, if a man were fed with this fare, he would never believe
that there exists a human being who finds pleasure in eating dung. The
dog <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) also among them is jealous,
according to Plato. But when we tell them that these things are fables,
and are full of absurdity, ‘You do not enter (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p39.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p39.3"></span>νοήσατε</span>) into the higher meaning,’ say
they. No, we do not enter into this your surpassing nonsense, and may we
never do so: for it requires (of course! <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) ) an excessively profound mind, to
inform me, what all this impiety and confusion would be at. Are you
talking, senseless men, in the language of crows, as the children are
wont (in play)? For you are in very deed children, even as they. But
Peter never thought of saying any of these things: he uttered a voice,
like a great light shining out in the dark, a voice which scattered the
mist and darkness of the whole world. Again, his deportment, how gentle
it was, how considerate (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p40.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p40.8"></span>πιεικὲς</span>); how far above all vainglory;
how he looked towards heaven without all self-elation, and this, even
when raising up the dead! But if it had come to be in the power of any
one of those senseless people (in mere fantasy of course) to do anything
like it, would he not straightway have looked for an altar and a temple
to be reared to him, and have wanted to be equal with the gods? since in
fact when no such sign is forthcoming, they are forever indulging such
fantastic conceits. And what, pray you, is that Minerva of theirs, and
Apollo, and Juno? They are different kinds of demons among them. And
there is a king of theirs, who thinks fit to die for the mere purpose of
being accounted equal with the gods. But not so the men here: no, just
the contrary. Hear how they speak on the occasion of the lame man’s
cure. “Ye men of Israel, why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by
our own power or holiness we had made him to walk? ([Acts
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv-p40.9"></span>.)
We also are men of like passions with you. ([Acts
14.14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)<span id="vi.iv-p40.10"></span>.)
But with those, great is the self-elation, great the bragging; all for
the sake of men’s honors, nothing for the pure love of truth and virtue.
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.11"></span>φιλοσοφίας
ἔνεκεν</span>.) For where an action is done for glory, all is worthless.
For though a man possess all, yet if he have not the mastery over this
(lust), he forfeits all claim to true philosophy, he is in bondage to
the more tyrannical and shameful passion. Contempt of glory; this it is
that is sufficient to teach all that is good, and to banish from the
soul every pernicious passion. I exhort you therefore to use the most
strenuous endeavors to pluck out this passion by the very roots; by no
other means can you have good esteem with God, and draw down upon you
the benevolent regard of that Eye which never sleepeth. Wherefore, let
us use all earnestness to obtain the enjoyment of that heavenly
influence, and thus both escape the trial of present evils, and attain
unto the future blessings, through the grace and loving-kindness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory,
power, honor, now and ever, and to all ages. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_91"></span>[i:92](1110009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="vi.iv-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p5"></span> i.e. in reference to the harvest. The modern
text has, “therefore He calls this the harvest:” missing the author’s
meaning, i.e. the allusion to the parable of the sower.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[i:93](1110009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="vi.iv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p6.1"></span>τουτέστι, πρὸς τῇ πεντηκοστῇ περὶ αὐτὴν ὡς
εἰπεῖν</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p6.2"></span>Πρὸς</span>, as in the phrase, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.3"></span>εἶναι</span> v. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.4"></span>γίνεσθαι πρός τινι</span>.
*Hom. in Matt.* 289. B. Field, not. and similarly <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.5"></span>περὶ</span> as in <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.6"></span>εἶναι περί τι</span>. Only
Œcumen. has preserved the true reading, in his comment <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.7"></span>πρὸς τῇ π</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.8"></span>.;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.9"></span>περὶ αὐτὴν ἤδη τὴν
ἑορτήν</span>. A. B. C. read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p6.10"></span>πρὸ τῆς πεντηκοστῆς περὶ αὐτὴν ὡς εἰπεῖν</span>:
so Cat. but with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p6.11"></span>περὶ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p6.12"></span>πρὸ</span>. The others, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p6.13"></span>οὐ πρὸ τῆς π., ἀλλὰ περὶ
αὐτὴν, ὡς εἰπεῖν</span>.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[i:94](1110009.htm#fr_93) <span
id="vi.iv-p6.15"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p7"></span> In the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.iv-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. the order of the following
sentences is confused. It is here restored by bringing the clause, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p7.2"></span>καὶ πάντας ἐκεῖ
συνήγαγεν</span> into what appears to be its proper connection, and
supplying the text to the comment <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p7.3"></span>πολλὴν τὴν ῥυμην λέγει τοῦ Πνεύματος</span>.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[i:95](1110009.htm#fr_94) <span
id="vi.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p9"></span> i.e. if the gift descended only upon the
Twelve, there would have been specific and distinctive mention of them
in this narrative, as there was in the former chapter; and with much
more reason here than there. The writer would not have said merely, They
were *all* together: it sat upon each one *of them:* they were *all*
filled: if he had meant that the Spirit came only upon the Apostles.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[i:96](1110009.htm#fr_95) <span
id="vi.iv-p9.10"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p10"></span> i.e. Mark how the enumeration, “Parthians,
and Medes,” etc., goes from east to west. This comment having been
transposed to the end of [Acts
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#012)<span id="vi.iv-p10.1"></span>,
was misunderstood: and E. has instead of it, “Do you see how it was,
that, as if they had wings, they sped their way through the whole
world?”

<span id="fn_96"></span>[i:97](1110009.htm#fr_96) <span
id="vi.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p12.1"></span>Τὰ γὰρ τοιαῦτα νηφουσῶν μὲν ψυχῶν προσπίπτοντα,
οὐ πολὺ\* ἔχει τὸν θόρυβον· ὅταν δὲ μεθύσωσιν τότε μὲν οὕτως, τοῖς
προφή\* ταις δὲ ἑτέρως</span>. In the modern text, which here also is
followed by Erasm. and Edd. it is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p12.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p12.3"></span>λλὰ τότε μὲν οὕτως ἐκείνοις, τοῖς προφήταις δὲ
ἑτέρως</span>. “But here indeed it is on this wise with them (the
disciples), but with the Prophets otherwise.”—The expression
“uninebriated” relates to the Old Testament: no such fire there, no
mighty rushing wind, no vehement commotion: this comes of “the new wine”
of the Spirit; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p12.4"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p12.5"></span>ταν μεθύσωσιν</span>, with allusion to [John ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010)<span id="vi.iv-p12.6"></span>.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[i:98](1110009.htm#fr_97) <span
id="vi.iv-p12.9"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p13"></span> So *de Sancta Pentecoste,* Hom. i. t. ii.
465. “Why does Ezekiel receive the gift of prophecy not by the likeness
of fire, but by a book, while the Apostles receive the gifts by fire?
For concerning him we read, that one gave him in his mouth a roll of a
book, etc.: but concerning the Apostles not so, but “there appeared unto
them tongues as of fire.” Why is it a book and writing there, here
tongue and fire? Because there the Prophet went his way to accuse sins,
and to bewail Jewish calamities: whereas these went forth to consume the
sins of the whole world: therefore he received a writing, to call to
mind the coming calamities: these fire, to burn up the sins of the
world, and utterly abolish them. For as fire falling among thorns will
with ease destroy them, even so the grace of the Spirit consumed the
sins of men.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[i:99](1110009.htm#fr_98) <span
id="vi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p14"></span> This, which we have marked as parenthesis,
seems to be out of its place: it interrupts what is said about Ezekiel,
and besides is not relevant to the matter immediately in hand, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p14.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p14.2"></span>Ενταῦθα δὲ αὐτὸ τὸ Πν. τὸ
῞Α. κ. τ. λ</span>. would come in more suitably after the mention of the
fire in the bush, in which God appeared to Moses. And so Œcumenius seems
to have taken it. “But it is in the likeness of fire, because the Spirit
also is God, and to prove by this also that the Spirit is of one Nature
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p14.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p14.4"></span>μοφυὲς</span>) with the
Father, Who appears in this manner to Moses at the bush.”

<span id="fn_99"></span>[i:100](1110009.htm#fr_99) <span
id="vi.iv-p14.13"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p15.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p15.2"></span>Οτι τοῦτο ἐκεῖνό ἐστι</span>: i.e. The Spirit
here given to the disciples, is the same that was given to those: but
more intense in operation; therefore it appears not merely under the
emblem of cloven tongues, but as tongues of *fire.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[i:101](1110009.htm#fr_100) <span
id="vi.iv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p16"></span> Chrys. seems to understand by <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p16.1"></span>διαμεριζόμεναι</span> ([Acts
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="vi.iv-p16.2"></span>),
divided, distributed among the members of the company, rather than of a
cloven form, a forked appearance, as indicating the shape of the
fire-like tongues. The former is the preferable interpretation. (So the
Rev. Vers. vs. A.V.). The latter view cannot explain the singular verb
which follows, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p16.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p16.4"></span>κάθισεν</span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[i:102](1110009.htm#fr_101) <span
id="vi.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.1"></span>ἵ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.2"></span>να δειχθῇ αὐτοῦ γυμνὴ ἡ πίστις</span>. Not, *ut
palam fieret fides ejus, fides ejus,* Ben. but,*quo ipsius nuda
simplexque fides declararetur,*” Erasm. The meaning seems to be: David
after the victory over Goliath, when the hearts of the people were
turned to him, and he might have taken possession of the kingdom to
which he was anointed, yet did not seek worldly greatness, but chose
rather to suffer persecutions, etc.: as developed in the Homilies *de
Davide et Saule,* t. iv. 752. Below, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.4"></span>νατρεφόμενον</span> (“Samuel *brought up* in the
temple,”) A. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p18.6"></span>ναστρεφόμενον</span>, which we have adopted.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[i:103](1110009.htm#fr_102) <span
id="vi.iv-p18.11"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p19"></span> So C and Cat. B. transposes Elisha and
Ezekiel, A. omits the clause. Chrys. elsewhere makes it a special praise
of Ezekiel, that he chose rather to accompany his people into captivity,
than to remain in his own land: Interp. in Isai. i. t. 1. 2. and *ad
Stagyr.* ii. t. ii. 228. In this manner then (he would say here), Ez.
“left all,” and having thus given proof of his worth, received the gift
of prophecy. The modern text reads: “Ezekiel again. And that the case
was thus, is manifest from what followed. For indeed these also forsook
all that they had. Therefore they then received the Spirit, when they
had given proof of their own virtue.”—By *these* (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p19.1"></span>οὗτοι</span>) we must
understand the Old Test. saints just mentioned. It should rather have
been <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p19.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p19.3"></span>κεῖνοι</span>, but Chrys. is
negligent in the use of these pronouns. See *Hom. in Matt.* Field.
Adnot. p. 709, B.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[i:104](1110009.htm#fr_103) <span
id="vi.iv-p19.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p20"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p20.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p20.2"></span>Η</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p20.3"></span>λαττοῦτο</span>. Alluding to [Numb. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017)<span id="vi.iv-p20.4"></span>. “I
will take of the Spirit that is upon thee, and will put it upon them.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[i:105](1110009.htm#fr_104) <span
id="vi.iv-p20.10"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p21.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p21.2"></span>Ινα δὲ ἐξῇ</span>. (Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.3"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.4"></span>να δείξῃ</span>.) Œcumen.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.5"></span>ἵ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.6"></span>να ἔχωσι</span>, “that they
may have it in their power, according to the law of their fathers, to
appear thrice in the year, etc.” The modern text has, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.8"></span>πεὶ ἐξῆν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.9"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p21.10"></span>διὰ τοῦτο</span>. “Because
it was permitted…therefore.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[i:106](1110009.htm#fr_105) <span
id="vi.iv-p21.11"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p22.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p22.2"></span>Εκεῖ δὲ ἐν αἰχμαλωσία ἦσαν πολλοὶ ἢ καὶ ἐκεῖ
διέσπαρτο τὰ ἔθνη τὰ τῶν δογμάτων</span>. A. B. C. N. As <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.3"></span>τὰ τῶν δ</span> taken as
apposition to <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.4"></span>τὰ
ἔθνη</span> yields no satisfactory sense, we adopt from the modern text
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.5"></span>πρὸς</span> before
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.6"></span>τὰ ἔθνη</span>, and
make, as there, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.7"></span>τὰ τῶν
δ</span>. the nom. to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p22.8"></span>διέσπαρτο</span>. And as in the next sentence
Chrys. distinguishes citizens, foreign (Jews), and *proselytes,* and
there is no mention of the last, unless it be in the clause <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.9"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.10"></span>καὶ ἐκεῖ διέσπαρτο</span>,
we infer that <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.11"></span>τὰ τῶν
δ</span>. means the Law of Moses. “Or also in those countries (Parthia,
Media, etc. in consequence of the dispersion of the Jews) the Law and
its religion had been disseminated among the Gentiles. So that from all
quarters, etc.” Thus it is explained how there came to be present at
Jerusalem “devout men” from Parthia and those other countries: there
were many Jews there in captivity, and also proselytes of the Law from
among the Gentiles.—In the modern text the passage is thus altered:
“But, inasmuch as the Jews were in captivity, it is likely that there
were then present with them many of the *Gentiles:* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.12"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.13"></span>ὅτι καὶ πρὸς τὰ ἔθνη τὰ τῶν
δογμάτῶν ἤδη κατέσπαρτο, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο πολλοὶ καὶ ἐξ αὐτῶν παρῆσαν
ἐκεῖ</span>. Or, because <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p22.14"></span>τὰ τῶν δ</span>. had become disseminated among
the Gentiles also, and therefore many also of them were there present,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p22.15"></span>κατὰ μνημὴν ὦν
ἤκουσαν</span>. Here <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p22.16"></span>τὰ τῶν δογμάτων</span> is taken to mean ‘the
doctrines of the Christian Faith:’ as Erasmus renders the passage, *Sive
quod ad gentes quoque fidei dogmata seminata fuerint, et hanc ob causam
complures ex iis aderant ut memorarent quæ audierant.* It can hardly be
supposed that St. Chrysostom meant to represent that some of these
Parthians, Medes, etc. were Gentiles who had heard in their own country
the tidings of the Faith of Christ, and therefore were present at
Jerusalem: yet this is what he is made to say in this text.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[i:107](1110009.htm#fr_106) <span
id="vi.iv-p22.17"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p23"></span> It is impossible to gain from this language
any clear view of the author’s opinion of the gift of tongues. The
uncertainty of the text here still further embarrasses the subject. That
the narrative means that they received at Pentecost a miraculous gift of
speaking foreign languages, is now almost unanimously maintained by
modern scholars. The difficult question as to the gift of tongues as
referred to in [1 Cor. xiv](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#000)<span
id="vi.iv-p23.1"></span>. should not lead to a weakening or explaining
away of such unmistakable expressions as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p23.2"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p23.3"></span>τέραις γλώσσαις</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p23.4"></span>(4),</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p23.5"></span>ἡμετέραις γλώσσαις</span> (11), and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p23.6"></span>τῇ ἰδί& 139· διαλέκτῳ</span>
(6, 8). Cf. <span id="vi.iv-p23.7"></span>[Mark xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#017)<span
id="vi.iv-p23.8"></span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[i:108](1110009.htm#fr_107) <span
id="vi.iv-p23.11"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.1"></span>Πάνυ γε</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.2"></span>(</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.3"></span>οὐ γάρ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.4"></span>;)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.5"></span>ἄνθρωποι κ. τ. λ</span>. See above, p. 47. note
u. and 66, note c. The modern text has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.6"></span>Πάνυ γε· ὅτι ἄνθρωποι κ. τ. λ</span>. Below,
“Since this was improbable, therefore, to impose upon the hearers, and
show that the men are drunken, they ascribe, etc.” But in the old text
it is, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p24.7"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p24.8"></span>τι οὐκ ἂν
ἐμεθύσθησαν</span>, meaning, “because \[so early in the day\] they would
not have been drinking *much,*” (this is the force of the tense <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p24.9"></span>μεθυσθῆναι</span> as in
[John ii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010)<span
id="vi.iv-p24.10"></span>) “therefore they ascribe all to the quality
(of the wine);” because as Œcumen. says, explaining this remark of
Chrys., the fumes of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.11"></span>γλεῦκος</span> mount more quickly to the brain,
etc. Erasmus, seemingly referring this to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p24.12"></span>μεμεστωμένοι</span>, translates *hebetudini
crapulæque rem totam ascribunt:* Ben. even more strangely, *‘agendi et
loquendi modo totum ascribunt.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[i:109](1110009.htm#fr_108) <span
id="vi.iv-p24.13"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p25.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p25.2"></span>Εκεῖ</span>: referring to ch. i. as expounded in
*Hom*. iii. So Œcumen, in loc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p25.3"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p25.4"></span>Ανω μὲν τὴν κηδεμονίαν ἐπιδείκνυται, ἐν οἷς τῷ
πλήθει ἐπιτρέπει τὴν ἐκλογὴν κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[i:110](1110009.htm#fr_109) <span
id="vi.iv-p25.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p26"></span> Here the modern text (Edd.) enlarges by the
additions “to account the wonder of the tongues the work of drunkenness?
But not a whit did this annoy the Apostles; nor did it make them less
bold at hearing such scoffing. By the presence of the Spirit they were
now transformed, and were become superior to all bodily considerations.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[i:111](1110009.htm#fr_110) <span
id="vi.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p28"></span> The change of subject (from the Jews to the
Apostles) is not expressed in the original. To remedy the confusion
occasioned by this negligence, the modern text (Edd.) transposes this
part: viz. after the sentence ending, “so great a multitude:” it has,
“For tell me: did they not fight—in a picture?” And then, “What? I pray
you; did they not exhaust, etc.” Clearly the other is the original
order. It is shown, first, how the Jews were utterly worsted, and how
awfully the whole posture of affairs was reversed for them; and then,
how victoriously the preachers of the new Faith maintained their ground
against the whole world.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[i:112](1110009.htm#fr_111) <span
id="vi.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p29"></span> Edd. “Were they not subjected to the
ridicule and mockery of those present? For in their case both these
befel together: for some derided them, others mocked.” Which is weak
enough; but the original text could not be retained, because on the
supposition that all this relates to the Jews *then present,* the
mention of “wrath” and “punishment” would be irrelevant.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[i:113](1110009.htm#fr_112) <span
id="vi.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p30.1"></span>Εὐθυμίαις</span>, i.e. “bursts of
self-complacent mirth” (e.g. at Athens), opposed to <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p30.2"></span>θυμοῖς</span> “explosions of
wrath.” Ben. without specifying the authority, notes a various reading,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p30.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p30.4"></span>θυμίαις</span>, which is
found in none of the Paris copies, and is quite unmeaning. Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p30.5"></span>μανίαις</span>.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[i:114](1110009.htm#fr_113) <span
id="vi.iv-p30.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p31"></span> Ben. interprets: “So unlooked for were
these trials, that the Apostles seemed to themselves to be dreaming or
beholding these things in a picture.” But when the true order of the
text is restored, no such far-fetched comment is needed.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[i:115](1110009.htm#fr_114) <span
id="vi.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p32"></span> The text is defective here, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p32.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p32.2"></span>ρχόντων φόβοι, ὅπλων ἰσχύς·
πόλεσι καὶ τείχεσιν ὀχυροῖς</span>. The text of the Edd. has: “And the
wonder is, that with bare body they took the field against armed men,
against rulers having power over them: without experience,” etc.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[i:116](1110009.htm#fr_115) <span
id="vi.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p34"></span> St. Chrysostom’s habitual use of the term
philosophy is thus explained in the index of Mr. Field’s edition of the
Com. on St. Matt. “Philosophy, according to the custom of Chrys. is not
Christian piety, not the exercise of any virtue, not a pious and chaste
life, not virtue in general, but that part of virtue, which consists in
subduing the carnal appetites and affections. Thus to Christian
philosophy are to be referred: forbearance and long suffering;
humblemindedness; contempt of wealth; an austere and monastic life;
every other mortification (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p34.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p34.2"></span>πάθεια</span>). Its contraries are: emulation
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p34.3"></span>ζηλοτυπία</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p34.4"></span>,</span> see below), envy
and vainglory, and all other passions.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[i:117](1110009.htm#fr_116) <span
id="vi.iv-p34.5"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.1"></span>καὶ φιλόσοφα, φησὶν, ἵνα</span>: “And
‘philosophical,’ forsooth:” but perhaps it should be <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.2"></span>καὶ ἐφιλοσόφησεν ἵνα</span>:
“this was the upshot of his philosophizing.” ῾Η <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.3"></span>τοῦ φιλοσόφου ψυχή</span>:
“the soul of the philosopher himself (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.4"></span>Α τοῦ διδασκάλου</span>), viz. equally with the
souls of other men, becomes, for instance, a fly,” etc. Comp. *infra:*
“our soul passes into flies and dogs,” etc. and *Hom. in Ev. Joann.* t.
viii. 8. D. “they say that the souls *of men* become flies, gnats,
shrubs.”—Edd. “For what is the benefit from learning that the soul of
the philosopher,” etc. The next sentence (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.5"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.6"></span>ντως μυῖα</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.7"></span>οὐκ εἰς μυῖαν μετέπιπτεν</span> (sc. ἡ <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.8"></span>ψυχὴ</span>), <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.10"></span>λλ᾽ ἐπέβαινε</span> (sc.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.11"></span>μυῖα τῇ ἐν Πλατ.
οἰκόυσῃ</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.12"></span>ψυχῇ</span> seems to mean, ‘He talks of the
soul becoming a fly: and truly the soul in Plato might be claimed by a
fly:’ <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.13"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.14"></span>πεβ. τῇ ψ</span>. as e.g.
is <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.15"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.16"></span>πιβαίνειν τῇ ἐπαρχί&
139·</span> to step into possession of, etc. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p35.17"></span>Ποίας γὰρ ταῦτα οὐ μυίας</span>; Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.18"></span>ματαιολογίας</span>;
adding, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p35.19"></span>Πόφεν δὴ
τοιαῦτα ληρεῖν ἐπεβάλετο</span>; “What could put it into his head to
rave in this fashion?”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[i:118](1110009.htm#fr_117) <span
id="vi.iv-p35.20"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p36"></span> The author’s depreciation of Plato
contrasts unfavorably with the more generous estimates of a long line of
Church Fathers from Justin to Augustin.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[i:119](1110009.htm#fr_118) <span
id="vi.iv-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p37"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p37.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p37.2"></span>Επεὶ ἐκεῖνό γε καὶ ἀνῇρει</span>. Erasmus
translates, *Quandoquidem et illud quod Plato docuit, sustulit:* whence
Ben. *Nam illud Platonis hic (Petrus) sustulit:* i.e. for Peter’s
doctrine (of chastity) has made an end of that lewd dogma of Plato’s.
But the following sentence rather implies that the meaning is as above
given.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[i:120](1110009.htm#fr_119) <span
id="vi.iv-p37.3"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p38"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p38.1"></span>Δι᾽ αὐτῶν</span>, Ben. *per illas*, which they
seem to refer to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p38.2"></span>γυναῖκες</span>. Erasm. *per illos,* which is
doubtless right: by means of the philosophers, as below, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p38.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p38.4"></span>ν ταῖς ἐκείνων
ψυχαῖς</span>.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[i:121](1110009.htm#fr_120) <span
id="vi.iv-p38.6"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p39.1"></span>Καὶ ζηλοῖ παῤ αὐτοῖς ὁ κύων κατὰ Πλάτωνα</span>.
Edd. have this after “polity and laws,” where it is clearly out of
place, whatever it means.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[i:122](1110009.htm#fr_121) <span
id="vi.iv-p39.4"></span>

<span id="vi.iv-p40"></span> Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.iv-p40.1"></span>Σφόδρα γε· οὐ γὰρ φρενὸς βαθείας</span>. Read
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.2"></span>Σφόδρα γε</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.3"></span>(</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.4"></span>οὐ γάρ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.5"></span>);</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.iv-p40.6"></span>φρ. β</span>. as above, p.
22, note 1, and 28, note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily V on Acts ii. 14.](1110010)
