[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110073)  [Next](1110075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xiii"></span> <span id="vii.xiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XI.</span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p2"></span>[Rom. VI.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="vii.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p3"></span>*“For if we have been planted
together* <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354) *in the likeness of
His death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection.”*

<span id="vii.xiii-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xiii-p5.1"></span>What</span> I had before occasion to remark,
that I mention here too, that he continually digresseth into
exhortation, without making any twofold division as he does in the other
Epistles, and setting apart the former portion for doctrines, and the
latter for the care of moral instruction. Here then he does not do so,
but blends the latter with the subject throughout, so as to gain it an
easy admission. Here then he says there are two mortifyings, and two
deaths, and that one is done by Christ in Baptism, and the other it is
our duty to effect by earnestness afterwards. For that our former sins
were buried, came of His gift. But the remaining dead to sin after
baptism must be the work of our own earnestness, however much we find
God here also giving us large help. For this is not the only thing
Baptism has the power to do, to obliterate our former transgressions;
for it also secures against subsequent ones. As then in the case of the
former, thy contribution was faith that they might be obliterated, so
also in those subsequent to this, show thou forth the change in thine
aims, that thou mayest not defile thyself again. For it is this and the
like that he is counselling thee when he says, “for if we have been
planted together in the likeness of His Death, we shall be also in the
likeness of His Resurrection.” Do you observe, how he rouses the hearer
by leading him straightway up to his Master, and taking great pains to
show the strong likeness? This is why he does not say “in death,” lest
you should gainsay it, but, “in the likeness of His Death.” For our
essence itself hath not died, but the man of sins, that is, wickedness.
And he does not say, “for if we have been” partakers of “the likeness of
His Death;” but what? “If we have been planted together,” so, by the
mention of planting, giving a hint of the fruit resulting to us from it.
For as His Body, by being buried in the earth, brought forth as the
fruit of it the salvation of the world; thus ours also, being buried in
baptism, bore as fruit righteousness, sanctification, adoption,
countless blessings. And it will bear also hereafter the gift of the
resurrection. Since then we were buried in water, He in earth, and we in
regard to sin, He in regard to His Body, this is why he did not say, “we
were planted together in His Death,” but “in the likeness of His Death.”
For both the one and the other is death, but not that of the same
subject. If then he says, “we have been planted together in His
Death, <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) we shall be in that of
His Resurrection,” speaking here of the Resurrection which (Gr. be of
His Resurrection) is to come. For since when he was upon the subject of
the Death before, and said, “Know ye not, brethren, that so many of us
as were baptized into Christ were baptized into His Death?” he had not
made any clear statement about the Resurrection, but only about the way
of life after baptism, bidding men walk in newness of life; therefore he
here resumes the same subject, and proceeds to foretell to us clearly
that Resurrection. And that you may know that he is not speaking of that
resulting from baptism, but about the other, after saying, “for if we
were planted together in the likeness of His Death,” he does not say
that we shall be in the likeness of His Resurrection, <span
id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) but we shall belong to the
Resurrection. <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) For to prevent
thy saying, and how, if we did not die as He died, are we to rise as He
rose? when he mentioned the Death, he did not say, “planted together in
the Death,” but, “in the likeness of His Death.” But when he mentioned
the Resurrection, he did not say, “in the likeness of the Resurrection,”
but we shall be “of the Resurrection” itself. And he does not say, We
have been made, but we shall be, by this word again plainly meaning that
Resurrection which has not yet taken place, but will hereafter. Then
with a view to give credibility to what he says, he points out another
Resurrection which is brought about here before that one, that from that
which is present thou mayest believe also that which is to come. For
after saying, “we shall be planted together in the Resurrection,” he
adds,

<span id="vii.xiii-p9"></span>[Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vii.xiii-p9.1"></span>.
“Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of
sin might be destroyed.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p10"></span>So putting together both the cause and
the demonstration of the Resurrection which is to come. And he does not
say is crucified, but is crucified with Him, so bringing baptism near to
the Cross. And on this score also it was that he said above, “We have
been planted together in the likeness of His Death that the body of sin
might be destroyed,” not giving that name to this body of ours, but to
all iniquity. For as he calls the whole sum of wickedness the old man,
thus again the wickedness which is made up of the different parts of
iniquity he calls the body of that man. And that what I am saying is not
mere guesswork, hearken to Paul’s own interpretation of this very thing
in what comes next. For after saying, “that the body of sin might be
destroyed,” he adds, “that henceforth we should not serve sin.” <span
id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) For the way in which I would have
it dead is not so that ye should be destroyed and die, but so that ye
sin not. And as he goes on he makes this still clearer.

<span id="vii.xiii-p12"></span>[Rom.
6.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#007)<span id="vii.xiii-p12.1"></span>.
“For he that is dead,” he says, “is freed (Gr. justified) from sin.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p13"></span>This he says of every man, that as he
that is dead is henceforth freed from sinning, lying as a dead body, so
must <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) he that has come up from
baptism, since he has died there once for all, remain ever dead to sin.
If then thou hast died in baptism, remain dead, for any one that dies
can sin no more; but if thou sinnest, thou marrest God’s gift. After
requiring of us then heroism (Gr. philosophy) of this degree, he
presently brings in the crown also, in these words.

<span id="vii.xiii-p15"></span>[Rom.
6.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008)<span id="vii.xiii-p15.1"></span>.
“Now if we be dead with Christ.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p16"></span>And indeed even before the crown, this is
in itself the greater crown, the partaking with our Master. But he says,
I give even another reward. Of what kind is it? It is life eternal. For
“we believe,” he says, “that we shall also live with Him.” And whence is
this clear?

<span id="vii.xiii-p17"></span>[Rom.
6.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="vii.xiii-p17.1"></span>.
“That Christ being raised from the dead, dieth no more.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p18"></span>And notice again his undauntedness, <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) and how he makes the thing good
from opposite grounds. Since then it was likely that some would feel
perplexed at the Cross and the Death, he shows that this very thing is a
ground for feeling confident henceforward.

<span id="vii.xiii-p20"></span>For suppose not, he says, because He once
died, that He is mortal, for this is the very reason of His being
immortal. For His death hath been the death of death, and because He did
die, He therefore doth not die. For even that death

<span id="vii.xiii-p21"></span>[Rom.
6.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010)<span id="vii.xiii-p21.1"></span>.
“He died unto sin.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p22"></span>What does “unto sin” <span
id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) mean? It means that He was not
subject even to that one, but for our sin, that He might destroy it, and
cut away its sinews and all its power, therefore He died. Do you see how
he affrighteth them? For if He does not die again, then there is no
second laver, then do thou keep from all inclinableness to sin. For all
this he says to make a stand against the “let us do evil that good may
come. Let us remain in sin that grace may abound.” To take away this
conception then, root and branch, it is, that he sets down all this. But
in that “He liveth, He liveth unto God,” he says,—that is, unchangeably,
so that death hath no more any dominion over Him. For if it was not
through any liability to it that He died the former death, save only for
the sin of others, much less will He die again now that He hath done
that sin away. And this he says in the Epistle to the Hebrews also, “But
now once,” he says, “in the end of the world hath He appeared to put
away sin by the Sacrifice of Himself. And as it is appointed unto men
once to die, and after that the judgment; so Christ was once offered to
bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for Him shall He appear
the second time without sin unto salvation.” (<span
id="vii.xiii-p23.1"></span>[Heb. ix.
26-28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xiii-p23.2"></span>.) And he both points out the power of the
life that is according to God, and also the strength of sin. For with
regard to the life according to God, he showeth that Christ shall die no
more. With regard to sin, that if it brought about the death even of the
Sinless, how can it do otherwise than be the ruin of those that are
subject to it? And then as he had discoursed about His life; that none
might say, What hath that which you have been saying to do with us? he
adds,

<span id="vii.xiii-p24"></span>[Rom.
6.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011)<span id="vii.xiii-p24.1"></span>.
“Likewise reckon ye also yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p25"></span>He well says, “reckon,” because there is
no setting that, which he is speaking of, before the eyes as yet. And
what are we to reckon? one may ask. That we “are dead unto sin, but
alive unto God. In Jesus Christ our Lord.” For he that so liveth will
lay hold of every virtue, as having Jesus Himself for his ally. For that
is what, “in Christ,” means, for if He raised them when dead, much more
when alive will He be able to keep them so.

<span id="vii.xiii-p26"></span>[Rom.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="vii.xiii-p26.1"></span>.
“Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body, that ye should obey it
in the lusts thereof.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p27"></span>He does not say, let not the flesh live
or act, but, “let not sin reign,” <span
id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) for He came not to destroy our
nature, but to set our free choice aright. Then to show that it is not
through any force or necessity that we are held down by iniquity, but
willingly, he does not say, let it not tyrannize, a word that would
imply a necessity, but let it not reign. For it is absurd for those who
are being conducted to the kingdom of heaven to have sin empress over
them, and for those who are called to reign with Christ to choose to be
the captives of sin, as though one should hurl the diadem from off his
head, and choose to be the slave of a frantic woman, who came begging,
and was clothed in rags. Next since it was a heavy task to get the upper
hand of sin, see how he shows it to be even easy, and how he allays the
labor by saying, “in your mortal body.” For this shows that the
struggles were but for a time, and would soon bring themselves to a
close. At the same time he reminds us of our former evil plight, and of
the root of death, as it was from this that, contrary even to its
beginning, it became mortal. Yet it is possible even for one with a
mortal body not to sin. Do you see the abundancy of Christ’s grace? For
Adam, though as yet he had not a mortal body, fell. But thou, who hast
received one even subject to death, canst be crowned. How then, is it
that “sin reigns?” he says. It is not from any power of its own, but
from thy listlessness. Wherefore after saying, “let it not reign,” he
also points out the mode of this reigning, by going on to say “that ye
should obey it in the lusts thereof.” For it is not honor to concede to
it (i.e. to the body) all things at will, nay, it is slavery in the
extreme, and the height of dishonor; for when it doth what it listeth,
then is it bereft of all liberties; but when it is put under restraints,
then it best keeps its own proper rank.

<span id="vii.xiii-p29"></span>[Rom.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span id="vii.xiii-p29.1"></span>.
“Neither yield ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto
sin…but as instruments of righteousness.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p30"></span>The body then is indifferent between vice
and virtue, as also instruments (or arms) are. But either effect is
wrought by him that useth it. As if a soldier fighting in his country’s
behalf, and a robber who was arming against the inhabitants, had the
same weapons for defence. For the fault is not laid to the suit of
armor, but to those that use it to an ill end. And this one may say of
the flesh too which becomes this or that owing to the mind’s decision,
not owing to its own nature. For if it be curious after the beauty of
another, the eye becomes an instrument of iniquity, not through any
agency of its own (for what is of the eye, is but seeing, not seeing
amiss), but through the fault of the thought which commands it. But if
you bridle it, it becomes an instrument of righteousness. Thus with the
tongue, thus with the hands, thus with all the other members. And he
well calls sin unrighteousness. For by sinning a man deals unrighteously
either by himself or by his neighbor, or rather by himself more than by
his neighbor. Having then led us away from wickedness, he leads us to
virtue, in these words:

<span id="vii.xiii-p31"></span>“But yield yourselves unto God, as those
that are alive from the dead.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p32"></span>See how by his bare words he exhorts
them, on that side naming “sin” and on this “God.” For by showing what a
difference there is between the rulers, he casts out of all excuse the
soldier that leaveth God, and desireth to serve under the dominion of
sin. But it is not only in this way, but also by the sequel, that he
establishes this; by saying, “as alive from the dead.” For by these he
shows the wretchedness of the other, and the greatness of God’s gift.
For consider, he says, what you were, and what you have been made. What
then were ye? Dead, and ruined by a destruction which could not from any
quarter be repaired. For neither was there any one who had the power to
assist you. And what have ye been made out of those dead ones? Alive
with immortal life. And by whom? By the all-powerful God. Ye ought
therefore to marshal yourselves under Him with as much cheerful
readiness, as men would who had been made alive from being dead.

<span id="vii.xiii-p33"></span>“And your members as instruments of
righteousness.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p34"></span>Hence, the body is not evil, since it may
be made an arm <span id="fr_1363"></span>[1364](#fn_1363) of
righteousness. But by calling it an arm, he makes it clear that there is
a hard warfare at hand for us. And for this reason we need strong armor,
and also a noble spirit, and one acquainted too with the ways of this
warfare; and above all we need a commander. The Commander however is
standing by, ever ready to help us, and abiding unconquerable, and has
furnished us with strong arms likewise. Farther, we have need of a
purpose of mind to handle them as should be, so that we may both obey
our Commander, and take the field for our country. Having then given us
this vigorous exhortation, and reminded us of arms, and battle, and
wars, see how he encourages the soldier again and cherishes <span
id="fr_1364"></span>[1365](#fn_1364) his ready spirit.

<span id="vii.xiii-p37"></span>[Rom.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#014)<span id="vii.xiii-p37.1"></span>.
“For sin shall no more have dominion over you; for ye are not under the
Law, but under grace.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p38"></span>If then sin hath no more dominion over
us, why does he lay so great a charge upon them as he does in the words,
“Let not sin reign in your mortal body,” and, “yield not ye your members
as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin?” What does that here said
mean then? He is sowing a kind of seed in this statement, which he means
to develop afterwards, and to cultivate in a powerful argument. What
then is this statement? It is this; that our body, before Christ’s
coming, was an easy prey to the assaults of sin. For after death a great
swarm of passions entered also. And for this cause it was not lightsome
for running the race of virtue. For there was no Spirit present to
assist, nor any baptism of power to mortify. ([John vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)<span id="vii.xiii-p38.1"></span>.)
But as some horse (Plato *Phædr.* §74) that answereth not the rein, it
ran indeed, but made frequent slips, the Law meanwhile announcing what
was to be done and what not, yet not conveying into those in the race
anything over and above exhortation by means of words. But when Christ
had come, the effort became afterwards more easy, and therefore we had a
more distant goal (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p38.2"></span>μείζονα τὰ σκάμματα</span>) set us, in that
the assistance we had given us was greater. Wherefore also Christ saith,
“Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.”
([Matt. v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xiii-p38.3"></span>.) But this he says more clearly in the
sequel. But at present he alludes here briefly to it, to show that
unless we stoop down very low to it, sin will not get the better of us.
For it is not the Law only that exhorteth us, but grace too which also
remitted our former sins, and secures us against future ones. For it
promised them crowns after toils, but this (i.e. grace) crowned them
first, and then led them to the contest. Now it seems to me that he is
not signifying here the whole life of a believer, but instituting a
comparison between the Baptism and the Law. And this he says in another
passage also; “The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life.” ([2 Cor.
iii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xiii-p38.4"></span>.) For the Law convinceth of transgression,
but grace undoes transgression. As then the former by convincing
establisheth sin so the latter by forgiving suffereth us not to be under
sin. And so thou art in two ways set free from this thraldom; both in
thy not being under the Law, and in thy enjoying grace. After then he
had by these words given the hearer a breathing time, he again furnishes
him a safeguard, by introducing an exhortation in reply to an objection,
and by saying as follows.

<span id="vii.xiii-p39"></span>[Rom.
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)<span id="vii.xiii-p39.1"></span>.
“What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the Law, but under
grace? God forbid.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p40"></span>So he first adopted a form of adjuration,
because it was an absurd thing he had named. And then he makes his
discourse pass on to exhortation, and shows the great facility of the
struggle, in the following words. <span
id="fr_1365"></span>[1366](#fn_1365)

<span id="vii.xiii-p42"></span>[Rom.
6.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#016)<span id="vii.xiii-p42.1"></span>.
“Know ye not, that to whom ye yield yourselves servants to obey, his
servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness?

<span id="vii.xiii-p43"></span>I do not, he would say, mention hell as
yet, nor that great (<span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xiii-p43.1"></span>ms</span>. Bodl. long) punishment, but the
shame it is in this world, when ye become slaves, and slaves of your own
accord too, and sin’s slaves, and when the wages are such as a second
death. For if before baptism, it wrought death of the body, and the
wound required so great attendance, that the Lord of all came down to
die, and so put a stop to the evil; if after so great a gift, and so
great liberty, it seize thee again, while thou bendest down under it
willingly, what is there that it may not do? Do not then run into such a
pit, or willingly give thyself up. For in the case of wars, soldiers are
often given up even against their will. But in this case, unless thou
desertest of thyself, there is no one who will get the better of thee.
Having then tried to shame them by a sense of duty, he alarms them also
by the rewards, and lays before them the wages of both; righteousness,
and death, and that a death not like the former, but far worse. For if
Christ is to die no more, who is to do away with death? No one! We must
then be punished, and have vengeance taken upon us forever. For a death
preceptible to the senses is not still to come in this case, as in the
former, which gives the body rest, and separates it from the soul. “For
the last enemy, death, is destroyed” ([1 Cor. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="vii.xiii-p43.2"></span>),
whence the punishment will be deathless. But not to them that obey, for
righteousness, and the blessings springing from it, will be their
rewards.

<span id="vii.xiii-p44"></span>[Rom.
6.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017)<span id="vii.xiii-p44.1"></span>.
“But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin, but ye have
obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered unto
you.” (Lit. “into which ye were delivered.”)

<span id="vii.xiii-p45"></span>After shaming them by the slavery, after
alarming them by the rewards, and so exhorting them, he again rights
them by calling the benefits to mind. For by these he shows that they
were great evils from which they were freed, and that not by any labors
of their own, and that things henceforth would be more manageable. Just
as any one who has rescued a captive from a cruel tyrant, and advises
him not to run away back to him, reminds him of his grievous thraldom;
so does Paul set the evils passed away most emphatically before us, by
giving thanks to God. For it was no human power that could set us free
from all those evils, but, “thanks be to God,” who was willing and able
to do such great things. And he well says, “Ye have obeyed from the
heart.” Ye were neither forced nor pressed, but ye came over of your own
accord, with willing mind. Now this is like one that praises and rebukes
at once. For after having willingly come, and not having had any
necessity to undergo, what allowance can you claim, or what excuse can
you make, if you run away back to your former estate? Next that you may
learn that it came not of your own willing temper only, but the whole of
it of God’s grace also, after saying, “Ye have obeyed from the heart,”
he adds, “that form of doctrine which was delivered you.” For the
obedience from the heart shows the free will. But the being delivered,
hints the assistance from God. But what is the form of doctrine? <span
id="fr_1366"></span>[1367](#fn_1366) It is living aright, and in
conformity with the best conversation.

<span id="vii.xiii-p47"></span>[Rom.
6.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span id="vii.xiii-p47.1"></span>.
“Being then made free from sin, ye became the servants of
righteousness.”

<span id="vii.xiii-p48"></span>There are two gifts of God which he here
points out. The “freeing from sin,” and also the “making them servants
to righteousness,” which is better than any freedom. For God hath done
the same as if a person were to take an orphan, who had been carried
away by savages into their own country, and were not only to free him
from captivity, but were to set a kind father over him, and bring him to
very great dignity. And this has been done in our case. For it was not
our old evils alone that He freed us from, since He even led us to the
life of angels, and paved the way for us to the best conversation,
handing us over to the safe keeping of righteousness, and killing our
former evils, and deadening the old man, and leading us to an immortal
life.

<span id="vii.xiii-p49"></span>Let us then continue living this life;
for many of those who seem to breathe and to walk about are in a more
wretched plight than the dead. For there are different kinds of
deadness; and one there is of the body, according to which Abraham was
dead, and still was not dead. For “God,” He says, “is not a God of the
dead, but of the living.” ([Matt. xxii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#032)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.1"></span>.)
Another is of the soul which Christ alludes to when He says, “Let the
dead bury their dead.” ([Matt.
8.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xiii-p49.2"></span>.) Another, which is even the subject of
praise, which is brought about by religion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p49.3"></span>φιλοσοφίας</span>), of which Paul saith,
“Mortify your members which are upon the earth.” ([Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.4"></span>.)
Another, which is the cause even of this, the one which takes place in
baptism. “For our old man,” he says, “has been crucified” ([Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.5"></span>),
that is, has been deadened. Since then we know this, let us flee from
the deadness by which, even though alive, we die. And let us not be
afraid of that with which common death comes on. But the other two,
whereof one is blissful, having been given by God, the other
praiseworthy (cf. Ar. Eth. i. 12), which is accomplished by ourselves
together with God, let us both choose and be emulous of. And of those
two, one doth David pronounce blessed, when he says, “Blessed are they
whose iniquities are forgiven” ([Ps. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.6"></span>);
and the other, Paul holds in admiration, saying, and writing to the
Galatians, “They that be Christ’s have crucified the flesh.” (<span
id="vii.xiii-p49.7"></span>[Gal. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#024)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.8"></span>.)
But of the other couple, one Christ declares to be easy to hold in
contempt, when He says, “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not
able to kill the soul:” and the other fearful, for, “Fear” (He says)
“Him that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.” ([Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="vii.xiii-p49.9"></span>.)
And therefore let us flee from this, and choose that deadness which is
held blessed and admirable; that of the other two, we may escape the one
and not <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) fear the other: for
it is not the least good to us to see the sun, and to eat and drink,
unless the life of good words be with us. For what would be the
advantage, pray, of a king dressed in a purple robe and possessed of
arms, but without a single subject, and exposed to all that had a mind
to attack and insult him? In like manner it will be no advantage to a
Christian to have faith, and the gift of baptism, and yet be open to all
the passions. In that way the disgrace will be greater, and the shame
more. For as such an one having the diadem and purple is so far from
gaining by this dress any honor to himself, that he even does disgrace
to that by his own shame: so the believer also, who leadeth a corrupt
life, is so far from becoming, as such, an object of respect, that he is
only the more one of scorn. “For as many,” it says, “as sinned without
law, shall also perish without law; and as many as have sinned in the
law, shall be judged by the law.” ([Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="vii.xiii-p50.4"></span>).
And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, he says, “He that despised Moses’ law
died without mercy under two or three witnesses: of how much sorer
punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who had trodden
under foot the Son of God?” (<span id="vii.xiii-p50.5"></span>[Heb.
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#029)<span id="vii.xiii-p50.6"></span>.)
And with reason. For I placed (He might say) all the passions in
subjection to thee by baptism. How then comes it that thou hast
disgraced so great a gift, and hast become one thing instead of another?
I have killed and buried thy former transgressions, like worms—how is it
that thou hast bred others?—for sins are worse than worms, since these
do harm to the body, those to the soul; and those make the more
offensive stench. Yet we perceive it not, and so we are at no pains to
purge them out. Thus the drunkard knows not how disgustful the stale
wine is, but he that is not drunken has a distinct perception of it. So
with sins also, he that lives soberly knows thoroughly that other mire,
and the stain. But he that gives himself up to wickedness, like a man
made drowsy with drunkenness, does not even know the very fact that he
is ill. And this is the most grievous part of vice, that it does not
allow those who fall into it even to see the greatness of their own
bane, but as they lie in the mire, they think they are enjoying
perfumes. And so they have not even the power of getting free, but when
full of worms, like men that pride themselves in precious stones, so do
they exult in these. And for this reason they have not so much as the
will to kill them, but they even nourish these up, and multiply them in
themselves, until they send them on to the worms of the world to come.
For these are providers for those, and are not only providers, but even
the fathers of those that never die; as it says, “their worm shall not
die.” (<span id="vii.xiii-p50.7"></span>[Mark ix.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044)<span id="vii.xiii-p50.8"></span>.)
These kindle the hell which never extinguishes. To prevent this from
happening then, let us do away with this fountain of evil, and
extinguish the furnace, and let us draw up the root of wickedness from
beneath, since you will do no good by cutting the tree off from above,
if the root remains below, and sends up fresh shoots of the same kind
again. What then is the root of the evils? Learn from the good
husbandman (i.e. St. Paul <span id="vii.xiii-p50.9"></span>[1 Cor. iii.
6-9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xiii-p50.10"></span>), who has an accurate knowledge of such
things, and tends the spiritual vine and cultivates the whole world. Now
what does he say is the cause of all the evils? The love of money. For
the “love of money is the root of all evils.” ([1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="vii.xiii-p50.11"></span>).
Hence come fightings, and enmities and wars; hence emulations, and
railings, and suspicions, and insults; hence murders, and thefts, and
violations of sepulchres.

<span id="vii.xiii-p51"></span>Through this, not cities and countries
only, but roads and habitable and inhabitable parts, and mountains, and
groves, and hills, and, in a word, all places are filled with blood and
murder. And not even from the sea has this evil withdrawn, but even
there also with great fury hath it revelled, since pirates beset it on
all sides, thus devising a new mode of robbery. Through this have the
laws of nature been subverted, and the claims of relationship set aside,
and the laws of piety itself <span id="fr_1368"></span>[1369](#fn_1368)
broken through. For the thraldom of money hath armed, not against the
living only, but even against the departed too, the right hands of such
men. And at death even, they make no truce with them, but bursting open
the sepulchres, they put forth their impious hands even against dead
bodies, and not even him that hath let go of life will they suffer to be
let go from their plotting. And all the evils that you may find, whether
in the house or in the market-place, or in the courts of law, or in the
senate, or in the king’s palace, or in any other place whatsoever, it is
from this that you will find they all spring. For this evil it is, this
assuredly, which fills all places with blood and murder, this lights up
the flame of hell, this makes cities as wretchedly off as a wilderness,
yea, even much worse. For those that beset the high roads, one can
easily be on one’s guard against, as not being always upon attack. But
they who in the midst of cities imitate them are so much the worse than
them, in that these are harder to guard against, and dare to do openly
what the others do with secrecy. For those laws, which have been made
with a view to stopping their iniquity, they draw even into alliance and
fill the cities with this kind of murders and pollutions. Is it not
murder, pray, and worse than murder, to hand the poor man over to
famine, and to cast him into prison, and to expose him not to famine
only, but to tortures too, and to countless acts of insolence? For even
if you do not do these things yourself to him, yet you are the occasion
of their being done, you do them more than the ministers who execute
them. The murderer plunges his sword into a man at once, and after
giving him pain for a short time, he does not carry the torture any
farther. But do you who by your calumnies, by your harassings, by your
plottings, make light darkess to him, and set him upon desiring death
ten thousand times over, consider how many deaths you perpetrate instead
of one only? And what is worse than all, you plunder and are grasping,
not impelled to it by poverty, without any hunger to necessitate you,
but that your horse’s bridle may be spattered over with gold enough, or
the ceiling of your house, or the capitals of your pillars. And what
hell is there that this conduct would not deserve, when it is a brother,
and one that has shared with yourself in blessings unutterable, and has
been so highly honored by the Lord, whom you, in order that you may deck
out stones, and floors, and the bodies of animals with neither reason,
nor perception of these ornaments, are casting into countless
calamities? And your dog <span id="fr_1369"></span>[1370](#fn_1369) is
well attended too, while man, or rather Christ, for the sake of the
hound, and all these things I have named, is straitened with extreme
hunger. What can be worse than such confusion? What more grievous than
such lawlessness as this? What streams of fire will be enough for such a
soul? He that was made in the Image of God stands in unseemly plight,
through thy inhumanity; but the faces of the mules that draw thy wife
glisten with gold in abundance, as do the skins and woods which compose
that canopy. And if it is a seat that is to be made, or a footstool,
they are all made of gold and silver. But the member of Christ, for whom
also He came hither from Heaven, and shed His precious Blood, does not
even enjoy the food that is necessary for him, owing to thy
rapaciousness. But the couches are mantled with silver on every side,
while the bodies of the saints are deprived even of necessary clothing.
And to thee Christ is less precious than anything else, servants, or
mules, or couch, or chair, or footstool; for I pass over furniture of
still meaner use than these, leaving it to you to know of it. But if
thou art shocked at hearing this, stand aloof from doing it, and then
the words spoken will not harm thee. Stand aloof, and cease from this
madness. For plain madness it is, such eagerness about these things.
Wherefore letting go of these things, let us look up, late as it is,
towards Heaven, and let us call to mind the Day which is coming, let us
bethink ourselves of that awful tribunal, and the exact accounts, and
the sentence incorruptible. Let us consider that God, who sees all these
things, sends no lightnings from Heaven; and yet what is done deserves
not thunderbolts merely. Yet He neither doth this, nor doth He let the
sea loose upon us, nor doth He burst the earth in twain, He quencheth
not the sun, nor doth He hurl the heaven with its stars upon us. He doth
not move aught from its place, but suffereth them to hold their course,
and the whole creation to minister to us. Pondering all this then, let
us be awestruck with the greatness of His love toward man, and let us
return to that noble origin which belongs to us, since at present
certainly we are in no better plight than the creatures without reason,
but even in a much worse one. For they do love their kin, and need but
the community of nature to cause affection towards each other. But thou
who besides nature hast countless causes to draw thee together and
attach thee to the member of thyself; the being honored with the Word,
the partaking in one religion, the sharing in countless blessings; art
become of wilder nature than they, by displaying so much carefulness
about profitless things, and leaving the Temples of God to perish in
hunger and nakedness, and often surrounding them also with a thousand
evils. For if it is from love of glory that you do these things, it is
much more binding on you to show your brother attention, than your
horse. For the better the creature that enjoys the act of kindness, the
brighter the crown that is woven for such carefulness. Since now while
thou fallest into the contrary of all this, thou pullest upon thyself
accusers without number, yet perceivest it not. For who is there that
will not speak ill of thee? who that will not indite thee as guilty of
the greatest atrocity and misanthrophy, when he sees that thou
disregardest the human race, and settest that of senseless creatures
above men, and besides senseless creatures, even the furniture of thy
house? Hast thou not heard the Apostles say, that they who first
received the word sold both “houses and lands” (<span
id="vii.xiii-p53.5"></span>[Acts iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034)<span id="vii.xiii-p53.6"></span>),
that they might support the brethren? but you plunder both houses and
lands, that you may adorn a horse or wood-work, or skins, or walls, or a
pavement. And what is worse is, that it is not men only, but women too
are afflicted with this madness, and urge their husbands to this empty
sort of pains, by forcing them to lay out their money upon anything
rather than the necessary things. And if any one accuse them for this,
they are practised with a defence, itself loaded with much to be
accused. For both the one and the other are done at once, says one.

<span id="vii.xiii-p54"></span>What say you? are you not afraid to utter
such a thing, and to set the same store by horses and mules and couches
and footstools, as by Christ an hungered? Or rather not even comparing
them at all, but giving the larger share to these, and to Him meting out
with difficulty a scant share? Dost thou not know that all belongs to
Him, both thou and thine? Dost thou not know that He fashioned thy body,
as well as gave thee a soul, and apportioned thee the whole world? but
thou art not for giving a little recompense to Him. But if thou lettest
a little hut, thou requirest the rent with the utmost rigor, and though
reaping the whole of His creation, and dwelling in so wide a world, thou
hast not courage to lay down even a little rent, but has given up to
vainglory thyself and all thou hast. For this is that whereof all these
things come. The horse is none the better above his natural excellence
for having this ornament, neither yet is the person mounted upon him,
for sometimes he is only in the less esteem for it; since many neglect
the rider and turn their eyes to the horse’s ornaments, and to the
attendants behind and before, and to the fan-bearers. But the man, who
is lackeyed by these, they hate and turn their heads from, as a common
enemy. But this does not happen when thou adornest thy soul, for then
men, and angels, and the Lord of angels, all weave thee a crown. And so,
if thou art in love with glory, stand aloof from the things which thou
art now doing, and show thy taste not in thy house, but in thy soul,
that thou mayest become brilliant and conspicuous. For now nothing can
be more cheap than thou art, with thy soul unfurnished, and but the
handsomeness of thy house for a screen. But if thou art impatient of
hearing me speak in this way, listen to what one of those that are
without did, and at all events be shamed by their philosophy. For it is
said that a certain one of them, who went into a palace that shone with
gold in abundance, and glistened with the great beauty of the marbles
and the columns, when he saw the floor strewed with carpets in all
directions, spat in the face of the master of the house, and when found
fault with for it said, that since there was no other part of the house
where he could do this, he was obliged to do this affront to his face.
See how ridiculous a man is, who displays his taste in exteriors, and
how little he is in the eyes of all reasonable men. And with good
reason. For if a person were to leave thy wife to be clad in rags, and
to be neglected, and clothed thy maid-servants with brilliant dresses,
thou wouldest not bear it meekly, but wouldest be exasperated, and say
that it was insulting in the extreme. Reason then in this way about your
soul. When you display your taste in walls then, and pavement, and
furniture, and other things of the kind, and do not give liberally in
alms, or practise the other parts of a religious life (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p54.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span>); you
do nothing less than this, or rather what is worse than this by far. For
the difference between servant and mistress is nothing, but between soul
and flesh, there is a great disparity. But if it be so with the flesh,
much more is it with a house or a couch or a footstool. What kind of
excuse then dost thou deserve, who puttest silver on all these, but for
it hast no regard, though it be covered with filthy rags, squalid,
hungry, and full of wounds, torn by hounds unnumbered (<span
id="vii.xiii-p54.2"></span>[Luke
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#021)<span id="vii.xiii-p54.3"></span>);
and after all this fanciest that thou shalt get thee glory by displaying
thy taste in externals wound about thee? And this is the very height of
phrenzy, while ridiculed, reproached, disgraced, dishonored, and falling
into the severest punishment, still to be vain of these things!
Wherefore, I beseech you, laying all this to heart, let us become
sober-minded, late as it is, and become our own masters, and transfer
this adorning from outward things to our souls. For so it will abide
safe from spoiling, and will make us equal to the angels, and will
entertain us with unaltering good, which may we all attain by the grace
and love toward man, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[i:1355](1110074.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="vii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p4"></span> Better: “United with him by the likeness”
or “united with the likeness.” See, note \*, p. 409.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[i:1356](1110074.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="vii.xiii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p6"></span> The construction here is harsh, and seems
to require “in the likeness of.”

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[i:1357](1110074.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="vii.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p7"></span> The word likeness in our version is in
italics as an addition, and unless it is understood, the construction is
scarcely grammatical; but this interpretation favors the reading
questioned in the last note. Perhaps also St. Chrysostom may have taken
the words thus, “If we have been in likeness planted together with His
Death,” which would be a parallel construction.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[i:1358](1110074.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="vii.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p8"></span> The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.1"></span>σύμφευτοι</span> should be rendered “united
with” (as in R.V.)—literally “grown together,” from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p8.2"></span>συν</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p8.3"></span>φύω</span>, not “planted
together” (A.V.) as if from <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.4"></span>συν</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.5"></span>φευτεύω</span>. The Dat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p8.6"></span>τῷ ὁμοιώματι</span> may be
taken as instrumental after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.7"></span>σύμ. γεγόν</span>. (R.V., Weiss), or (I think
better), after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.8"></span>σύν</span> in composition (Thayer’s *Lex.,*
Meyer), because there is no indirect object expressed and on the former
view one must be supplied (as <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.9"></span>αὐτῶ</span>, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.10"></span>χριστῷ</span>). We must supply in the
apodosis, <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p8.11"></span>σύμφευτοι
τῷ ὀμοιώματι</span>. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.12"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p8.13"></span>μοίωμα</span> here means that which
corresponds to the death and resurrection of Christ, i.e. our moral
death to sin and resurrection to a holy life (vid. [Rom.
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="vii.xiii-p8.14"></span>),
or (dropping the figure) the cessation of the old life and the beginning
of the new. If the former occurs, the latter also must take place and
thus the objection that if sin makes grace abound we should continue in
sin, contradicts the very idea of the Christian life which is that of
freedom from sin and continuance in holiness. The interp. of Chrys. is
somewhat confused, apparently by not clearly apprehending the fact that
Paul is dealing with an *analogy* to the death and resurrection of
Christ.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[i:1359](1110074.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="vii.xiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p11"></span> [Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="vii.xiii-p11.1"></span>
urges the same thought under the specific figure of the crucifixion of
the body. The use of this figure almost necessitates the use of the word
*body* to carry it out. As the one is figurative, so is the other. By
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p11.2"></span>σῶμα τῆς
ἁμαρτίας</span> is not meant “the body which is sin—or sinful,” but the
body which is under the sway of sin. In the moral process of the new
life the body so far as ruled by sin—as being the seat of evil passions
and desires—is destroyed *in this character.* Paul could hardly have
employed this figure had he not regarded the body as the special
manifestation-point of sin.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[i:1360](1110074.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="vii.xiii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p14"></span> The necessity spoken of is clearly, from
the context, that of obligation.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[i:1361](1110074.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="vii.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p19.1"></span>φιλονεικίαν</span>, his determination to take
the highest ground, and give up no single point.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[i:1362](1110074.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="vii.xiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p23"></span> Or “by sin.”

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[i:1363](1110074.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="vii.xiii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p28"></span> In all this there is a design to obviate
Manichæan notions concerning matter, and the opinion resulting from
them, that we must be content to live in sin as unavoidable.

<span id="fn_1363"></span>[i:1364](1110074.htm#fr_1363) <span
id="vii.xiii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p35"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p35.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p35.2"></span>πλα</span>is most usually arms, secondarily
any instruments.

<span id="fn_1364"></span>[i:1365](1110074.htm#fr_1364) <span
id="vii.xiii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p36.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p36.2"></span>λείφει</span>. anoints. Hannibal, before his
victory on the Trebia, sent oil round to his battalions to refresh their
limbs. *Ignibus ante tentoria factis, oleoque per manipulos, ut
mollirent artus, misso, et cibo per otium capto,* etc. Liv. xxi. 55.

<span id="fn_1365"></span>[i:1366](1110074.htm#fr_1365) <span
id="vii.xiii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p41"></span> The Argument of the [Rom.
6.15-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xiii-p41.1"></span> is briefly this: Does the principle that we
are not under the (Mosaic) law lead to lawlessness and sin? No! for,
although we are freed from the Mosaic law as such, we are still under
the law of righteousness (cf. [1 Cor. ix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021)<span id="vii.xiii-p41.2"></span>
“Not being without law to God, but under law to Christ). We are free
from the law and free from sin, but are bondsmen to righteousness. See
esp. [Rom. 6.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xiii-p41.3"></span>. “And being made free from sin, ye became
servants of righteousness.”—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1366"></span>[i:1367](1110074.htm#fr_1366) <span
id="vii.xiii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p46"></span> <span id="vii.xiii-p46.1"></span>[Tit.
ii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xiii-p46.2"></span>; [1 Tim. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)<span id="vii.xiii-p46.3"></span>;
are instances of a similar use of the term “doctrine.” Compare [Eph. iv.
19-24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xiii-p46.4"></span>, from which context the phrase, “Even as
Truth is in Jesus,” appears to be used nearly in the same sense.

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[i:1368](1110074.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="vii.xiii-p49.10"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p50"></span> [So
4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#000)<span id="vii.xiii-p50.1"></span>
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xiii-p50.2"></span>mss.</span> Sav. and
3 <span class="c14"><span id="vii.xiii-p50.3"></span>mss.</span> omit
“not,” but the sense requires it.

<span id="fn_1368"></span>[i:1369](1110074.htm#fr_1368) <span
id="vii.xiii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p52"></span> So Field from one <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xiii-p52.1"></span>ms</span>. Vulg. “of our
very being,”—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p52.2"></span>οὐσίας</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p52.3"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xiii-p52.4"></span>σίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1369"></span>[i:1370](1110074.htm#fr_1369) <span
id="vii.xiii-p52.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xiii-p53"></span> Or “the pillar” and so in the next line
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p53.1"></span>κιών</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p53.2"></span>κιόνα</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p53.3"></span>κύων</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xiii-p53.4"></span>κύνα</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XII on Rom. vi. 19.](1110075)
