[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110078)  [Next](1110080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xviii"></span> <span id="vii.xviii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xviii-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p2"></span>[Rom. IX.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)<span id="vii.xviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p3"></span>“I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my
conscience also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xviii-p4.1"></span>Did</span> I not seem yesterday to you to
have spoken some great and exorbitant things of Paul’s love toward
Christ? And great indeed they were, too great for any words to express.
Yet what you have heard to-day are as far above those things, as those
things were above ours. And yet I did not think they could be exceeded,
still when I came to what has been read to-day <span
id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458) it did appear far more glorious
than the whole of the former. And that he was aware of this himself he
shows by his exordium. For as on the point of entering upon greater
things than those, and therefore liable to be disbelieved by the
generality, he first uses a strong asseveration about the matter he is
going to speak of; which many are in the habit of doing when they are
going to say somewhat which is not believed by the generality, and about
which they feel the utmost certainty in their own minds. Hence he says,
“I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, and my conscience beareth
witness,”

<span id="vii.xviii-p6"></span>[Rom.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p6.1"></span>.
“That I have a great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart. For I
could wish that myself were accursed from Christ.” <span
id="fr_1459"></span>[1460](#fn_1459)

<span id="vii.xviii-p8"></span>What sayest thou, O Paul? from Christ,
thy beloved One, from Whom neither kingdom nor hell, nor things visible
nor intelligible, nor another world as great, would separate thee, is it
from Him that thou wouldst now be accursed? What has happened? Hast thou
changed, hast thou given over that love? No, he replies, fear not.
Rather I have even made it more intense. How then is it that thou
wouldest fain be accursed, and seekest a separation, and a removal to
such a distance, that after it there is no possibility of finding a more
distant one? Because I love Him exceedingly, he may reply. How, pray,
and in what manner? For the things seem a riddle. Or rather, if you
will, let us learn what the curse is, and then we will question him upon
these points, and shall understand this unspeakable and extraordinary
love. What then is the curse? Hear his own words, “If any man love not
our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed.” (*anathema,* <span
id="vii.xviii-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022)<span id="vii.xviii-p8.2"></span>.)
That is, let him be set apart from all, removed from all. For as in the
case of a thing dedicated (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p8.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p8.4"></span>νάθημα</span>), which is set apart for God,
no one would venture so much as to touch it with his hand or even to
come near it; so too with a man who is put apart from the Church, in
cutting him off from all, and removing him as far off as possible, he
calls him by this name (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p8.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p8.6"></span>νάθεμα</span>) in a contrary sense, <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) thus with much fear denouncing to
all men to keep apart from him, and to spring away from him. For the
thing set apart, no one, from respect of it, ventures to come near to.
But from him who is cut off, all men separate themselves from a very
opposite feeling. And so the separation is the same, and both the one
and the other are equally removed from the generality. Still, the mode
of separation is not the same, but in this case it is the opposite to
what it is in that. For from the one they keep back as being dedicated
to God; from the other as being estranged from God, and broken off from
the Church. This then is what Paul means when he says, “I could wish
that myself were accursed from Christ.” And he does not say merely that
I could be willing, but using a stronger term, he says even, “I could
wish” (or pray <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p9.1"></span>ηὐχόμην</span>). But if what he says trouble
you in your (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p9.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p9.3"></span>σθενέστερον</span>) feebleness, consider the
real state of the case, not only that he wished to be separated, but
also the cause for which he wished it, and then you will see the
greatness of his love. <span id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461) For he
even circumcised (Timothy, <span id="vii.xviii-p10.5"></span>[Acts xvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p10.6"></span>),
and we pay no attention to what was done, but to the intention of it,
and the cause of it, and hence we wonder at him the more. And he not
only circumcised a person, but he even shaved himself and sacrificed
(<span id="vii.xviii-p10.7"></span>[Acts xviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018)<span id="vii.xviii-p10.8"></span>;
[Acts xxi. 24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024)<span
id="vii.xviii-p10.9"></span>), and yet surely we do not therefore assert
him to be a Jew, but upon this very score to be perfectly free from
Judaizing, and clear of it, and a genuine worshipper of Christ. As then
when you see him circumcising and sacrificing, you do not therefore
condemn him as Judaizing, but upon this very score have the best reason
for crowning him as quite an alien to Judaism; thus when thou seest him
to have become desirous of being accursed, do not therefore be troubled,
but upon this very ground give him the loudest praise, when thou knowest
the cause why he wishes this. For if we do not look narrowly into the
causes, we shall call Elijah a manslayer, and Abraham not a manslayer
only, but a murderer of his son. <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462) And Phinees and Peter we shall
implead for murder likewise. Nor is it in the case of the saints alone,
but also of the God of the universe, that he who does not keep to this
rule, will be suspecting sundry unbecoming things. Now to prevent this
happening in all cases of the kind, let us bring together both the
cause, and the intention, and the time, and all that makes in behalf of
what is so done, and in this way let us investigate the actions. And
this we must do now also in the case of this blessed soul. Now what is
the cause? It is Jesus Himself Who is so beloved. And yet he does not
say *for* Him; for what he says is, I would wish that I were accursed
*from* Him for my brethren. And this comes of his humbleness of mind.
For he has no wish to make himself conspicuous, as if he were saying
something great, and doing Christ a favor in this. Wherefore also he
said “my kinsmen,” that he may conceal his high aim (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p11.1"></span>πλεονέκτημα</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p11.2"></span>)</span>. Since to see
that he wished it all for Christ’s sake, just hear what comes next.
After speaking of kinsmen then, he proceeds,

<span id="vii.xviii-p12"></span>[Rom.
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="vii.xviii-p12.1"></span>.
“To whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God,and the promises; whose
are the father’s, and of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, Who
is over all, God blessed for ever. Amen.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p13"></span>And what is this? one asks. For if with
a view to the belief of others he was willing to become accursed, he
ought to have also wished for this in the Gentiles’ behalf. But if he
wishes it in the Jews’ behalf only, it is a proof that he did not wish
it for Christ’s sake, but for his own relationship to them. But in fact
if he had prayed for the Gentiles only, this would not have been equally
clear. But since it is for the Jews only, it is a clear proof that it is
only for Christ’s glory that he is thus earnest. And I am aware that
what I am saying will seem a paradox to you. Still if ye do not make a
disturbance, <span id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463) I will presently
endeavor to make it clear. For what he has said he has not said nakedly;
but since all were talking and accusing God, that after being counted
worthy of the name of sons, and receiving the Law, and knowing Him
beyond all men, and enjoying such great glory, and serving him beyond
the whole world, and receiving the promises, and being from fathers who
were His friends, and what was the greatest thing of all, having been
forefathers of Christ Himself (for this is the meaning of the words, “of
whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came”), they are now cast out and
disgraced; and in their place are introduced men who had never known
Him, of the Gentiles. Now since they said all this, and blasphemed God,
Paul hearing it, and being cut to the heart, and vexed for God’s glory’s
sake, wished that he were accursed, had it been possible, so that they
might be saved, and this blasphemy be put a stop to, and God might not
seem to have deceived the offspring of those to whom He promised the
gifts. And that you may see that it was in sorrow for this, that the
promise of God might not seem to fall to the ground, which said to
Abraham, “I will give this land to thee and to thy seed,” that he
uttered this wish, he proceeds,

<span id="vii.xviii-p15"></span>[Rom.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="vii.xviii-p15.1"></span>.
“Not as though the word of God had taken none effect.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p16"></span>To show that he had courage (Mar. and 4
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> wished)
to bear all these things for the word of God, that is, the promise made
to Abraham. For as Moses seemed to be pleading for the Jews, yet was
doing everything for God’s glory (for he says, “Lest they say, Because
He was not able to save them, He led them forth to destroy them in the
wilderness” ([Deut. ix. 28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xviii-p16.2"></span>); stay Thy wrath), so also does Paul, That
they may not say (he means) that the promise of God has fallen to the
ground, and He has disappointed us of that He vouched to us, and this
word has not issued in deed, I could wish to be accursed. This then was
why he did not speak of the Gentiles (for to them no promises had been
made by Him, nor had they worshipped Him, wherefore neither did any
blaspheme Him on their account), but it was for the Jews who had both
received the promise, and had also been brought into closer connection
with Him than others, that he expressed this wish. Do you see, that if
he had expressed it for the Gentiles, he would not have been shown to be
doing this so purely for Christ’s glory? But since he was willing to
become accursed in the Jews’ behalf, then it was most evidenced that it
was for Christ’s sake only that he desired this. <span
id="fr_1464"></span>[1465](#fn_1464) And for this cause he says,

<span id="vii.xviii-p18"></span>“To whom pertaineth the adoption, and
the glory, and the service of God, and the promises.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p19"></span>For the Law, he means, which speaks of
Christ, comes from thence, and all the covenants made with them, and
Himself came from them, and the Fathers who received the promises were
all from them. Yet still the opposite has resulted, and they have fallen
from all their good things. Hence, he means, I am vexed, and if it were
possible to be separated from the company about Christ, and to be made
an alien, not from the love of Him (that be far from him; for even all
this he was doing through love), but from all that enjoyment and glory,
I would accept that lot, provided my Master were not to be blasphemed,
that He might not have to hear some saying, that it has been all for
stage-effect; He promises to one, and gives to another. He was sprung
from one race, He saved another. It was to the forefathers of the Jews
that He made the promises, and yet He has deserted their descendants,
and put men, who never at any time knew Him, into their good things.
They labored in the practice of the Law, and reading the Prophets, while
men who have come but yesterday from heathen altars and images have been
set up above them. What foresight is there in all this? Now that these
things may not be said of my Master, he means, even if they are said
unjustly, I would willingly lose even the kingdom and that glory
unutterable, and any sufferings would I undergo, as considering it the
greatest consolation possible no longer to hear Him Whom I so long for,
so blasphemed. But if you be still against allowing this explanation,
just reflect that many fathers have at many times taken up with thus
much for their children, and have chosen to be separated from them, and
rather to see them in honor, considering their honor dearer to them than
their company. But since we are so short of love like this (Bacon, N. O.
Aph. lib. 2, §7), we cannot even form an idea of what is here meant. For
there be some that are so wholly unworthy even to hear the name of Paul,
and that stand at such an interval and distance from that vehemency of
his, as to fancy that he says this of temporal death. Who I should say
were as ignorant of Paul, as the blind of the sun’s rays, or even much
more so. For he that died daily, and set before him dangers thick as a
snow-storm, and then said, “Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine?” and
still unsatisfied with what he had said, and after going above the
heaven and the heaven of heavens, and running through the Angels and
Archangels, and all the higher orders of beings, and taking in at once
things present, things to come, things visible, things intelligible,
things grievous, and things good, that were on either part, and leaving
nothing out at all, yet not even thus satiated, but even bodying forth
another non-existing creation, how should he, by way of saying some
great thing after all those things, make mention of a temporal death? It
is not so, surely it is not! But such a notion is that of worms nestling
in their dunghill. For had he said this, in what sense would he be
wishing himself accursed from Christ? For death ([Phil. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023)<span id="vii.xviii-p19.1"></span>)
of that sort would have joined him more closely with the band of Christ,
and made him enjoy that glory the more. Yet some there are who venture
to say things different from these, even more ridiculous. It was not
then, they say, death that he wished to have, but to be a treasure, a
thing set apart, of Christ’s. And who even of the most worthless and
indolent that would not wish for this? And in what way was this likely
to be in his kinsmen’s behalf? Let us then leave these fables and
trifles (for it is no more worth while making a reply to these things
than to children babbling at play), and let us go back again to the
words themselves, luxuriating in this very ocean of love, and fearlessly
swimming there in every direction, and reflecting upon the unspeakable
flame of love—or rather say what one may, one shall say nothing worthy
the subject. For there is no ocean so wide, no flame so intense, as
this. And no language can set it forth as it deserves, but he alone knew
it who in good earnest gained it. And now let me bring the words
themselves before you again.

<span id="vii.xviii-p20"></span>“For I could wish that I myself were
accursed.” What does the “I myself” mean? It means I that have been a
teacher ([1 Cor. ix. 27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="vii.xviii-p20.1"></span>) of all, that have gathered together
countless good deeds, that am waiting for countless crowns, that desired
Him so much, as to value His love above all things, who all my days am
burning for Him, and hold all things (<span
id="vii.xviii-p20.2"></span>[Phil. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="vii.xviii-p20.3"></span>)
of second importance to the love of Him. For even being loved by Christ
was not the only thing he cared for, but loving Him exceedingly also.
And this last he cared most for (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p20.4"></span>τούτου μάλιστα ἦν</span>). So it was that he
looked to this only, and took all things light-heartedly. For he kept
one aim in view in all circumstances, the fulfilling of this excellent
love. And this he wishes for. But since things were not to take this
course, nor he to become accursed, <span
id="fr_1465"></span>[1466](#fn_1465) he next attempts to go into a
defence against the charges, and so to bring what was bruited abroad by
all before them as to overthrow it. And before he openly enters into his
defence against these, he first lays down some seeds of it beforehand.
For when he says, “to whom pertaineth the adoption, and the glory, and
the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises,” he
does but say that God willed them indeed to be saved, and this he showed
by His former dealings, and by Christ’s having sprung from them, and by
what He promised to the Fathers. But they out of their own untreatable
temper thrust the benefit away from them. And this is also the reason of
his setting down such things as set forth God’s gift, not such as were
encomiums upon them. For the adoption came of His grace, and so too the
glory, and the promises, and the Law. After taking all these things then
into consideration, and reflecting how earnest God along with His Son,
had been for their salvation, he lifts up his voice aloud, and says,
“Who is <span id="fr_1466"></span>[1467](#fn_1466) blessed forever.
Amen.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p23"></span>So himself offering up thanksgiving for
all men unto the Only-Begotten of God. What, he says, if others do
blaspheme? Still we who know His mysteries, and His unspeakable Wisdom,
and great Providence over us, know well that it is not to be blasphemed,
but to be glorified, that He is worthy. Still not satisfied with being
himself conscious of it, he endeavors next to use arguments, and to use
a sharper way of speech against them. And he does not direct his aim at
them, without first divesting them of a suspicion they had. Lest then he
should seem to be addressing them as enemies, further on he says
“Brethren, my heart’s desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they
might be saved.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p23.1"></span>[Rom. x.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001)<span id="vii.xviii-p23.2"></span>.)
And here, along with other remarks, he so ordered things, as not to seem
to be saying what he was going to say out of enmity against them. Hence
he does not decline calling them even kinsmen and brothers. For even if
it was for Christ’s sake that he said what he did, still he is for
drawing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p23.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p23.4"></span>πισπἅται</span>) their mind to him
also, <span id="fr_1467"></span>[1468](#fn_1467) and paves his way to
what he has to say, and quits himself of all suspicion owing to what had
to be said against them, and then he at last goes into the subject most
of them were looking for. For many, as I have already stated, wanted to
know what was the reason why they who had received the promise fell
short of it, while those who had even never heard of it were saved
before them. Therefore, to clear up this difficulty, he brings forward
the answer before the objection. For to prevent any from saying, What?
Art thou more thoughtful for God’s glory than God is for His own? And
does He need thy aid that His word may not fall to the ground? In reply
to these things he says, I spoke this not as if God’s Word had fallen to
the ground, but to show my love for Christ. For as things have had this
issue, we are in no want of words in God’s behalf, or of showing that
stand His promise did. God said to Abraham, “To thee and to thy seed
will I give the land.” And, “In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p24.5"></span>[Gen.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p24.6"></span>.)
Let us see then, he says, of what sort this seed is. For it is not all
that are from him that are his seed. Whence he says, “For they are not
all Israel that are of (or from) Israel.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p25"></span>[Rom.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="vii.xviii-p25.1"></span>.
“Neither, because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p26"></span>Now when you come to know of what kind
the seed of Abraham is, you will see that the promise is given to his
seed, and know that the word hath not fallen to the ground. <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[1469](#fn_1468) Of what kind, pray, is the seed
then? It is no saying of mine, he means, but the Old Testament itself
explains itself by saying as follows, “In Isaac shall thy seed be
called.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p27.6"></span>[Gen. xxi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span id="vii.xviii-p27.7"></span>.)
What is, “In Isaac?” Explain.

<span id="vii.xviii-p28"></span>[Rom.
9.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="vii.xviii-p28.1"></span>.
“That is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the
children of God: but the children of the promise, these are counted for
the seed.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p29"></span>And observe the judgment and depth of
Paul’s mind. For in interpreting, he does not say, “they which are the
children of the flesh, these are not” the children of Abraham, but, “the
children of God:” so blending the former things with the present, and
showing that even Isaac was not merely Abraham’s son. And what he means
is something of this sort: as many as have been born as Isaac was, they
are sons of God, and of the seed of Abraham. And this is why he said,
“in Isaac shall thy seed be called.” That one may learn that they who
are born after the fashion of Isaac, these are in the truest sense
Abraham’s children. In what way was Isaac born then? Not according to
the law of nature, not according to the power of the flesh, but
according to the power of the promise. What is meant then by the power
of “the promise?”

<span id="vii.xviii-p30"></span>[Rom.
9.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#009)<span id="vii.xviii-p30.1"></span>.
“At this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a son.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p31"></span>This promise then and word of God it was
that fashioned Isaac, and begat him. For what if a womb was its
instrument and the belly of a woman? Since it was not the power of the
belly, but the might of the promise that begat the child. Thus are we
also gendered by the words of God. Since in the pool of water it is the
words of God which generate and fashion us. For it is by being baptized
into the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost that we
are gendered. And this birth is not of nature, but of the promise of
God. (<span id="vii.xviii-p31.1"></span>[John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p31.2"></span>;
[Eph. v. 26](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xviii-p31.3"></span>; [James i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xviii-p31.4"></span>;
[1 Pet. iii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021)<span
id="vii.xviii-p31.5"></span>.) For as after first foretelling the birth
of Isaac, He then accomplished it; so ours also He had announced before,
many ages ago by all the Prophets, and afterwards brought it to pass.
You know how great He has set it forth as being, and how, as He promised
a great thing, He furnished it with abundant ease! ([Hos. ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001)<span id="vii.xviii-p31.6"></span>,
etc.) But if the Jews were to say, that the words, “In Isaac shall thy
seed be called,” mean this, that those born of Isaac should be reckoned
to him for a seed, then the Edomites too, and all those people, ought to
be denominated his sons, since their forefather Esau was a son of his.
But now so far are they from being called sons, that they are the
greatest possible aliens. You see then that it is not the children of
the flesh that are the children of God, but that even in nature itself
the generation by means of baptism from above was sketched out
beforehand. And if you tell me of the womb, I in return have to tell you
of the water. But as in this case all is of the Spirit, so in the other
all was of promise. For the womb was more chilled than any water owing
to barrenness and to old age. Let us then gain accurate knowledge of our
own nobility, and display a life worthy of it. For in it is nothing
fleshly or earthy: hence neither let there be in us. For it was neither
sleep, nor the will of the flesh ([John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="vii.xviii-p31.7"></span>),
nor embraces, nor the madness of desire, but “God’s love toward man,”
which wrought the whole. ([Tit. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)<span id="vii.xviii-p31.8"></span>.)
And as in that case it was when the age was past hope, so in this also
it was when the old age of sins had come over us, that Isaac <span
id="fr_1469"></span>[1470](#fn_1469) suddenly sprang up in youth, and we
all became the children of God, and the seed of Abraham. ([Is. xl.
31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031)<span id="vii.xviii-p32.1"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p33"></span>[Rom.
9.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xviii-p33.1"></span>. “And not only this; but when Rebecca also
had conceived by one, even by our father Isaac.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p34"></span>The subject in question was an important
one. Hence he turns to several arguments, and endeavors by all means to
solve the difficulty. For if it was at once strange and new for them to
be cast out after so great promises, it is much more strange that we
even should come into their good things, who did not expect anything of
the kind. And the case was the same as if a king’s son, who had promises
made him that he should succeed to the power he had, were to be cast
into the level of disreputable men, and in his place a condemned man,
and one laden with evils unnumbered, after being taken out of prison,
were to come into the power, which properly was the other’s. For he
means, what have you to say? that the son is unworthy? Well, but so is
this man unworthy, and much more so. Hence he ought either to have been
punished along with the former, or to have been honored along with him.
Now it was something of this sort which befel the Jews and the Gentiles,
or something far more strange than this. Now that all were unworthy, he
has shown above, where he says, “For all have sinned, and come short of
the glory of God.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p34.1"></span>[Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="vii.xviii-p34.2"></span>.)
But the new thing is, that when all were unworthy, the Gentiles were
saved alone. And beside this there is another difficulty that some one
may start, he says. If God had no intention of fulfilling the promises
to them, why make them at all? For men who know not the future, and are
many times deceived, do promise even the undeserving that they shall
have their largesses. But He Who knoweth beforehand things to come as
well as things present, and hath a clear knowledge that they will make
themselves undeserving of the promises, and therefore will not receive
any of the things specified,—why should He promise at all? Now what is
Paul’s way of meeting all this? It is by showing what the Israel is to
whom He made the promise. For when this has been shown, there is at the
same time demonstrated the fact that the promises were all fulfilled.
And to point this out he said, “For they are not all Israel that are of
Israel.” And this is why he does not use the name of Jacob, <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470) but that of Israel, which was a
sign of the virtue of that just man, and of a gift from above, and of
having seen God. ([Gen. xxxii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xviii-p35.2"></span>.) Yet, “all,” he says, “have sinned, and
come short of the glory of God.” ([Rom. iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="vii.xviii-p35.3"></span>.)
Now if all have sinned, how come some to be saved, and some to perish?
It is because all were not minded to come to Him, since for His part all
were saved, for all were called. However, he does not set this down yet
awhile, but meets it from an advantageous position, and from other
examples, by bringing before them another question, and as in the former
case meets a difficulty very great, by another difficulty. For when he
was discussing how by Christ being justified all the rest enjoyed that
righteousness, he brought in Adam’s case, saying, “For if by one man’s
offence death reigned, much more they which receive abundance of grace
shall reign in life.” ([Rom. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#017)<span id="vii.xviii-p35.4"></span>).
And the case of Adam, indeed, he does not clear up, but from it he
clears up His (or his own), and shows that it was more reasonable that
He Who died in their behalf should have power over them at His will. For
that when one had sinned all should be punished, does not seem to be so
very reasonable to most men. But that when One had done aright all
should be justified, is at once more reasonable and more suited to God.
Yet still he has not solved the difficulty he raised. For the more
obscure that point remained, the more the Jew was put to silence. And
the difficulty of his position passed over to the other, and this become
clearer from it (Mar. and 4 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p35.5"></span>mss.</span> “than that”). So in this passage
also, it is by raising other difficulties that he meets the questions
raised, inasmuch as it was against Jews that he was contending. Hence he
takes no pains to solve the examples which he has brought before us. For
he was not answerable for <span id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471)
them as in the fight against the Jews. But from them he makes his own
subject throughout clearer. Why do you feel surprised, he means, that
some of the Jews were saved, and some not saved at this time? Why of
old, in the patriarch’s times, one may see this happening. For why was
Isaac only called the seed, and yet he was the father of Ishmael also,
and of several others. “But he was of a mother that was a slave.” And
what has this to do with his father? Still I will not be captious. Let
this son be set aside on his mother’s account. What are we to say of
those sprung from Keturah? were they not free, and from a mother that
was free? How came they not to be honored with the same preference as
Isaac? And why do I speak of these? for Rebecca was even Isaac’s only
wife, and bearing two children she bore them both to Isaac; still those
so born, though of the same father, and the same mother, and the fruit
of the same labor, being both of one father and one mother, and twins
besides, yet did not enjoy the same lot. And yet here you have no
mother’s slavery to account for it, as in Ishmael’s case, nor can you
say that one was begotten of this womb and the other of a different one,
as in the case of Keturah and Sarah, since in this case they had the
same hour in common to them for their birth. This was why Paul then, in
order to give a clearer example, says that this happened not in Isaac’s
case only, “but when Rebecca also had conceived by one, even by our
father Isaac.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p37"></span>[Rom.
9.11-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xviii-p37.1"></span>. “For the children being not yet born,
neither having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according
to election might stand, not of works, but of him that calleth, it was
said unto her, the elder shall serve the younger. As it is written,
Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p38"></span>What was the cause then why one was
loved and the other hated? why was it that one served, the other was
served? It was because one was wicked, and the other good. <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472) And yet the children being not yet
born, one was honored and the other condemned. For when they were not as
yet born, God said, “the elder shall serve the younger.” With what
intent then did God say this? Because He doth not wait, as man doth, to
see from the issue of their acts the good and him who is not so, but
even before these He knoweth which is the wicked and which not such. And
this took place in the Israelites’ case also, in a still more wonderful
way. Why, he says, do I speak of Esau and of Jacob, of whom one was
wicked and the other good? For in the Israelites’ case, the sin belonged
to all, since they all worshipped the calf. Yet notwithstanding some had
mercy shown them, and others had not. <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473)

<span id="vii.xviii-p41"></span>[Rom.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xviii-p41.1"></span>. “For I will have mercy, He says, on whom I
will have mercy, and I will show compassion on whom I will show
compassion.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p41.2"></span>[Ex. xxxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span id="vii.xviii-p41.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p42"></span>This one may see also in the case of
those who are punished, for what would you say of Pharaoh who was
punished, and had to pay so heavy a penalty? You say he was hardened and
disobedient. Was he then alone such, and not even one person else? How
came he then to be so severely punished? Why even in the case of the
Jews did he call that a people which was no people, or again, why not
count all worthy of equal honor? “For if they be” (it says) “as the sand
of the sea, yet shall a remnant be saved.” (<span
id="vii.xviii-p42.1"></span>[Is. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="vii.xviii-p42.2"></span>.)
And why is it to be only a remnant? You see what difficulty he has
filled the subject with. And with great propriety. For when you have
power to throw your adversary into perplexity, do not at once bring
forward the answer, because if he be found himself responsible for the
same ignorance, why take unnecessary dangers upon yourself? Why make him
more bold, by drawing it all upon yourself? Now tell me, O thou Jew,
that hast so many perplexing questions, and art unable to answer any of
them, how thou comest to annoy us on account of the call of the
Gentiles? I, however, have a good reason to give you why the Gentiles
were justified and ye were cast out. And what is the reason? It is that
they are of faith, ye of the works of the Law. And it is owing to this
obstinacy of yours that ye have in every way (Mar. and several <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p42.3"></span>mss.</span> all) been
given up. For, “they being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and going
about to establish their own righteousness, have not submitted
themselves unto the righteousness of God.” (<span
id="vii.xviii-p42.4"></span>[Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p42.5"></span>.)
The clearing up then of the whole passage, to give the whole sense
summarily, is here brought out by that blessed person. But that this may
be clearer, let us investigate the things he says also one by one; this
knowing, that what the blessed Paul aimed at was, to show by all that he
said that God only knoweth who are worthy, and no man whatever knoweth,
even if he seem to know ever so well, but that in this sentence of his
there are sundry aberrations. For He that knoweth the secrets of the
hearts, He only knoweth for a certainty who deserve a crown, and who
punishment and vengeance. Hence it is that many of those, by men
esteemed good, He convicts and punishes, and those suspected to be bad
He crowns, after showing it not to be so; thus forming his sentence not
after the judgment of us slaves, but after his own keen and uncorrupt
decision, and not waiting for the issue of actions to look at the wicked
and him who is not so therefrom. But that we may not make the subject
more obscure, again let us go to the very words of the Apostle.

<span id="vii.xviii-p43"></span>[Rom.
9.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xviii-p43.1"></span>. “And not only this, but when Rebecca also
had conceived by one.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p44"></span>I might, he implies, have mentioned the
children by Keturah besides, but I do not. But to gain the victory from
a vantage ground it is those born of one and the same father, and mother
too, that I bring forward. For they were both sprung from Rebecca, and
from Isaac the true-born, the elect, the son honored above all, of whom
He said, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called,” who became “the father of
us all;” but if he was our father, then should his sons have been our
fathers; yet it was not so. You see how this happens not in Abraham’s
case only, but also in that of his son himself, and how it is faith and
virtue in all cases that is conspicuous, and gives the real relationship
its character. For hence we learn that it is not only from the manner of
birth, but owing to their being worthy of the father’s virtue, that the
children are called children of him. For if it were only owing to the
manner of the birth, then ought Esau to have enjoyed the same as Jacob
did. For he also was from a womb as good as dead, and his mother was
barren. Yet this was not the only thing required, but the character too,
which fact contributes no common amount of practical instruction for us.
And he does not say that one is good and another bad, and so the former
was honored; lest this kind of argument should be wielded against him,
“What, are those of the Gentiles good men rather than those of the
circumcision?” For even supposing the truth of the matter was so, still
he does not state it yet, as that would have seemed to be vexatious. But
it is upon God’s knowledge that he has cast the whole, and this no one
would venture to gainsay, though he were ever so frantic. “For the
children being not yet born,” he says, “it was said unto her, The elder
shall serve the younger.” And he shows that noble birth after the flesh
is of no avail, but we must seek for virtue of soul, which even before
the works of it God knoweth of. For “the children,” he says, “being not
yet born, nor having done any good or evil, that the purpose <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474) of God according to election might
stand, it was said unto her that the elder shall serve the younger:” for
this was a sign of foreknowledge, that they were chosen from the very
birth. That the election made according to foreknowledge, might be
manifestly of God, from the first day He at once saw and proclaimed
which was good and which not. Do not then tell me that thou hast read
the Law (he means) and the Prophets, and hast been a servant for such a
long time. For He that knoweth how to assay the soul, knoweth which is
worthy of being saved. Yield then to the incomprehensibleness of the
election. For it is He alone Who knoweth how to crown aright. How many,
for instance, seemed better than St. Matthew; to go by the exhibition of
works then visible. But He that knoweth things undeclared, and is able
to assay the mind’s aptitude, knew the pearl though lying in the mire,
and after passing by others, and being well pleased with the beauty of
this, He elected it, and by adding to the noble born free-will grace
from Himself, He made it approved. For if in the case of these arts
which are perishable, and indeed in other matters, those that are good
judges do not use the grounds on which the uninstructed form their
decision, in selecting out of what is put before them; but from points
which they are themselves well aware of, they many times disparage that
which the uninstructed approve, and decide upon what they disparage: and
horse-breakers often do this with horses, and so the judges of precious
stones, and workmen in other arts: much more will the God that loveth
man, the infinite Wisdom, Who alone hath a clear knowledge of all
things, not allow of man’s guesses, but will out of His own exact and
unfailing Wisdom pass his sentence upon all men. Hence it was that He
chose the publican, the thief, and the harlot; but dishonored priests,
and elders, and rulers, and cast them out. And this one may see
happening in the martyrs’ case also. Many accordingly of those who were
utterly cast aside, have in the time of trial been crowned. And, on the
other hand, some that have been held great ones by many have
stumbled <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475) and fallen. Do not
then call the Creator to account, nor say, Why is it that one was
crowned and another punished? For He knoweth how to do these things with
exactness. Whence also he says, “Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated.” That it was with justice, you indeed know from the result: but
Himself even before the result knew it clearly. For it is not a mere
exhibition of works that God searcheth after, but a nobleness of choice
and an obedient temper (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p46.1"></span>γνώμην εὐγνώμονα</span>) besides. For a man
of this kind, if he should ever sin through some surprise, <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476) will speedily recover himself. And
if he should even stay long haply in a state of vice, he will not be
overlooked, but God Who knoweth all things will speedily draw him out.
And so he that is herein corrupted, even if he seem to do some good
things, will perish, in that he doth this with an ill intention. Hence
even David, after committing murder and adultery, since he did this as
being carried away by surprise, and not from habitual practice of
wickedness, speedily washed it out. The Pharisee, however, who had not
perpetrated any such crime (<span id="vii.xviii-p47.2"></span>[Luke
xviii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xviii-p47.3"></span>), but even had good deeds besides to boast
of, lost all by the bad spirit he had chosen.

<span id="vii.xviii-p48"></span>[Rom.
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xviii-p48.1"></span>. “What shall we say then? Is there
unrighteousness with God? God forbid.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p49"></span>Hence there is no such thing in the case
of us and the Jews. And then he goes on with another thing, a more clear
than this. And of what sort is it?

<span id="vii.xviii-p50"></span>[Rom.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xviii-p50.1"></span>. For he saith to Moses, I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will
have compassion.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p51"></span>Here again he adds force to the
objection by dividing it in two and meeting it, and starting another
fresh difficulty. But to make what I have said clearer, one must needs
explain it. God, he means, said that “the elder shall serve the
younger,” before the travail. What then? “Is God unrighteous?” By no
means. Now listen to what follows also. For in that case the virtue or
the vice, might be the decisive thing. But here there was one sin on
which all the Jews joined, that of the molten calf, and still some were
punished, and some were not punished. And this is why He says, “I will
have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom
I will have compassion.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p51.1"></span>[Ex. xxxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019)<span id="vii.xviii-p51.2"></span>:
observe context.) For it is not thine to know, O Moses, he means, which
are deserving of My love toward man, but leave this to Me. But if Moses
had no right to know, much less have we. And this is why he did not
barely quote the passage, but also called to our minds to whom it was
said. For it is Moses, he means, that he is speaking to, that at least
by the dignity of the person he might make the objector modest. Having
then given a solution of the difficulties raised, he divides it in two,
by bringing forward another objection besides, as follows:

<span id="vii.xviii-p52"></span>[Rom.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)<span id="vii.xviii-p52.1"></span>.
“So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of
God that showeth mercy. <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477) For
the Scripture saith unto Pharaoh, Even for this same purpose have I
raised thee up, that I might show my power in thee, and that my name
might be declared throughout all the earth.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p54"></span>As then in the one case, he means, some
were saved and some were punished, so here also. This man was reserved
for this very purpose. And then he again urges the objection.

<span id="vii.xviii-p55"></span>[Rom.
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)<span id="vii.xviii-p55.1"></span>.
“Therefore He hath mercy on whom He will have mercy, and whom He will He
hardeneth. Thou wilt say then unto me, Why doth he then find fault? For
who hath resisted His will?”

<span id="vii.xviii-p56"></span>See what pains he takes to embarrass the
subject in every way. And the answer he does not produce forthwith, it
being a useful thing not to do so, but he first stops the disputant’s
mouth, saying as follows,

<span id="vii.xviii-p57"></span>[Rom.
9.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020)<span
id="vii.xviii-p57.1"></span>. “Nay but, O man, who art thou that
repliest against God?”

<span id="vii.xviii-p58"></span>This he does to take down the objector’s
unseasonable inquisitiveness, and excessive curiosity, and to put a
check upon it, and teach him to know what God is, and what man, and how
incomprehensible His foreknowledge is, and how far above our reason, and
how obedience to Him in all points is binding. So when he has made this
preparatory step in his hearer, and has hushed and softened down his
spirit, then with great felicity he introduces the answer, having made
what he says easy of admittance with him. And he does not say, it is
impossible to answer questions of this kind, but that (5 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p58.1"></span>mss.</span> No, but what?
that) it is presumptuous to raise them. For our business is to obey what
God does, not to be curious even if we do not know the reason of them.
Wherefore he said, “Who art thou that repliest against God?” You see how
very light he makes of him, how he bears down his swelling spirit! “Who
art thou?” art thou a sharer of His power? (compare [Job
xxxviii](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xviii-p58.2"></span>.) nay, art thou sitting in judgment upon
God? Why in comparison with Him thou canst not have a being even! nor
this or that sort of being, but absolutely none! For the expression,
“who art thou?” doth much more set him at naught than “thou art
nothing.” And he takes other ways of showing further his indignation in
the question, and does not say, “Who art thou that” answerest “God?”
but, “that repliest against,” that is, that gainsayest, and that
opposest. For the saying things ought to be so, and ought not to be so,
is what a man does that “replieth against.” See how he scares them, how
he terrifies them, how he makes them tremble rather than be questioning
and curious. This is what an excellent teacher does; he does not follow
his disciples’ fancy everywhere, but leads them to his own mind, and
pulls up the thorns, and then puts the seed in, and does not answer at
once in all cases to the questions put to him.

<span id="vii.xviii-p59"></span>[Rom.
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span id="vii.xviii-p59.1"></span>.
“Shall the thing formed say to Him that formed it, Why hast Thou made me
thus? Hath not the potter (Read <span id="vii.xviii-p59.2"></span>[Jer.
xviii. 1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001)<span
id="vii.xviii-p59.3"></span>) power, of the same lump to make one vessel
unto honor, and another unto dishonor?”

<span id="vii.xviii-p60"></span>Here it is not to do away with free-will
that he says this, but to show, up to what point we ought to obey God.
For in respect of calling God to account, we ought to be as little
disposed to it as the clay is. For we ought to abstain not from
gainsaying or questioning only, but even from speaking or thinking of it
at all, and to become like that lifeless matter, which followeth the
potter’s hands, and lets itself be drawn about anywhere he may please.
And this is the only point he applied the illustration to, not, that is,
to any enunciation of the rule of life, but to the complete obedience
and silence enforced upon us. And this we ought to observe in all cases,
that we are not to take the illustrations quite entire, but after
selecting the good of them, and that for which they were introduced, to
let the rest alone. As, for instance, when he says, “He couched, he lay
down as a lion;” ([Numb. xxiv. 9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xviii-p60.1"></span>) let us take out the indomitable and
fearful part, not the brutality, nor any other of the things belonging
to a lion. And again, when He says, “I will meet them as a bereaved
bear” ([Hos. xiii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008)<span
id="vii.xviii-p60.2"></span>), let us take the vindictiveness. And when
he says, “our God is a consuming fire” ([Deut.
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024), [Heb.
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xviii-p60.3"></span>[Deut. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)<span id="vii.xviii-p60.4"></span>;
and [Heb. xii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xviii-p60.5"></span>), the wasting power exerted in punishing.
So also here must we single out the clay, the potter, and the vessels.
And when he does go on to say, “Hath not the potter power over the clay,
of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and another unto
dishonor?” do not suppose that this is said by Paul as an account of the
creation, nor as implying a necessity over the will, but to illustrate
the sovereignty and difference of dispensations; for if we do not take
it in this way, divers incongruities will follow, for if here he were
speaking about the will, and those who are good and those not so, He
will be Himself the Maker of these, and man will be free from all
responsibility. And at this rate, Paul will also be shown to be at
variance with himself, as he always bestows chief honor upon free
choice. There is nothing else then which he here wishes to do, save to
persuade the hearer to yield entirely to God, and at no time to call Him
to account for anything whatever. For as the potter (he says) of the
same lump makes what he pleaseth, and no one forbids it; thus also when
God, of the same race of men, punisheth some, and honoreth others, be
not thou curious nor meddlesome herein, but worship only, and imitate
the clay. And as it followeth the hands of the potter, so do thou also
the mind of Him that so ordereth things. For He worketh nothing at
random, or mere hazard, though thou be ignorant of the secret of His
Wisdom. Yet thou allowest the other of the same lump to make divers
things, and findest no fault: but of Him you demand an account of His
punishments and honors, and will not allow Him to know who is worthy and
who is not so; but since the same <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1479](#fn_1478) lump is of the same substance, you
assert that there are the same dispositions. And, how monstrous this is!
And yet not even is it on the potter that the honor and the dishonor of
the things made of the lump depends, but upon the use made by those that
handle them, so here also it depends on the free choice. Still, as I
said before, one must take this illustration to have one bearing only,
which is that one should not contravene God, but yield to His
incomprehensible Wisdom. For the examples ought to be greater than the
subject, and than the things on account of which they are brought
forward, so as to draw on the hearer better. Since if they were not
greater and did not mount far above it, he could not attack as he ought,
and shame the objectors. However, their ill-timed obstinacy he silenced
in this way with becoming superiority. And then he introduces his
answer. Now what is the answer?

<span id="vii.xviii-p62"></span>[Rom.
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024)<span id="vii.xviii-p62.1"></span>.
“What if God, willing to show His wrath, and to make His power known,
endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to
destruction: and that He might make known the riches of His glory on the
vessels of mercy, which He had afore prepared unto glory, even us, whom
He hath chosen, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p63"></span>What he means is somewhat as follows.
Pharaoh was a vessel of wrath, that is, a man who by his own
hard-heartedness had kindled the wrath of God. For after enjoying much
long-suffering, he became no better, but remained unimproved. Wherefore
he calleth him not only “a vessel of wrath,” but also one “fitted for
destruction.” That is, fully fitted indeed, but by his own proper
self. <span id="fr_1479"></span>[1480](#fn_1479) For neither had God
left out aught of the things likely to recover him, nor did he leave out
aught of those that would ruin him, and put him beyond any forgiveness.
Yet still, though God knew this, “He endured him with much
long-suffering,” being willing to bring him to repentance. For had He
not willed this, then He would not have been thus long-suffering. But as
he would not use the long-suffering in order to repentance, but fully
fitted himself for wrath, He used him for the correction of others,
through the punishment inflicted upon him making them better, and in
this way setting forth His power. For that it is not God’s wish that His
power be so made known, but in another way, by His benefits, namely, and
kindnesses, he had shown above in all possible ways. For if Paul does
not wish to appear powerful in this way (“not that we should appear
approved,” he says, “but that ye should do that which is honest,”)
(<span id="vii.xviii-p64.2"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007)<span id="vii.xviii-p64.3"></span>),
much less doth God. But after that he had shown long-suffering, that He
might lead to repentance, but he did not repent, He suffered him a long
time, that He might display at once His goodness and His power, even if
that man were not minded to gain anything from this great
long-suffering. As then by punishing this man, who continued
incorrigible, He showed His power, so by having pitied those who had
done many sins but repented, He manifested His love toward man. But it
does not say, love towards man, but glory, to show that this is
especially God’s glory, and for this He was above all things earnest.
But in saying, “which He had afore prepared unto glory,” he does not
mean that all is God’s doing. Since if this were so, there were nothing
to hinder all men from being saved. But he is setting forth again His
foreknowledge, and doing away with the difference between the Jews and
the Gentiles. And on this topic again he grounds a defence of his
statement, which is no small one. For it was not in the case of the Jews
only that some men perished, and some were saved, but with the Gentiles
also this was the case. Wherefore he does not say, all the Gentiles,
but, “of the Gentiles,” nor, all the Jews, but, “of the Jews.” As then
Pharaoh became a vessel of wrath by his own lawlessness, so did these
become vessels of mercy by their own readiness to obey. For though the
more part is of God, still they also have contributed themselves some
little. Whence he does not say either, vessels of well-doing, or vessels
of boldness (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p64.4"></span>παρρησίας</span>), but “vessels of mercy,”
to show that the whole is of God. For the phrase, “it is not of him that
willeth, nor of him that runneth,” even if it comes in the course of the
objection, still, were it said by Paul, would create no difficulty.
Because when he says, “it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth,” he does not deprive us of free-will, but shows that all is not
one’s own, for that it requires grace from above. For it is binding on
us to will, and also to run: but to confide not in our own labors, but
in the love of God toward man. And this he has expressed elsewhere. “Yet
not I, but the grace which was with me.” (<span
id="vii.xviii-p64.5"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="vii.xviii-p64.6"></span>.)
And he well says, “Which He had afore prepared unto glory.” For since
they reproached them with this, that they were saved by grace, and
thought to make them ashamed, he far more than sets aside this
insinuation. For if the thing brought glory even to God, much more to
them through whom God was glorified. But observe his forbearance, and
unspeakable wisdom. For when he had it in his power to adduce, as an
instance of those punished, not Pharaoh, but such of the Jews as had
sinned, and so make his discourse much clearer, and show that where
there were the same fathers, and the same sins, some perished, and some
had mercy shown them, and persuade them not to be doubtful-minded, even
if some of the Gentiles were saved, while the Jews were perishing; that
he might not make his discourse irksome, the showing forth of the
punishment he draws from the foreigner, so that he may not be forced to
call them “vessels of wrath.” But those that obtained mercy he draws
from the people of the Jews. And besides, he also has spoken in a
sufficient way in God’s behalf, because though He knew very well that
the nation was fitting itself as a vessel of destruction, still He
contributed all on His part, His patience, His long-suffering, and that
not merely long-suffering, but “much long-suffering;” yet still he was
not minded to state it barely against the Jews. Whence then are some
vessels of wrath, and some of mercy? Of their own free choice. God,
however, being very good, shows the same kindness to both. For it was
not those in a state of salvation only to whom He showed mercy, but also
Pharaoh, as far as His part went. For of the same long-suffering, both
they and he had the advantage. And if he was not saved, it was quite
owing to his own will: since, as for what concerneth God, he had as much
done for him as they who were saved. Having then given to the question
that answer which was furnished by facts, in order to give his discourse
the advantage of other testimony in its favor, he introduces the
prophets also making the same declarations aforetime. For Hosea, he
says, of old put this in writing, as follows:

<span id="vii.xviii-p65"></span>[Rom.
9.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)<span
id="vii.xviii-p65.1"></span>. “I will call them My people, which were
not My people; and her beloved, which was not beloved.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p66"></span>Here to prevent their saying, that you
are deceiving us here with specious reasoning, he calls Hosea to
witness, who crieth and saith, “I will call them My people, who were not
My people.” ([Hos. ii. 23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)<span
id="vii.xviii-p66.1"></span>.) Who then are the not-people? Plainly, the
Gentiles. And who the not-beloved? The same again. However, he says,
that they shall become at once people, and beloved, and sons of God.

<span id="vii.xviii-p67"></span>[Rom.
9.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xviii-p67.1"></span>. “For even they shall be called,” he says,
“the children of the living God.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p68"></span>But if they should assert that this was
said of those of the Jews who believed, even then the argument stands.
For if with those who after so many benefits were hard-hearted and
estranged, and had lost their being as a people, so great a change was
wrought, what is there to prevent even those who were not estranged
after being taken to Him, but were originally aliens, from being called,
and, provided they obey, from being counted worthy of the same
blessings? Having then done with Hosea, he does not content himself with
him only, but also brings Isaiah in after him. sounding in harmony with
him.

<span id="vii.xviii-p69"></span>[Rom.
9.27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027)<span
id="vii.xviii-p69.1"></span>. “For Esaias,” he says, “crieth concerning
Israel.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p70"></span>That is, speaks out boldly, and uses no
dissimulation. Why then lay a charge against us, when they afore
declared the same thing with more than trumpet’s loudness? And what does
Isaiah cry? “Though the number of the children of Israel be as the sand
of the sea, a remnant shall be saved.” (<span
id="vii.xviii-p70.1"></span>[Is. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span id="vii.xviii-p70.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p71"></span>Do you see that he too does not say that
all are to be saved, but that those that are worthy shall? For I regard
not the multitude, he means, nor does a race diffused so far distress
me, but those only do I save that yield themselves worthy of it. And he
does not mention the “sand of the sea” without a reason, but to remind
them of the ancient promise whereof they had made themselves unworthy.
Why then are you troubled, as though the promise had failed, when all
the Prophets show that it is not all that are to be saved? Then he
mentions the mode of the salvation also. Observe the accuracy of the
Prophet, and the judgment of the Apostle, what a testimony he has cited,
how exceedingly apposite! For it not only shows us that those to be
saved are some and not all, but also adds the way they are to be saved.
How then are they to be saved, and how will God count them worthy of the
benefit?

<span id="vii.xviii-p72"></span>[Rom.
9.28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xviii-p72.1"></span>. “He will finish the work, and cut it short
in righteousness,” he says, “because a short work will the Lord make
upon the earth.” ([Isa. 10.23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)<span
id="vii.xviii-p72.2"></span>, LXX.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p73"></span>What he means then is somewhat of this
sort. There is no need of fetching a circuit, and of trouble, and the
vexation of the works of the Law, for the salvation is by a very short
way. For such is faith, it holds salvation in a few short words. “For if
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine
heart that God hath raised Him from the dead, thou shalt be saved.”
([Rom. x. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xviii-p73.1"></span>.) Now you see what this, “the Lord shall
make a short word (LXX. lit.) upon earth,” is. And what is indeed
wonderful is, that this short word carries with it not salvation only,
but also righteousness.

<span id="vii.xviii-p74"></span>[Rom.
9.29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xviii-p74.1"></span>. “And as Esaias said before, Except the
Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we had been as Sodoma, and had been
made like unto Gomorrha.” (<span id="vii.xviii-p74.2"></span>[Is. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="vii.xviii-p74.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xviii-p75"></span>Here again he shows another thing, that
not even those few were saved from their own resources. For they too
would have perished, and met with Sodom’s fate, that is, they would have
had to undergo utter destruction (for they (of Sodom) were also
destroyed root and branch, and left not even the slightest remnant of
themselves,) and they too, he means, would have been like these, unless
God had used much kindness to them, and had saved them by faith. And
this happened also in the case of the visible captivity, the majority
having been taken away captive and perished, and some few only being
saved.

<span id="vii.xviii-p76"></span>[Rom.
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span id="vii.xviii-p76.1"></span>.
“What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, which followed not after
righteousness, have attained to righteousness, even the righteousness
which is by faith. But Israel, which followed after the law of
righteousness, hath not attained to the law of righteousness.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p77"></span>Here at last is the clearest answer. For
since he had used a proof as well from facts (“for they are not all
Israel that are of Israel”) as from the case of the forefathers Jacob
and Esau, and from the prophets Hosea and Isaiah, he further gives the
most decisive answer, after first adding to the perplexity. The points
discussed, then, are two; one that the Gentiles attained, and the other
that they attained it without following after it, that is, without
taking pains about it. And again in the Jews’ case also there are two
difficulties of the same kind; one that Israel attained not, the other
that, though they took pains, they attained not. Whence also his use of
words is more emphatical. For he does not say that they had, but that
they “attained to righteousness.” For what is especially new and unusual
is, that they who followed after it attained not, but they which
followed not after it attained. And he seems to be indulging them by
saying, “followed after.” But afterwards he strikes the blow home. For
since he had a strong answer to give them, he had no fear of making the
objection a little harsher. Hence he doth not speak of faith either, and
the righteousness ensuing thereon, but shows that before the faith even,
on their own ground they were worsted and condemned. For thou, O Jew, he
says, hast not found even the righteousness which was by the Law. For
thou hast transgressed it, and become liable to the curse. But these
that came not through the Law, but by another road, have found a greater
righteousness than this, that, namely, which is of faith. And this he
had also said before. “For if Abraham was justified by works, he hath
whereof to glory, but not before God” ([Rom.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xviii-p77.1"></span>.): so showing that the other righteousness
was greater than this. Before, then, I said that there were two
difficulties, but now they have even become three questions: that the
Gentiles found righteousness, and found it without following after it,
and found a greater than that of the Law. These same difficulties are
again felt in the Jews’ case with an opposite view. That Israel did not
find, and though he took pains he did not find, and did not find even
the less. Having then thrust his hearer into perplexity, he proceeds to
give a concise answer, and tells him the cause of all that is said. When
then is the cause?

<span id="vii.xviii-p78"></span>[Rom.
9.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)<span
id="vii.xviii-p78.1"></span>. “Because they sought it not by faith, but
as it were by the works of the Law.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p79"></span>This is the clearest answer in the
passage, which if he had said immediately upon starting he would not
have gained so easy a hearing. But since it is after many perplexities,
and preparations, and demonstrations that he sets it down, and after
using countless preparatory steps, he has at last made it more
intelligible, and also more easily admitted. For this he says is the
cause of their destruction: “Because it was not by faith, but as it were
by the works of the Law,” that they wished to be justified. And he does
not say, “by works,” but, “as it were by the works of the Law,” to show
that they had not even this righteousness.

<span id="vii.xviii-p80"></span>“For they stumbled at that
stumbling-stone;”

<span id="vii.xviii-p81"></span>[Rom.
9.33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span
id="vii.xviii-p81.1"></span>. “As it is written, Behold I lay in Sion a
stumbling-stone, and rock of offence: and whosoever believeth on Him
shall not be ashamed.”

<span id="vii.xviii-p82"></span>You see again how it is from faith that
the boldness comes, and the gift is universal; since it is not of the
Jews only that this is said, but also of the whole human race. For every
one, he would say, whether Jew, or Grecian, or Scythian, or Thracian, or
whatsoever else he may be, will, if he believes, enjoy the privilege of
great boldness. But the wonder in the Prophet is that he foretells not
only that they should believe, but also that they should not believe.
For to stumble is to disbelieve. As in the former passage he points out
them that perish and them that are saved, where he says, “If the number
of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, the remnant shall
be saved. And, If the Lord of Sabaoth had not left us a seed, we should
have been as Sodoma.” And, “He hath called not of the Jews only, but
also of the Gentiles;” so here too he implies that some will believe,
and some will stumble. But stumbling comes of not taking heed, of gaping
after other things. Since then they did give heed to the Law, they
stumbled on the stone, “And a stone of stumbling and rock of offence” he
calls it from the character and end of those that believe not.

<span id="vii.xviii-p83"></span>Is then the language used made plain to
you? or does it still want much in clearness? I think indeed that, to
those who have been attending, it is easy to get a clear view of it. But
if it has slipped anybody’s memory, you can meet in private, and learn
what it was. And this is why I have continued longer upon this
explanatory part of the discourse, that I might not be compelled to
break off the continuity of the context, and so spoil the clearness of
the statements. And for this cause too I will bring my discourse to a
conclusion here, without saying anything to you on the more immediately
practical points, as I generally do, lest I should make a fresh
indistinctness in your memories by saying so much. It is time now to
come to the proper conclusion, by shutting up the discourse with the
doxology to the God of all. Let us then both pause, me that am speaking
and you that are hearing, and offer up glory to Him. For His is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[i:1459](1110079.htm#fr_1458) <span
id="vii.xviii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p5"></span> So Field from one <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p5.1"></span>ms</span>. Vulg. “what has
been read to-day, as it reached my ears.”

<span id="fn_1459"></span>[i:1460](1110079.htm#fr_1459) <span
id="vii.xviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p7"></span> [Rom.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#000), [Rom.
10:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#000), [Rom.
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#000)<span id="vii.xviii-p7.1"></span>.
may be viewed as a kind of appendix to the doctrinal part of the
epistle, in which the apostle considers the problems to which the
unbelief and rejection of the Jews gave rise. It is Paul’s purpose in
these chapters to show that his doctrine does not contradict God’s
promises to the Jews. [Rom. 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xviii-p7.2"></span>. contains strong assertions that the
providential dealing of God with the Jews is not to be called in
question. It is evident from the gradual approach of the apostle to this
theme, how painful it was to him to be compelled to contemplate
it.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[i:1461](1110079.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="vii.xviii-p8.7"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p9"></span> Thus *sacer* is used in both senses, and
devoted in our own language somewhat similarly.

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[i:1462](1110079.htm#fr_1461) <span
id="vii.xviii-p9.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p10"></span> The force of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.1"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.2"></span>υχόμην</span> here is: “I would wish, if it
were a thing which could possibly be realized for the advantage of my
brethren.” The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p10.4"></span>νάθεμα</span> means anything devoted to God
and then (as in the N.T.) something devoted to his wrath, i.e. accursed.
The expression is to be understood as the language of intense passion
and can scarcely mean anything less than a readiness to perish if by so
doing he could save his people Israel.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[i:1463](1110079.htm#fr_1462) <span
id="vii.xviii-p10.10"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p11"></span> Aug. *de Civ. Dei,* i. 21. Butler,
*Anal.* p. 262, ii. 3, v. fin.

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[i:1464](1110079.htm#fr_1463) <span
id="vii.xviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p14"></span> This was sometimes done; but the <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p14.1"></span>mss.</span> vary unusually
in this word, and three different readings mean, “if ye are not
disturbed.” See Twining on Arist. *Poet.* note 22, and Gaisf. on *Rhet.*
p. 46.

<span id="fn_1464"></span>[i:1465](1110079.htm#fr_1464) <span
id="vii.xviii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p17"></span> As galled at the blasphemies against
Him for breaking His promise.

<span id="fn_1465"></span>[i:1466](1110079.htm#fr_1465) <span
id="vii.xviii-p20.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p21"></span> This passage makes, perhaps, a comment
on the words, <span id="vii.xviii-p21.1"></span>[Luke ix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#024)<span id="vii.xviii-p21.2"></span>,
Whosoever will lose his life (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p21.3"></span>τὴν ψυχὴν</span>), the same shall save it.

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[i:1467](1110079.htm#fr_1466) <span
id="vii.xviii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p22"></span> So all copies of St. Chrys. The
following words, however, imply that this was not his reading of the
text, (which had before been read at length, as the first words of this
Homily show, see p. 459), he quotes it as in our text, in Hom. xx. on [1
Cor. viii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#005)<span
id="vii.xviii-p22.1"></span>, p. 266 O.T. and elsewhere. See note in
Mill’s G. T. All <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p22.2"></span>mss.</span> agree with the rec. text.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[i:1468](1110079.htm#fr_1467) <span
id="vii.xviii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p24"></span> 1 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p24.1"></span>ms</span>. he is aware of their way of
thinking, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p24.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p24.3"></span>πίσταται</span>, this gives a more common
sense to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p24.4"></span>διάνοιαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[i:1469](1110079.htm#fr_1468) <span
id="vii.xviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p27"></span> At [Rom.
9.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="vii.xviii-p27.1"></span>
begins Paul’s theodicy in view of the lapse of the Israelites. The
argument of [Rom. 9.6-13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xviii-p27.2"></span> is: God’s promise cannot fail because it
applies to the *true Israel.* This point he illustrates from Old
Testatment examples. The argument throughout this chapter is conducted
from the point of view of God’s sovereign election. In the two
subsequent chapters, other considerations drawn from the freedom and
disobedience of the people are introduced. It is as if the apostle had
said: God has done according to His sovereign good pleasure. We might
leave the matter there. To one who should say: why then does he blame
me? ([Rom. 9.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xviii-p27.3"></span>), or: why has he made me thus? ([Rom.
9.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span
id="vii.xviii-p27.4"></span>), we might reply: who art thou to reply
against God? The apostle does not rest the consideration of the case
with the presentation of this view. In the closing verses of the chap.
he shifts the point of view and asks: *why* did Israel fail? why was she
cut off and the Gentiles chosen? ([Rom.
9.31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span
id="vii.xviii-p27.5"></span>). He answers, because they did not seek
righteousness by faith; they were not trustful and obedient, and hence
they found the Messiah a stone of stumbling and failed to realize the
ideal of their prophetic history.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[i:1470](1110079.htm#fr_1469) <span
id="vii.xviii-p31.9"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p32"></span> i.e. the true Seed of promise.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[i:1471](1110079.htm#fr_1470) <span
id="vii.xviii-p34.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p35"></span> Didymus in [Psalm xcvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)<span id="vii.xviii-p35.1"></span>,
and Hesych. ps. lii. 7, *ap. Corderium,* t. 2.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[i:1472](1110079.htm#fr_1471) <span
id="vii.xviii-p35.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p36"></span> Gr. to them, i.e. to them considered as
objections. Compare [Matt. xxi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#027)<span id="vii.xviii-p36.1"></span>.
“Neither tell I you by what authority I do these things.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[i:1473](1110079.htm#fr_1472) <span
id="vii.xviii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p39"></span> If this is to be read interrogatively,
so as to imply the negative, it must be understood of that time
exclusively, as the context shows.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[i:1474](1110079.htm#fr_1473) <span
id="vii.xviii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p40"></span> He refers to the occasion on which the
words next quoted were spoken, viz. when Moses interceded for them after
that sin.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[i:1475](1110079.htm#fr_1474) <span
id="vii.xviii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p45"></span> This expression supports St. Augustin’s
interpretation of [Rom. viii. 28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xviii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[i:1476](1110079.htm#fr_1475) <span
id="vii.xviii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p46"></span> Perhaps alluding to the supplanting of
Esau.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[i:1477](1110079.htm#fr_1476) <span
id="vii.xviii-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p47"></span> Literally under some circumstance, but
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p47.1"></span>περιστάσις</span>
implies surrounding and assault.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[i:1478](1110079.htm#fr_1477) <span
id="vii.xviii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p53"></span> One <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xviii-p53.1"></span>ms</span>. adds, “Isaac, for his part,
wished to bless Esau, he ran to the field (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xviii-p53.2"></span>παιδίον</span>, by a common mistake for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p53.3"></span>πεδίον</span>) to
do his father’s bidding, desirous of the blessing. But God brought in
Jacob who was worthy, and by a just judgment declared him deserving of
the blessing.”

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[i:1479](1110079.htm#fr_1478) <span
id="vii.xviii-p60.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p61"></span> Such is plainly the sense, but most
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.xviii-p61.1"></span>mss.</span> have
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p61.2"></span>τὸ αὐτο φύραμα τῆς
οὐσίας ἐστὶ</span>, it is the same lump in regard of the substance.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[i:1480](1110079.htm#fr_1479) <span
id="vii.xviii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xviii-p64"></span> The Greek word, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xviii-p64.1"></span>κατηρτισμένον</span>,
makes this more obvious.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVII on Rom. x. 1.](1110080)
