[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110020)  [Next](1110022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xvi"></span> <span id="vi.xvi-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Homily XVI.</span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p2"></span>[Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#007)<span id="vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p3"></span>“And God spake on this wise, That his seed
should sojourn in a strange land; and that they should bring them into
bondage, and entreat them evil four hundred years. And the nation to
whom they shall be in bondage will I judge, said God: and after that
shall they come forth, and serve Me in this place.”

<span id="vi.xvi-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xvi-p4.1"></span>See,</span> what a number of years the Promise
has been given, and the manner of the Promise, and nowhere sacrifice,
nowhere circumcision! He here shows, how God Himself suffered them to be
afflicted, not <span id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) that He had
anything to lay to their charge. “And they shall bring them into
bondage,” etc. But nevertheless, they did not these things with
impunity. “And the nation to whom they shall be in bondage I will judge,
said God.” For, <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) to show that
they are not to go by this, in estimating who are pious (by reason of
their saying, “He trusted in God, let Him deliver Him,”) ([Matt. xxvii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)<span
id="vi.xvi-p6.10"></span>).—He, the Same that promised, He that gave the
land, first permits the evils. So also now, though He has promised a
Kingdom, yet He suffers us to be exercised in temptations. If here the
freedom was not to be till after four hundred years, what wonder, with
regard to the Kingdom? Yet he performed it, and lapse of time availed
not to falsify His word. Moreover, it was no ordinary bondage they
underwent. <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) And the matter does
not terminate solely in the punishment of those (their oppressors); but
they themselves also, He saith, shall enjoy a mighty salvation. Here he
reminds them too of the benefit which they enjoyed. “And he gave him the
covenant of circumcision: and so he begat Isaac.” Here he lets himself
down to lower matters. “And circumcised him on the eighth day: and Isaac
(begat) Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.” ([Acts
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#008)<span
id="vi.xvi-p7.4"></span>).—Here <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364)
he seems to hint now at the type. “And the patriarchs moved with envy,
sold Joseph into Egypt.” ([Acts
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)<span id="vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>.)
Here again, the type of Christ. <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365)
Though they had no fault to find with him, and though he came on purpose
to bring them their food, they thus ill-treated him. Still here again
the promise, though it is a long while first, receives its fulfillment.
“And God was with him”—this also is for them—“and delivered him out of
all his afflictions.” ([Acts 7.10](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xvi-p9.1"></span>). He shows that unknowingly they helped to
fulfil the prophecy, and that they were themselves the cause, and that
the evils recoiled on their own selves. “And gave him favor and wisdom
in the sight of Pharaoh king of Egypt, Gave him favor,” in the eyes of a
barbarian, to him, the slave, the captive: his brethren sold him, this
(barbarian) honored him. “Now there came a dearth over all the land of
Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction: and our fathers found no
sustenance. But when Jacob heard that there was corn in Egypt, he sent
out our fathers first. And at the second time Joseph was made known to
his brethren.” ([Acts 7.11-13](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xvi-p9.2"></span>). They came down to buy, and had to depend upon
him for everything. What then did he? \[“He made himself known to his
brethren:”\] not to this point only did he carry his friendliness; he
also made them known to Pharaoh, and brought them down into the land.
“And Joseph’s kindred was made known unto Pharaoh. Then sent Joseph, and
called his father Jacob to him, and all his kindred, threescore and
fifteen souls. So Jacob went down into Egypt, and died, he, and our
fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and laid in the sepulchre
that Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor the father
of Sychem. But when the time of the promise drew nigh, which God had
sworn to Abraham the people grew and multiplied in Egypt, till another
king arose, which knew not Joseph.” ([Acts
7.13-18](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xvi-p9.3"></span>). Then again, fresh disappointment (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p9.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p9.5"></span>νελπιστία</span>): first,
famine, but they came through that: secondly, the falling into the hands
of their enemy: thirdly, the being destroyed by the king. Then (to show)
God’s fulness of ways and means (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p9.6"></span>εὐμήχανον</span>), “In which time,” it says,
“Moses was born, and was exceeding fair.” ([Acts
7.20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)<span id="vi.xvi-p9.7"></span>.)
If the former circumstance was wonderful, that Joseph was sold by his
brethren, here again is another circumstance more wonderful still, that
the king “nourished” the very person who was to overthrow his dominion,
being himself the person that was to perish. Do you observe all along a
figurative enacting, so to say, of the resurrection of the dead? But it
is not the same thing for God himself to do a thing, and for a thing to
come to pass in connection with man’s purpose (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p9.8"></span>προαίρεσις</span>). For these things indeed were
in connection with man’s purpose \[ <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) but the Resurrection by itself,
independently.\]—“And he was mighty,” it says, “in word and in deed”
([Acts 7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xvi-p10.8"></span>): he that was to have died. Then again he
shows how ungrateful they were to their benefactor. For, just as in the
former instance, they were saved by the injured Joseph, so here again
they were saved by another injured person, I mean, Moses. “And when he
was full forty years old,” etc. For <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) what though they killed him not
actually? In intention they did kill, as did the others in the former
case. There, they sold out of their own into a strange land: here, they
drive from one strange land into another strange land: in the former
case, one in the act of bringing them food; in this, one in the act of
giving them good counsel; one to whom, under God, the man was indebted
for his life! Mark how it shows (the truth of) that saying of
Gamaliel’s, “If it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it.” ([Acts
7.39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039)<span id="vi.xvi-p11.14"></span>.)
See the plotted-against eventually becoming the authors of salvation to
those plotting against them: <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) the
people, plotting against itself, and itself plotted against by others;
and for all this, saved! A famine, and it did not consume them: nor was
this all: but they were saved by means of the very person, whom they had
expected to be destroyed (by their means). A royal edict, and it did not
consume them: nay then most did their number increase, when he was dead
“who knew” them. Their own Saviour they wished to kill, but for all
that, they had not power to do it. Do you observe, that by the means
whereby the devil tried to bring to naught the promise of God, by those
very means it was advanced?

<span id="vi.xvi-p13"></span>“And God spake on this wise,” etc.
(Recapitulation, [Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#007)<span id="vi.xvi-p13.1"></span>.)
This <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369) is suitable to be said here
also: that God is rich in ways and means to bring us up from hence. For
this above all showed the riches of God’s resources, that in its very
reverses (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p14.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p14.4"></span>ποστροφῇ</span>) the nation increased, while
enslaved, while evil-entreated, and sought to be exterminated. And this
is the greatness of the Promise. For had it increased in its own land,
it had not been so wonderful. And besides, it was not for a short time,
either, that they were in the strange land: but for four hundred years.
Hence we learn <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) a (great lesson)
of philosophic endurance (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p15.1"></span>φιλοσοφίαν</span>):—they did not treat them as
masters use slaves, but as enemies and tyrants—and he foretold that they
should be set in great liberty: for this is the meaning of that
expression, “They shall serve (Me): and they shall come up hither again”
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p15.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p15.3"></span>νταὕθα
ἐπανελεύσονται</span>); and with impunity. <span
id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) —And observe, how, while he seems to
concede something to circumcision, he in fact allows it nothing ([Acts
7.8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#008)<span id="vi.xvi-p16.2"></span>);
since the Promise was before it, and it followed after.—“And the
patriarchs,” he says, “moved with envy.” ([Acts
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)<span id="vi.xvi-p16.3"></span>.)
Where it does no harm, he humors (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p16.4"></span>χαρίζεται</span>) them: <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) for they prided themselves much on
these also.— <span id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) And he shows, that
the saints were not exempt from tribulation, but that in their very
tribulations they obtained help. And that these persons did themselves
help to bring about the results, who wished to cut short these same
(afflictions): just as these made Joseph the more glorious: just as the
king did Moses, by ordering the children to be killed: since had he not
ordered, this would not have been: just as also that (Hebrew) drives
Moses into exile, that there he may have the Vision, having become
worthy. Thus also him who was sold for a slave, makes He to reign as
king there, where he was thought to be a slave. Thus also does Christ in
His death give proof of His power: thus also does He there reign as king
where they sold Him. “And gave him favor and wisdom,” etc. ([Acts
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#010)<span id="vi.xvi-p18.1"></span>.)
This <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) was not only by way of
honor, but that he should have confidence in his own power. “And he made
him governor over Egypt and all his house.” “Now there came a dearth,”
etc. On account of famine—such preparations is he making—“with
threescore and fifteen souls,” he says, “Jacob went down into Egypt, and
died, he and our fathers, and were carried over into Sychem, and laid in
the sepulchre that Abraham bought for a sum of money from the sons of
Emmor the father of Sychem.” <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375)
([Acts 7.11-16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#011)<span
id="vi.xvi-p20.8"></span>). It shows, that they were not masters even to
the extent of a burying-place. “But when the time of the promise drew
nigh, which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in
Egypt, till another king arose, which knew not Joseph” ([Acts
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#018)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.9"></span>).
Observe, that it is not during the four hundred years that He multiplies
them, but (only) when the end was about to draw nigh. And yet already
four hundred years were passed, nay more, in Egypt. But this is the
wonder of it. “The same dealt subtly with our kindred, and
evil-entreated our fathers, that they should cast out their young
children, to the end they might not live.” ([Acts
7.19](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#019)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.10"></span>.)
“Dealt subtly:” he hints at their not liking to exterminate them openly:
“that they should cast out their young children,” it says. “In which
time Moses was born and was exceeding fair.” ([Acts
7.20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.11"></span>.)
This is the wonder, that he who is to be their champion, is born,
neither after nor before, these things, but in the very midst of the
storm (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p20.12"></span>θυμῷ</span>).
“And was nourished up in his father’s house three months.” But when
man’s help was despaired of, and they cast him forth, then did God’s
benefit shine forth conspicuous. “And when he was cast out, Pharaoh’s
daughter took him up, and nourished him for her own son.” ([Acts
7.21](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#021)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.13"></span>.)
Not a word of Temple, not a word of Sacrifice, while all these
Providences are taking place. And he was nourished in a barbarian house.
“And Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and was
mighty in words and in deeds.” ([Acts
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.14"></span>.)
“Was trained,” both <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) in
discipline and in letters. “And when he was full forty years old.”
([Acts 7.23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xvi-p21.8"></span>.) Forty years he was there, and was not found
out from his being circumcised. Observe, how, being in safety, they
overlook their own interests, both he and Joseph, in order that they may
save others: “And when he was full forty years old, it came into his
heart to visit his brethren the children of Israel. And seeing one of
them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him that was oppressed,
and smote the Egyptian: for he supposed his brethren would have
understood how that God by his hand would deliver them: but they
understood not.” ([Acts 7.23-25](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)<span
id="vi.xvi-p21.9"></span>.)—See how up to this point he is not yet
offensive to them; how they listened to him while he said all this. And
“his face,” we read, “was as the face of an angel” ([Acts
6.15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015)<span
id="vi.xvi-p21.10"></span>).—“For he supposed,” etc. And yet it was by
deeds that his championship was shown; what intelligence was there need
of here? but still for all this “they understood not. And the next day
he showed himself unto them as they strove, and would have set them at
one again, saying, Sirs, ye are brethren; why do ye wrong one to
another?” ([Acts 7.26-28](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xvi-p21.11"></span>.) Do you mark with what mildness he addresses
them? He who had shown his wrath in the case of the other, shows his
gentleness <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) in his own case. “But
he that did his neighbor wrong thrust him away, saying, Who made thee a
ruler and a judge over us? Wilt thou kill me, as thou didst the Egyptian
yesterday?” Mark; the very words which they said to Christ: “Who made
Thee ruler and judge over us?” So habitual a thing was it for Jews to
wrong (their benefactors) when in the act of receiving benefits! And
again, mark the atrocious baseness: (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.7"></span>μιαρίαν</span> al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.8"></span>μοχθηρίαν</span>, Sav. marg.) “As thou didst
the Egyptian yesterday! Then fled Moses at this saying, and was a
stranger in the land of Midian, where he begat two sons.” ([Acts
7.29](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#029)<span id="vi.xvi-p22.9"></span>.)
But neither did flight extinguish the plan of Providence, as neither did
death (i.e. the death of Christ).

<span id="vi.xvi-p23"></span>“And when forty years were expired, there
appeared to him in the wilderness of mount Sinai an angel of the Lord in
a flame of fire in a bush.” ([Acts
7.30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)<span id="vi.xvi-p23.1"></span>.)
Do you mark that it is not hindered by lapse of time? For when he was an
exile, when a stranger, when he had now passed much time in a foreign
land, so as to have two sons, when he no longer expected to return, then
does the Angel appear to him. The Son of God he calls an Angel, as also
he calls Him man. (Appears) in the desert, not in a temple. See how many
miracles are taking place, and no word of Temple, no word of Sacrifice.
And here also not simply in the desert, but in the bush. “When Moses saw
it, he wondered at the sight: and as he drew near to behold it, the
voice of the Lord came unto him.” ([Acts
7.31](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#031)<span id="vi.xvi-p23.2"></span>.)
Lo! he was deemed worthy of the Voice also. “I am the God of thy
fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.” ([Acts 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#033)<span id="vi.xvi-p23.3"></span>.)
Lo! <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) how He shows that He is none
other than “the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob”—He, “the Angel of the Great Counsel.” (<span
id="vi.xvi-p24.7"></span>[Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="vi.xvi-p24.8"></span>. LXX.
“Wonderful, Counsellor,” E.V.) Here he shows what great loving-kindness
God herein exhibits. “Then Moses trembled, and durst not behold. Then
said the Lord to him, Put off thy shoes from thy feet; for the place
where thou standest is holy ground.” Not a word of Temple, and the place
is holy through the appearance and operation of Christ. Far more
wonderful this than the place which is in the Holy of Holies: for there
God is nowhere said to have appeared in this manner, nor Moses to have
thus trembled. And then the greatness of His tender care. “I have seen,
I have seen the affliction of My people which is in Egypt, and I have
heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them. And now come, I
will send thee into Egypt.” ([Acts
7.34](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#034)<span id="vi.xvi-p24.9"></span>.)
See, how he shows, that both by kindnesses, and by chastisements, and by
miracles, God was drawing them to Him: but they were still the same.
That God is everywhere present, they learned.

<span id="vi.xvi-p25"></span>Hearing these things, let us in our
afflictions flee to Him. “And their groaning,” saith He, “I have heard:”
not <span id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) simply, “because of their
calamities.” But if any should ask, Why then did He suffer them to be
evil entreated there? Why, in the first place, to every just man his
sufferings are the causes of his rewards. And in the next place, as to
why He afflicted them: it was to show His power, that He can (do all),
and not only so, but that He may also train them. Observe in fact; when
they were in the desert, then they “waxed fat, they grew thick, they
spread out in breadth, they kicked” (<span
id="vi.xvi-p26.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span id="vi.xvi-p26.2"></span>):
and ever and always ease was an evil. Therefore also from the beginning
He said to Adam: “In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread.”
(<span id="vi.xvi-p26.3"></span>[Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="vi.xvi-p26.4"></span>.)
Also <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) (it was) in order that
having come out of much suffering into rest, they might give thanks to
God. For affliction is a great good. For hear the Prophet saying, “It is
good for me, that Thou hast humbled me.” ([Ps. cxix.
71](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#071)<span id="vi.xvi-p27.1"></span>.)
But if to great and wonderful men affliction be a great (good), much
more to us. And, if you will, let us examine into the nature of
affliction as it is in itself. Let there be some person rejoicing
exceedingly, and gay, and giving a loose to jollity: what more unseemly,
what more senseless than this? Let there be one sorrowing and dejected:
what more truly philosophic than this? For, “It is better,” we read, “to
go into the house of mourning, than into the house of laughter.” (<span
id="vi.xvi-p27.2"></span>[Eccles. vii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#002)<span id="vi.xvi-p27.3"></span>.)
But, likely enough, you <span id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) do not
like the saying, and want to evade it. Let us however see, what sort of
man Adam was in Paradise, and what he was afterwards: what sort of man
Cain was before, and what he was afterwards. The soul does not stand
fast in its proper place, but, like as by a running tide, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p28.5"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p28.6"></span>εύματος</span>, Edd. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p28.7"></span>πνεύματος</span>, “wind”)
is raised and buoyed up by pleasure, having no steadfastness; facile in
making professions, prompt at promising; the thoughts all in restless
commotion: laughter ill-timed, causeless hilarity, idle clatter of
unmeaning talk. And why speak of others? Let us take in hand some one of
the saints, and let us see what he was while in pleasure, what again,
when in distress. Shall we look at David himself? When he was in
pleasure and rejoicing, from his many trophies, from his victory, from
his crowns, from his luxurious living, from his confidence, see what
sort of things he said and did: “But I said in my prosperity,” says he,
“I shall never be moved.” ([Ps. xxx.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)<span id="vi.xvi-p28.8"></span>.) But
when he has come to be in affliction, hear what he says: “And if He say
to me, I have no mind for thee; lo! here am I, let Him do that which is
pleasing in His sight.” ([2 Sam. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#026)<span id="vi.xvi-p28.9"></span>.)
What can be more truly philosophic than these words? “Whatsoever may be
pleasing to God,” saith he, “so let it be.” And again he said to Saul:
“If the Lord stirreth thee up against me, may thy sacrifice be
acceptable.” (<span id="vi.xvi-p28.10"></span>[1 Sam. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019)<span id="vi.xvi-p28.11"></span>.)
And then too, being in affliction, he spared even his enemies: but
afterwards, not friends even, nor those who had done him no injury.
Again, Jacob when he was in affliction, said: “If the Lord will give me
bread to eat, and raiment to put on.” (<span
id="vi.xvi-p28.12"></span>[Gen. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020)<span id="vi.xvi-p28.13"></span>.)
As also the son of Noah did nothing of the kind erewhile; but when he
was no longer afraid for his safety, you hear how wanton he became.
([Gen. 9.22](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#022)<span
id="vi.xvi-p28.14"></span>.) Hezekiah too, when he was in affliction,
see what things he did in order to his deliverance; he put on sackcloth,
and such like; but when he was in pleasure, he fell through the
haughtiness of his heart. ([2 Kings
19.20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xvi-p28.15"></span>.) For, saith the Scripture, “When thou hast
eaten, and drunk, and art filled, take heed to thyself.” (<span
id="vi.xvi-p28.16"></span>[Deut. 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012)<span id="vi.xvi-p28.17"></span>.)
For perilous, as on a precipice’s brink, is the post of affluence. “Take
heed,” saith he, “to thyself.” When the Israelites were afflicted, they
became all the more increased in number: but when He left them to
themselves, then they all went to ruin. And why speak of examples from
the ancients? In our own times, let us see, if you please, is it not the
case, that when the most are in good case, they become puffed up,
hostile to everybody, passionate, while the power is with them: but if
it be taken away, they are gentle, lowly (and as) human beings, are
brought to a consciousness of their own natural condition. Therefore the
Scripture saith, “Pride hath holden them unto the end: their iniquity
shall go forth as from fatness.” (<span id="vi.xvi-p28.18"></span>[Ps.
lxxiii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xvi-p28.19"></span>. LXX.)

<span id="vi.xvi-p29"></span>Now these things I have spoken, that we
should not make enjoyment every way our object. How then does Paul say,
“Rejoice alway?” He does not say simply, “Rejoice,” but he adds, “in the
Lord.” (<span id="vi.xvi-p29.1"></span>[Phil. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004)<span id="vi.xvi-p29.2"></span>.)
This is the greatest joy, such as the Apostles rejoiced withal; the joy
of which prisons, and scourges, and persecutions, and evil report, and
all painful things, are the source, and the root, and the occasion;
whence also it comes to a happy issue. But that of the world, on the
contrary, begins with sweets and ends in bitters. Neither do I forbid to
rejoice in the Lord, nay, I earnestly exhort to this. The Apostles were
scourged, and they rejoiced: were bound, and they gave thanks: were
stoned, and they preached. This is the joy I also would have: from
nothing bodily has it its origin, but from spiritual things. It is not
possible for him who joys after the fashion of the world, to rejoice
also after a godly sort: for every one who joys after the world’s
fashion, has his joy in riches, in luxury, in honor, in power, in
arrogance: but he who rejoices after the mind of God, has his joy in
dishonor for God’s sake, in poverty, in want, in fasting, in humbleness
of mind. Seest thou, how opposite are the grounds (of joy)? To go
without joy here, is to be without grief also: and to be without grief
here, is to go without pleasure too. And in truth these are the things
which produce real joy, since the others have the name only of joy, but
they altogether consist of pain. What misery the arrogant man endures!
How is he cut short (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p29.3"></span>διακόπτεται</span>) in the midst of his
arrogance, bespeaking for himself numberless insults, much hatred, great
enmity, exceeding spite, and many an evil eye! Whether it be that he is
insulted by greater men, he grieves: or that he cannot make his stand
against everybody, he is mortified. Whereas the humble man lives in much
enjoyment: expecting honor from none, if he receive honor, he is
pleased, but if not, he is not grieved. He takes it contentedly that he
is honored; but <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) above all, none
dishonors him. Now not to seek honor, and yet to be honored—great must
be the enjoyment of this. But in the other, it is just the reverse: he
seeks honor, and is not honored. And the pleasure that the honor gives
is not the same to him who seeks it, as it is to him who seeks it not.
The one, however much he receives, thinks he has received nothing: the
other, though you give him ever so little, takes it as though he had
received all. Then again, he who lives in affluence and luxury has
numberless affairs of business, and let his revenues flow in to him ever
so easily, and, as it were, from full fountains, yet he fears the evils
arising from luxurious living, and the uncertainty of the future: but
the other is always in a state of security and enjoyment, having
accustomed himself to scantiness of diet. For he does not so bemoan
himself at not partaking of a sumptuous board, as he luxuriates in not
fearing the uncertainty of the future. But the evils arising from
luxurious living, how many and great they are, none can be ignorant: it
is necessary, however, to mention them now. Twofold the war, in the
body, and in the soul: twofold the storm: twofold the diseases; not only
in this respect, but because they are both incurable, and bring with
them great calamities. Not so, frugality: but here is twofold health,
twofold the benefits. “Sleep of health,” we read, “is in moderate
eating.” ([Ecclesiasticus 31.20](../../../bib/apo/sir031.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xvi-p30.8"></span>.) For everywhere, that which keeps measure is
pleasant, that which is beyond measure, ceases to please. For say now:
on a little spark put a great pile of fagots, and you will no longer see
the fire shining, but much disagreeable smoke. On a very strong and
large man lay a burden which exceeds his strength, and you will see him
with his burden lying prostrate on the ground. Embark too large a
freight in your vessel, and you have ensured a grievous shipwreck. Just
so it is here. For just as in overladen ships, great is the tumult of
the sailors, the pilot, the man at the prow, and the passengers, while
they cast into the sea the things above deck, and things below; so here
too, with their vomitings upwards, and their purgings downwards, they
mar their constitutions, and destroy themselves. And what is the most
shameful of all, the mouth is made to do the office of the nether parts,
and that becomes the more shameful member. But if to the mouth the
disgrace be such, think what must it be in the soul! For indeed there it
is all mist, all storm, all darkness, great the uproar of the thoughts,
at being so thronged and crushed, the soul itself crying out at the
abuse done to it: all <span id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) (the parts
and faculties) complaining of one another, beseeching, entreating, that
the filth may be discharged somewhere. And after it is flung out, still
the turmoil is not at an end; but then comes fever and diseases. “And
how comes it,” say you, “that one may see these luxurious livers, in
goodly plight, riding on horseback? What idle talk is this,” say you,
“to tell us of diseases? It is I that am diseased, I that am racked, I
that am disgusting, while I have nothing to eat.” Ah me! for one may
well lament at such words. But the sufferers with the gout, the men that
are carried on litters, the men that are swathed with bandages, from
what class of people, I ask you, shall we see these? And indeed, were it
not that they would deem it an insult, and think my words opprobrious, I
would before now have addressed them even by name. “But there are some
of them, who are in good health as well.” Because they give themselves
not merely to luxurious living, but also to labors. Else show me a man,
who does nothing whatever but fatten himself, free from pain as he lies
there, without an anxious thought. For though a host of physicians
without number came together, they would not be able to rescue him from
his diseases. It is not in the nature of things. For I will hold you a
medical discourse. Of the matters sent down into the belly, not all
becomes nourishment; since even in the food itself, not all is
nutritive, but part of it in the process of digestion passes into stool,
part is turned into nourishment. If then in the process of digestion the
operation is perfect, this is the result, and each finds its proper
place; the wholesome and useful part betakes itself to its appropriate
place, while that which is superfluous and useless, withdraws itself,
and passes off. But if it be in too great quantity, then even the
nutritive part of it becomes hurtful. And, to speak by way of example,
in order that my meaning may be clearer to you: in wheat part is fine
flour, part meal, part bran: now if the mill be able to grind (what is
put in), it separates all these: but if you put in too much, all becomes
mixed up together. Wine again, if it go through its proper process of
formation, and under due influence of the seasons, then, whereas at
first all is mixed together, anon part settles into lees, part rises
into scum, part remains for enjoyment to those that use it, and this is
the good part, and will not readily undergo any change. But what they
call “nourishment,” is neither wine, nor lees, while all are mixed up
together.—The same may be seen in the river, <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384) when its waters make a whirling flood.
As at such time we see the fishes floating at top, dead, their eyes
first blinded by the muddy slime: so is it with us. For when
gormandizing, like a flood of rain, has drenched the inward parts, it
puts all in a whirl, and makes that the faculties (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p32.1"></span>λογισμοὶ</span>), healthy
till then and living in a pure element, drift lifeless on the surface.
Since then by all these examples we have shown how great the mischief
is, let us cease to count these men happy for that, for which we ought
to think them wretched, and to bemoan ourselves for that, for which we
ought to count ourselves happy, and let us welcome sufficiency with a
contented mind. Or do you not hear even what physicians tell you, that
“want is the mother of health?” But what I say is, that want is mother,
not of bodily health, but also of that of the soul. These things Paul
also, that physician indeed, cries aloud; when he says, “Having food and
raiment, let us therewith be content.” ([1 Tim. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="vi.xvi-p32.2"></span>.) Let
us therefore do as he bids us, that so, being in sound health, we may
perform the work that we ought to do, in Christ Jesus our Lord, with
Whom to the Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory, dominion,
honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_361"></span>[i:362](1110021.htm#fr_361) <span
id="vi.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>καίτοι οὐδεν ἔχων αὐτοῖς ἐγκαλεῖν</span>. A. B.
C. N. Cat.—E. F. D. Edd. omit this clause, and read: “to be afflicted:
and that they did not,” etc. So Edd.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[i:363](1110021.htm#fr_362) <span
id="vi.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.2"></span>Ινα γὰρ μὴ τούτῳ</span> (Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p6.3"></span>τούτων</span>, A. C. N.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p6.4"></span>τοῦτο</span> B. om.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p6.5"></span>νομίσωσιν
εὐσεβεῖς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.6"></span>(Ν.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.7"></span>εὐσεβεῖν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.8"></span>)</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p6.9"></span>εἶναι, διὰ τὸ λέγειν κ. τ. λ</span>. The wording
of the passage is not strictly grammatical, but the sense seems to be as
expressed above.—E. D. F. omit this sentence, and substitute, “Seest
thou?” So Edd.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[i:364](1110021.htm#fr_363) <span
id="vi.xvi-p6.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p7"></span> The relation of [Acts
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#007),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005)<span id="vi.xvi-p7.1"></span> is,
as Chrys. intimates, to show that the apparent incongruity between the
promise of God to give the land to Abraham and his seed, and the fact
that Abraham never personally possessed the land, was not accidental nor
did it involve the failure of the divine promise. Accompanying the
promise were divine assurances (<span id="vi.xvi-p7.2"></span>[Gen.
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014)<span id="vi.xvi-p7.3"></span>)
that a period of bondage and oppression was to precede the occupation of
the land which was to be the inheritance of the nation.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[i:365](1110021.htm#fr_364) <span
id="vi.xvi-p7.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p8"></span> E. Edd. omit this sentence: and below for
“Here again,” etc. the same substitute: “This happened also in the case
of Christ: for indeed Joseph is a type of Him: wherefore also he
narrates the history at large, hinting (at this meaning).”

<span id="fn_365"></span>[i:366](1110021.htm#fr_365) <span
id="vi.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p9"></span> If it be too strong language to say, with
Chrys., that Joseph is set forth here as a “type of Christ,” it is clear
that the narrative of his ill-treatment by his brethren, subsequent
exaltation and his return of good for evil to those who had sold him
into bondage, is meant to suggest that their treatment of Jesus had been
similar.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[i:367](1110021.htm#fr_366) <span
id="vi.xvi-p9.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p10.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p10.2"></span>δε ἀναστασις καθ᾽ εαυτήν</span>. This clause is
found in the Catena alone. Something seems to be required as the
antithesis to the preceding clause, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p10.3"></span>ταῦτα μὲν γὰρ μετὰ προαιρ. ἀνθρ. ἦν</span>—for
which E. Edd. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p10.4"></span>ταῦτα γοῦν οὐκ ἀπὸ προαιρ. ἀνθρ. ἦν</span>.
“These things however did not come of man’s purpose.”—At the end of the
next sentence, Edd. (with E. alone) omit the clause, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p10.5"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p10.6"></span>ὀφείλων ἀποθανεῖν</span>:
and for <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p10.7"></span>Εἶτα
πάλιν</span>, have, “This he says, by way of showing both him (Moses) as
savior, and these ungrateful to their benefactor.”

<span id="fn_367"></span>[i:368](1110021.htm#fr_367) <span
id="vi.xvi-p10.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.1"></span>Τί γὰρ εἰ μὴ ἀνεῖλον αὐτὸν τῷ
πράγματι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.2"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.3"></span>τῷ λόγῳ ἀνεῖλον ὥσπερ κᾀκεῖνοι</span>. N. and
Catena read <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.5"></span>νεῖλεν</span>, both times, as if the Compiler
understood the passage in the sense of a preceding comment extracted
from S. Clem. Alex. Strom. “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.6"></span>φασὶ δὲ οἱ μυσταὶ λόγῳ μόνῳ ἀνελεῖν τὸν
Αἰγύπτιον</span>: the initiated say that Moses struck the Egyptian dead
by a word, as in the Acts Peter is related to have done in the case of
Ananias,” etc. But Chrys. nowhere thus interprets the fact, and the
context, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.7"></span>ὥ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.8"></span>σπερ κᾀκεῖνοι</span>, is against this
view.—Below, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p11.9"></span>δἰ ὃν
ἔζη μετὰ Θεὸν</span>: i.e. the Hebrew whom Moses saved, [Acts
7.24](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#024)<span id="vi.xvi-p11.10"></span>,
who is here supposed to be one of the parties in the strife mentioned in
[Acts 7.26](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#026)<span
id="vi.xvi-p11.11"></span>. This however not being clear, A., as usual
omits: and the innovator assuming the passage to be corrupt,
substitutes, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p11.12"></span>δἰ ὧν
ἔσονται μετὰ Θεοῦ</span>, giving them counsel by means of which they
shall be with God.” So Edd.: only Sav. notes in the margin the genuine
reading of the other <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xvi-p11.13"></span>mss.</span> and Cat.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[i:369](1110021.htm#fr_368) <span
id="vi.xvi-p11.15"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p12"></span> E. “But do thou, observing this, stand
amazed at the riches of God’s wisdom and resources: for, had those not
been plotted against, these had not been saved.” So Edd.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[i:370](1110021.htm#fr_369) <span
id="vi.xvi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p14.1"></span>Τοῦτο καὶ ἐνταῦθα ἁρμόττει εἰπεῖν</span>. Edd.
from E. only, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p14.2"></span>τοῦτο
καὶ αὐτους ἥρμοττε τότε εἰπεῖν</span>: “This was also suitable for them
to say at that time.” It was not perceived that the recapitulation
begins here. See note 5, p. 102.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[i:371](1110021.htm#fr_370) <span
id="vi.xvi-p14.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p15"></span> Edd. from E. D. F. “how they exhibited a
great (example of) philosophy.”

<span id="fn_371"></span>[i:372](1110021.htm#fr_371) <span
id="vi.xvi-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p16"></span> Edd. (from E. alone) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p16.1"></span>καὶ οὐκ ἀτιμωρητὶ</span>,
“not unavenged (upon their enemies).” But the meaning is, “Their enemies
shall not be able to be avenged of them.”

<span id="fn_372"></span>[i:373](1110021.htm#fr_372) <span
id="vi.xvi-p16.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p17"></span> E. D. F. insert for explanation, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p17.1"></span>πατριάρχας δέ φησι τοὺς
προγόνους</span>: “he calls their ancestors, patriarchs.” This is the
“humoring” spoken of above: in C.’s time, “patriarch” had become a title
of honor.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[i:374](1110021.htm#fr_373) <span
id="vi.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p18"></span> Edd. from E. “But they not only did not
loose (the afflictions), but even cooperated with those afflicting them,
when they ought rather to have cut through them (the afflictions).”

<span id="fn_374"></span>[i:375](1110021.htm#fr_374) <span
id="vi.xvi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p19"></span> Morel. Ben. with E. D. F. omit this
clause: Savile transposes it. “But as this (Joseph) reigns there as king
where they sold him, so does Christ in His death,” etc.—In the next
sentence, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.1"></span>τοῦτο</span> seems to refer to the description
in <span id="vi.xvi-p19.2"></span>[Gen.
41:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043)<span id="vi.xvi-p19.3"></span>, of
the distinctions conferred upon Joseph, which perhaps Chrys.
cited.—After this sentence, Edd. have (from E. only) the formula of
recapitulation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.5"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἴδωμεν κ. τ. λ</span>., which is quite
misplaced.—Below, A. and the mod. t. insert <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.6"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.7"></span>Ορα</span>, before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p19.8"></span>διὰ λιμὸν οἷα κατασκευάζει</span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[i:376](1110021.htm#fr_375) <span
id="vi.xvi-p19.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p20"></span> The reading of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p20.1"></span>τοῦ Συχέμ</span> (T. R.), doubtless meaning the
“father of Sychem” (<span id="vi.xvi-p20.2"></span>[Gen. xxxiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019)<span id="vi.xvi-p20.3"></span>), is
replaced by Tisch., W. and H. (after <span id="vi.xvi-p20.4"></span>א.
B. C.) with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p20.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p20.6"></span>ν Συχέμ</span>, making <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p20.7"></span>Συχέμ</span> the name of
the place just mentioned—not of the person referred to in the O.T. The
Vulgate renders *filii Sichem* thus coming into collision with the O.T.
*l. c.*—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[i:377](1110021.htm#fr_376) <span
id="vi.xvi-p20.15"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p21.1"></span>καὶ παιδεί& 139· καὶ γράμμασιν</span>, as the
comment on <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p21.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p21.3"></span>παιδεύθη</span> [Acts
7.22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)<span id="vi.xvi-p21.4"></span>,
which must be supplied. Cat. has, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p21.5"></span>καὶ παιδεία καὶ γράμματα</span>. E. omits the
clause, and substitutes, as the beginning of the next sentence, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p21.6"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p21.7"></span>Εμοὶ θαυμάζειν ἐπέρχεται
πῶς</span>. “To me it occurs to wonder how he could be forty years,”
etc. So Edd.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[i:378](1110021.htm#fr_377) <span
id="vi.xvi-p21.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.2"></span>φ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ</span>, B. C. F. D. N. but A. E. Edd.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p22.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p22.4"></span>πὶ τούτου</span> “in the
case of this man.” So perhaps Œcumen. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p22.6"></span>πιεικῶς νῦν τῷ ἀδικοῦντι
προσφέρεται</span>.—Below, E. Edd. “With the same spirit they appear to
say the same with reference to Christ, ‘We have no king but Cæsar.’ Thus
was it ever habitual to the Jews to act, even when receiving benefits.
Do you mark their madness? Him who was to save them, they accuse, by
saying, ‘As thou,’” etc.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[i:379](1110021.htm#fr_378) <span
id="vi.xvi-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p24"></span> So A. B. N. Cat. (in C. the sentence <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p24.1"></span>῎</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p24.2"></span>Ιδου</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p24.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p24.4"></span>Ιακὼβ</span> is omitted by
an oversight caused by the homœoteleuton <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p24.5"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p24.6"></span>Ιακώβ</span>.) Edd. “Not only does he here show
that the Angel which appeared unto him was the Angel of the Great
Counsel, but he shows also what loving-kindness God exhibits by this
manifestation.”

<span id="fn_379"></span>[i:380](1110021.htm#fr_379) <span
id="vi.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p26"></span> i.e. “I have heard their groaning:” not
simply (“I have come down) because of their calamities.” The expression,
“I have heard” denotes His ready sympathy.—But the modern text: “He does
not simply say, ‘I have heard;’ but because of their calamities.”

<span id="fn_380"></span>[i:381](1110021.htm#fr_380) <span
id="vi.xvi-p26.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p27"></span> Edd. from E. “Therefore in order that
having come out of much affliction into rest, they may not be insolent,
he permits them to be afflicted.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[i:382](1110021.htm#fr_381) <span
id="vi.xvi-p27.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p28.1"></span>διακρουεσθε τὰ λεγόμενα</span>. Edd <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p28.2"></span>διαμωκᾶσθε</span>, “make a
mock at.”—Below all the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xvi-p28.3"></span>mss.</span> agree in <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p28.4"></span>οἷος ἦν ὁ Κάιν πρὸ τούτου</span>. Either the
text is corrupt, or something is needed for explanation.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[i:383](1110021.htm#fr_382) <span
id="vi.xvi-p29.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p30.1"></span>μάλιστα δὲ οὐδεὶς αὐτὸν ἀτιμάζει</span>. Savile
justly retains this sentence from the old text. Montf. rejects it, as
superfluous, and disturbing the sense. Downe ap. Sav. proposes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p30.2"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xvi-p30.3"></span>τι οὐκ ἠτιμάσθη</span>:
“*non ambit honorem, sed bene secum actum putat si nulla affectus sit
ignominia.*” But in the old text there is no <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p30.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p30.5"></span>λλὰ</span> before <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p30.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p30.7"></span>γαπᾷ</span>: and the meaning is not, “he thinks
himself well off,” etc., nor as Ben., “he rejoices that,” etc., but, “he
is content not to be honored; knowing this at any rate, that nobody can
dishonor him.”

<span id="fn_383"></span>[i:384](1110021.htm#fr_383) <span
id="vi.xvi-p30.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p31"></span> E. Edd. “Thence also the gormandizers
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xvi-p31.1"></span>γαστριζόμενοι</span>) themselves complain of
one another, are in ill humor, haste to be rid of the filth within.
Still, even after it is cast out,” etc. And below:—“fever and diseases.
‘Yes,’ say you, ‘they are sick and are disgusting; it is waste of words
to tell us all this, and make a catalogue of diseases: for it is I that
am diseased. etc,…while these luxurious livers one may see in good
plight, sleek, merry, riding on horseback.’”

<span id="fn_384"></span>[i:385](1110021.htm#fr_384) <span
id="vi.xvi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xvi-p32"></span> Edd. from E. “in the sea, under a violent
storm in winter,” and below, “the fishes floating at top, dead, which by
reason of the cold had not power to sink to the bottom.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XVII on Acts vii. 35.](1110022)
