[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110080)  [Next](1110082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xx"></span> <span id="vii.xx-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p1"></span>[Rom.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="vii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xx-p2.1"></span>Homily XVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.xx-p3"></span>“How then shall they call on Him in Whom
they have not believed? and how shall they believe in Him of Whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? and how
shall they preach except they be sent? as it is written.”

<span id="vii.xx-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xx-p4.1"></span>Here</span> again he takes from them all excuse.
For since he had said, “I bear them record that they have a zeal of God,
but not according to knowledge,” and that “being ignorant of God’s
righteousness, they submitted not themselves” to it: he next shows, that
for this ignorance itself they were punishable before God. This he does
not say indeed so, but he makes it good by carrying on his discourse in
the way of question, and so convicting them more clearly, by framing the
whole passage out of objections and answers. But look further back. The
Prophet, saith he, said, “Whosoever shall call upon the Name of the Lord
shall be saved.” Now somebody might say perhaps, “But how could they
call upon Him Whom they had not believed? Then there is a question from
him after the objection; And why did they not believe? Then an objection
again. A person certainly may say, And how could they believe, since
they had not heard? Yet hear they did, he implies. Then another
objection again. “And how could they hear without a preacher?” Then an
answer again. Yet preach they did, and there were many sent forth for
this very purpose. And whence does it appear that these are those
persons sent? Then he brings the prophet in next, who says, “How
beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and
bring glad tidings of good things!” (<span id="vii.xx-p4.2"></span>[Is.
iii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#007)<span id="vii.xx-p4.3"></span>.)
You see how by the kind of preaching he points out the preachers. For
there was nothing else that these men went about telling everywhere, but
those unspeakable good things, and the peace made by God with men. And
so by disbelieving, it is not we, he implies, whom you disbelieve, but
Isaiah the prophet, who spake many years ago, that we were to be sent,
and to preach, and to say what we do say. If the being saved, then, came
of calling upon Him, and calling upon Him from believing, and believing
from hearing, and hearing from preaching, and preaching from being sent,
and if they were sent, and did preach, and the prophet went round with
them to point them out, and proclaim them, and say that these were they
whom they showed of so many ages ago, whose feet even they praised
because of the matter of their preaching; then it is quite clear that
the not believing was their own fault only. And that because God’s part
had been fulfilled completely. <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494)

<span id="vii.xx-p6"></span>[Rom.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="vii.xx-p6.1"></span>.
“But they have not all obeyed the Gospel. For Esaias saith, Lord, who
hath believed our report? So then faith cometh by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God.” ([Isa. 53.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span
id="vii.xx-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xx-p7"></span>Since they pressed him with another
objection again to this effect, that if these were the persons sent upon
the mission by God, all ought to have hearkened to them: observe Paul’s
judgment, and see how he shows that this very thing which made the
confusion, did in fact do away with confusion and embarrassment. What
offends you, O Jew, he would say, after so great and abundant evidence,
and demonstration of the points? that all did not submit to the Gospel?
Why this very thing, when taken along with the others, is of force to
certify thee of the truth of my statements, even in that some do not
believe. For this too the prophet foretold. Notice his unspeakable
wisdom too; how he shows more than they were looking for, or expected
him to have to say in reply. For what is it that you say? he means. Is
it that all have not believed the Gospel? Well! Isaiah foretold this too
from of old. Or rather, not this only, but even much more than this. For
the complaint you make is Why did not all believe? But Isaiah goes
further than this. For what is it he says? “Lord, who hath believed our
report?” Then since he had rid himself of this embarrassment. by making
the Prophet a bulwark against them, he again keeps to the line he was
before upon. For as he had said that they must call upon Him, but that
they who call must believe, and they who believe must hear first, but
they who are to hear must have preachers, and the preachers be sent, and
as he had shown that they were sent, and had preached; as he is going to
bring in another objection again, taking occasion first of another
quotation from the Prophet, by which he had met the objection a little
back, he thus interweaves it, and connects it with what went before. For
since he had produced the Prophet as saying, “Lord, who hath believed
our report” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xx-p7.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xx-p7.2"></span>κοᾕ</span>)? he happily seizes on the quotation,
as proving what he says, “So then faith cometh by hearing” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p7.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p7.4"></span>κοἥς</span>). And this he
makes not a mere naked statement. But as the Jews were forever seeking a
sign, and the sight of the Resurrection, and were gaping after the thing
much; he says, Yet the Prophet promised no such thing, but that it was
by hearing that we were to believe. Hence he makes this good first, and
says, “so then faith cometh by hearing.” And then since this seemed a
mean thing to say, see how he elevates it. For he says, I was not
speaking of mere hearing, nor of the need of hearing men’s words and
believing them, but I mean a great sort of hearing. For the hearing is
“by the word of God.” They were not speaking their own, but they were
telling what they learnt from God. And this is a higher thing than
miracles. For we are equally bound to believe and to obey God, whether
speaking or working miracles. <span id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495)
Since both works and miracles come of His words. For both the heaven and
everything else was established in this way. ([Ps. xxxiii.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006)<span id="vii.xx-p8.2"></span>.)
After showing then that we ought to believe the prophets, who always
speak God’s words, and not to look after anything more, he proceeds next
to the objection I mentioned, and says,

<span id="vii.xx-p9"></span>[Rom.
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="vii.xx-p9.1"></span>.
“But I say, Have they not heard?”

<span id="vii.xx-p10"></span>What, he means, if the preachers were sent,
and did preach what they were bid, and these did not hear? Then comes a
most perfect reply to the objection.

<span id="vii.xx-p11"></span>“Yes, verily, their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.” <span
id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496)

<span id="vii.xx-p22"></span>What do you say? he means. They have not
heard? Why the whole world, and the ends of the earth, have heard. And
have you, amongst whom the heralds abode such a long time, and of whose
land they were, not heard? Now can this ever be? Sure if the ends of the
world heard, much more must you. Then again another objection.

<span id="vii.xx-p23"></span>[Rom.
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)<span id="vii.xx-p23.1"></span>.
“But I say, Did not Israel know?”

<span id="vii.xx-p24"></span>For what if they heard, he means, but did
not know what was said, nor understand that these were the persons sent?
Are they not to be forgiven for their ignorance? By no means. For Isaiah
had described their character in the words, “How beautiful are the feet
of them that preach the Gospel of peace.” (<span
id="vii.xx-p24.1"></span>[Is. lii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="vii.xx-p24.2"></span>.) And
before him the Lawgiver himself. Hence he proceeds.

<span id="vii.xx-p25"></span>“First Moses saith, I will provoke you to
jealousy by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will
anger you.” (<span id="vii.xx-p25.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xx-p26"></span>And so they ought even from him to have
been able to distinguish the preachers, not from the fact of these
disbelieving only, not from the fact of their preaching peace, not from
the fact of their bringing the glad tidings of those good things, not
from the word being sown in every part of the world, but from the very
fact of their seeing their inferiors, those of the Gentiles, in greater
honor. For what they had never heard, nor their forefathers, that wisdom
did these <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497) on a sudden embrace
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p27.1"></span>ἑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p27.2"></span>φιλοσόφουν</span>). And
this was a mark of such intense honor, as should gall them, and lead
them to jealousy, and to recollection of the prophecy of Moses, which
said, “I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people.” For
it was not the greatness of the honor alone that was enough to throw
them upon jealousy, but the fact too that a nation had come to enjoy
these things which was of so little account that it could hardly be
considered a nation at all. “For I will provoke you to jealousy, by them
which are no nation, and by a foolish nation will I anger you.” For what
more foolish than the Greeks (Heathen, see pp. 373, 377)? or what of
less account? See how by every means God had given from of old
indications and clear signs of these times, in order to remove their
blindness. For it was not any little corner in which the thing was done,
but in land, and in sea, and in every quarter of the globe. And they saw
those in the enjoyment of countless blessings now, who had formerly been
objects of their contempt. One should consider then that this is that
people of which Moses said, “I will provoke you to jealousy by them that
are no people, and by a foolish nation will I anger you.” Was it Moses
only then that said this? No, for Isaiah also after Him saith so. And
this is why Paul said, “First Moses,” to show that a second will come
who says the same things in a clearer and plainer way. As then he says
above, that Esaias crieth, so too here.

<span id="vii.xx-p28"></span>[Rom.
10.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020)<span id="vii.xx-p28.1"></span>.
“But Esaias is very bold, and saith.”

<span id="vii.xx-p29"></span>Now what he means is something of this
kind. He put a violence on himself, and was ambitious to speak, not some
thing veiled over, but to set things even naked before your eyes, and
choosing rather to run (Origen *in loc*.) into dangers from being plain
spoken, than by looking to his own safety, to leave you any shelter for
your impenetrableness; although it was not the manner of prophecy to say
this so clearly; but still to stop your mouths most completely, he tells
the whole beforehand clearly and distinctly. The whole! what whole? Why
your being cast out, and also their being brought in; speaking as
follows, “I was found of them that sought Me not, I was made manifest of
them that asked not after Me.” (<span id="vii.xx-p29.1"></span>[Is. lxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span id="vii.xx-p29.2"></span>.) Who
then are they that sought not? who they that asked not after Him?
Clearly not the Jews, but they of the Gentiles, who hitherto had not
known Him. As then Moses gave their characteristic mark in the words,
“no people” and “a foolish nation,” so here also he takes the same
ground to point them out from, viz. their extreme ignorance. And this
was a very great blame to attach to the Jews, that they who sought Him
not found Him, and they who sought Him lost Him.

<span id="vii.xx-p30"></span>[Rom.
10.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p30.1"></span>.
“But unto Israel He saith, All the day long have I stretched forth My
hands unto a disobedient and gainsaying people.” (<span
id="vii.xx-p30.2"></span>[Is. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="vii.xx-p30.3"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xx-p31"></span>Observe now that difficulty, which so many
make a subject of question, is discovered laid up from of old in the
words of the Prophet, and with a clear solution to it too. And what is
this? You heard Paul say before. “What shall we say then? That the
Gentiles which followed not after righteousness have attained unto
righteousness. But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness
hath not attained to the law of righteousness.” (<span
id="vii.xx-p31.1"></span>[Rom. 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)<span id="vii.xx-p31.2"></span>.)
This Esaias also says here. For to say, “I was found of them that sought
me not, I was made manifest unto them which asked not after me,” is the
same with saying, “that the Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness have attained unto righteousness.” Then to show that what
was happening was not of God’s grace only, but also of the temper of
those who came to Him, as also the casting off of the others came of the
disputatiousness of those who disobeyed, hear what he proceeds with.
“But to Israel He saith, All the day long have I stretched forth My
hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people;” here meaning by the day
the whole period of the former dispensation. But the stretching out of
the hands, means calling and drawing <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498) them to Him, and inviting them.
Then to show that the fault was all their own, he says “to a disobedient
and gainsaying people.” You see what a great charge this is against
them! For they did not obey Him even when He invited them, but they
gainsaid Him, and that when they saw Him doing so, not once or twice or
thrice, but the whole period. But others who had never known Him, had
the power to draw Him to them. Not that he says they themselves had the
power to do it, but to take away lofty imaginings even from those of the
Gentiles, and to show that it was His grace that wrought the whole, He
says, I was made manifest, and I was found. It may be said, Were they
then void of everything? By no means, for the taking of the things
found, and the getting a knowledge of what was manifested to them, was
what they contributed themselves. <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499) Then to prevent these saying, But
why wast Thou not made manifest to us also? he sets down what is more
than this, that I not only was made manifest, but I even continue with
My hands stretched out, inviting them, and displaying all the concern of
an affectionate father, and a mother that is set on her child. See how
he has brought us a most lucid answer to all the difficulties before
raised, by showing that it was from their own temper that ruin had
befallen them, and that they are wholly undeserving of pardon. For
though they had both heard and understood what was said, still not even
then were they minded to come to Him. And what is far more, He did not
cause them to hear these things and to understand them only, but a thing
which hath more force to rouse them up and draw them to Him, when they
were disobedient and gain-saying, He added to the others. Now what is
this? It is His exasperating them, and making them jealous. For ye know
the domineering might of the passion, and how great the power is which
jealousy is naturally possessed of for bringing all disputatiousness to
an end, and rousing those who have grown remiss. And why need one say
this of man when in brutes without reason, and children before they are
of full age, the power it shows is so great? For a child often will not
submit to its father when it is called, but continues obstinate. But
when another child has notice taken of it, then it even though not
called comes to its father’s bosom, and what calling could not do,
provoking to jealousy will. This then God also did. For He not only
called and stretched out His hands, but stirred up in them the feeling
of jealousy also, by bringing those far inferior to them (a thing which
makes men excessively jealous) not into their good things, but (what was
a much stronger step, and makes the feeling even more domineering,) into
much greater good things, and of greater necessity than theirs, and such
as they had never even fancied in a dream. But still they did not
submit. What pardon then do they deserve who exhibit such excessive
obstinacy? None. Yet this he does not say himself, but leaves it to the
consciences of his hearers, to gather it from the conclusion of what he
had stated, and again also confirms it by what he goes on to in his
usual wisdom. And this he did also above, by introducing objections both
in the case of the Law (see on [Rom. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)<span id="vii.xx-p33.1"></span>, pp.
420, I) and of the people, which presented an accusation beyond the true
one; and then in the answer, which was to overthrow this, yielding as
much as he pleased, and as the case allowed, so as to make what he was
saying not unwelcome. And this he doth here, writing as follows:

<span id="vii.xx-p34"></span>[Rom.
11.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)<span id="vii.xx-p34.1"></span>.
“I say then, Hath God cast away His people whom He foreknew? God
forbid.” <span id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500)

<span id="vii.xx-p36"></span>And he introduces the form a person would
use in doubt, as though taking occasion from what had been said, and
after making this alarming statement, by the denial of it he causes the
sequel to be allowed with readiness; and what by all the former
arguments he had been laboring to show that he makes good here also.
What then is this? That even if there be but a few saved, the promise
yet stands good. This is why he does not merely say “people,” but
“people which He foreknew.” Then proceeding with the proof that the
“people” were not cast off, “For I also am an Israelite, of the seed of
Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.”

<span id="vii.xx-p37"></span>I, he says, the instructor, the preacher.
Now since this seemed contrary to what was said before in the words,
“Who hath believed our report?” and, “All the day long have I stretched
forth My hands to a disobedient and gainsaying people;” and, “I will
provoke you to jealousy by them which are no people;” he was not
satisfied with the deprecation, nor with having said, “God forbid,” but
makes it good by taking it up again and saying, “God hath not cast away
His people.” But this is not a confirmation, men may say, but an
assertion. Observe then the confirmation, both the first, and that which
follows it. For the first is that he was himself of that race. But He
would not, if on the point of casting them off, have chosen from them
him to whom He entrusted all the preaching, and the affairs of the
world, and all mysteries, and the whole economy. This then is one proof,
but the next, after it, is his saying, that “people whom He foreknew,”
that is, who He knew clearly were suited to it, and would receive the
faith. (Pococke on Hos. p. 23. See <span id="vii.xx-p37.1"></span>[Acts
ii. 41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="vii.xx-p37.2"></span>;
iv. 4; xxi. 20.) For three, five, even ten thousand were believers from
among them. And so to prevent any from saying, Art thou the people,
then? And because thou hast been called, hath the nation been called? he
proceeds.

<span id="vii.xx-p38"></span>[Rom.
11.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span id="vii.xx-p38.1"></span>.
“He hath not cast off His people, whom He foreknew.”

<span id="vii.xx-p39"></span>As though he said, I have with me three,
five, or ten thousand. What then? has the people come to be <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[1502](#fn_1501) three, five, or ten thousand? that
seed that compared with the stars of heaven for multitude, or the sand
of the sea? Is this the way you deceive us and put a cheat upon us, by
making the whole people thyself and the few that are with thee; and
didst thou inflate us with idle hopes, and say that the promise has been
fulfilled, when all are lost, and the salvation comes down to a few?
This is all bombast and vanity! we cannot away with such sophistry as
this! Now, that they may not say this, see how in the sequel he proceeds
to the answer, not giving the objection indeed, but before it grounding
the answer to it upon ancient history. What then is the answer?

<span id="vii.xx-p41"></span>[Rom.
11.2-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002)<span id="vii.xx-p41.1"></span>.
“Wot ye not,” he says, “what the Scripture saith of Elias? how he (so
most; <span class="c14"><span id="vii.xx-p41.2"></span>mss.</span> Sav.
who) maketh intercession to God against Israel, saying, Lord, they have
killed Thy prophets, and digged down Thine altars; and I am left alone,
and they seek my life. But what saith the answer of God unto him? I have
reserved to Myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to
the image of Baal. Even so then at this present time also, there is a
remnant according to the election of grace.”

<span id="vii.xx-p42"></span>What he means is nearly this. “God hath not
cast off His people.” For had He done so, He would have admitted none of
them. But if He did admit some, He hath not cast them off. Still it is
said, if He had not cast off, He would have admitted all. This does not
follow; since in Elijah’s time the part to be saved had come down to
“seven thousand:” and now also there are probably many that believe. But
if you do not know who they are, this is no wonder, for that prophet,
who was so great and good a man, did not know. But God ordered things
for Himself when even the prophet knew them not. But consider his
judgment. Now in proving what was before him, he covertly augments the
charge against them. For this is why he gave the whole passage, that he
might parade before them their untowardness, and show that they had been
so from of old. For if he had not wished this, but had directed his
whole attention to prove that the people lay in the few, he would have
said that even in Elijah’s time, seven thousand were left. But now he
reads to them the passage further back, as having been throughout at
pains to show that it was no strange thing that they did with Christ,
and the Apostles, but their habitual practice. For to prevent their
saying that it was as a deceiver we put Christ to death, and as
impostors that we persecute the Apostles, he brings forward the text
which says, “Lord, they have killed Thy prophets, and digged down thine
altars.” (<span id="vii.xx-p42.1"></span>[1 Kings xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014)<span id="vii.xx-p42.2"></span>.)
Then in order not to make his discourse galling to them, he attaches
another reason to the bringing forward of the text. For he quotes it not
as if it was on purpose to accuse them, but as if intent upon showing
some other things. And he leaves them without any excuse even by what
had before been done. For observe how strong the accusation is even from
the person speaking. For it is neither Paul, nor Peter, nor James, nor
John, but one whom they held in the greatest estimation, the chief of
the Prophets, the friend of God, a man who had been so very
zealous <span id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) in their behalf as
even to be given up to hunger for them, who even to this day hath never
died. What then doth this man say? “Lord, they have killed Thy prophets,
and digged down Thine altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my
life.” What could be more brutal cruelty than this? For when they should
have besought pardon for the offences they had already committed, they
were minded even to kill him. And all these things put them quite beyond
pardon. For it was not during the prevalence of the famine, but when the
season was favorable, and their shame was done away, and the devils
(i.e. false gods) had been put to shame, and the power of God had been
shown, and the king had bowed beneath it, that they committed these
audacities, passing from murder to murder, and making away with their
teachers, and such as would bring them to a better mind. What then could
they have to say to this? Were they too deceivers? Were they too
impostors? Did they not know whence they were either? But they
distressed you. Yes, but they also told you goodly things. But what of
the altars? the altars too did not surely distress you? Did they too
exasperate you? See of what obstinacy, of what insolence they were ever
yielding proofs! This is why in another passage too Paul says, when
writing to the Thessalonians, “Ye also have suffered like things of your
own countrymen, even as they have of the Jews, who both killed the Lord,
and their own prophets, and have persecuted us, and please not God, and
are contrary to all men (<span id="vii.xx-p43.4"></span>[1 Thess.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015)<span id="vii.xx-p43.5"></span>);
which is what he says here too, that they both digged down the altars,
and killed the prophets. But what saith the answer of God unto him? “I
have reserved to Myself seven thousand men who have not bowed the knee
to the image of Baal.” (<span id="vii.xx-p43.6"></span>[1 Kings xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)<span id="vii.xx-p43.7"></span>.)
And what has this to do with the present subject? some may say. It hath
a great deal to do with the present subject. For he shows here that it
is the worthy that God useth to save even if the promise be made to the
whole nation. And this he pointed out above when he said, “Though the
number of the children of Israel be as the sand of the sea, a remnant
shall be saved.” And, “Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we
should have become as Sodoma.” (<span id="vii.xx-p43.8"></span>[Rom.
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="vii.xx-p43.9"></span>.)
And he points it out from this passage also. Wherefore he proceeds to
say, “Even so then at this present time also, there is a remnant
according to the election of grace.” Observe that each word maintains
its own rank, showing at once God’s grace, and the obedient temper of
them that receive salvation. For by saying election, he showed the
approval of them, but by saying grace, he showed the gift of God.

<span id="vii.xx-p44"></span>[Rom.
11.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="vii.xx-p44.1"></span>.
“And if by grace, then it is no more of works, otherwise grace is no
more grace: but if it be of works, then is it no more grace, <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503) otherwise work is no more work.”

<span id="vii.xx-p46"></span>He again springs upon the disputatiousness
of the Jews, in what has just been quoted; and on this ground bereaves
them of excuse. For you cannot, he means, so much as say, that the
Prophets called indeed, and God invited, and the state of things cried
aloud, and the provoking to jealousy was enough to draw us to Him, but
what was enjoined was grievous, and this is why we could not draw nigh,
since we had a display of works demanded of us, and laborious
well-doings. For you cannot even say this. For how should God have
demanded this of you, when this would just throw His grace into the
shade? And this he said out of a wish to show that He was most desirous
that they might be saved. ([Deut. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029)<span id="vii.xx-p46.1"></span>.)
For not only would their salvation be easily brought about, but it was
also God’s greatest glory to display His love toward man. Why then are
you afraid of drawing nigh, since you have no works demanded of you? Why
are you bickering and quarrelsome, when grace is before you, and why
keep putting me the Law forward to no purpose whatsoever? For you will
not be saved by that, and will mar this gift also; since if you
pertinaciously insist on being saved by it, you do away with this grace
of God. Then that they might not think this strange, having first taken
those seven thousand; he said that they were saved by grace. For when he
says, “Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant
according to the election of grace;” he shows that they also were saved
by grace. And not hereby only, but likewise by saying, “I have reserved
unto Myself.” For this is the language of One Who showeth that He
Himself was the chief Contributor. And if by grace, it will be said, how
came we all not to be saved? Because ye would not. For grace, though it
be grace, saves the willing, not those who will not have it, and turn
away from it, who persist in fighting against it, and opposing
themselves to it. Observe how throughout the point he is proving is,
“Not as though the Word of God had taken none effect,” by showing that
the worthy were those to whom the promise came, and that these, few
though they be, may yet be the people of God; and indeed he had stated
it in the beginning of the Epistle with much force, where he says, “For
what if some did not believe” (<span id="vii.xx-p46.2"></span>[Rom. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)<span id="vii.xx-p46.3"></span>), and
did not even stop at this, but proceeded, “Yea, let God be true, and
every man a liar.” ([Rom. 3.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="vii.xx-p46.4"></span>.) And here again he confirms it another way,
and shows the force of grace, and that always the one were being saved,
the other perished. Let us then give thanks, that we belong to them that
are being saved, and not having been able to save ourselves by works,
were saved by the gift of God. But in giving thanks, let us not do this
in words only, but in works and actions. For this is the genuine
thanksgiving, when we do those things whereby God is sure to be
glorified, and flee from those from which we have been set free. For if
we, after insulting the King, instead of being punished have been
honored, and then go and insult Him afresh, since we are detected in the
utmost ingratitude, we should with justice have to suffer the utmost
punishment, one greater far than the former. For the former insolence
did not show us so ungrateful as that committed after honor and much
attention shown us. Let us then flee those things from which we have
been set free, and not give thanks with our mouths only, lest it be said
of us also, “This people honoreth Me with their lips, but with their
heart is far from Me.” (<span id="vii.xx-p46.5"></span>[Is. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="vii.xx-p46.6"></span>.)
For how is it else than unseemly, when the “heavens declare the glory of
God” (<span id="vii.xx-p46.7"></span>[Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="vii.xx-p46.8"></span>), and
thou, for whom the heavens were made that glorify Him, doest such things
that through thee the God that made thee is blasphemed? It is for this
that not only he that blasphemeth, but thyself also, wilt be liable to
punishment. For the heavens also do not glorify God by sending forth a
voice but by putting others upon doing it at the sight of them, and yet
they are said “to declare the glory of God.” Thus too they that furnish
a life to be wondered at, even though they hold their peace, yet glorify
God, when others through them glorify Him. For He is not so much
reverenced because of the heaven, as of a spotless life. When then we
are discoursing with the Gentiles, we cite (4 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p46.9"></span>mss.</span> read or point to the reading, “let
us not cite”) not the heavens before them, but the men, whom though they
were in worse plight than brutes, He hath persuaded to be the Angels’
competitors. And we (1 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p46.10"></span>mss.</span> “let us”) stop their mouths by
speaking of this change. For far better than the heaven is man, and a
soul brighter than their beauty may he possess. For it, though visible
for so long a time, did not persuade much. But Paul, after preaching a
short time, drew the whole world unto him. (St. Aug. on [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="vii.xx-p46.11"></span>.)
For he possessed a soul no less than the heaven, which was able to draw
all men unto him. Our soul is not a match even for the earth: but his is
equal to the heavens. That stands indeed keeping to its own boundary and
rule; but the loftiness of his soul transcended all the heavens, and
conversed with Christ Himself. (<span id="vii.xx-p46.12"></span>[2 Cor.
x. 15](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#015)<span id="vii.xx-p46.13"></span>;
[Rom. xv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019)<span
id="vii.xx-p46.14"></span>, etc.) And the beauty of it was so great,
that even God heraldeth it forth. For the stars did the angels marvel at
when they were made. ([Job xxxviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)<span id="vii.xx-p46.15"></span>.)
But this He marvelled at when He saith, “He is a chosen vessel unto Me.”
([Acts ix. 15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xx-p46.16"></span>.) And this Heaven doth a cloud many times
overshadow. But Paul’s soul no temptation overshadowed but even in
storms he was clearer to the sight than the hard sky (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p46.17"></span>σταθερἅς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p46.18"></span>μεσημβρίας</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xx-p46.19"></span>)</span> at noon, and
shone constantly as it had done before the clouds came on. For the Sun
who shone in him sent not forth such rays as to be over-clouded by the
concourse of temptations, but even then shone forth the more. Wherefore
he says, “My grace is sufficient for thee, for My Strength is made
perfect in weakness.” ([2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="vii.xx-p46.20"></span>.)
Let us then strive to be like him, and then even to what we are this
heaven will be as nothing, if we wish it, nor yet the sun, nor the whole
world. For these are for us, and not we for them. Let us show that we
are worthy of having had these made for us. For if we be found unworthy
of these, how shall we be worthy a kingdom? For indeed all that live so
as to blaspheme God are unworthy to see the sun. They who blaspheme Him
are unworthy to enjoy the creatures who glorify Him: since even a son
who insulteth his father is unworthy to be waited upon by the approved
servants. Hence these will enjoy glory, and that great glory; but we
shall have to undergo punishment and vengeance.

<span id="vii.xx-p47"></span>How miserable then will it be for the
creation which was made for thee to be fashioned “according to the
glorious liberty of the children of God,” (<span
id="vii.xx-p47.1"></span>[Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p47.2"></span>) but
for us who were made children of God, through our much listlessness, to
be sent away to destruction and hell, for whose sake the creation shall
enjoy that great festal time? Now to keep this from coming to pass, let
such of us as have a pure soul keep it still such, or rather let us make
its brightness more intense. And let those of us that have a soiled one,
not despair. For “if” (he says) “your sins be as purple, I will make
them white as snow. And if they be as scarlet, I will make them white as
wool.” (<span id="vii.xx-p47.3"></span>[Is. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span id="vii.xx-p47.4"></span>.)
But when it is God that promiseth, doubt not, but do those things
whereby thou mayest draw to thee these promises. Are they unnumbered,
the fearful and outrageous acts done by thee? And what of this? For
hitherto thou art not gone away into the grave where no man shah
confess. ([Isa. 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018), [Ps.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span id="vii.xx-p47.5"></span>.)
Hitherto the arena (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xx-p47.6"></span>θέατρον</span>) is not broken up for thee, but
thou art standing within the line, and thou art able even by a struggle
at the last to recover all thy defeats. Thou art not yet come to where
the rich man was, for thee to hear it said, “there is a gulf betwixt you
and us.” (<span id="vii.xx-p47.7"></span>[Luke xvi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026)<span id="vii.xx-p47.8"></span>.)
The Bridegroom is not yet at hand, that one should fear to give you of
his oil. Still canst thou buy and store up. And there is not one yet to
say, “Not so; lest there be not enough for us and and you” ([Matt. xxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#009)<span id="vii.xx-p47.9"></span>); but
there are many that sell, the naked, the hungry, the sick, the
imprisoned. Give food to these, clothing to those, visit the sick, and
the oil will come more than from fountains. The day of account is not
here. Use the time as need be, and make deductions from the debts, and
to him that oweth “an hundred measures of oil, say, Take thy bill and
write fifty.” (<span id="vii.xx-p47.10"></span>[Luke xvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#006)<span id="vii.xx-p47.11"></span>.)
And with money, and with words, <span
id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) and with every other thing do in
like manner, imitating that steward. And advise this to thyself, and
also to thy relatives, for thou hast still the power of saying so. Thou
art not yet come to the necessity of calling in another in their behalf,
but thou hast power to give advice at once to thyself and to others.
([Luke 16.28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028)<span
id="vii.xx-p48.2"></span>.) But when thou art gone away thither, neither
of these things wilt thou have it in thy power to do at need. And with
good reason. For thou who hast had so long a period fixed thee, and
neither done thyself good, nor any else, how when thou art under the
Judge’s hands shalt thou be able to obtain this grace? Putting all these
things together then, let us cling fast to our own salvation, and not
lose the opportunity of this life present. For it is possible, it is,
even at our last breath to please God. It is possible to gain approval
by thy last will, not indeed in such way as in our lifetime, still it is
possible. How, and in what way? If thou leavest Him among thine heirs,
and givest Him also (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xx-p48.3"></span>καὶ αὐτᾥ</span>) a portion of thine whole
estate. Hast thou not fed Him in thy lifetime? At all events when
departed, when thou art no longer owner, give Him a share of thy goods.
He is loving unto man, He doth not deal niggardly by thee. It is a mark
to be sure of a greater desire, and so it will be more rewarded, to feed
Him in thy lifetime. But if thou hast not done this, at all events do
the next best thing. Leave Him joint-heir (see p. 384) with thy
children, and if thou art dilatory over this, bethink thyself that His
Father made thee joint-heir with Him, and break down thy inhuman spirit.
For what excuse wilt thou have if thou dost not even make Him a sharer
with thy children, who made thee share the Heaven, and was slain for
thee? And yet all that ever He did, He did not in repayment of a debt,
but as bestowing a favor. But you after so great benefits, have been
made a debtor as well. And yet, though things are so, it is as if
receiving a favor, not as demanding payment of a debt, that He crowneth
thee; and this too when what He is to receive is His own. Give then thy
money, which is now no longer of any use to thee, and of which thou art
no longer owner; and He will give thee a Kingdom which shall be of
service to thee perpetually, and with it will bestow also the things of
this life. For if He be made the joint heir of thy children, He doth
lighten their orphanage for them, do away with plots against them, beat
off insults, stop the mouths of pettifoggers. And if they themselves be
unable to stand up for their bequeathments, He will Himself stand up,
and not let them be broken through. But if He do even allow this, then
He makes up of Himself all that was ordered in the will with still
greater liberality, because He has been but mentioned in it. Leave Him
then thine heir. For it is to Him that thou art upon the point of going.
He will be thy Judge Himself in the trial for all that hath been done
here. But there are some so miserable and pinched, that though they have
no children, still they have not the courage to do this, but approve of
giving that they have to hangers on, and to flatterers, and to this
person and to that, sooner than to Christ, Who hath done them so great
benefits. And what can be more unreasonable than this conduct? For if
one were to compare men of this cast to asses, aye, or to stones, one
shall not still be saying anything tantamount to their unreasonableness
and senselessness. Nor could one find a similitude to put before you
their madness and dementedness. For what pardon shall they obtain for
not having fed Him in their lifetime, who, even when they are on the
point of departing to Him, have not the inclination to give Him but a
trifle out of those goods, of which they are no longer the owners, but
are of such an inimical and hostile disposition, as not even to give Him
a share in what is useless to themselves? Do you not know how many of
mankind have not even been counted worthy to obtain an end of this kind,
but have been snatched off suddenly? But thee doth God empower to give
orders to thy kindred, and to speak with them about thy property, and
set all that is in thy house in order. What defence then wilt thou have
to set up, when even after receiving this favor from Him, thou hast
treacherously given up the benefit, and art standing as it were in
diametrical opposition to thy forefathers in the faith? For they even in
their lifetime sold all, and brought it to the Apostle’s feet. But thou,
even at thy death, dost not give any share to them that need. What is
the better part, and gives one much boldness, is to remedy poverty in
one’s lifetime. But if thou hast not been minded to do this, at all
events do upon thy death-bed some noble act. For this is not what a
strong love for Christ would do, yet still it is an act of love. For if
thou wilt not have the high place with the Lambs, still even to be after
them at all is no light thing, and so not to be placed with the goats
nor on the left hand. But if thou wilt not do even this, what plea is to
rescue thee, when neither the fear of death nor thy money having become
henceforth of no use to thee, nor the leaving of safety behind thee to
thy children, nor the laying up of much pardon there against the time to
come, will make thee merciful to man? Wherefore I advise, as the best
thing, that in your lifetime you give the larger half of your goods to
the poor. But if there be any of so narrow a soul as not to have the
heart to do so, at all events let them by necessity become merciful. For
when you were living as if there were no death, then you clung close to
your goods. But now since you have learnt that you are to die, at least
now give over your opinion, and deliberate about your affairs as one
that must die. Or rather as one that ought to enjoy immortal life for
evermore. For if what I am going to say be distasteful, and big with
horror, still it must be said. Reckon with thy slaves the Lord. Art thou
giving thy slaves liberty? Give Christ liberty from famine, from
distress, from imprisonment, from nakedness. Art thou horrified at the
words? Is it not then more horrible when thou dost not even thus much?
And here the word makes thy blood curdle. But when thou art gone to that
world, and hast to hear things far more grievous than these, and seest
the tortures which are incurable, what wilt thou say? To whom wilt thou
flee for refuge? Whom wilt thou call to thy alliance and assistance?
Will it be Abraham? He will not hearken to thee. Or those virgins? They
will not give thee of their oil. Thy father then or thy grandfather? But
none even of these, if he be ever so holy, will have it in his power to
reverse that sentence. Weighing then all these things, to Him Who alone
is Lord to blot out the bill against thee and to quench that flame, to
Him make prayer and supplication, and propitiate Him, by now feeding Him
and clothing Him continually: that in this world thou mayest depart with
a good hope, and when thou art there thou mayest enjoy eternal
blessings, which may we all attain to by the grace and love toward man,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[i:1495](1110081.htm#fr_1494) <span
id="vii.xx-p4.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p5"></span> [Rom.
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="vii.xx-p5.1"></span>
state a threefold objection to Paul’s doctrine of the Jews’
responsibility. [Rom. 10.16-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xx-p5.2"></span> are the reply to this objection. Paul takes up
three points which are summarized in the objections. (1) Shall the fact
that they have not believed constitute any excuse? ([Rom.
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span id="vii.xx-p5.3"></span>).
The apostle answers that the real fact is that the message of faith and
of the Messianic salvation has been proclaimed to the Jews and a large
part of them have rejected and disobeyed it. They must therefore have
heard, for disobedience, on the one hand, and faith, on the other,
depends upon hearing the message and hearing it depends upon God having
spoken it. (2) Then comes the prior question concerning the hearing on
which disobedience or hearing is dependent ([Rom.
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span id="vii.xx-p5.4"></span>).
Certainly they have heard, answers Paul, for we might apply to God’s
message the words of the Psalm ([Psa.
19.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span id="vii.xx-p5.5"></span>)
which describe the movements of the heavenly bodies, so plain and
wide-spread have been God’s messages concerning Christ and the
principles on which his Gospel is based. (3) Since Israel has heard,
does it not follow that they knew and are therefore inexcusable? ([Rom.
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)<span id="vii.xx-p5.6"></span>).
Yes. The Jews complain that God’s promise has failed; that He has not
preserved to them their promised prerogatives. Hence it is excusable for
them to fall away from confidence in Him, etc. The apostle answers that
this is an entire misunderstanding of their own providential history.
The coming of the Gentiles into the kingdom of God was already
foreshadowed in the Old Testament, e.g. Moses ([Deut. xxxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)<span id="vii.xx-p5.7"></span>)
speaks of Israel being made jealous and angry by a “no-people”—“a
foolish nation” (heathen). And again, Isaiah ([Isa.
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="vii.xx-p5.8"></span>) uses
very bold words which the apostle applies to the relation of Jews and
Gentiles. The three points placed in close relation are: (1) Israel has
heard and (2) hence knows, and (3) is blameworthy for the rejection of
the Messiah.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[i:1496](1110081.htm#fr_1495) <span
id="vii.xx-p7.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p8"></span> Four <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> The believing and obeying God
equally when He speaks and when He works wonders.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[i:1497](1110081.htm#fr_1496) <span
id="vii.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p12"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="vii.xx-p12.1"></span>(V and
LXX. xviii). The mystical interpretation of this Psalm here indicated,
is acknowledged by the Church in using it on Christmas day. An ancient
Latin hymn has this paraphrase on a part of it:

<span id="vii.xx-p13"></span>From Chastity, His Palace bright,

<span id="vii.xx-p14"></span>Forth came the Bridegroom decked with
light,

<span id="vii.xx-p15"></span>Giant! God and Man in one!

<span id="vii.xx-p16"></span>Glad His glorious race to run.

<span id="vii.xx-p17"></span>From the Eternal Father sent

<span id="vii.xx-p18"></span>Back to Him His circuit bent,

<span id="vii.xx-p19"></span>Down to hell His path descends,

<span id="vii.xx-p20"></span>At the throne of God it ends.

<span id="vii.xx-p21"></span>Origen on this passage (t. iv. p. 627), and
St. Augustin on the Psalm, enlarge upon its Christian interpretation.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[i:1498](1110081.htm#fr_1497) <span
id="vii.xx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p27"></span> “They” “their” i.e. the Jews: “these” i.e.
the Gentiles.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[i:1499](1110081.htm#fr_1498) <span
id="vii.xx-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p32"></span> This of course does not exclude the other
interpretation of J. Martyr. *Apol.* i. 35. p. 27 O.T. *Tryph.* 97, p.
193 O.T. and others. See, on the contrary, St. [John xii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)<span id="vii.xx-p32.1"></span>,
also St. Cyr. Hier. Cat. xiii. 27, and note, p. 157 O.T. add St.
Cyprian, Test. ii. 20, p. 56, O.T. and note.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[i:1500](1110081.htm#fr_1499) <span
id="vii.xx-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p33"></span> As in Cornelius’ case. See p. 379, and
context.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[i:1501](1110081.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="vii.xx-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p35"></span> The central thought of [Rom.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#000)<span id="vii.xx-p35.1"></span>. is
that Israel’s rejection is not forever; the nation is to be restored.
The order of thought is as follows: (1) The rejection is *partial.* The
Scriptures furnish analogous examples of partial falls and rejections of
the nation, [Rom. 11.1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001)<span
id="vii.xx-p35.2"></span>. (2) The fall of Israel is *temporary.* Some
branches were cut off because of unbelief and Gentile branches inserted
in their place, but the natural branches shall yet be restored, [Rom.
11.11-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xx-p35.3"></span>. (3) Reflections upon the wise and gracious
purposes of God in all these dispensations, [Rom.
11.25-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span
id="vii.xx-p35.4"></span>.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[i:1502](1110081.htm#fr_1501) <span
id="vii.xx-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p40"></span> Field with one <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p40.1"></span>ms</span>. reads “What then? Is this the
people? is that seed come to be 3, 5, or 10,000?” and mentions with
approval the reading of the Catena “What then? are the people come down
to thee and 3, 5, or 10,000?”

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[i:1503](1110081.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="vii.xx-p42.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p43"></span> Referring to his words, <span
id="vii.xx-p43.1"></span>[1 Kings xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014)<span id="vii.xx-p43.2"></span>, and
to his sharing in the famine, [1 Kings
17.13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#013)<span id="vii.xx-p43.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[i:1504](1110081.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="vii.xx-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p45"></span> 4 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p45.1"></span>mss.</span> omit these words: most early <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xx-p45.2"></span>mss.</span> and versions of
the N.T. omit the whole second half of the verse.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[i:1505](1110081.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="vii.xx-p47.12"></span>

<span id="vii.xx-p48"></span> All Field’s <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xx-p48.1"></span>mss.</span> om. “words,” which however may mean
offence given by words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIX on Rom. xi. 7.](1110082)
