[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110017)  [Next](1110019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xiii"></span> <span id="vi.xiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XIII.</span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p2"></span>[Acts
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#018)<span id="vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p3"></span>“Then having risen up, the high-priest and
they that were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees) were filled
with indignation, and laid their hands on the Apostles, and put them in
the common prison.”

<span id="vi.xiii-p4"></span>“<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>Having</span> risen up,” that is, being <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) roused, being excited at the things
taking place, the high-priest and they which were with him (which is the
sect of the Sadducees) were filled with indignation, and laid their
hands on the Apostles:” they now assault them more vigorously: “and put
them in the common prison;” but did not forthwith bring them to trial,
because they expected them again to be softened down. “But the Angel of
the Lord opened the prison doors, and brought them forth, and said, Go,
stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.”
“And when they heard that, they entered into the temple early in the
morning, and taught.” ([Acts
5.19-21](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xiii-p5.15"></span>.) This was done both for the encouragement of
the disciples, and for the benefit and instruction of the others. And
observe how the proceeding in the present instance is just the same as
in what Christ Himself did. Namely, in His miracles though He does not
let men see them in the act of being wrought, He furnishes the means
whereby they may be apprised of the things wrought: thus, in His
Resurrection, He did not let them see how He rose: in the water made
wine, the guests do not see it done, for they have been drinking much,
and the discernment He leaves to others. Just so in the present case,
they do not see them in the act of being brought forth, but the proofs
from which they might gather what had been done, they do see. And it was
by night that the Angel put them forth. Why was this? Because <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) in this way they were more believed
than they would have been in the other: so, people would not even have
had occasion to put the question: they would not in some other way have
believed. So it was in the old times, in the case of Nebuchadnezzar: he
saw them praising God in the furnace, and then indeed he was put in
amazement. ([Dan. iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xiii-p6.18"></span>.) Whereas then these priests ought as their
first question to have asked, How came ye out? instead of this, as if
nothing had happened, they ask, “Did we not straitly charge you not to
speak?” ([Acts 5.28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xiii-p6.19"></span>.) And observe, by report of others they are
apprised of all the circumstances: they see the prison remaining closed
with safety, and the guards standing before the doors. <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) A twofold security this; as was the
case at the sepulchre, where was both the seal, and the men to watch.
See how they fought against God! Say, was this of man’s doing, that
happened to them? Who led them forth, when the doors were shut? How came
they out, with the keepers standing before the door? Verily they must be
mad or drunken to talk so. Here are men, whom neither prison, nor bonds,
nor closed doors, had been able to keep in; and yet they expect to
overpower them: such is their childish folly! Their officers come and
confess what has taken place, as if on purpose to debar them from all
show of reason. Do you mark how there is miracle upon miracle, differing
in kind, some wrought by them, others on them, and these more
illustrious than the others? “And when they heard that, they entered
into the temple early in the morning, and taught. But the high-priest
came, and they that were with him, and called the council together, and
all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have
them brought. But when the officers came, and found them not in the
prison, they returned, and told, saying, The prison truly found we shut
with all safety, and the keepers standing without before the doors: but
when we had opened, we found no man within. Now when the high-priest and
the captain of the temple and the chief priests heard these things, they
doubted of them whereunto this would grow.” ([Acts
5.21-25](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xiii-p7.4"></span>.) It <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)
is well ordered that the information was not brought to them at once,
but they are first utterly at a loss what to think, that when they have
considered it well and seen that there is a Divine Power in the case,
then they may learn the whole state of the case. “Then came one, and
told them, saying, Behold, the men whom ye put in prison are standing in
the temple, and teaching the people. Then went the captain with the
other officers, and brought them without violence: for they feared the
multitude, lest they should have been stoned.” ([Acts
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#026)<span id="vi.xiii-p8.3"></span>.) O
the folly of the men! “They feared,” saith he, “the multitude.” Why, how
had the multitude helped the Apostles? When they ought to have feared
that God Who was continually delivering them like winged creatures out
of their power, instead of that, “they feared the multitude!” “And the
high-priest,” shameless, reckless, senseless, “asked them, saying, Did
not we straitly command you that ye should not teach in this name? and,
behold ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine and intend to bring
this man’s blood upon us.” ([Acts
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span id="vi.xiii-p8.4"></span>.)
What then (say the Apostles)? Again with mildness they address them; and
yet they might have said, “Who are ye, that ye countermand God?” But
what do they say? Again in the way of exhortation and advice, and with
much mildness, they make answer. “Then Peter and the other Apostles
answered and said, We ought to obey God rather than men.” ([Acts
5.29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="vi.xiii-p8.5"></span>.)
High magnanimity! He shows them too that they are fighting against
God. <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) For, he says, Whom ye
killed, Him hath God raised up. “The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,
Whom ye slew and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted with His right
hand to be a Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins.” ([Acts 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031)<span id="vi.xiii-p9.2"></span>.)
And again they refer the whole to the Father, that He should not seem to
be alien to the Father. “And hath exalted,” saith He, “with his right
hand.” He affirms not merely the Resurrection, but the Exaltation also.
“For to give repentance to Israel.” Observe here as before the gain (to
them): observe the perfection of doctrine conveyed in the form of
apology. “And we are witnesses of these things.” ([Acts
5.32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032)<span id="vi.xiii-p9.3"></span>.)
Great boldness of speech! And the ground of their credibility: “And so
is also the Holy Ghost, Whom God hath given to them that obey Him.” Do
you observe that they allege not only the Spirit’s testimony? And they
said not, “Whom He hath given” to us, but, “to them that obey Him:”
therein alike showing their own unassuming temper, and intimating the
greatness of the gift, and showing the hearers that it was possible for
them also to receive the Spirit. See, how these people were instructed
both by deeds and by words, and yet they paid no heed, that their
condemnation might be just. For to this end did God suffer the Apostles
to be brought to trial, that both their adversaries might be instructed,
and all might learn, and that the Apostles might be invigorated to
boldness of speech. “And they hearing that, were cut to the heart.”
([Acts 5.33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xiii-p9.4"></span>.) The <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304)
others (on a former occasion) “when they heard these things were
pricked;” here they were cut (as with a saw) (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p10.5"></span>διεπρίοντο</span>) “and desired to slay them.”
([Acts 2.37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span
id="vi.xiii-p10.6"></span>.)

<span id="vi.xiii-p11"></span>But it is necessary now to look over again
what we have read. “But the angel of the Lord by night opened the prison
doors, and brought them forth, and said, Go, stand and speak in the
temple to the people all the words of this life. Brought <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) them forth.” (Recapitulation, [Acts
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#020)<span id="vi.xiii-p12.6"></span>.)
He did not bring them away to benefit themselves thereby, but, “Stand,”
he says, “and speak in the temple to the people.” But if the guards had
put them out, as those thought, they would have fled, that is, supposing
they had been induced to come out: and if those had put them forth, they
would not have stood in the temple, but would have absconded. No one is
so void of sense, as not at once to see this. “Did we not straitly
charge you?” ([Acts 5.28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xiii-p12.7"></span>.) Well, if they undertook to obey you, ye do
well to call them to account: but if even at the very time they told you
they would not obey, what account have you to call them to, what defence
is there for them to make? “And behold ye have filled Jerusalem with
your doctrine, and intend to bring this man’s blood upon us.” <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) Mark the inconsistency of the
accusations and the exceeding folly. They want to make it appear now,
that the dispositions of the Jews <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) are sanguinary, as if they were doing
these things not for the truth’s sake, but in the wish to be revenged.
And for this reason too the Apostles do not answer them with defiance
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.8"></span>θρασέως</span>):
for they were teachers. And yet where is the man, who, with a whole city
to back him, and endowed with so great grace, would not have spoken and
uttered something big? But not so did these: for they were not angered;
no, they pitied these men, and wept over them, and marked in what way
they might free them from their error and wrath. And they no longer say
to them, “Judge ye:” ([Acts 4.19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019)<span
id="vi.xiii-p14.9"></span>) but they simply affirm, saying, “Whom God
raised up, Him do we preach: it is by the will of God that these things
are done.” They said not, Did not we tell you even then, that “we cannot
but speak the things which we have seen and heard?” ([Acts
4.20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020)<span
id="vi.xiii-p14.10"></span>.) for they are not contentious for glory;
but they repeat again the same story,—the Cross, the Resurrection. And
they tell not, wherefore He was crucified—that it was for our sakes: but
they hint at this indeed, but not openly as yet, wishing to terrify them
awhile. And yet what sort of rhetoric is here? None at all, <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) but everywhere it is still the
Passion, and the Resurrection and the Ascension, and the end wherefore:
“The God of our fathers raised up Jesus,” etc. ([Acts
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031)<span id="vi.xiii-p15.1"></span>.)
And yet what improbable assertions are these! Very improbable, no doubt;
but for all that, not rulers, not people, had a word to say against
them: but those had their mouths stopped, and these received the
teaching. “And we,” saith he, “are witnesses of these things.” ([Acts
5.32](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#032)<span id="vi.xiii-p15.2"></span>.)
Of what things? Of His having promised forgiveness and repentance: for
the Resurrection indeed was acknowledged, now. But that He giveth
forgiveness, both we are witnesses, and “so is the Holy Ghost,” Who
would not have come down, unless sins had been first remitted: so that
this is an indisputable proof. “When they heard that, they were cut” (to
the heart), “and took counsel to slay them.” ([Acts
5.33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#033)<span id="vi.xiii-p15.3"></span>.)
Hearest thou of the forgiveness of sins, O wretched man, and that God
doth not demand punishment, and dost thou wish to slay them? What
wickedness was this! And yet, either they ought to have convicted them
of lying, or if they could not do that, to have believed: but if they
did not choose to believe, yet they ought not to slay them. For what was
there deserving of death? Such was their intoxication, they did not even
see what had taken place. Observe, how everywhere the Apostles, when
they have made mention of the crime, add the mention of forgiveness;
showing, that while what had been done was worthy of death, that which
was given was proffered to them as to benefactors! In what other way
could any one have persuaded them?

<span id="vi.xiii-p16"></span>“Then stood up the high-priest,” etc.
As <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) men in high repute, these
(the Apostles) were about to take their place near to the Prophets. The
Sadducees were they that were most sore on the subject of the
Resurrection. But perchance some one will say: Why, what man, endowed
with such gifts as the Apostles were, would not have been great? But
consider, <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) I pray you, how,
before that they were endowed with the grace, “they were continuing
steadfastly with one accord in prayer” ([Acts
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014)<span id="vi.xiii-p18.3"></span>),
and depending on the aid from above. And dost thou, my beloved, hope for
the kingdom of heaven, yet endurest naught? And hast thou received the
Spirit, yet sufferest not such things, nor encounterest perils? But
they, before they had breathing-time from their former dangers, were
again led into others. And even this too, that there is no arrogance, no
conceit, how great a good it is! To converse with mildness, what a gain
it is! For not all that they did was the immediate work of grace, but
there are many marks of their own zeal as well. That the gifts of grace
shine forth in them, this was from their own diligence. See, for
instance, from the very beginning, how careful Peter is; how sober and
vigilant: how they that believed cast away their riches, had no private
property, continued in prayer, showed that they were of one mind, passed
their time in fastings. What grace, I ask (alone), did all this?
Therefore it is that He brings the evidence home to them through their
own officers. Just as in the case of Christ, it was their officers who
said, “Never man spake as this Man speaketh.” (<span
id="vi.xiii-p18.4"></span>[John vii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#046)<span id="vi.xiii-p18.5"></span>.)
These <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) (proofs) are more apt to
be believed than the Resurrection.—Observe also the moderation shown by
(the rulers) themselves, and how they give way. “The high-priest asked
them, saying,” etc. ([Acts 5.27](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#027)<span
id="vi.xiii-p19.4"></span>): here he reasons with them, forsooth, in a
moderate tone; for he was frightened: indeed to hinder was what he
desired rather than to kill, since that he cannot do: and with the view
to rouse them all, and show them the extreme danger they are in, “And
intend,” says he (to the Apostles), “to bring this man’s blood upon us.”
Dost thou still take Him to be but *man?* He wants to make it appear
that the injunction was necessary for their own safety. But mark what
(Peter) says: “Him hath God exalted with His right hand to be a Prince
and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of
sins.” ([Acts 5.31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031)<span
id="vi.xiii-p19.5"></span>.) Here he forbears to mention the Gentiles,
not to give them a handle against him. “And they desired,” it says, “to
slay them.” ([Acts 5.33](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#033)<span
id="vi.xiii-p19.6"></span>.) See again these in perplexity, these in
pain: but those in quiet and cheerfulness and delight. It is not merely,
They were grieved, but “They were cut” (to the heart). Truly this makes
good that proverb, “Evil do, evil fare:” as we may see in this case.
Here were these men in bonds, set at the bar of judgment, and the men
that sit in judgment upon them were in distress and helpless perplexity.
For as he who strikes a blow upon the adamant, gets the shock of the
blow himself, so it was with these men. But they saw that not only was
their boldness of speech not stopped, but rather their preaching
increased the more, and that they discoursed without a thought of fear,
and afforded them no handles against them.

<span id="vi.xiii-p20"></span>Let us imitate these, my beloved: let us
be undaunted in all our dangers. There is nothing dreadful to him that
fears God; but all that is dreadful is for others. For when a man is
delivered from his passions, and regards all present things as a shadow,
say, from whom shall he suffer anything dreadful? whom shall he have to
fear? whom shall he need plead to? Let us flee to this Rock which cannot
be shaken. If any one were to build for us a city, and throw up a wall
around it, and remove us to a land uninhabited, where there were none to
disturb us, and there supply us with abundance of everything, and not
suffer us to have aught to trouble us with anybody, he would not set us
in such perfect safety, as Christ hath done now. Be it a city made of
brass, if you will, surrounded on all sides with a wall, lofty and
impregnable, let there be no enemy near it; let it have land plentiful
and rich, let there be added abundance of other things, let the citizens
too be mild and gentle, and no evil-doer there, neither robber, nor
thief, no informer, no court of justice, but merely agreements (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p20.1"></span>συναλλάλματα</span>); and
let us dwell in this city: not even thus would it be possible to live in
security. Wherefore? Because there could not but be differences with
servants, with wives, with children, to be a groundwork of much
discomfort. But here was nothing of the kind; for here was nothing at
all to pain them or cause any discomfort. Nay, what is more wonderful to
say, the very things which are thought to cause discomfort, became
matter of all joy and gladness. For tell me, what was there for them to
be annoyed at? what to take amiss? Shall we cite a particular case for
comparison with them? Well, let there be one of consular dignity, let
him be possessed of much wealth, let him dwell in the imperial city, let
him have no troublesome business with anybody, but only live in delight,
and have nothing else but this to do, seated at the very summit of
wealth and honor and power: and let us set against him a Peter, in bonds
if you will, in evils without number: and we shall find that he is the
man that lives the most delightfully. For when there is such excess of
joy, as to be delighted when in bonds, think what must be the greatness
of that joy! For like as those who are high in office, whatsoever evils
may happen, are not sensible of them, but continue in enjoyment: so did
these the more rejoice on account of these very evils. For it is
impossible, impossible in words to express how great pleasure falls to
their lot, who suffer for Christ’s sake: for they rejoice in their
sufferings, rather than in their good things. Whoso loves Christ, knows
what I say.—But what as regards safety? And who, I ask, if he were ever
so rich, could have escaped so many perils, going about among so many
different nations, for the sole purpose <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) of bringing about a reformation in
their manner of life? For it was just as if by royal mandate that they
carried all before them, nay, far more easily, for never mandate could
have been so effectual, as their words were. For the royal edict compels
by necessity, but these drew men willingly and spontaneously, yea, and
with hearts above measure thankful. What royal edict, I ask, would ever
have persuaded men to part with all their property and their lives; to
despise home, country, kindred, yea, even self-preservation? Yet the
voices of fishermen and tent-makers availed for this. So that they were
both happy, and more powerful and strong than all others. “Yes,” say
you, “those of course were, for they wrought miracles.” (*supra,* p. 83,
note 4.) But I ask what miracles did those who believed work, the three
thousand, and the five thousand; and yet these, we read, passed their
time in gladness? And well they might: for that which is the groundwork
of all discomforts, the possession of riches, was done away with. For
that, that, I say, was ever the cause both of wars and fighting, and
grief, and discomfort, and all evils: the thing which makes life full of
labor and troubles, it is that. And indeed it would be found that many
more rich than poor have reason to be sad. If any think this is not
true, their notion is derived not from the nature of the things, but
from their own fancy. And if the rich do enjoy some sort of pleasure,
this is not to be wondered at: for even those who are covered all over
with the itch, have a good deal of pleasure. For that the rich are for
all the world like these, and their mind affected in the same sort, is
plain from this circumstance. Their cares annoy them, and they choose to
be engrossed with them for the sake of the momentary pleasure: while
those who are free from these affections, are in health and without
discomfort. Whether is more pleasant, I ask, whether of the two more
safe? To have to take thought only for a single loaf of bread and suit
of clothes, or for an immense family, both slaves and freemen, not
having care about himself (only)? For as this man has his fears for
himself, so have you for those who depend on your own person. Why, <span
id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) I pray you, does poverty seem a thing
to be shunned? Just in the same way as other good things are, in the
judgment of many, things to be deprecated. “Yes,” say you, “but it is
not that those good things are subjects for deprecation, but that they
are hard of attainment.” Well, so is poverty, not a thing to be
deprecated, but hard of attainment: so that if one could bear it, there
would be no reason to deprecate it. For how is it that the Apostles did
not deprecate it? how is it that many even choose it, and so far from
deprecating, even run to it? For that which is really a thing to be
deprecated, cannot be an object of choice save to madmen. But if it be
the men of philosophic and elevated minds that betake themselves to
this, as to a safe and salubrious retreat, no wonder if to the rest it
wears a different appearance. For, in truth, the rich man seems to me to
be just like a city, unwalled, situated in a plain, inviting assailants
from all sides: but poverty, a secure fortress, strong as brass can make
it, and the way up to it difficult. “And yet,” say you, “the fact is
just the reverse: for these are they, who are often dragged into courts
of law, these are they who are overborne and ill-treated.” No: not the
poor, as poor, but those who being poor want to be rich. But I am not
speaking of them, but of such as make it their study to live in poverty.
For say, how comes it that nobody ever drags the brethren of the hills
into courts of law? and yet if to be poor is to be a mark for
oppression, those ought most of all to be dragged thither, since they
are poorer than all others. How comes it that nobody drags the common
mendicants into the law-courts? Because they are come to the extreme of
poverty. How is it that none does violence to them, none lays vexatious
informations against them? Because they abide in a stronghold too safe
for that. How many think it a condition hard to struggle against,
poverty, I mean, and begging! What then, I ask, is it a good thing to
beg? “It is good, if there be comfort,” say you; “if there be one to
give: it is a life so free from trouble and reverses, as every one
knows.” But I do not mean to commend this; God forbid! what I advise is
the not aiming at riches.

<span id="vi.xiii-p23"></span>For say, whom would you rather call
blessed? those who find themselves at home with virtue, (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p23.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p23.2"></span>πιτηδείους πρὸς
ἀρετήν</span>) or those who stand aloof? Of course, those who are near.
Say then, which of the two is the man to learn anything that is
profitable, and to shine in the true wisdom? the former, or the latter?
The first, all must see. If you doubt it, satisfy yourself in this way.
Fetch hither from the market-place any of the poor wretches there; let
him be a cripple, lame, maimed: and then produce some other person,
comely of aspect, strong in body, full of life and vigor in every part,
overflowing with riches: let him be of illustrious birth, and possessed
of great power. Then let us bring both these into the school of
philosophy: which of them, I ask, is more likely to receive the things
taught? The first precept, at the outset, “Be lowly and moderate” (for
this is Christ’s command): which will be most able to fulfil it, this
one or the other? “Blessed are they that mourn” ([Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="vi.xiii-p23.3"></span>):
which will most receive this saying? “Blessed are the lowly:” which will
most listen to this? “Blessed are the pure in heart. Blessed are they
which do hunger and thirst after righteousness. Blessed are they which
are persecuted for righteousness’ sake” ([Matt.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span id="vi.xiii-p23.4"></span>).
Which will with ease receive these sayings? And, if you will, let us
apply to all of them these rules, and see how they will fit. Is not the
one inflamed and swollen all over, while the other is ever lowly minded
and subdued in his whole bearing? It is quite plain. Yes, and there is a
saying to that effect among those that are without: “(I was) a
slave, <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) Epictetus by name, a
cripple in body, for poverty a very Irus, and a friend of the
Immortals.” For how, I would ask, can it be otherwise, but that the soul
of the rich must teem with evils; folly, vainglory, numberless lusts,
anger and passion, covetousness, iniquity, and what not? So that even
for philosophy, the former is more congenially (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.7"></span>πιτηδεία</span>) disposed
than the latter. By all means seek to ascertain which is the more
pleasant: for this I see is the point everywhere discussed, whether such
an one has the more enjoyable way of life. And yet even as regards this,
we need not be in doubt; for to be near to health, is also to have much
enjoyment. But whether of the two, I would ask, is best disposed (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.9"></span>πιτήδειος</span>) to the
matter now in hand, that which we will needs carry into
accomplishment—our law, I mean—the poor man or the rich? Whether of them
will be apt to swear? The man who has children to be provoked with, the
man who has his covenants with innumerable parties, or the man who is
concerned to apply for just a loaf of bread or a garment? This man has
not even need of oaths, should he wish, but always lives free from cares
of business; nay, more, it is often seen that he who is disciplined to
swear not at all, will also despise riches; and one shall see in his
whole behavior his ways all branching off from this one good habit, and
leading to meekness, to contempt of riches, to piety, to subduedness of
soul, to compunction of heart. Then let us not be indolent, my beloved,
but let us again show great earnestness: they who have succeeded, that
they may keep the success achieved, that they be not easily caught by
the receding wave, nor the refluent tide carry them back again
\[they <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) too who are yet
behindhand, that they may be raised up again, and strive to make up that
which is wanting. And meanwhile let those who have succeeded, help those
who have not been able to do the same\]: and by reaching out their
hands, as they would to men struggling in the deep water, receive them
into the haven of no-swearing (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p28.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p28.2"></span>νωμοσίας</span>). For it is indeed a haven of
safety, to swear not at all: whatever storms burst upon us, to be in no
danger of sinking there: be it anger, be it insult, be it passion, be it
what it may, the soul is stayed securely; yea, though one have vented
some chance word or other that ought not, and had been better not, to be
spoken, yet he has laid himself under no necessity, no law. (*Supra,*
Hom. ix. §5. ad. Pop. Ant. viii. §3.) See what Herod did for his oath’s
sake: he cut off the head of the Fore-runner. “But because of his
oaths,” it says, “and because of them which sat at meat with him” (<span
id="vi.xiii-p28.3"></span>[Mark vi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#026)<span id="vi.xiii-p28.4"></span>),
he cut off the head of the Prophet. Think what the tribes had to suffer
for their oath in the matter of the tribe of Benjamin (<span
id="vi.xiii-p28.5"></span>[Judges xxi.
5-10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#005)<span id="vi.xiii-p28.6"></span>):
what Saul had to suffer for his oath (<span id="vi.xiii-p28.7"></span>[1
Sam. xiv. 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)<span
id="vi.xiii-p28.8"></span>, etc.). For Saul indeed perjured himself, but
Herod did what was even worse than perjury, he committed murder. Joshua
again—you know how it fared with him, for his oath in the matter of the
Gibeonites. ([Josh. 9](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#000)<span
id="vi.xiii-p28.9"></span>.) For it is indeed a snare of Satan, this
swearing. Let us burst <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) the
cords; let us bring ourselves into a condition in which it will be easy
(not to swear); let us break loose from every entanglement, and from
this snare of Satan. Let us fear the command of the Lord: let us settle
ourselves in the best of habits: that, making progress, and having
achieved this and the rest of the commandments, we may obtain those good
things which are promised to them that love Him, through the grace and
loving-kindness of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and
the Holy Ghost together be glory, power, and honor, now and ever, and
world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[i:300](1110018.htm#fr_299) <span
id="vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p5"></span> Œcumenius has in part preserved the true
reading, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>τ. ἐ.
διεγερθεὶς, κινηθεὶς, ἐπὶ τοῖς γινομένοις</span> \[text omitted\] <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.2"></span>σφοδρότερον αὐτοῖς
ἐπιτίθεται</span>. A. B. C. Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p5.3"></span>τ. ἐ., διηγέρθη, κινηθεὶς ἐπὶ τοῖς γεν.</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.4"></span>“</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.5"></span>Καὶ ἐθ. αὐτοὺς ἐν τ.
δ.</span><span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.6"></span>”</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.7"></span>Νῦν σφοδρ. αὐτοῖς
ἐπιτίθενται</span>. And again after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p5.8"></span>πράους ἔσεσθαι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p5.9"></span>,</span>—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p5.10"></span>Καὶ σφοδρ. ἐπιτίθενται</span> (Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.11"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.12"></span>πιτίθεται</span>): <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.13"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p5.14"></span>θεντο αὐτοὺς, φ., ἐν τ. δ.
῎Αγγελος δὲ κ. τ. λ</span>.—E. D. F. Edd. “Nothing more reckless than
wickedness, nothing more audacious. Having learned by experience the
courage of these men, from the attempts they had made before, they
nevertheless attempt, and again come to the attack. What means it, ‘And
having risen up, the high-priest and they that were with him?’ He was
roused, it says, being excited at what had taken place. ‘And laid their
hands on the Apostles, and put them in the common prison.’ Now they
assault them more vigorously: but did not forthwith, etc. And whence is
it manifest that they assaulted them more vigorously? From their putting
them in the common prison. Again they are involved in danger, and again
they experience succor from God. And in what manner, hear from what
follows.”

<span id="fn_300"></span>[i:301](1110018.htm#fr_300) <span
id="vi.xiii-p5.16"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.2"></span>Οτι οὕτω μᾶλλον ἢ ἐκείνως ἐπιστεύθησαν· οὕτω
καὶ οὐκ ἂν ἐπὶ τὸ ἐρωτῆσαι ἦλθον, οὐκ ἂν ἑτέρως ἐπίστευσαν</span>. If it
be meant that the Apostles were more believed because the miracle itself
was not seen, than they would have been if the Angel had brought them
out in open day, this may be understood in a sense which St. Chrys.
expresses elsewhere, viz. with reference to the nature of faith: “in the
latter case there could have been no room for doubt; people would have
been forced to acknowledge the claims of the Apostles.” Thus Hom. vi. in
1 Cor. “Put the case that Christ should come this moment with all the
Angels, reveal Himself as God, and all be subject unto Him: would not
the heathen believe? But will this be counted unto the heathen for
faith? No: this were no faith; for a compulsory power from without—the
visible appearance—would have effected this. There is no free choice in
the matter: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.3"></span>οὐκ ἐστι
τὸ πρᾶγμα προαιρέσεως</span>.” But then the next sentence ought to be,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.4"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.5"></span>Ε</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.6"></span>κείνως γὰρ οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐπὶ τὸ
ἐρ. ἦλθον· εἰ δὲ οὐχ οὕτως, οὐκ ἂν ἑτέρως ἐπ</span>., or to that
effect.—Perhaps, however, the meaning is rather: “It was so plain to
common sense that a miracle must have been wrought, that had the Angel
brought them out in the sight of all men (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.7"></span>οὕτω</span>), they could not have been more
believed than they had a right to be as the case was (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.9"></span>κείνως</span>). Had the
miracle been performed openly (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.10"></span>οὕτω</span>), people would have had no
occasion even to ask, How is this? And they who, as it was, were not
brought to ask such a question, would certainly not have believed under
any other circumstances. So in the Old Testament, Nebuchadnezzar, when
he sees the Holy Men praising God in the furnace, is brought to ask in
amazement, Did we not cast three men, etc.: but these priests are so
hardened, that instead of asking as they ought to have done, How came ye
out? they only ask, as if nothing had happened, Did we not straitly
charge you, etc. And observe, they have no excuse for their wilful
apathy: for they have had a full report of the circumstances from the
officers: the prison shut, the guards at their posts.” If this be the
meaning, we must replace <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.11"></span>οὐκ ἂν</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.12"></span>οὐδ ἂν</span> in the sentence <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.13"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.14"></span>τι οὕτω μᾶλλον κ. τ.
λ</span>. But the text is too corrupt to be restored by any simple
emendation.—Edd. “Because in this way, etc. especially as they would not
have been brought to ask the question, nor yet in another case would
they themselves have believed;” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.15"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p6.16"></span>λλως τε καὶ ὅτι οὐκ ἂν</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p6.17"></span>οὔτε μὴν ἑτέρως ἂν καὶ
αὐτοὶ ἐπίστευσαν</span>.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[i:302](1110018.htm#fr_301) <span
id="vi.xiii-p6.20"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p7"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> insert [Acts
5.21-23](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#021)<span
id="vi.xiii-p7.2"></span>, inconveniently; for it interrupts the
connection. Chrys. here deviates from his usual method, not following
the narrative point by point, but reflecting first upon the conduct of
the priests. Of course it is to be understood, that the whole text, at
least to [Acts 5.28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span
id="vi.xiii-p7.3"></span>, had been first read out.

<span id="fn_302"></span>[i:303](1110018.htm#fr_302) <span
id="vi.xiii-p7.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p8"></span> In the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii-p8.1"></span>mss.</span> this comment is placed before [Acts
5.24](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#024)<span id="vi.xiii-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[i:304](1110018.htm#fr_303) <span
id="vi.xiii-p8.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p9"></span> Here A. B. C. N. insert [Acts
5.29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="vi.xiii-p9.1"></span>
omitted above by the two first. The following sentence, omitted here by
D. E. F. and inserted after v. 31, is there repeated by A. B. C.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[i:305](1110018.htm#fr_304) <span
id="vi.xiii-p9.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p10"></span> E. Edd. “Observe the excess of their
wickedness. When they ought to have been struck with alarm at what they
heard, here they are cut (to the heart), and take counsel in their
temerity (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p10.1"></span>βουλεύονται εἰκῇ</span>) to slay (them).” The
innovator did not perceive the reference to [Acts
2.37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="vi.xiii-p10.2"></span>
in <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p10.3"></span>οἱ ἄλλοι</span>
“<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p10.4"></span>ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες
κατενύγησαν</span>.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[i:306](1110018.htm#fr_305) <span
id="vi.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p12"></span> E. and Edd. “‘Having brought them forth.’
He does not himself bring them away, but lets them go: that in this way
also their intrepidity might be known; which also they showed, in that
by night they entered into the temple and taught.” In the following
sentence perhaps the purport of what St. Chrys. said was, that “if, as
the priests supposed, the guards had let them out, the guards themselves
would have absconded, and the Apostles would not have stood in the
temple, but would have escaped.” <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p12.1"></span>Εἴ γε πεισθέντες</span> may have been said of
the guards, “if they had been bribed or otherwise induced to let them
out;” but all the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii-p12.2"></span>mss.</span> have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p12.3"></span>εἴ γε π. ἐξῆλθον</span>, in the sense,
“supposing, which is not likely, that the Apostles had been induced to
come forth at the request of the guards.” Savile gives this clause to
the latter part, beginning as E. and Edd. with <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p12.4"></span>μᾶλλον δὲ εἰ ἐξέβ</span>. for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p12.5"></span>καὶ εἰ ἐξέβ</span>.
“Supposing they had been induced to come out, or rather if those had put
them out:” Ben. refers it to what precedes; “they would have fled, if
they had come out at their request: nay, if those had put them out,”
etc.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[i:307](1110018.htm#fr_306) <span
id="vi.xiii-p12.8"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p13"></span> The meaning of the council’s statement:
“Ye intend to bring this man’s blood upon us” ([Acts
5.28](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#028)<span id="vi.xiii-p13.1"></span>)
probably is: You would cause an insurrection against us and thus be
avenged for the crucifixion of Jesus (Meyer): others take it to mean:
You would carry the idea that we had murdered an innocent man in
crucifying Jesus (Hackett). The strong language of Peter in reply ([Acts
5.29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029)<span id="vi.xiii-p13.2"></span>)
which seems to imply: We cannot help consequences; we must obey God in
our preaching and healing, favors the former view. The confusion of the
text of Chrys. here (see note *in loco*) makes his view on this point
uncertain.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[i:308](1110018.htm#fr_307) <span
id="vi.xiii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p14.1"></span>φονικὰς λοιπὸν βούλονται δεῖξαι τὰς
προαιρέσεις τῶν ’Ιουδαίων</span>. As the latter part of the sentence,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.2"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.3"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.4"></span>οὐ δι᾽ ἀλήθειαν ταῦτα
ποιοῦντων ἀλλ᾽ ἀμύνασθαι βουλομένων</span>, seems inapplicable to the
Jews, and to be meant for the Apostles, it may be conjectured that the
true reading is <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.5"></span>τῶν
᾽Αποστόλων</span>: “that the Apostles were bent upon having blood.” But
all the <span class="c14"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.6"></span>mss.</span>
have <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p14.7"></span>τῶν
᾽Ιουδαίων</span>, and the sense so far is satisfactory: viz. They want
to make it appear now indeed what bloody-minded men the Jews are: now,
not when Christ was crucified.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[i:309](1110018.htm#fr_308) <span
id="vi.xiii-p14.11"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p15"></span> The modern text: “So artlessly did they
preach the Gospel of life. But when he says, ‘He hath exalted,’ he
states for what purpose, namely, ‘to give repentance’ he adds, ‘to
Israel, and remission of sins.’ But, it will be said, these things
seemed incredible. How say you? And why not rather credible, seeing that
neither rulers,” etc.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[i:310](1110018.htm#fr_309) <span
id="vi.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p17"></span> Here begins a second recapitulation or
rather gleaning, partly of matter not touched upon before, partly of
further remarks on what has been said.—<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p17.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p17.2"></span>Ως εὐδοκιμοῦντες ἐγγὺς τῶν προφητῶν ἔμελλον
ἵστασθαι</span>: This relates to [Acts
5.13-16](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#013)<span
id="vi.xiii-p17.3"></span>, as the reason why they were “filled with
indignation.” The innovator (E. F. D. Edd.) not perceiving this, alters
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p17.4"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p17.5"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p17.6"></span>εὐδοκιμοῦντες</span> to
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p17.7"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p17.8"></span>ὡς εὐδοκιμοῦντας</span>,
which he joins to the former sentence, “How else could any one have
persuaded them than (by treating them) as persons in high repute?” and
adds, “And mark their malignity: they set on them the Sadducees who were
most sore on the subject of the Resurrection: but they got nothing by
their wickedness. But perchance,” etc.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[i:311](1110018.htm#fr_310) <span
id="vi.xiii-p17.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p18"></span> St. Chrysostom frequently contends
against the common excuse, “We cannot attain to the holiness of the
first Christians, because there are no miracles now.” Thus, he urges,
*Hom. in Matt.* xlvi., that it was not their miracles that made the
saints, both of the Old and of the New Testament, great and admirable,
but their virtues: without which, no miracles would have availed for
themselves or others: that if they wrought miracles, it was after they,
by their noble qualities and admirable lives had attracted the Divine
grace: for miracles proceed from a holy life, and this is also their
goal: only he that lives a holy life receives this grace; and he that
receives it, receives it only that he may amend the life of others…Let
no man therefore wait for miracles. It afflicts the evil spirit when he
is expelled from the body, much more when he sees the soul set free from
sin: for in this lies Satan’s great power, and to destroy this, Christ
died. In expelling this from thyself, thou hast performed a miracle
greater than all miracles. This is not my doctrine; it is the doctrine
of the Apostle Paul. <span id="vi.xiii-p18.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#031)<span id="vi.xiii-p18.2"></span>,
the “more excellent way” is not miracles, but Charity, the root of all
good. If we practise this we need no miracles; and if we practise not
from miracles we shall get no good.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[i:312](1110018.htm#fr_311) <span
id="vi.xiii-p18.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p19.1"></span>ταῦτα τῆς ἀναστάσεως πιστότερα</span>. E.
omits this, and inserts <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p19.2"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p19.3"></span>πήγγειλαν ὑποστρέψαντες ἅπερ εἶδον</span>.
“They reported on their return just what they had seen:” so Edd. except
Savile, who retains the reading of E. and adds to it as above (from N.)

<span id="fn_312"></span>[i:313](1110018.htm#fr_312) <span
id="vi.xiii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p21.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p21.2"></span>θνεσι τοσούτοις ὁμιλῶν ὑπὲρ μεταστάσεως
πολιτείας μόνης</span>.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[i:314](1110018.htm#fr_313) <span
id="vi.xiii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p22"></span> Edd. “And why,” you will ask, “is poverty
thought a thing to be fled from!” Why, because other good things are, in
the judgment of many, things to be fled from, not because they are to be
deprecated, but because hard of attainment.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[i:315](1110018.htm#fr_314) <span
id="vi.xiii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p24"></span> The Epigram is preserved in the Palatine
Anthology, 7. 676.

<span id="vi.xiii-p25"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p25.1"></span>Δοῦλος ᾽Επίκτητος γενόμην, καὶ σώματι
πηρὸς</span>,

<span id="vi.xiii-p26"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p26.1"></span>καὶ πενίαν ῏Ιρος, καὶ φίλος ἀθανάτοις</span>.

<span id="vi.xiii-p27"></span>But our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xiii-p27.1"></span>mss.</span> except E., for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.2"></span>῏</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.3"></span>Ιρος</span> have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.4"></span>ἱ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p27.5"></span>ερὸς</span>, “sacred.”

<span id="fn_315"></span>[i:316](1110018.htm#fr_315) <span
id="vi.xiii-p27.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p28"></span> Something is wanting in the old text to
complete the sense: the matter in the brackets is supplied from E. D. F.
Below, the same have: “to swear not at all: a haven, that one be not
drowned by the storm bursting. For though wrath, though (sense of)
insult, though passion boil over, yea though anything, be what it may,
the soul is in security, so that it will not even utter aught that
should not be spoken: for one has laid himself,” etc.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[i:317](1110018.htm#fr_316) <span
id="vi.xiii-p28.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xiii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p29.1"></span>Διαρρήξωμεν τὰ σχοινία· ἐν εὐκολί& 139·
καταστήσωμεν ἑαυτούς· πάσης ἀπορίας ἀπαλλαγῶμεν καὶ τῆς σατανικῆς
παγίδος</span>. i.e. “The cords of this snare are, the ties of worldly
business in the possession or pursuit of wealth: there is a condition,
as was said above, in which it is full easy not to swear; let us bring
ourselves into that condition: all that makes us say, ‘We cannot help
swearing,’ (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p29.2"></span>πάσης
ἀπορίας</span>), let us have done with it, and break loose from the
snare of the devil.” The exhortation connects both parts of the
“Morale”—the commendation of voluntary poverty, and the invective
against swearing. In the modern text (E. F. D. Edd.) this is lost sight
of: it reads: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xiii-p29.3"></span>διαρρ.
τὰ σχ. καὶ ἐν εὐκ. καταστήσομεν</span> (al. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p29.4"></span>-σωμεν</span>) <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xiii-p29.5"></span>πάσης φυλακῆς· ἀπαλλαγῶμεν τῆς σατ.
παγ</span>. “Let us burst the cords, and we shall bring ourselves into a
facility of all watchfulness: let us break loose,” etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XIV on Acts v. 34.](1110019)
