[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110012)  [Next](1110014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.viii"></span> <span id="vi.viii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VIII.</span>

<span id="vi.viii-p2"></span>[Acts III.
1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)<span id="vi.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p3"></span>“Now Peter and John went up together into
the temple, at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.”

<span id="vi.viii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.viii-p4.1"></span>Everywhere</span> we find these two Apostles in
great harmony together. “To him Simon Peter beckoned.” ([John xiii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#024)<span id="vi.viii-p4.2"></span>.)
These two also “came together to the sepulchre. ([John
20.3](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#003)<span id="vi.viii-p4.3"></span>
*et seq.*) And concerning John, Peter said unto Christ, “And what shall
this man do?” ([John 21.21](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#021)<span
id="vi.viii-p4.4"></span>.) Now as for the other miracles, the writer of
this book omits them; but he mentions the miracle by which they were
all <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) put in commotion. Observe
again that they do not come to them purposely; so clear were they of
ambition, so closely did they imitate their Master. Why now did they go
up to the temple? Did they still live as Jews? No, but for expediency
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p5.10"></span>χρησίμως</span>). <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) A miraculous sign again takes place,
which both confirms the converts, and draws over the rest; and such, as
they were a sign for having wrought. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) The disease was in the nature of the
man, and baffled the art of medicine. He had been forty years lame
([Acts 4.20-22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020)<span
id="vi.viii-p7.2"></span>), as the writer says afterwards, and no one
during all that time had cured him. And the most obstinate diseases are
those which are born with men. It was a great calamity, insomuch that
even to provide for himself his necessary sustenance was impossible for
him. The man was conspicuous both from the place, and from his malady.
Hear how the matter is related. “And a certain man, lame from his
mother’s womb, was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the
temple which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into
the temple.” ([Acts 3.2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)<span
id="vi.viii-p7.3"></span>.) He sought to receive alms, and he did not
know who the men were. “Who seeing Peter and John about to go into the
temple, asked an alms. And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him, with
John, said, Look on us.” ([Acts 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004)<span id="vi.viii-p7.4"></span>.)
Yet, not even so were the man’s thoughts elevated, but he persisted in
his importunity. For such is poverty; upon a refusal, it compels people
still to persist. Let this put us to shame who fall back in our prayers.
But observe, I pray you, Peter’s gentleness: for he said, “Look on us.”
So truly did their very bearing, of itself, betoken their character.
“And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have I give
thee.” ([Acts 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)<span id="vi.viii-p7.5"></span>.) He
did not say, I give thee something much better than silver or gold: but
what? “In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk. And he
took him by the right hand, and lifted him up.” ([Acts
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#007)<span id="vi.viii-p7.6"></span>.)
Such was also the way of Christ. Often He healed by word, often by an
act, often also He stretched forth the hand, where men were somewhat
weak in faith, that the cure might not appear to be spontaneous. “And he
took him by the right hand, and lifted him up.” This act made manifest
the Resurrection, for it was an image of the Resurrection. “And
immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength. And he leaping
up stood, and walked.” ([Acts 3.8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008)<span
id="vi.viii-p7.7"></span>.) Perhaps it was by way of trying himself that
he put it thus to further proof, whether perchance the thing done might
not be to no purpose. His feet were weak; it was not that he had lost
them. Some say that he did not even know how to walk. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) “And entered with them into the
temple.” Of a truth it was marvellous. The Apostles do not urge him; but
of his own accord he follows, by the act of following pointing out his
benefactors. “And leaping and praising God;” not admiring them, but God
that wrought by them. The man was grateful.

<span id="vi.viii-p9"></span>\[“Now <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) Peter and John went up together into
the temple,” etc.\] You observe how they continued in prayer. “The ninth
hour:” there they prayed together. \[“And a certain man,” etc.\] The man
was in the act of being carried at that instant. \[“Whom they laid
daily:”\] (his bearers carried him away:) \[“at the gate,” etc.\] just
when people went into the temple. And that you may not suppose that they
carried him for some other purpose, but that it was in order that he
might receive alms, hear what the writer says: “so that he might receive
alms of those entering into the temple.” (Recapitulation of [Acts
3.1-8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001)<span
id="vi.viii-p10.4"></span>.) And this is the reason why he also makes
mention of the places, to give evidence of what he relates. “And how was
it,” you may ask, “that they did not present him to Christ?” Perhaps
they were certain unbelieving men, that haunted the temple, as in fact
neither did they present him to the Apostles, when they saw them
entering, after having done such great miracles. “He asked,” it is
written, “to receive an alms.” ([Acts
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#003)<span id="vi.viii-p10.5"></span>.)
Their bearing marked them as certain devout and righteous men. \[“And
Peter fastening his eyes upon him, with John, said,” etc.\] ([Acts
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#005)<span id="vi.viii-p10.6"></span>.)
And observe how John is everywhere silent, while Peter makes excuse for
him also; “Silver and gold,” he says, “have I none.” ([Acts
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006)<span id="vi.viii-p10.7"></span>.)
He does not say, I have none here, as we are wont to speak, but
absolutely, I have none. “What then?” he might say, “do you take no
notice of me, your suppliant?” Not so, but of what I have, receive thou.
Do you remark how unassuming Peter is, how he makes no display even to
the object of his beneficence? \[“In the name,” etc. “And he took him by
the hand,” etc.\] ([Acts 3.7](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#007)<span
id="vi.viii-p10.8"></span>.) And the mouth and the hand did all.
Such <span id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) sort of persons were the
Jews; lame, and the right thing being to ask for health, these same ask
for money, grovelling on the ground: for this it was that they beset the
temple—to get money. What then does Peter? He did not despise him; he
did not look about for some rich subject; he did not say, If the miracle
is not done to some great one (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p11.10"></span>εἰς ἐκεἵνον</span>), nothing great is done:
he did not look for some honor from him, no, nor heal him in the
presence of people; for the man was at the entrance, not where the
multitude were, that is, within. But Peter sought no such object; nor
upon entering did he proclaim the matter: no, it was by his bearing that
he attracted the lame man to ask. And the wonder is, that he believed so
readily. For those who are set free from diseases of long standing,
hardly believe their very eyesight. Once healed, he remains with the
Apostles, giving thanks to God. “And he entered,” it is said, “with them
into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.” ([Acts
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#008)<span id="vi.viii-p11.11"></span>.)
Observe how restless he is, in the eagerness of his delight, at the same
time shutting the mouths of the Jews. Also, that he leaped, was to
prevent the suspicion of hypocrisy; for after all, this was beyond the
possibility of deception. For if previously he was totally unable to
walk, even when hunger pressed hard (and indeed he would not have chosen
to share with his bearers the proceeds of his begging, if he had been
able to manage for himself), this holds still more in the present case.
And how should he have feigned in behalf of those who had given him no
alms? But the man was grateful, even after his recovery. And thus on
either side his faith is shown, both by his thankfulness, and by the
recent event.

<span id="vi.viii-p12"></span>He was so <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) well known to all, that “they
recognized him. And all the people,” it says, “saw him walking and
praising God; and they recognized (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.9"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.10"></span>πεγίνωσκον</span>) that it was he which sat
for alms at the Beautiful gate of the temple.” ([Acts
3.9](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#009)<span id="vi.viii-p13.11"></span>.)
It is well said, “they recognized,” inasmuch as he was one unknown now
by reason of what had happened: for we use this term with regard to
objects, which we find a difficulty in recognizing. \[“And they were
filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him.”\]
Needs must it be believed that <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203)
the name of Christ remits sins, seeing it produces even such effects as
this. (“And as he held Peter and John, all the people came together at
the porch that is called Solomon’s, greatly wondering.” ([Acts
3.11](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#011)<span id="vi.viii-p14.7"></span>.)
From his good feelings and love towards the Apostles, the lame man would
not leave them; perhaps he was thanking them openly, and praising them.
“And all the people,” it is said, “ran together unto them. And when
Peter saw them, he answered.” ([Acts
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#012)<span id="vi.viii-p14.8"></span>.)
Again it is he who acts, and addresses the people.

<span id="vi.viii-p15"></span>And in the former instance, it was the
circumstance of the tongues that aroused them to hearing, now it was
this miracle; then, he took occasion to speak from their accusations
now, from their supposition. Let us then consider, in what this address
differs from the former, and in what it agrees with that. The former was
held in a house, before any one has come over, and before they
themselves have wrought anything; this, when all are wondering, and the
healed man is standing by; when none doubt, as in the other case where
some said “These men are full of new wine.” (<span
id="vi.viii-p15.1"></span>[Acts xii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#013)<span id="vi.viii-p15.2"></span>.)
At the one, he was surrounded by all the Apostles as he spoke; but at
this, he has John alone; for by this time he is bold, and become more
energetic. Such is the nature of virtue; once started, it advances, and
never stops. Observe also how it was divinely ordered, that the miracle
should take place in the temple, that others also might wax bold, while
the Apostles work not in holes (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p15.3"></span>εἰς καταδύσεις</span>) and corners, and in
secret: though not in the interior of the temple either, where the
greater number were. How then, I pray you, was it believed? The man
himself who was healed proclaimed the benefit. For there was no reason
why he should lie, nor why he should have joined a different set of
people. <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) Either then it was
because of the spaciousness of the place, that he there wrought the
miracle, or because the spot was retired. And observe the event. They
went up for one object, and they accomplished another. Thus also did
Cornelius: he prayed and fasted <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205)
\* \* \*. But hitherto they always call Him, “of Nazareth.” “In the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazareth,” said Peter, walk. For in the first
instance, the thing required was, that He should be believed in.

<span id="vi.viii-p18"></span>Let us not, I pray you, give over at the
beginning of the story: <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) and if
one has named some particular achievement of virtue, and then has
dropped it for awhile, let us begin over again. If we get into the right
mood (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p19.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p19.4"></span>ν ἕξει</span>), we shall
soon arrive at the end, soon reach the summit. For earnestness, it is
said, begets earnestness, and dulness begets dulness. He who has
effected some little reformation, thereby receives encouragement to
approach greater things, and thence again to go on something more than
that; and just as it is with fire, the more wood it lays hold on, the
more vehement it becomes, so likewise zeal, the more pious reflections
it kindles, the more effectually is it armed against their opposites.
As, for example: There are set in us, like so many thorns, perjury,
falsehood hypocrisy, deceit, dishonesty, abusiveness, scoffing,
buffoonery, indecency, scurrility; again under another head,
covetousness, rapacity, injustice, calumny, insidiousness; again, wicked
lust, uncleanness, lewdness, fornication, adultery; again, envy,
emulation, anger, wrath, rancor, revenge, blasphemy, and numberless
others. If we effect a reformation in the first instances, not only in
them will the success have been achieved, but through them in the
following cases also. For reason has then gained more strength to
overthrow those other vices. For instance, if he, who has frequently
sworn, once extirpates that satanic habit, he has not only gained this
point, but a habit of piety in other respects will have been brought in.
For no one, I suppose, averse to swearing would easily consent to do any
other wicked act; he will feel a reverence for the virtue already
acquired. Just as the man who wears a beautiful robe, will blush to roll
himself in the mire; so is it also here. From this beginning he will
come to learn not to be angry, not to strike, not to insult. For if once
he has come right in little matters, the whole affair is done. Often,
however, something of this sort takes place, that a person has once
reformed, and then again through carelessness falls back into the old
sins but too readily, so that the case becomes irremediable. For
instance, we have made it a law to ourselves not to swear; we have got
on well, for some three, or even four days; after that being hard put to
it, we scattered away the whole of our collected gain; we then fall into
indolence and recklessness. Still it is not right to give over; one must
set to work zealously again. For it is said, he that has built up a
house, and then sees his building pulled down, will have less spirit for
building again. Yes, but for all this, one must not be dispirited, but
must once more set to work zealously.

<span id="vi.viii-p20"></span>Let us then lay down daily laws for
ourselves. For a time let us begin with the easier. Let us retrench all
that superfluity of paths, and put a bridle on our tongues; let no one
swear by God. Here is no outlay, here is no fatigue, here is no cost of
time. It is sufficient to will, and all is done. It is a matter of
habit. I beseech and entreat you, let us contribute thus much of zeal.
Tell me, if I had bid you contribute your money, would not each one of
you readily cast in according to his ability? If you saw me in extreme
danger, would you not, if it had been possible, have cut off your own
flesh to give me? Well, I am in danger now, and in great danger, such
indeed that, were I withal confined to a dungeon, or had I received ten
thousand stripes, or were a convict in the mines, I could not suffer
more. Reach me then the hand. Consider how great is the danger, that I
should not have been able to reform this which is least: I say “least”
in regard to the labor required. What shall I have to say hereafter,
when thus called to account? “Why did you not remonstrate? why did you
not enjoin? why did you not lay the law before them? why did you not
check the disobedient?” It will not be enough for me to say, that I did
admonish. It will be answered, “You ought to have used more vehement
rebuke; since Eli also admonished.” ([1 Sam. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#024)<span id="vi.viii-p20.1"></span>.)
But God forbid I should compare you with Eli’s sons. Indeed, he did
admonish them and say, “Nay, my sons, do not so; evil is the report that
I hear of you.” (<span id="vi.viii-p20.2"></span>[1 Sam. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013)<span id="vi.viii-p20.3"></span>.)
But subsequently the Scripture saith, that he did not admonish his sons:
since he did not admonish them severely, or with threats. For is it not
strange indeed, that in the synagogues of the Jews the laws are in such
force, and whatever the teacher enjoins is performed; while here we are
thus despised and rejected? It is not my own glory that I care for (my
glory is your good report), but it is for your salvation. Every day we
lift up our voice, and shout in your ears. But there is none to hear.
Still we take no strong measures. I fear we shall have to give an
account at the coming Day of this excessive and unseasonable leniency.

<span id="vi.viii-p21"></span>Wherefore, with a loud and clear voice, I
proclaim to all and testify, that those who are notorious for this
transgression, who utter words which come “of the evil one,” ([Matt. v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)<span id="vi.viii-p21.1"></span>.)
(for such is swearing,) shall not step over the threshold of the Church.
Let this present month be the time allowed you for reforming in this
matter. Talk not to me, “Necessity of business compels me to use oaths,
else people do not believe me.” To begin with this, retrench those oaths
which come merely of habit. I know many will laugh, but it is better to
be laughed at now, than wept for hereafter. They will laugh, who are
mad. For who, I ask, in his right mind would laugh at the keeping of the
commandment? But suppose they do; why, it will not be at us, but at
Christ, that such men will laugh. You shudder at the word! I knew you
would. Now if this law were of my making, at me would be the laughing;
but if Another be the Lawgiver, the jeering passes over to Him. Yes, and
Christ was once spit upon, and smitten with the palm, smitten upon the
face. Now also He bears with this, and it is no wonder (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p21.2"></span>οὐδὲν ἀπεικὸς</span>)! For
this, hell is prepared; for this, the worm that dieth not. Behold, again
I say and testify; let him laugh that will, let him scoff that listeth.
Hereunto are we set, to be laughed at and mocked, to suffer all things.
We are “the offscouring” ([1 Cor. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="vi.viii-p21.3"></span>) or
the world, as blessed Paul says. If any man refuse to conform to this
order, that man I, by my word, as with a trumpet’s blast, do prohibit to
set foot over the Church’s threshold, be he prince, be he even the
crowned head. Either depose me from this station, or if I am to remain,
expose me not to danger. I cannot bear to ascend this throne, without
effecting some great reformation. For if this be impossible, it is
better to stand below. Nothing more wretched than a ruler who does his
people no good. Do exert yourselves, and attend to this, I entreat you;
and let us strive, and of a surety more will come of it. Fast, entreat
God (and we will do the same with you) that this pernicious habit may be
eradicated. It is no great matter, <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) to become teachers to the world; no
small honor to have it said everywhere, that really in this city there
is not a man that swears. If this come to pass, you will receive the
reward not only of your own good works; indeed what I am to you, this
you will become to the world. Assuredly others also will emulate you;
assuredly you will be a candle set upon a candlestick.

<span id="vi.viii-p23"></span>And is this, you will say, the whole
matter? No, this is not all, but this is a beginning of other virtues.
He who swears not, will certainly attain unto piety in other respects,
whether he will or not, by dint of self-respect and awe. But you will
urge that most men do not keep to it, but fall away. Well, better one
man that doeth the will of the Lord, than ten thousand transgressors. In
fact, hereby is everything subverted, everything turned upside down, I
mean, because after the fashion of the Theatre we desire numbers not a
select number. For what indeed will a multitude be able to profit? Would
you learn that it is the saints, not the numbers, which make the
multitude? Lead out to war ten hundred thousand men, and one saint, and
let us see who achieves the most? Joshua the son of Nun went out to war,
and alone achieved all; the rest were of no use. <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) Wouldest thou see, beloved, that the
great multitude, when it does not the will of God, is no better than a
thing of naught? I wish indeed, and desire, and with pleasure would be
torn in pieces, to adorn the Church with a multitude, yea, but a select
multitude; yet if this be impossible, that the few should be select, is
my desire. Do you not see, that it is better to possess one precious
stone, than ten thousand farthing pieces? Do you not see that it is
better to have the eye sound, than to be loaded with flesh, and yet
deprived of sight? Do you not see that it is better to have one healthy
sheep, than ten thousand with the murrain; that fine children, though
few, are better than many children diseased withal; that in the Kingdom
there will be few, but in hell many? What have I to do with a multitude?
what profit therein? None. Rather they are a plague to the rest. It is
as if one who had the option of ten healthy persons or ten thousand sick
folks, should take to himself the latter in addition to the ten. The
many who do nothing well, will avail us only for punishment hereafter,
and disgrace for the time being. For no one will urge it as a point in
our favor that we are many; we shall be blamed for being unprofitable.
In fact, this is what men always tell us, when we say, We are many;
“aye, but bad,” they answer.

<span id="vi.viii-p25"></span>Behold again: I give warning, and proclaim
with a loud voice, let no one think it a laughing matter: I will exclude
and prohibit the disobedient; and as long as I sit on this throne, I
will give up not one of its rights. If any one depose me from it, then I
am no longer responsible; as long as I am responsible, I cannot
disregard them; on account not of my own punishment, but of your
salvation. For I do exceedingly long for your salvation. To advance it,
I endure pain and vexation. But yield your obedience, that both here and
hereafter you may receive a plentiful reward, and that we may in common
reap eternal blessings; through the grace and mercy of the only-begotten
Son of God; to Whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost be glory, power,
and honor, now and ever, world without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[i:197](1110013.htm#fr_196) <span
id="vi.viii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p5"></span> Œcumen. has preserved the true reading:
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.2"></span>φ᾽ οὗ πάντες
ἐκινήθησαν</span>. <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.viii-p5.3"></span>Mss.</span> and Cat. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p5.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p5.5"></span>κίνησεν</span>. (N. in the margin, by a later
hand, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.6"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.7"></span>νίκησε</span>.) E. and Edd.
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.8"></span>ὃ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p5.9"></span>δὲ τολλὴν εἶχε τὴν ἔκπληξιν
καὶ πάντας ἐξένισε, τοῦτο λέγει</span>.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[i:198](1110013.htm#fr_197) <span
id="vi.viii-p5.11"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p6"></span> There is no evidence that Peter and John
attended upon the Jewish worship simply “for expediency.” There is much
to the contrary. The early Christians had no idea of ceasing to be Jews.
Peter at this time supposed it to be necessary for the Gentile converts
to be circumcised ([Gal. ii](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span
id="vi.viii-p6.1"></span>.). It was incident to the gradual separation
of Christianity from Judaism that those who had been zealous adherents
of the latter should suppose that its forms were still to be the moulds
of the new system. They were not for this reason less honestly and
genuinely Christian, but had not yet apprehended the principle of
Christian liberty as Paul afterward expounded it. The point of
difficulty was not so much the entrance of the Gentiles into the Kingdom
of God as the question whether they should enter through the gate of
Judaism.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[i:199](1110013.htm#fr_198) <span
id="vi.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p7.1"></span>καὶ οἷον σημεῖον ἦσαν ποιήσαντες</span>. E.
“And a miracle such as they had not yet wrought.” So Edd.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[i:200](1110013.htm#fr_199) <span
id="vi.viii-p7.8"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p8"></span> Œcumen. “That he leaped was either because
he was incredulous of what had happened, or, by way of trying his power
of stepping more surely and firmly, or, the man did not know how to
walk.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[i:201](1110013.htm#fr_200) <span
id="vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p10"></span> E. and Edd. “But let us look over again
what has been said. ‘They went up,’ he says, ‘at the hour of prayer, the
ninth hour.’ Perhaps just at that time they carried and laid the lame
man, when people,” etc. In the old text the clause <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p10.1"></span>αὐτὸν βαστάζοντες
ἀπήνεγκαν</span> (which should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p10.2"></span>οἱ βαστ. αὐτὸν</span>) seems meant to explain
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p10.3"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμέραν</span>:
they bore him daily, and the same persons carried him away.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[i:202](1110013.htm#fr_201) <span
id="vi.viii-p10.9"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p11"></span> E. and Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p11.1"></span>τοιοῦτοί τινες ἦσαν καὶ ᾽Ιουδαῖοι</span> (for
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.2"></span>οἱ ᾽Ι</span>.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.3"></span>χωλεύοντες</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.4"></span>…</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.5"></span>οἱ δὲ</span> (for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.6"></span>αὐτοὶ</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p11.7"></span>μᾶλλον χρήματα
αἰτοῦσι</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p11.8"></span>…</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p11.9"></span>οἳ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο</span>…“Such sort of people
were also \[the\] Jews, being lame (i e. like many beggars among
ourselves): even when they have only to ask for health, yet they rather
ask for money…who even for this reason beset the temple,” etc. But the
meaning seems rather to be: “See here an emblem of the Jews. Lame, and
needing but,” etc.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[i:203](1110013.htm#fr_202) <span
id="vi.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.1"></span>οὕτω πᾶσι γνωριμὸς ἦν ὅτι ἐπεγίνωσκον</span>,
A. B. C. D. F. Sav. Morel. Ben. But Commelin. and Ed. Par. Ben. 2. after
Erasm. adopt the reading of E. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.2"></span>οὐ μὴν πᾶσι γνώριμος ἦν ὅθεν καὶ</span>:
because of the following comment on <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.4"></span>πεγίνωσκον</span>. But the meaning is: They
were all acquainted with him (it could not be otherwise): but seeing him
walking and leaping, they found it difficult to believe that it was he,
and yet they could not doubt it. This is well denoted by <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p13.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p13.6"></span>πεγίνωσκον</span>: for we
use this word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p13.8"></span>πὶ τῶν μόλις γνωριζομένων</span>: strange as
it was, they were satisfied that it was he, the man whom they all knew
so well.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[i:204](1110013.htm#fr_203) <span
id="vi.viii-p13.12"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p14.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p14.2"></span>Εδει πιστευθῆναι διότι</span>, B. C. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p14.3"></span>δί ὅτι</span> A. This
seems to be the comment on the remaining clause of [Acts
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#010)<span id="vi.viii-p14.4"></span>,
which we have supplied: but the meaning is obscure. The modern text has
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p14.5"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p14.6"></span>δει γοὖν π. ὅτι</span>.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[i:205](1110013.htm#fr_204) <span
id="vi.viii-p15.4"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p16.1"></span>οὐδὲ γὰρ ἂν ἐψεύσατο, οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἐπ᾽ ἄλλους τινὰς
ἦλθεν</span>. It is not clear who are the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p16.2"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p16.3"></span>λλοι τινὲς</span>: and something is wanting.
In fact, this part of the Homily is very defective. The next sentence
seems to refer to the mention of the porch called Solomon’s, but
evidently supposes something preceding: e.g. “The miracle was performed
at the Beautiful Gate, beside which was the Porch called Solomon’s.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[i:206](1110013.htm#fr_205) <span
id="vi.viii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p17"></span> E. and Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p17.1"></span>Κορνήλιος ἄλλα νηστεύων ηὔχετο, καὶ ἄλλα
ὁρᾷ</span>. “Cornelius prayed with fasting, for one object: and sees a
vision of something other than he thought for.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[i:207](1110013.htm#fr_206) <span
id="vi.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p19"></span> It can hardly be imagined that St.
Chrysostom’s meaning is correctly reported here. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p19.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p19.2"></span>Εν ἀρχῇ τοῦ
διηγματος</span>, can only mean, In the beginning of the narrative (of
this miracle). It seems that the case of this man, who at first lies at
the gate of the temple, unable to stir, and in the end, enters with the
Apostles walking and leaping and praising God, furnished the theme for
the ethical part of the discourse. “There is the like cure for our
souls: let us not give over for want of success in the first attempt,
but begin again after every failure.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[i:208](1110013.htm#fr_207) <span
id="vi.viii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p22.1"></span>Οὐδὲν μέγα ἐστὶ γεν. διδασκ. τῆς οἰκ. Οὐ
μικρὸν κ. τ. λ</span>. The passage is manifestly corrupt, and the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.viii-p22.2"></span>mss.</span> lend no
assistance. Ben. conjecturally, *Nihil majus est quam esse doctores
orbis: nec parum,* etc. Ed. Par. Ben. 2. *Fortasse,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.viii-p22.3"></span>οὐκοῦν μέγα</span>. But it
is more likely that something is wanting, e.g. “It is no great matter
\[to be free from the vice of swearing. But to set an example to others
would be a great thing\], to be teachers herein of the whole world,”
etc.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[i:209](1110013.htm#fr_208) <span
id="vi.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vi.viii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p24.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p24.2"></span>Αλλα ποῦ θέλεις ἰδεῖν. ἀγαπητὲ, ὅτι ὁ πολὺς
ὄχλος κ. τ. λ</span>. The modern text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p24.3"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.viii-p24.4"></span>Ο πολὺς ὄχλος, ἀγαπητὲ, κ. τ. λ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily IX on Acts iii. 12.](1110014)
