[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110093)  [Next](1110095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.xxxiii"></span> <span id="vii.xxxiii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Homily XXXI.</span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p2"></span>[Rom. XVI.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p3"></span>“Salute my well-beloved Epenetus, who is
the first-fruits of Achaia unto Christ.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p4"></span>I <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>Think</span> that many even of those who
have the appearance of being extremely good men, hasten over this part
of the Epistle <span id="fr_1668"></span>[1669](#fn_1668) as
superfluous, and having no great weight in it. And I think that the same
befalls them in regard to the genealogy that is in the Gospel. For
because it is a catalogue of names, they think they cannot get any great
good from it. Yet the gold founders’ people <span
id="fr_1669"></span>[1670](#fn_1669) are careful even about the little
fragments; <span id="fr_1670"></span>[1671](#fn_1670) while these pass
over even such great cakes of gold. That this then may not befall them,
what I have already said were enough to lead them off from their
listlessness. For that the gain even from this is no contemptible one,
we have shown even from what was said on a former occasion, when we
lifted up your soul by means of these addresses. We will endeavor then
to-day also to mine in this same place. For it is possible even from
bare names to find a great treasure. If, for instance, you were shown
why Abraham was so called, why Sarah, why Israel, why Samuel, you would
find even from this a great many real subjects of research. And from
times too, and from places, you may gather the same advantage. For the
good man waxes rich even from these; but he that is slothful, does not
gain even from the most evident things. Thus the very name of Adam
teaches us no small wisdom, and that of his son, and of his wife, and
most of the others. For names serve to remind us of several
circumstances. They show at once God’s benefits and women’s
thankfulness. For when they conceived by the gift of God, it was they
who gave these names to the children. But why are we now philosophizing
about names, while meanings so important are neglected, and many do not
so much as know the very names of the sacred books? Still even then we
ought not to recede from an attention to things of this sort. For “thou
oughtest,” He says, “to have put My money to the exchangers.” ([Matt.
xxv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>.) And therefore though there be nobody that
listens to it, let us do our part, and show that there is nothing
superfluous, nothing added at random in the Scriptures. For if these
names had no use, they would not then have been added to the Epistle,
nor would Paul have written what he has written. But there are some even
so low-minded, and empty, and unworthy of Heaven, as not to think that
names only, but whole books of the Bible are of no use, as Leviticus,
Joshua, and more besides. And in this way many of the simple ones have
been for rejecting the Old Testament, and advancing on in the way, that
results from this evil habit of mind, have likewise pruned away many
parts of the New Testament also. But of these men, <span
id="fr_1671"></span>[1672](#fn_1671) as intoxicated and living to the
flesh, we do not make much account. But if any be a lover of wisdom, and
a friend to spiritual entertainments, let him be told that even the
things which seem to be unimportant in Scripture, are not placed there
at random and to no purpose, and that even the old laws have much to
profit us. For it says, “All these things are types (A.V. ensamples) and
are written for our instruction.” (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p8.1"></span>[1
Cor. x. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p8.2"></span>.) Wherefore to Timothy too he says, “Give
heed to reading, to exhortation” ([1 Tim. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p8.3"></span>),
so urging him to the reading of the old books, though he was a man with
so great a spirit in him, as to be able to drive out devils, <span
id="fr_1672"></span>[1673](#fn_1672) and to raise the dead. Let us now
keep on with the subject in hand. “Salute my well-beloved Epenetus.” It
is worth learning from this how he distributes to each the different
praises. For this praise is no slight one, but even very great, and a
proof of great excellence in him, that Paul should hold him beloved,
Paul who had no idea of loving by favor, and not by cool judgment. Then
another encomium comes, “Who is the first-fruits of Achaia.” For what he
means is, either that he leaped forward before any one else, and became
a believer (and this were no slight praise), or that he displayed more
religious behavior than any other. And on this account after saying,
“who is the first-fruits of Achaia,” he does not hold his peace, but to
prevent your suspecting it to be a glory of the world’s, he added, “unto
Christ.” Now if in civil matters, he that is first seemeth to be great
and honorable, much more so in these. As then it was likely that they
were of low extraction, he speaks of the true noble birth and
preëminency, and gives him his honors from this. And he says, that he
“is the first-fruits,” not of Corinth only, but of the whole nation, as
having become as it were a door, and an entrance to the rest. And to
such, the reward is no small one. For such an one will reap much
recompense also from the achievements of others, in that he too
contributed much toward them by beginning.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p10"></span>[Rom.
16.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p10.1"></span>. “Greet Mary, who bestowed much labor on
us.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p11"></span>How is this? a woman again is honored
and proclaimed victorious! Again are we men put to shame. Or rather, we
are not put to shame only, but have even an honor conferred upon us. For
an honor we have, in that there are such women amongst us, but we are
put to shame, in that we men are left so far behind by them. But if we
come to know whence it comes, that they are so adorned, we too shall
speedily overtake them. Whence then is their adorning? Let both men and
women listen. It is not from bracelets, or from necklaces, nor from
their eunuchs either, and their maid-servants, and gold-broidered
dresses, but from their toils in behalf of the truth. For he says, “who
bestowed much labor on us,” that is, not on herself only, nor upon her
own advancement, (see p. 520) (for this many women of the present day
do, by fasting, and sleeping on the floor), but upon others also, so
carrying on the race Apostles and Evangelists ran. In what sense then
does he say, “I suffer not a woman to teach?” ([1 Tim. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>.) He means to hinder her from publicly
coming forward (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p11.2"></span>[1 Cor. xiv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#035)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p11.3"></span>), and from the seat on the bema, <span
id="fr_1673"></span>[1674](#fn_1673) not from the word of
teaching. <span id="fr_1674"></span>[1675](#fn_1674) Since if this were
the case, how would he have said to the woman that had an unbelieving
husband, “How knowest thou, O woman, if thou shalt save thy husband?”
([1 Cor. 7.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p13.5"></span>.) Or how came he to suffer her to admonish
children, when he says, but “she shall be saved by child-bearing <span
id="fr_1675"></span>[1676](#fn_1675) if they continue in faith, and
charity, and holiness, with sobriety?” ([1 Tim. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>.) How came Priscilla to instruct even
Apollos? It was not then to cut in sunder private conversing for
advantage that he said this, but that before all, and which it was the
teacher’s duty to give in the public assembly; or again, in case the
husband be believing and thoroughly furnished, able also to instruct
her. When she is the wiser, then he does not forbid her teaching and
improving him. And he does not say, who taught much, but “who bestowed
much labor,” because along with teaching (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p14.2"></span>τοὓ λόγου</span>) she performs other
ministries besides, those in the way of dangers, in the way of money, in
the way of travels. For the women of those days were more spirited than
lions, sharing with the Apostles their labors for the Gospel’s sake. In
this way they went travelling with them, and also performed all other
ministries. And even in Christ’s day there followed Him women, “which
ministered unto Him of their substance” ([Luke viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p14.3"></span>),
and waited upon the Teacher.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p15"></span>[Rom.
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p15.1"></span>. “Salute Andronicus and Junia my kinsmen.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p16"></span>This also looks like an encomium. And
what follows is much more so. And what sort is this of? “And my
fellow-prisoners.” For this is the greatest honor, the noble
proclamation. And where was Paul a prisoner, that he should call them
“my fellow-prisoners?” A prisoner indeed he had <span
id="fr_1676"></span>[1677](#fn_1676) not been, but he had suffered
things worse <span id="fr_1677"></span>[1678](#fn_1677) than prisoners,
in being not an alien only to his country and his family, but in
wrestling with famine and continual death, and thousands of other
things. For of a prisoner the only misfortune is this, that he is
separated from his relations, and often has to be a slave instead of
being free. But in this case one may mention temptations thick as
snow-flakes, which this blessed person underwent by being carried and
taken about, scourged, fettered, stoned, shipwrecked, with countless
people plotting against him. And captives indeed have no further foe
after they are led away, but they even experience great care from those
who have taken them. But this man was continually in the midst of
enemies, and saw spears on every side, and sharpened swords, and arrays,
and battles. Since then it was likely that these shared many dangers
with him, he calls them fellow-captives. As in another passage also,
“Aristarchus my fellow-prisoner.” ([Col. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p18.3"></span>.) Then another praise besides. “Who are of
note among the Apostles.” And indeed to be apostles <span
id="fr_1678"></span>[1679](#fn_1678) at all is a great thing. But to be
even amongst these of note, just consider what a great encomium this is!
But they were of note owing to their works, to their achievements. Oh!
how great is the devotion (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p19.5"></span>φιλοσοφία</span>) of this woman, <span
id="fr_1679"></span>[1680](#fn_1679) that she should be even counted
worthy of the appellation of apostle! <span
id="fr_1680"></span>[1681](#fn_1680) But even here he does not stop, but
adds another encomium besides, and says, “Who were also in Christ before
me.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p22"></span>For this too is a very great praise,
that they sprang forth and came before others. But let me draw your
attention to the holy soul, how untainted it is by vanity. For after
glory such as his in kind and degree, he sets others before himself, and
does not hide from us the fact of his having come after them, nor is
ashamed of confessing this. And why art thou surprised at his not being
ashamed of this, when he shunneth not even to parade before men his
former life, calling himself “a blasphemer, and a persecutor?” ([1 Tim.
i. 13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>.) Since then he was not able to set them
before others on this score, he looked out himself, who had come in
after others, and from this he did find means of bestowing a praise upon
them by saying, “Who were in Christ before me.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p23"></span>[Rom.
16.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#008)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p23.1"></span>. “Greet Amplias my beloved.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p24"></span>Here again he passes encomiums upon his
person by his love. For the love of Paul was for God, carrying countless
blessings with it. For if being loved by the king is a great thing, what
a great encomium must it be to be beloved by Paul? For if he had not
acquired great virtue, he would not have attracted his love? Since as
for those who live in vice and transgressions he is accustomed (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>οἶδε</span>) not only
to abstain from loving them, but even to anathematize them. As when he
says, “If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be accursed” (<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p24.2"></span>[1 Cor. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p24.3"></span>); and, “If any man preach any other gospel
unto you than that ye have received, let him be accursed.” ([Gal. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p24.4"></span>.)

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p25"></span>[Rom.
16.9](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p25.1"></span>. “Salute Urbane, my helper in the Lord.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p26"></span>This is a greater encomium than the
other. For this even comprehends that. “And Stachys, my beloved.” This
again is an honor of the same kind.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p27"></span>[Rom.
16.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#010)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p27.1"></span>. “Salute Apelles, approved in Christ.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p28"></span>There is no praise like this, being
unblamable, and giving no handle in the things of God. For when he says,
“approved in Christ,” he includes the whole list of virtues. And on what
ground does he nowhere say my Lord such an one, my Master this? It is
because these encomiums were greater than those. For those are mere
titles of rank (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p28.1"></span>τιμἥς</span>), but these are of virtue. And
this same honor he paid them not at random, or as addressing several of
inferior virtue with the high and great characters. For so far as he is
addressing, and that too one along with another, and in the same letter,
he honors them all alike. But by stating the praises particularly to
each, he sets before us the virtue peculiar to each; so as neither to
give birth to envy by honoring one and dishonoring another, nor to work
in them listlessness and confusion, by giving them all the same dignity,
though they did not deserve the same. See now how he again comes to the
admirable women. For after saying, “Salute them which are of
Aristobulus’ household,”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p29"></span>[Rom.
16.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#011)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p29.1"></span>. “Salute Herodion my kinsman; greet them
which be of the household of Narcissus;”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p30"></span>Who, it is likely, were not so worthy
as the afore-mentioned, on which account also he does not mention them
all by name even, and after giving them the encomium which was suited to
them, that of being faithful, (and this the meaning of,)

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p31"></span>“Which are in the Lord.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p32"></span>He again reverts to the women, and
says,

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p33"></span>[Rom.
16.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p33.1"></span>. “Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor
in the Lord.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p34"></span>And in regard to the former woman, he
says that “she bestowed labor upon you,” but of these that they are
still laboring. And this is no small encomium, that they should be in
work throughout, and should not only work, but labor even. But Persis he
calls beloved too, to show that she is greater than these.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p35"></span>For he says, “Salute my beloved
Persis.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p36"></span>And of her great laborings he likewise
bears testimony, and says, “which labored much in the Lord.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p37"></span>So well does he know how to name each
after his deserts, so making these more eager by not depriving them of
any of their dues, but commending even the slightest preëminence, and
making the others more virtuous, and inciting them to the same zeal, by
his encomiums upon these.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p38"></span>[Rom.
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#013)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p38.1"></span>. “Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and
his mother and mine.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p39"></span>Here again the good things are without
any drawback, since the son and the mother are each of such a character,
and the house is full of blessing, and the root agreeth with the fruit;
for he would not have simply said, “his mother and mine,” unless he had
been bearing testimony to the woman for great virtue.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p40"></span>[Rom.
16.14](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p40.1"></span>. “Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermas,
Patrobas, Hermes, and the brethren which are with them.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p41"></span>Here do not be looking to how he starts
them without any encomium, but how he did not reckon them, though far
inferior, as it seems, to all, unworthy of being addressed by him. Or
rather even this is no slight praise that he even calls them brethren,
as also those that are after them he calls saints. For he says,

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p42"></span>[Rom.
16.15](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p42.1"></span>. “Salute Philologus, and Julius, and
Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints which are with
them;”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p43"></span>Which was the greatest dignity, and
unspeakable height of honor. Then to prevent any jealousy rising from
his addressing one in one way and another in another, and some by name
and some with no distinction, and some with more points of praise, and
some with fewer, he again mingles them in the equality of charity, and
in the holy kiss, saying,

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p44"></span>[Rom.
16.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p44.1"></span>. “Salute one another with an holy kiss.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p45"></span>To cast out of them, by this
salutation, all arguing that confused them, and all grounds for little
pride; that neither the great might despise the little, nor the little
grudge at the greater, but that haughtiness and envy might be more
driven away, when this kiss soothed down and levelled every one. And
therefore he not only bids them salute in this way, but sends in like
manner to them the greeting from the Churches. For “there salute you,”
he says, not this or that person individually, but all of you in common,

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p46"></span>“The Churches of Christ.”

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p47"></span>You see that they are no small gains
that we earn from these addresses, and what treasures we should have
passed hastily over, unless in this part of the Epistle also we had
examined it with accuracy, such, I mean, as was in our power. So if
there be found any man of wisdom and spiritual, he will dive even
deeper, and find a greater number of pearls. <span
id="fr_1681"></span>[1682](#fn_1681) But since some have often made it a
question wherefore it was that in this Epistle he addressed so many,
which thing he has not done in any other Epistle, we might say that it
is owing to his never having seen the Romans yet, that he does this. And
yet one may say, “Well, he had not seen the Colossians either, and yet
he did not do anything of the kind.” But these were more honorable than
others, and had come thither from other cities, as to a safer and more
royal city. Since then they were living in a foreign country, and they
needed much provision for security, <span
id="fr_1682"></span>[1683](#fn_1682) and some of them were of his
acquaintance, but some too were there who had rendered him many
important services, he with reason commends them by letters; for the
glory of Paul was then not little, but so great, that even from his
sending them letters, those who had the happiness to have an Epistle to
them, gained much protection. For men not only reverenced him, but were
even afraid of him. Had this not been so, <span
id="fr_1683"></span>[1684](#fn_1683) he would not have said, who had
been “a succorer of many, and of myself also.” <span
id="fr_1684"></span>[1685](#fn_1684) ([Rom.
16.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#002)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.2"></span>.) And again, “I could wish that myself
were accursed.” (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p51.3"></span>[Rom. ix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p51.4"></span>.)
And to Philemon he wrote and said, “as Paul the aged, and a prisoner of
Jesus Christ.” (Phil. 9<span id="vii.xxxiii-p51.5"></span>.) And to the
Galatians, “Behold, I Paul say unto you.” (<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.6"></span>[Gal. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p51.7"></span>.)
And, “Ye received me even as Jesus Christ.” ([Gal.
4.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.8"></span>.) And writing to the Corinthians he said,
“Now some are puffed up, as though I would not come unto you.” ([1 Cor.
iv. 18](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#018)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.9"></span>.) And again, “These things I have in a
figure transferred to myself and to Apollos, that ye might learn in us
not to think of men above that which is written.” ([1 Cor.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.10"></span>.) Now from all these passages it is clear
that all had a great opinion of him. Wishing then that they should feel
on easy terms, and be in honor, he addressed each of them, setting forth
their praise to the best advantage he might. For one he calls beloved,
another kinsman, another both, another fellow-prisoner, another
fellow-worker, another approved, another elect. And of the women one he
addresses by her title, for he does not call her servant of the Church
in an undefined way (because if this were so he would have given
Tryphena and Persis this name too), but this one as having the office of
deaconess, and another as helper and assistant, another as mother,
another from the labors she underwent, and some he addresses from the
house they belonged to, some by the name of Brethren, some by the
appellation of Saints. And some he honors by the mere fact of addressing
them, and some by addressing them by name, and some by calling them
first-fruits, and some by their precedence in time, but more than all,
Priscilla and Aquila. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.11"></span>τοὺς περὶ Πρ. κ. ᾽Α</span>.) For even if
all were believers, still all were not alike, but were different in
their merits. Wherefore to lead them all to greater emulation, he keeps
no man’s encomiums concealed. For when they who labor <span
id="fr_1685"></span>[1686](#fn_1685) more, do not receive the greater
reward also, many <span id="fr_1686"></span>[1687](#fn_1686) become more
listless. On this ground even in the kingdom, the honors are not equal,
nor among the disciples were all alike, but the three <span
id="fr_1687"></span>[1688](#fn_1687) were preëminent above the rest. And
among these three again there was a great difference. For this is a very
exact method observed by God even to the last. Hence, “one star
differeth from another star in glory,” ([1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p54.1"></span>), it says. And yet all were Apostles and
all are to sit on twelve thrones, <span
id="fr_1688"></span>[1689](#fn_1688) and all left their goods, and all
companied with Him; still it was the three He took. And again, to these
very three, He said it was possible (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p55.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p55.2"></span>γχωρεῖν</span>) that some might even be
superior. “For to sit,” He says, “on My right hand and on My left, is
not mine to give, save to those for whom it is prepared.” ([Mark x.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#040)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p55.3"></span>.) And He sets Peter before them, when He
says, “Lovest thou Me more than these?” (<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p55.4"></span>[John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p55.5"></span>.) And John too was loved even above the
rest. For there shall be a strict examination of all, and if thou be but
little better than thy neighbor, if it be even an atom, or anything ever
so little, God will not overlook even this. And this even from of old
one might see coming out. For even Lot was a righteous man, yet not so,
as was Abraham; and Hezekiah again, yet not so as was David: and all the
prophets, yet not so as was John.

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p56"></span>Where then are they who with all this
great exactness in view, yet will not allow that there is a hell? For if
all the righteous are not to enjoy the same lot, if they exceed others
even a little (“for one star,” it says, “differeth from another star in
glory,”) (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p56.1"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#041)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p56.2"></span>), how are sinners to be in the same lot
with the righteous? Such a confusion as this even man would not make,
much less God! But if ye will, I will show you that even in the case of
sinners, arguing from existing facts, there is this distinction, and
exact just judgment. Now consider; Adam sinned, and Eve sinned, and both
transgressed, yet they were not equally sinful. And therefore neither
were they equally punished. For the difference was so great that Paul
said, “Adam was not deceived but the woman being deceived was in the
transgression.” <span id="fr_1689"></span>[1690](#fn_1689) And yet the
deceit was one. But still God’s searching examination pointed out a
difference so great, as that Paul should make this assertion. Again,
Cain was punished, but Lamech, who committed a murder after him, did not
suffer near so great a punishment. And yet this was a murder, and that
was a murder, and that so much the worse, because even by the example he
had not become the better. But since the one neither killed his brother
after exhortation, nor needed an accuser, nor shrunk from answering when
God questioned him, but even without any accuser both pleaded again
himself, and condemned himself more severely, he obtained pardon. But
the other as having done the opposite was punished. See with what
exactness God sifteth the facts. For this reason He punished those in
the flood in one way, and those in Sodom in another; and the Israelites
again, both those in Babylon, and those in Antiochus’ time, in different
ways: so showing that He keeps a strict account of our doings. And these
were slaves for seventy years, and those for four hundred, but others
again ate their children, and underwent countless other more grievous
calamities, and even in this way were not freed, either they or those
that were burnt alive in Sodom. “For it shall be more tolerable,” He
says, “for the land of Sodom and Gomorrha, than for that city.” ([Matt.
x. 15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p57.3"></span>.) For if He hath no care for us, either
when we sin or when we do aright, perhaps there will be some reason in
saying that there is no punishment. But since He is so exceedingly
urgent about our not sinning, and adopts so many means to keep us in the
right, it is very plain that He punisheth the wicked, and also crowneth
those that do right. But let me beg you to consider the unfairness of
the generality. For they find fault with God because He so often
long-suffering, overlooks so many that are impious, impure, or violent,
without now suffering punishment. Again, if He threaten to punish them
in the other world, they are vehement and pressing in their accusations.
And yet if this be painful, they ought to accept and admire the other.
But alas the folly! the unreasonable and asinine spirit! alas the
sin-loving <span id="fr_1690"></span>[1691](#fn_1690) soul, that gazes
after vice! For it is from this that all these opinions have their
birth. And so if they who utter these things should be minded to lay
hold upon virtue, they will presently find themselves satisfied
concerning hell also, and will not doubt. And where (it is said) and in
what place is this hell? For some fablers say that it is in the valley
of Josaphat, thus drawing that which was said about a certain by-gone
war, to apply to hell. <span id="fr_1691"></span>[1692](#fn_1691) But
the Scripture does not say this. But in what place, pray, will it be?
Somewhere as I think at least quite out of the pale of this world. For
as the prisons and mines are at a great distance from royal
residences, <span id="fr_1692"></span>[1693](#fn_1692) so will hell be
somewhere out of this world. Seek we not then to know where it is, but
how we may escape it. Neither yet because God doth not punish all here,
therefore disbelieve things to come. For merciful and long-suffering He
is: that is why he threatens, and does not cast us into it forthwith.
For “I desire not,” He says, “the death of a sinner.” (<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p60.3"></span>[Ez. xviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p60.4"></span>.) But if there is no death of a sinner,
the words are but idle. And I know indeed that there is nothing less
pleasant to you than these words. But to me nothing is pleasanter. And
would it were possible at our dinner, and our supper, and our baths, and
everywhere, to be discoursing about hell. For we should not then feel
the pain at the evils in this world, nor the pleasure of its good
things. For what would you tell me was an evil? poverty? disease?
captivity? maiming of the body? Why all these things are sport compared
to the punishment there, even should you speak of those who are
tormented with famine all their life long; or those who are maimed from
their earliest days, and beg, even this is luxury compared to those
other evils. Let us then continually employ ourselves with talking about
these things. <span id="fr_1693"></span>[1694](#fn_1693) For to remember
hell prevents our falling into hell. Dost thou not hear St. Paul saying,
“Who shall suffer everlasting punishment from the face of the Lord?” ([2
Thess. i. 9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p61.1"></span>.) Dost thou not hear what Nero’s character
was, whom Paul even calls the Mystery of Antichrist? For “the mystery of
iniquity,” he says, “already worketh.” ([2 Thess.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p61.2"></span>.) What then? Is Nero to suffer nothing? Is
Antichrist to suffer nothing? or the Devil nothing? Then he will always
be Antichrist, and so the Devil. For from mischief they will not leave
off, unless they be punished. “Yea,” you say, “but that there is a hell
everybody sees. But the unbelievers only are to fall into it.” What is
the reason, pray? It is because the believers acknowledge their Master.
And what is this to the purpose? when their life is impure, they will on
this ground be punished more severely than the unbelievers. “For as many
as have sinned without law shall also perish without law: but as many as
have sinned in the law shall be judged by the law.” ([Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p61.3"></span>.) And, “The servant that knew his master’s
will, and did it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.” ([Luke xii.
47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p61.4"></span>.) But if there is no such thing as giving
an account of one’s life, and all this is said in a loose way then
neither will the Devil have vengeance taken upon him. For he too knows
God, and far more than <span id="fr_1694"></span>[1695](#fn_1694) men
too, and all the demons know Him, and tremble, and own He is their
Judge. If then there is no giving an account of our life, nor of evil
deeds, then will they also clean escape. These things are not so, surely
they are not! Deceive not yourselves, beloved. For if there is no hell,
how are the Apostles to judge the twelve tribes of Israel? How cometh
Paul to say, “Know ye not that we shall judge Angels? how much more
things of this life?” (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p62.1"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p62.2"></span>.)
How came Christ to say, “The men of Nineveh shall arise and condemn this
generation” ([Matt. xii. 41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.3"></span>); and, “It shall be more tolerable for the
land of Sodom in the day of judgment?” ([Matt.
11.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.4"></span>.) Why then make merry with things that are
no subjects for merriment? Why deceive thyself and put cheats upon thy
reason (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.5"></span>παραλογίζῃ</span>, om. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p62.6"></span>τὴν ψυχήνσου</span>)?
Why fight with the love of God toward man? For it was through this that
He prepared it, and threatened, that we might not be cast into it, as
having by this fear become better. And thus he that does away with
speaking on these subjects doth nothing else than thrust us into it, and
drive us thither by this deceit. Slacken not the hands of them then that
labor for virtue, nor make the listlessness of them that sleep greater.
For if the many be persuaded that there is no hell, when will they leave
off vice? Or when will right be seen? I do not say between sinners and
righteous men, but between sinners and sinners? For why is it that one
is punished here, and another not punished, though he does the same
sins, or even far worse? For if there be no hell, you will having
nothing to say in defence of this to those who make it an objection.
Wherefore my advice is, that we leave off this trifling, and stop the
mouths of those that are gainsayers upon these subjects. For there will
be an exact searching into the smallest things, both in the way of sins
and in the way of good deeds, and we shall be punished for unchaste
looks, and for idle words, and for mere reproachful words, and for
drunkenness we shall render an account, as even for a cup of cold water
we shall receive a reward, and a sigh only. ([Eccl. xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.7"></span>.) For it says, “Set a mark upon the
foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry.” (<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.8"></span>[Ez. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p62.9"></span>.)
How then darest thou to say that He, who with so great exactness will
search into our doings, threatened hell in bare words, and lightly? Do
not, I beseech you, do not with these vain hopes destroy thyself and
those that are persuaded by thee! For if thou disbelievest our words,
make enquiry of Jews and Gentiles, <span
id="fr_1695"></span>[1696](#fn_1695) and all heretics. And all of them
as with one mouth will answer that a judgment there shall be, and a
retribution. And are men not enough? Ask the devils themselves, and thou
wilt hear them cry, “Why hast thou come thither to torment us before the
time.” ([Matt. viii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p63.1"></span>.) And putting all this together persuade
thy soul not to trifle idly, lest by experience thou come to know there
is a hell, but from this thou mayest be sobered, and so able to escape
those tortures, and attain to the good things to come; whereof may we
all partake by the grace and love towards man, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1668"></span>[i:1669](1110094.htm#fr_1668) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p5"></span> So <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> Ben. Sav. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p5.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p5.3"></span>ντολῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_1669"></span>[i:1670](1110094.htm#fr_1669) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p6"></span> Stallbaum ad Plat. *Phileb.* 74.

<span id="fn_1670"></span>[i:1671](1110094.htm#fr_1670) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p7"></span> See the Introduction to Boyle’s
*Reflections,* where this is beautifully applied to the improvement of
all fragments of time by meditation.

<span id="fn_1671"></span>[i:1672](1110094.htm#fr_1671) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p8"></span> Such as the Manichees, see St. Aug.
*Conf.* p. 340, O.T. note at the end, and Marcion. Tert. adv. M. lib. 4.

<span id="fn_1672"></span>[i:1673](1110094.htm#fr_1672) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p8.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p9"></span> This was done by his relics. St. Chrys.
Hom. 1 *ad Pop. Ant.* §2, *on the Statues,* p. 4, O.T.

<span id="fn_1673"></span>[i:1674](1110094.htm#fr_1673) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p11.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p12"></span> A raised place in which the Clergy
were, v. Suicer, and Bingham, b. viii. c. 6, §1, and 9–12.

<span id="fn_1674"></span>[i:1675](1110094.htm#fr_1674) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p13"></span> Or “Teaching of the word.” <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p13.1"></span>τοῦ λόγου τῆς
διδασκαλίας</span>, but we have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p13.2"></span>τοῦ λόγου τῆς παρακλήσεως</span>, <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p13.3"></span>[Heb. xiii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p13.4"></span>.
The word of Exhortation.

<span id="fn_1675"></span>[i:1676](1110094.htm#fr_1675) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p13.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p14"></span> St. C. does not seem to be here
alluding to the former, but to the latter part of this very difficult
passage. The most comprehensive view of it, on this interpretation,
seems to be, that Christ has so hallowed all pain, that it has a saving
influence in it: yet not in such wise saving, that the bearing of the
great pain and peril of childbearing will atone for the neglect of the
after labors of education. See Marlorate and Corn. *a Lapide. in loc.*
The whole interpretation is questionable. Theoph. mentions some who take
the words “the childbearing” of the birth of our Lord, which he rejects
as not agreeing with what follows. But Estius justly observes, that the
“abiding,” etc. may be better applied to the man and wife.

<span id="fn_1676"></span>[i:1677](1110094.htm#fr_1676) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p17"></span> St. Chrys. takes the word in its
literal sense of a captive in war. If so meant it might be figurative,
but it most likely refers either to an imprisonment, or to what he
speaks of [2 Cor. xi. 26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p17.1"></span>, as perils from robbers.

<span id="fn_1677"></span>[i:1678](1110094.htm#fr_1677) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p18"></span> Lit. “far more like a prisoner”—for
Field reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>αἰχμαλωτότερα</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p18.2"></span>χαλεπώτερα</span>.

<span id="fn_1678"></span>[i:1679](1110094.htm#fr_1678) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p19"></span> St. Chrys. on [2 Cor. viii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>,
p. 215. O.T. and [Phil. ii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p19.2"></span>, p. 104 O.T. takes this word to mean
messengers of the Churches. Theodoret, on [Phil. ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#025)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p19.3"></span>,
takes it to mean “Bishop,” as on [1 Tim. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p19.4"></span>,
he says, “they then called the same persons Bishops and Elders, but
those who are now called Bishops they named Apostles.” St. Chrys. Hom.
*in St. Ignat.* call him an Apostle.

<span id="fn_1679"></span>[i:1680](1110094.htm#fr_1679) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p19.6"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p20"></span> Hammond reads the name Junias, and
supposes a man to be intended.

<span id="fn_1680"></span>[i:1681](1110094.htm#fr_1680) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p21"></span> It is impossible to determine with
certainty whether <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p21.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p21.2"></span>πισήμοι ἐν τοῖς ἀποστόλοις</span> ([Rom.
16.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#007)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p21.3"></span>) means that the persons referred to were
themselves apostles, or merely that they were held in high esteem by the
apostles. The interpretation of Chrys. (the former) is possible both in
point of language and in view of the fact that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p21.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p21.5"></span>ποστόλοι</span> embraced more than the
twelve in N.T. usage, e.g. Paul, Barnabas, and probably, James, the
Lord’s Brother (<span id="vii.xxxiii-p21.6"></span>[Gal. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p21.7"></span>)
(so Tholuck, Rückert, Ewald). The more probable view is that Andronicus
and Junias \[not Junia as Chrys., certainly not if his interpretation is
correct; that a woman should have been an apostle is out of the
question\] are designated as distinguished, honorably known among (by)
the apostles. (So De Wette, Philippi, Hofmann, Meyer).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1681"></span>[i:1682](1110094.htm#fr_1681) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p48"></span> He perhaps means something in the
names, as well as in the facts implied; most of them are significant. In
several places, as where he refers to [Ps.
xix](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#000)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p48.1"></span>. and in his metaphors, he shows that he
knew and valued allegorical interpretation, but he makes little public
use of it.

<span id="fn_1682"></span>[i:1683](1110094.htm#fr_1682) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p49"></span> This is rather an unusual way of
taking “<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p49.1"></span>πολλῆς
ἀσφαλείας ἔδει ἀπολαύειν αὐτοῖς</span>,” but the sequel allows no other.

<span id="fn_1683"></span>[i:1684](1110094.htm#fr_1683) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p50"></span> i.e. had he not been so greatly
esteemed.

<span id="fn_1684"></span>[i:1685](1110094.htm#fr_1684) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p51"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.1"></span>αὐτοῦ ἐμοῦ</span>, even of myself.

<span id="fn_1685"></span>[i:1686](1110094.htm#fr_1685) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p51.12"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p52"></span> So Field with 4 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.xxxiii-p52.1"></span>mss.</span> Vulg. “do,”

<span id="fn_1686"></span>[i:1687](1110094.htm#fr_1686) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p53"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p53.1"></span>πολλοὶ</span> would bear to be rendered
“they often.”

<span id="fn_1687"></span>[i:1688](1110094.htm#fr_1687) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p54"></span> i.e. Peter, James, and John.

<span id="fn_1688"></span>[i:1689](1110094.htm#fr_1688) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p55"></span> See Macarius, Hom. vi. v. fin. “So
then many that were taught by Peter, came to repentance, and formed a
new world, elect of God. You see how a beginning of judgment was
manifested. For then a new world was made manifest. For then was power
given them to sit and judge in this world. However, they will sit and
give judgment at the coming of the Lord, in the resurrection of the
dead.”

<span id="fn_1689"></span>[i:1690](1110094.htm#fr_1689) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p56.3"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p57"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#014)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p57.1"></span>,
whence it appears that St. C. looked upon the pains of childbirth as a
punishment, though they were capable of being turned to good: see [Gen.
iii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span
id="vii.xxxiii-p57.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1690"></span>[i:1691](1110094.htm#fr_1690) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p57.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p58"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p58.1"></span>mss.</span> omit “pleasure-loving” and
“love of pleasure” in the next line.

<span id="fn_1691"></span>[i:1692](1110094.htm#fr_1691) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p59"></span> [Joel iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p59.1"></span>,
which is however a type of the last judgment. <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p59.2"></span>[Isaiah xxx.
33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)<span id="vii.xxxiii-p59.3"></span>.
can hardly be meant, as the LXX. there has not the name Tophet.

<span id="fn_1692"></span>[i:1693](1110094.htm#fr_1692) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p59.4"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p60"></span> Ben. and 3 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p60.1"></span>mss.</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.xxxiii-p60.2"></span>βασιλείων</span>.

<span id="fn_1693"></span>[i:1694](1110094.htm#fr_1693) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p60.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p61"></span> This whole argument is nearly that of
the close of Hom. 25. The object of it is clearly to keep their minds to
the subject, as well as to convince gainsayers.

<span id="fn_1694"></span>[i:1695](1110094.htm#fr_1694) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p61.5"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p62"></span> So Field; others: “more than many.”

<span id="fn_1695"></span>[i:1696](1110094.htm#fr_1695) <span
id="vii.xxxiii-p62.10"></span>

<span id="vii.xxxiii-p63"></span> See Bp. Taplor, *Serm.* on Sir G.
Dalston; and Bp. Butler, *Anal.* 1. 2, note n.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XXXII on Rom. xvi. 17, 18.](1110095)
