[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110068)  [Next](1110070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.viii"></span> <span id="vii.viii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.viii-p1.1"></span>Homily VI.</span>

<span id="vii.viii-p2"></span>[Rom.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018)<span id="vii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p3"></span>*“Behold,* <span
id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) *thou art called a Jew, and restest
in the Law, and makest thy boast of God, and knowest His will, and
approvest the things that are more excellent, being instructed out of
the Law.”*

<span id="vii.viii-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vii.viii-p5.1"></span>After</span> saying that the Gentile wanteth
nothing appertaining to salvation if he be a doer of the Law, and after
making that wonderful comparison, he goes on to set down the glories of
the Jews, owing to which they thought scorn of the Gentiles: and first
the very name itself, which was of great majesty, as the name Christian
is now. For even then the distinction which the appellation made was
great. And so he begins from this, and see how he takes it down. For he
does not say, Behold, thou art a Jew, but “art called” so, “and makest
thy boast in God;” that is, as being loved by Him, and honored above all
other men. And here he seems to me to be gently mocking their
unreasonableness, and great madness after glory, because they misused
this gift not to their own salvation, but to set themselves up against
the rest of mankind, and to despise them. “And knowest His will, and
approvest the things that are more excellent.” Indeed this is a
disadvantage, if without working: yet still it seemed to be an
advantage, and so he states it with accuracy. For he does not say, thou
doest, but knowest; and approvest, not followest and doest. <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246)

<span id="vii.viii-p7"></span>[Rom.
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#019)<span id="vii.viii-p7.1"></span>.
“And art confident that thou thyself.”

<span id="vii.viii-p8"></span>Here again he does not say that thou art
“a guide of the blind,” but “thou art confident,” so thou boastest, he
says. So great was the unreasonableness of the Jews. Wherefore he also
repeats nearly the very words, which they used in their boastings. See
for instance what they say in the Gospels. “Thou wast altogether (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p8.1"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p8.2"></span>λος</span> 4 <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p8.3"></span>mss.</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p8.4"></span>ὅ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p8.5"></span>λως</span>) born in sin,
and dost thou teach us?” ([John ix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034)<span id="vii.viii-p8.6"></span>.)
And all men they utterly looked down upon, to convince them of which,
Paul keeps extolling them and lowering the others, that so he may get
more hold on them, and make his accusation the weightier. Wherefore he
goes on adding the like things, and making more of them by different
ways of relating them. For “Thou art confident,” he saith, “that thou
thyself art a leader of the blind,”

<span id="vii.viii-p9"></span>[Rom.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020)<span id="vii.viii-p9.1"></span>.
“An instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which hast the form
of knowledge and truth, which is in the Law.”

<span id="vii.viii-p10"></span>Here again he says not, in the conscience
and in actions and in well-doings, but “in the Law;” and after saying
so, he does here also what he did with regard to the Gentiles. For as
there he says, “for wherein thou judgest another, thou condemnest
thyself,” so saith he here also.

<span id="vii.viii-p11"></span>[Rom.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span id="vii.viii-p11.1"></span>.
“Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?”

<span id="vii.viii-p12"></span>But there he frames his speech with more
of sharpness, here with more of gentleness. For he does not say, However
on this score thou deservest greater punishment, because though
entrusted with so great things thou hast not made a good use of any of
them, but he carries his discourse on by way of question, turning them
on themselves (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p12.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p12.2"></span>ντρέπων</span>), and saying, “Thou that
teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?” And here I would have you
look at the discretion of Paul in another case. For he sets down such
advantages of the Jews, as came not of their own earnestness, but by a
gift from above, and he shows not only that they are worthless to them
if neglectful, but that they even bring with them increase of
punishment. For neither is the being called a Jew any well doing of
theirs, nor yet is the receiving of the Law, nor the other things he has
just enumerated, but of the grace from above. And towards the beginning
he had said, that the hearing of the Law is valueless unless the doing
be thereto added (“for not the hearers of the Law,” he says, “are just
before God,”) but now he shows further still, that not only the hearing,
but, what is more than the hearing, the teaching of the Law itself will
not be able to screen the teacher, unless he do what he says; and not
only will it not screen him, but will even punish him the more. And he
has used his expressions well too, since he does not say, Thou hast
received the Law, but “Thou restest in the Law.” For the Jew was not
wearied with going about to seek what was to be done, but had on easy
terms the Law pointing the way leading to virtue. For if even the
Gentiles have natural reason (and it is on this ground that these are
better than they, in that they do the Law without hearing), yet still
the others had greater facility. But if you say, I am not only a hearer,
but even a teacher, this very thing is an aggravation of your
punishment. For because they prided themselves upon this, <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) from this above all he shows them
to be ridiculous. But when he says, “a guide of the blind, an instructor
of the foolish, a teacher of babes,” he is speaking their own pompous
language. For they treated proselytes extremely ill, and these were the
names they called them by. And this is why he dwells at large upon what
were supposed to be their praises, well knowing that what was said gave
ground for greater accusation; “Which hast the form of knowledge and of
the truth in the Law.” As if any one who had a picture of the king, were
to draw nothing after it, and they that were not entrusted with it were
to imitate it exactly even without the original. And then after
mentioning the advantages they had from God, he tells them of their
failings, bringing forward what the prophets accused them of. “Thou
therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself? Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal? Thou that sayest a
man should not commit adultery, dost thou commit adultery? Thou that
abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege?” <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248) For it was strictly forbidden them
to touch any of the treasures upon the idols (so Field from the <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p14.3"></span>mss.:</span> Vulg. “in the
idol temples”) by reason of the defilement. But the tyranny of avarice,
he says, has persuaded you (4 <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.viii-p14.4"></span>mss.</span> and mar. “us”) to trample this
Law also under foot. Then he brings the far more grievous charge
afterwards, saying,

<span id="vii.viii-p15"></span>[Rom.
2.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023)<span id="vii.viii-p15.1"></span>.
“Thou that makest a boast in the Law through breaking the Law
dishonorest thou God?”

<span id="vii.viii-p16"></span>There are two accusations which he makes,
or rather three. Both that they dishonor, and dishonor that whereby they
were honored; and that they dishonor Him that honored them, which was
the utmost extreme of unfeelingness. And then, not to seem to be
accusing them of his own mind, he brings in the Prophet as their
accuser, here briefly and concisely as it were in a summary, but
afterwards more in detail, and here Isaiah, and after that David, when
he had shown the grounds of reproof to be more than one. For to show, he
means, that it is not I who speak these things to your reproach, hear
what Isaiah saith.

<span id="vii.viii-p17"></span>[Rom.
2.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024)<span id="vii.viii-p17.1"></span>.
“For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you.”
(<span id="vii.viii-p17.2"></span>[Is. lii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="vii.viii-p17.3"></span>;
[Ezek. 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#020),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)<span id="vii.viii-p17.4"></span>.)

<span id="vii.viii-p18"></span>See again another double accusation. For
they not only commit insolence themselves, but even induce others to do
so. What then is the use of your teaching when ye teach not your own
selves? Above, however, he merely said this, but here he has even turned
it round to the contrary. For not only yourselves, but even others, do
ye not teach what should be done. And what is far worse—ye not only
teach not the things of the Law, but ye even teach the opposite, viz. to
blaspheme God, which is opposite to the Law. But the circumcision, one
will say, is a great thing. Yea, I also confess it, but when? when (So
all <span class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p18.1"></span>mss.</span> S.
“then, when”) it hath the inward circumcision. And observe his judgment,
in bringing in what he says about it so opportunely. For he did not
begin straightway with it, since the conceit men had of it was great.
But after he had shown them to have offended in that which was
greater <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) and to be responsible
for the blasphemy against God, then having henceforth possession of the
reader’s judgment against them, and having stripped them of their
pre-eminence, he introduces the discussion about circumcision, feeling
sure that no one will any more advocate it, and says,

<span id="vii.viii-p20"></span>[Rom.
2.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)<span id="vii.viii-p20.1"></span>.
“For circumcision verily profiteth, if thou keep the Law.”

<span id="vii.viii-p21"></span>And yet, were this not so, a man might
have rejected it and said, What is circumcision? for is it any good deed
on his part that hath it? is it any manifestation of a right choice? For
it takes place at an unripe age, and those in the wilderness too
remained uncircumcised for a long time. And from many other points of
view also, one might look at it as not necessary. And yet it is not on
this foot that he rejects it, but upon the most proper ground, from the
case of Abraham. For this is the most exceeding victory,—to take the
very reason for showing it to be of small regard, whence it was held by
them in reverence. Now he might have said that even the prophets call
the Jews uncircumcised. But this is no disparagement of circumcision,
but of those that hold ill to it. For what he aims at is to show that
even in the very best life, it has not the least force. This is what he
next proves. And here he does not bring forward the Patriarch, but
having previously overturned it upon other grounds, he keeps him till
afterwards, when he brings in what he has to say of faith, on the
words—“How then was it reckoned” to Abraham? “when he was in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision?” For so long as it is struggling
against the Gentile and the uncircumcised, he is unwilling to say aught
of this, lest he should be over irksome to them. But when it comes in
opposition to the faith, then he disengages himself more completely for
a combat with it. Up to the present point then it is uncircumcision that
the contest is against, and this is why he advances in His discourse in
a subdued tone, and says,

<span id="vii.viii-p22"></span>“For circumcision verily profiteth if
thou keep the Law; but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision
is made uncircumcision.” For here he speaks of two uncircumcisions, and
two circumcisions, as also two laws. For there is a natural law and
there is a written law. But there is one also between these, that by
works. And see how he points these three out, and brings them before
you.

<span id="vii.viii-p23"></span>“For when the Gentiles,” he says, “which
have not the Law.” What Law, say? The written one. “Do by nature the
things of the Law.” Of what Law? Of that by works. “These having not the
Law.” What Law? The written one. “Are a law unto themselves.” How so? By
using the natural law. “Who show the work of the Law.” Of what law? Of
that by actions. For that which is by writing lieth outside; but this is
within, the natural one, and the other is in actions. And one the
writing proclaims; and another, nature; and another, actions. Of this
third there is need, <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) for the
sake of which also those two exist, both the natural and the written.
And if this be not present they are of no good, but even very great
harm. And to show this in the case of the natural he said, “For wherein
thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself.” But of the written Law,
thus—“Thou that preachest a man should not steal, dost thou steal?” Thus
also there are two uncircumcisions, one that of nature, and the second
from conduct: and one circumcision in the flesh, and the other from the
will. I mean for instance, a man has been circumcised upon the eighth
day; this is circumcision of the flesh: a man has done all the Law bids
him; this is circumcision of the mind which St. Paul requires above all,
yea rather the Law also. See now how having granted it in words, he in
deed does away with it. For he does not say the circumcision is
superfluous, the circumcision is of no profit, of no use. But what saith
he? “Circumcision verily profiteth if thou keepest the Law.” (<span
id="vii.viii-p24.1"></span>[Deut. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016)<span id="vii.viii-p24.2"></span>;
xxx. 6.) He approves it so far, saying, I confess and deny not that the
circumcision is honorable. But when? When it has the Law kept along with
it.

<span id="vii.viii-p25"></span>“But if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy
circumcision is made uncircumcision.” He does not say, it is no more
profitable, lest he should seem to insult it. But having stripped the
Jew of it, he goes on to smite him. And this is no longer any insult to
circumcision, but to him who through listlessness has lost the good of
it. As then in the case of those who are in dignified stations and are
after convicted of the greatest misdemeanors, the judges deprive them of
the honors of their stations and then punish them; so has Paul also
done. For after saying, if thou art a breaker of the Law, thy
“circumcision is made uncircumcision,” and having shown him to be
uncircumcised, he condemns him after that without scruple.

<span id="vii.viii-p26"></span>[Rom.
2.26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026)<span id="vii.viii-p26.1"></span>.
“Therefore if the uncircumcision keep the righteousness of the Law,
shall not his uncircumcision be turned <span
id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) into circumcision?”

<span id="vii.viii-p28"></span>See how he acts. He does not say that the
uncircumcision overcomes circumcision (for this was highly grating to
those who then heard him), but that the uncircumcision hath become
circumcision. And he next enquires what circumcision is, and what
uncircumcision and he says that circumcision is well doing and
uncircumcision is evil doing. And having first transferred into the
circumcision the uncircumcised, who has good deeds, and having thrust
out the circumcised man that lived a corrupt life into the
uncircumcision, he so gives the preference to the uncircumcised. And he
does not say, To the uncircumcised, but goes on to the thing itself,
speaking as follows: “Shall not his uncircumcision be turned into
circumcision?” And he does not say “reckoned,” but “turned to,” which
was more expressive. As also above he does not say thy circumcision is
reckoned uncircumcision, but has been made so.

<span id="vii.viii-p29"></span>[Rom.
2.27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027)<span id="vii.viii-p29.1"></span>.
“And shall not the uncircumcision which is by nature judge?”

<span id="vii.viii-p30"></span>You see, he recognizes two
uncircumcisions, one from nature, and the other from the will. Here,
however, he speaks of that from nature, but does not pause here, but
goes on, “if it fulfil the Law, judge thee, who by the letter and
circumcision dost transgress the Law?” See his exquisite judgment. He
does not say, that the uncircumcision which is from nature shall judge
the circumcision, but while where the victory had been, he brings in the
uncircumcision, yet where the defeat is, he does not expose the
circumcision as defeated; but the Jew himself who had it, and so by the
wording spares offending his hearer. And he does not say, “thee that
hast the Law and the circumcision,” but yet more mildly, “thee who by
the letter and circumcision dost transgress the Law.” That is, such
uncircumcision even stands up for the circumcision, for it has been
wronged and comes to the Law’s assistance, for it has been insulted, and
obtains a notable triumph. For then is the victory decided, when it is
not by Jew that Jew is judged, but by the uncircumcised; as when he
says, “The men of Nineveh shall rise in judgment against this
generation, and shall condemn it.” ([Matt. xii.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041)<span id="vii.viii-p30.1"></span>.)
It is not then the Law that he dishonors (for he reverences it greatly),
but him that does disgrace to the Law. Next, having settled these
grounds clearly, he goes on confidently to define what the Jew really
is; and he shows that it is not the Jew, nor the circumcision, but he
that is no Jew, and uncircumcised, whom he is rejecting. And he seemeth
indeed to stand up in its behalf, but yet does away with the opinion
regarding it, securing men’s concurrence by the conclusion he comes to.
For he shows not only that there is no difference between the Jew and
the uncircumcised, but that the uncircumcised has even the advantage, if
he take heed to himself, and that it is he that is really the Jew; and
so he says:

<span id="vii.viii-p31"></span>[Rom.
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="vii.viii-p31.1"></span>.
“For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly.”

<span id="vii.viii-p32"></span>Here he attacks them as doing all things
for show.

<span id="vii.viii-p33"></span>[Rom.
2.29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span id="vii.viii-p33.1"></span>.
“But he is a Jew which is one inwardly; and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter.”

<span id="vii.viii-p34"></span>By saying this he sets aside all things
bodily. For the circumcision is outwardly, and the sabbaths and the
sacrifices and purifications: all of which he hints in a single word,
when he says, “For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly.” But since
much was made of the circumcision, inasmuch <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) as even the sabbath gave way to it
(<span id="vii.viii-p35.1"></span>[John vii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022)<span id="vii.viii-p35.2"></span>),
he has good reason for aiming more especially against it. But when he
has said “in the spirit” he thereafter paves the way for the
conversation <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253) of the Church,
and introduces the faith. For it too is in the heart and spirit and hath
its praise of God. And how cometh he not to show that the Gentile which
doeth aright is not inferior to the Jew which doeth aright, but that the
Gentile which doeth aright is better than the Jew which breaketh the
Law? It was that he might make the victory an undoubted one. For when
this is agreed upon, of necessity the circumcision of the flesh is set
aside, and the need of a good life is everywhere demonstrated. For when
the Greek is saved without these, but the Jew with these is yet
punished, Judaism stands by doing nothing. And by Greek he again means
not the idolatrous Greek, but the religous and virtuous, and free from
all legal observances.

<span id="vii.viii-p37"></span>[Rom.
3.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)<span id="vii.viii-p37.1"></span>.
“What advantage then hath the Jew?” <span
id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254)

<span id="vii.viii-p39"></span>Since he has set all aside, the hearing,
the teaching, the name of the Jew, the circumcision, and all the other
particulars by his saying that “he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,
but he which is one inwardly;” he next sees an objection which starts
up, and against this makes his stand. Now what is this objection? If, he
means, these things are no use, what reason was there for that nation
being called, and the circumcision too being given? What does he then
and how does he solve it? By the same means as he did before: for as
there, he told, not of their praises, but the benefits of God; nor their
well doings (for to be called a Jew and to know His Will and to approve
the things which are more excellent, was no well doing of their own, but
came of the grace of God: and this the Prophet also says, upbraiding
them; “He hath not done so to any nation, neither hath he showed His
judgments unto them;” (<span id="vii.viii-p39.1"></span>[Ps. cxlvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#020)<span id="vii.viii-p39.2"></span>.)
and Moses again; “Ask now whether there hath been any such thing as
this?” he says, “did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of
the midst of the fire, and live?”) ([Deut.
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033)<span id="vii.viii-p39.3"></span>),
this then he does here also. For as, when speaking of circumcision, he
did not say, Circumcision is valueless without a good life, but,
Circumcision is of value with a good life, pointing out the same thing
but in a more subdued tone. And again he does not say, If thou be a
breaker of the Law, thou who art circumcised art no whit profited, but
“thy circumcision is made uncircumcision:” and after this again, “the
uncircumcision,” saith he, shall “judge,” not the circumcision, but
“thee that dost transgress the Law,” so sparing the things of the Law,
and smiting the persons. So he doth here also. For after setting before
himself this objection, and saying, “what advantage then hath the Jew?”
he says not, None, but he concurs with the statement, and confutes it
again by the sequel, and shows that they were even punished owing to
this preëminence. And how he does so, I will tell you when I have stated
the objection. “What advantage then,” he says, “hath the Jew,” or “what
profit is there of circumcision?”

<span id="vii.viii-p40"></span>[Rom.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span id="vii.viii-p40.1"></span>.
“Much every way: chiefly, because that they were entrusted with the
oracles of God.”

<span id="vii.viii-p41"></span>Do you see that, as I said above, it is
not their well doings, but the benefits of God, that he everywhere
counts up? And what is the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p41.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p41.2"></span>πιστεύθησαν</span>? (they were trusted.) It
means, that they had the Law put into their hands because He held
them <span id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) to be of so much account
that He entrusted to them oracles which came down from above. I know
indeed that some take the “entrusted” not of the Jews, but of the
oracles, as much as to say, the Law was believed in. But the context
does not admit of this being held good. For in the first place he is
saying this with a view to accuse them, and to show that, though in the
enjoyment of many a blessing from above, they yet showed great
ingratitude. Then, the context also makes this clear. For he goes on to
say, “For what if some did not believe?” If they did not believe, how do
some say, the oracles were believed in? <span
id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) What does he mean then? Why that
God entrusted the same to them, and not that they trusted to the
oracles: <span id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) how else will the
context make sense? For he farther goes on to say,

<span id="vii.viii-p45"></span>[Rom.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)<span id="vii.viii-p45.1"></span>.
“For what if some did not believe?” <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258)

<span id="vii.viii-p47"></span>And what comes next makes the same point
clear. For he again adds and follows; “Shall their unbelief make the
faith of God without effect?”

<span id="vii.viii-p48"></span>[Rom.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="vii.viii-p48.1"></span>.
“God forbid.” The word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p48.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p48.3"></span>πιστεύθησαν</span>, then, proclaims God’s
gift.

<span id="vii.viii-p49"></span>And I would have you here also note his
judgment. For again he does not bring in his accusation of them on his
own part, but as it were by way of objection, as if he said, But perhaps
you will say, ‘What then is the use of this circumcision since they used
it not as was fitting, since they were trusted with the Law and were
unfaithful to the trust?’ And hitherto he is not a severe accuser, but
as if to clear God of complaints against Him, he by this means turns the
whole of the accusation round upon themselves. For why, he would say, do
you complain that they did not believe? and how doth this affect God?
For as for His benefit, doth the ingratitude of those benefited overturn
it? Or doth it make the honor to be no honor? For this is what the
words, “Shall their unfaithfulness make the faith of God without
effect,” amount to. “God forbid.” As if one should say, I have honored
such an one. And if he did not receive the honor, this gives no ground
for accusing me, nor impairs my kindness, but shows his want of feeling.
But Paul does not say this merely, but what is much more. That not only
does their unbelief not leave the soil of complaint upon God, but even
shows His honor and love of man to be the greater, in that He is seen to
have bestowed honor upon one who would dishonor Him. See how he has
brought them out guilty of misdemeanors by means of what they gloried
in; forasmuch as the honor with which God treated them was so great,
that even when He saw what would come thereof, He withheld not His
good-will toward them! Yet they made the honors bestowed on them a means
of insulting Him that Honor them! Next, since he said, “For what if some
did not believe?” (while clearly it was all of them that did not
believe,) lest by speaking here too as the history allowed him, he
should seem to be a severe accuser of them like an enemy, he puts that,
which really took place, in the method of reasoning and syllogism,
saying as follows: “Yea, let God be true, but every man a liar.” What he
says is something of this sort. I do not mean, he says, that some did
not believe, but if you will, suppose that all were unbelieving, so
waiving what really happened, to fall in with the objector, that he
might seem overbearing or to be suspected. Well, he says, in this way
God is the more justified. What does the word justified mean? That, if
there could be a trial and an examination of the things He had done for
the Jews, and of what had been done on their part towards Him, the
victory would be with God, and all the right on His side. And after
showing this clearly from what was said before, he next introduces the
Prophet also as giving his approval to these things, and saying, “that
Thou mightest be justified in Thy sayings, and clear when Thou art
judged.” (<span id="vii.viii-p49.1"></span>[Ps. li.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004)<span id="vii.viii-p49.2"></span>.)
He then for His part did everything, but they were nothing the better
even for this. Then he brings forward after this another objection that
arises, and says,

<span id="vii.viii-p50"></span>[Rom.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005)<span id="vii.viii-p50.1"></span>.
“But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God, what shall
we say? is God unrighteous Who taketh vengeance? I speak as a man.”

<span id="vii.viii-p51"></span>[Rom.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006)<span id="vii.viii-p51.1"></span>.
“God forbid.”

<span id="vii.viii-p52"></span>He solves one perplexity by another
again. Yet as this is not clear, we must needs declare it more clearly.
What is it then he means? God honored the Jews: they did despite to Him.
This gives Him the victory, and shows the greatness of His love towards
man, in that He honored them even such as they were. Since then, he
means, we did despite to Him and wronged Him, God by this very thing
became victorious, and His righteousness was shown to be clear. <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) Why then (a man may say) am I to be
punished, who have been the cause of His victory by the despite I did
Him? Now how does he meet this? It is, as I was saying, by another
absurdity again. For if it were you, he says, that were the cause of the
victory, and after this are punished, the thing is an act of injustice.
But if He is not unjust, and yet you are punished, then you are no more
the cause of the victory. And note his apostolic reverence; (or caution:
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p53.1"></span>εὐλάβεια</span>);
for after saying, “Is God unrighteous Who taketh vengeance?” he adds, “I
speak as a man.” As if, he means, any body were to argue in the way men
reason. For what things seem with us to be justice, these the just
judgment of God far exceedeth, and has certain other unspeakable grounds
for it. Next, since it was indistinct, he says the same thing over
again:

<span id="vii.viii-p54"></span>[Rom.
3.7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007)<span id="vii.viii-p54.1"></span>.
“For if the truth of God hath more abounded through my lie unto His
glory: why yet am I also judged as a sinner?”

<span id="vii.viii-p55"></span>For if God, he means is shown to be a
Lover of man, and righteous, and good, by your acts of disobedience, you
ought not only to be exempt from punishment but even to have good done
unto you. But if so, that absurdity will be found to result, which is in
circulation with so many, that good comes of evil, and that evil is the
cause of good; and one of the two is necessary, either that He be
clearly unjust in punishing, or that if He punish not, it is from our
vices that He hath the victory. And both of these are absurd to a
degree. And himself meaning to show this too, he introduces the Greeks
(i.e. heathens) as the fathers of these opinions, thinking it enough to
allege against what he has mentioned the character of the persons who
say these things. For then they used to say in ridicule of us, “let us
do evil that good may come.” And this is why he has stated it clearly in
the following language.

<span id="vii.viii-p56"></span>[Rom.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008)<span id="vii.viii-p56.1"></span>.
“If <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) not (as some affirm that
we say,) Let us do evil that good may come? Whose damnation is just.”

<span id="vii.viii-p58"></span>For whereas Paul said, <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) “where sin abounded grace did much
more abound” ([Rom. v. 20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span
id="vii.viii-p59.3"></span>), in ridicule of him and perverting what he
said to another meaning, they said, We must cling to vice that we may
get what is good. But Paul said not so; however <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) to correct this notion it is that
he says, “What then? shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God
forbid!” ([Rom. 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)<span id="vii.viii-p60.2"></span>.)
For I said it, he means, of the times which are past, not that we should
make this a practice. To lead them away then from this suspicion, he
said, that henceforth this was even impossible. For “how shall we,” he
says, “that are dead unto sin, live any longer therein?” Against the
Greeks then he inveighs (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p60.3"></span>κατέδραμεν</span>) without difficulty. For
their life was exceeding abandoned. But of the Jews, even if their life
seemed to have been careless, still they had great means of cloaking
these things in the Law and circumcision, and the fact of God having
conversed with them, and their being the teachers of all. And this is
why he strips them even of these, and shows that for these they were the
more punished, and this is the conclusion to which he has here drawn his
discussion. For if they be not punished, he would say, for so doing,
that blasphemous language—let us do evil that good may come—must
necessarily gain currency. But if this be impious, and they who hold
this language shall be punished (for this he declared by saying, “whose
damnation is just”), it is plain that they are punished. For if they who
speak it be deserving of vengeance, much more are they who act it, but
if deserving thereof, it is as having done sin. For it is not man that
punishes them, that any one should suspect the sentence, but God, that
doeth all things righteously. But if they are righteously punished, it
is unrighteously that they, who make ridicule of us, said what they did.
For God did and doth everything, that our conversation might shine forth
and be upright on every side.

<span id="vii.viii-p61"></span>Let us then not be listless; for so we
shall be able to recover the Greeks also from their error. But when we
are in words lovers of wisdom, but in deeds behave unseemly, with what
looks shall we face them? with what lips shall we discourse concerning
doctrines? For he <span id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) will say to
each of us, How can you that have failed in what is less, claim to teach
me about what is greater? you who as yet have not learnt that
covetousness is a vice, how can you be wise upon the things in heaven?
But do you know that it is a vice? Then, the charge is the greater,
because you transgress knowingly. And why speak I of the Greek, for even
our laws allow us not to speak thus boldly when our life has become
abandoned. For to “the sinner,” it says, “saith God, what hast thou to
do to declare my statutes?” ([Ps. l.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#016)<span id="vii.viii-p62.1"></span>.)
There was a time when the Jews were carried away captive, and when the
Persians were urgent with them, and called upon them to sing those
divine songs unto them, they said, “How shall we sing the Lord’s song in
a strange land?” (<span id="vii.viii-p62.2"></span>[Ps. cxxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004)<span id="vii.viii-p62.3"></span>.)
Now if it were un lawful to sing the oracles of God in a strange land,
much less might the estranged soul do it. For estranged <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) the merciless soul is. If the Law
made those who were captives and had become slaves to men in a strange
land, to sit in silence; much more is it right for those who are slaves
to sin and are in an alien community (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p63.2"></span>πολιτεί& 139·</span>) to have a curb upon
their mouths. And however they had their instruments then. For it says,
“Upon the willows in the midst thereof did we hang our instruments,” but
still they might not sing. And so we also, though we have a mouth and
tongue, which are instruments of speech, have no right to speak boldly,
so long as we be slaves to what is more tyrannical than any barbarian,
sin. For tell me what have you to say to the Greek, if you plunder, and
be covetous? will you say, Forsake idolatry, acknowledge God, and draw
not near to gold and silver? Will he not then make a jest of you, and
say, Talk to thyself first in this way? For it is not the same thing for
a Gentile to practise idolatry, and a Christian to commit this same (4
<span class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p63.3"></span>mss</span>. om.
“same”) sin. For how are we to draw others away from that idolatry if we
draw not ourselves away from this? For we are nearer related to
ourselves <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) than our neighbor
is, and so when we persuade not ourselves, how are we to persuade
others? For if he that doth not rule well over his own house, will not
take care of the Church either ([1 Tim. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#005)<span id="vii.viii-p64.2"></span>),
how shall he that doth not rule even over his own soul be able to set
others right? Now do not tell me, that you do not worship an image of
gold, but make this clear to me, that you do not do those things which
gold bids you. For there be different kinds of idolatry, and one holds
mammon lord, and another his belly his god, and a third some other most
baneful lust. But, “you do not sacrifice oxen to them as the Gentiles
do.” Nay, but what is far worse, you butcher your own soul. But “you do
not bow the knee and worship.” Nay, but with greater obedience you do
all that they command you, whether it be your belly, or money, or the
tyranny of lust. For this is just what makes Gentiles disgusting, that
they made gods of our passions; calling lust Venus, and anger Mars, and
drunkenness Bacchus. If then you do not grave images as did they, yet do
you with great eagerness bow under the very same passions, when you make
the members of Christ members of an harlot, and plunge yourself into the
other deeds of iniquity. (<span id="vii.viii-p64.3"></span>[1 Cor. vi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#015)<span id="vii.viii-p64.4"></span>.)
I therefore exhort you to lay to heart the exceeding unseemliness
hereof, and to flee from idolatry:—for so doth Paul name
covetousness—and to flee not only covetousness in money, but that in
evil desire, and that in clothing, and that in food, and that in
everything else: since the punishment we shall have to suffer if we obey
not God’s laws is much severer. For, He says, “the servant that knew his
Lord’s will,” and did it not, “shall be beaten with many stripes.”
([Luke xii. 47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047)<span
id="vii.viii-p64.5"></span>.) With a view then to escaping from this
punishment, and being useful both to others and to ourselves, let us
drive out all iniquity from our soul and choose virtue. For so shall we
attain to the blessings which are to come, whereto may it be granted us
all to attain by the grace and love toward man, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[i:1246](1110069.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="vii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p4"></span>One <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.viii-p4.1"></span>ms</span>. appears to have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p4.2"></span>εἰ δὲ</span> “but if,”
with most <span class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p4.3"></span>mss</span>.
of the N.T., instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p4.4"></span>ἴ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p4.5"></span>δε</span>, “behold,” which St. Chrysostom
appears to have read with the present T. R.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[i:1247](1110069.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="vii.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p6"></span> From the [Rom.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)<span id="vii.viii-p6.1"></span>
on the apostle speaks of the Jew by name and clearly shows that he had
him in mind from the beginning of the chapter. The correct text reads
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p6.2"></span>εἰ δὲ</span> instead
of <span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p6.3"></span>ἴ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p6.4"></span>δε</span> to which the
question of [Rom. 2.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021)<span
id="vii.viii-p6.5"></span> corresponds as apodosis. Chrys.’
interpretation of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p6.6"></span>δοκιμάζεις τὰ διαρέροντα</span> is that which
is followed by the Vulgate (*“probas utiliora”*), most anct. vss.,
Wordsworth, Meyer, and our Eng. vss. The majority of modern
commentators, however, adopt the interpretation: “testest things that
differ.” So Weiss, Godet, Wilke (Clavis N.T.), Lange, Tholuck. Alford,
Philippi. This interpretation has the advantage of following the
original meaning of both verbs.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[i:1248](1110069.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="vii.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p13"></span>The younger Buxtorf, in his preface to
his father’s *Synagoga Judaica*, gives specimens of their language, as
from Cad Hakkemach, “Such is the power of Circumcision, that none who is
circumcised goeth down into Hell,” and R. Abraham, than the Israelites
were “all wise, all understanding, all skilled in the Law.” See also
Smith’s *Select Discourses*, No. 7.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[i:1249](1110069.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="vii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p14"></span> There are three interpretations of
ἱεροσυλεῖς ([Rom. 2.22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022)<span
id="vii.viii-p14.1"></span>) (1) “rob (heathen) temples.” So Wilke,
Meyer, Godet, Philippi, Alford, Conybeare and Howson, R.V. (2) “Rob the
temple” (at Jerusalem, by embezzling or withholding the temple-tribute).
So Hofmann, Ewald, Lange, Weiss. (3) “commit sacrilege,” Calvin, Bengel,
Luther, A.V. marg. of R.V. The contrast with ὁβδελ, τὰ εἴδωλα strongly
favors (1) which is adopted by Chrys. That such robbery had taken place
among the Jews seems implied in [Acts xix.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037)<span id="vii.viii-p14.2"></span>,
and is clearly referred to in Josephus’ *Ant*. iv. 8, 10.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[i:1250](1110069.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="vii.viii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p19"></span> ἀπὸ τοῦ μείζονος. Perhaps “the more
guilty,” as having offended with greater advantages.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[i:1251](1110069.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="vii.viii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p24"></span> See Butler, *Anal. II*. i. v. fin.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[i:1252](1110069.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="vii.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p27"></span> Four <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.viii-p27.1"></span>mss</span>. have μετατραπήσεται, both here
and a little below: the others read λογισθήσεται here, and then
contradict themselves, by putting τραπήσεται there. The old Edd. have
περιτραπήσεται. Nearly all <span class="c14"><span
id="vii.viii-p27.2"></span>mss</span>. of the N.T. have λογισθήσεται: so
we must either think with Heyse that St. Chrysostom expresses his
definite opinion in favor of μετατρ. or with Matthiae that he made a
slip of memory.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[i:1253](1110069.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="vii.viii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p35"></span> It might be observed, that all St.
Paul’s reasoning here and to the Galatians holds against circumcision
and the Sabbath alike.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[i:1254](1110069.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="vii.viii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p36.1"></span>πολιτεί& 139·</span>. We want a word to
express at once the spiritual citizenship and the corresponding life.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[i:1255](1110069.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="vii.viii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p38"></span> The passage [Rom.
3.1-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)<span id="vii.viii-p38.1"></span>
considers four possible objections. (1) “This placing of Jews and
Gentiles in the same condition, takes away all the theocratic
prerogatives.” ([Rom. 3.1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)<span
id="vii.viii-p38.2"></span>.) No, answers Paul, they have a great
advantage as to light and privilege, though none as to righteousness.
([Rom. 3.2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span
id="vii.viii-p38.3"></span>.) (2) “They have the O.T. scriptures, you
say; but what if those scriptures have not attained their end in
bringing the Jews to believe in Jesus as the Messiah? If some have not
believed, does not that render void God’s promises to his people in the
O.T., so that he is no longer bound by them?” ([Rom.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)<span id="vii.viii-p38.4"></span>.)
The answer is: “No, God is faithful to his promises in all conditions
([Rom. 3.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span
id="vii.viii-p38.5"></span>). (3) “Then the unbelief of the Jews seems
to be the occasion of eliciting God’s faithfulness. The conclusion would
be that falseness contributes to God’s glory.” To this Paul gives no
specific reply but develops the argument so as to show that it leads to
a (5) position: “Let us do evil that good may come.” ([Rom.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008)<span id="vii.viii-p38.6"></span>.)
He thinks it enough to exhibit the logical conclusion of such an
objection. It is enough to know that it obliterates all moral
distinctions and impugns the justice of God. Paul might have shown that
from God’s overruling of sin to his praise the approval of sin does not
follow. But he is content to make it clear that the objection is
inconsistent with a righteous judgment of the world.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[i:1256](1110069.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="vii.viii-p41.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p42"></span> See [Gen.
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019), [Deut.
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037), [Deut.
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#015)<span
id="vii.viii-p42.1"></span>[Gen. xviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#019)<span id="vii.viii-p42.2"></span>;
[Deut. iv. 37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037)<span
id="vii.viii-p42.3"></span>, and x. 15.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[i:1257](1110069.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="vii.viii-p42.4"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p43"></span> For this use of the word, see <span
id="vii.viii-p43.1"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="vii.viii-p43.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[i:1258](1110069.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="vii.viii-p43.3"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p44"></span> Field reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p44.1"></span>λόγοις</span> “His words:” probably by a
misprint.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[i:1259](1110069.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="vii.viii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p46"></span> A practical, not a theoretical unbelief.
It might be clearer to use the word “unfaithful” throughout, but that
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p46.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p46.2"></span>πιστεῖν</span> is treated
as the exact negative of <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p46.3"></span>πιστεύειν</span>: in fact we cannot translate
idiomatically all that either St. Paul or St. Chrysostom has to say of
<span class="Greek"><span id="vii.viii-p46.4"></span>πίστις</span>,
without using the three words “faith” “trust” and “belief” for it and
its correlatives.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[i:1260](1110069.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="vii.viii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p53"></span> Field thinks that St. Chrysostom wrote
“Therefore if, because we did despite to Him……was shown to be clear, why
am I to be punished,” etc.? Heyse would have “Then, since through our
despite and wrong God became victorious.…why,” etc.?

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[i:1261](1110069.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="vii.viii-p56.2"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p57"></span> So Field with most <span
class="c14"><span id="vii.viii-p57.1"></span>mss</span>. and Interp.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[i:1262](1110069.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="vii.viii-p58.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p59"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p59.1"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p59.2"></span>λεγεν</span>. St. Chrysostom treats it as his
habitual teaching, so that it had been already misrepresented, though
not yet embodied in this Epistle.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[i:1263](1110069.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="vii.viii-p59.4"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p60"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p60.1"></span>γοῦν</span>. He is evidently aiming at some
who still used such reasonings.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[i:1264](1110069.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="vii.viii-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p62"></span> i.e. The Greek, see a few lines below.
Savile’s punctuation was first corrected by the Benedictines.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[i:1265](1110069.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="vii.viii-p62.4"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p63"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p63.1"></span>Βάρβαρος</span>, Though this word is not
equivalent to Barbarian, it has force enough to give a fitness to the
term “merciless.” St. Chrysostom excels in these side-strokes, which he
so much admires too in the Apostle.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[i:1266](1110069.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="vii.viii-p63.4"></span>

<span id="vii.viii-p64"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.viii-p64.1"></span>κάκιστος ὁ πρὸς ἑαυτὸν χρώμενος τῇ μοχθηρί&
139·</span>, etc. Arist. *Eth.* v. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VII on Rom. iii. 9-18.](1110070)
