[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110055)  [Next](1110057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.li"></span> <span id="vi.li-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.li-p1.1"></span>Homily LI.</span>

<span id="vi.li-p2"></span>[Acts
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023)<span id="vi.li-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p3"></span>“And when Felix heard these things, having
more perfect knowledge of that way, he deferred them and said, When
Lysias the tribune shall come down, I will know the uttermost of your
matter. And he commanded a centurion to keep Paul, and to let him have
liberty, and that he should forbid none of his acquaintance to minister
or come unto him.”

<span id="vi.li-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.li-p4.1"></span>See</span> how much close investigation is made
by the many in a long course of time, that it should not be said that
the trial was hurried over. For, as the orator had made mention of
Lysias, that he took “him away with violence, Felix,” he says, “deferred
them. Having knowledge of that way:” that is, he put them off on
purpose: not because he wanted to learn, but as wishing to get rid of
the Jews. On their account, he did not like to let him go: to punish him
was not possible; that would have been (too) barefaced. “And to let him
have liberty, <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) and to forbid
none of his acquaintance to minister to him.” So entirely did he too
acquit him of the charges. Howbeit, to gratify them, he detained him,
and besides, expecting to receive money, he called for Paul. “And after
certain days, when Felix came with his wife Drusilla, which was a
Jewess, he sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ.
And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance (i.e. self-control or
chastity), and judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy
way for this time; when I have a convenient season, I will call for
thee. He hoped also that money should have been given him of Paul, that
he might loose him; wherefore he sent for him the oftener, and communed
with him. But after two years Porcius Festus came into Felix’s room: and
Felix, willing to show the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound.” ([Acts
24.24-27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024)<span
id="vi.li-p5.9"></span>.) See how close to the truth are the things
written. But he sent for him frequently, not that he admired him, nor
that he praised the things spoken, nor that he wished to believe, but
why? “Expecting,” it says, “that money should have been given him.”
Observe how he does not hide here the mind of the judge. “Wherefore he
sent for him,” etc. And yet if he had condemned him, he would not have
done this, nor have wished to hear a man, condemned and of evil
character. And observe Paul, how, though reasoning with a ruler, he says
nothing of the sort that was likely to amuse and entertain, but (“he
reasoned,” it says,) “of righteousness, and of the coming judgment,” and
of the resurrection. And such was the force of his words, that they even
terrified the governor. <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) This
man is succeeded in his office by another, and he leaves Paul a
prisoner: and yet he ought not to have done this; he ought to have put
an end to the business: but he leaves him, by way of gratifying them.
They however were so urgent, that they again besought the judge. Yet
against none of the Apostles had they set themselves thus
pertinaciously; there, when they had attacked, anon they desisted. So
providentially is he removed from Jerusalem, having to do with such wild
beasts. And they nevertheless request that he might be brought again
there to be tried. “Now when Festus was come into the province, after
three days he ascended from Cæsarea to Jerusalem. Then the high priest
and the chief of the Jews informed him against Paul, and besought him,
and desired favor against him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem,
laying wait in the way to kill him.” ([Acts
25.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001)<span id="vi.li-p6.3"></span>.)
Here now God’s providence interposed, not permitting the governor to do
this: for it was natural that he having just come to the government
would wish to gratify them: but God suffered him not. “But Festus
answered, that Paul should be kept at Cæsarea, and that he himself would
depart shortly thither. Let them therefore, said he, which among you are
able, go down with me, and accuse this man, if there be any wickedness
in him. And when he had tarried among them more than ten days, he went
down unto Cæsarea; and the next day sitting on the judgment seat
commanded Paul to be brought.” ([Acts
25.4-6](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004)<span id="vi.li-p6.4"></span>.)
But after they came down, they forthwith made their accusations
shamelessly and with more vehemence: and not having been able to convict
him on grounds relating to the Law, they again according to their custom
stirred the question about Cæsar, being just what they did in Christ’s
case. For that they had recourse to this is manifest by the fact, that
Paul defends himself on the score of offences against Cæsar. “And when
he was come, the Jews which came down from Jerusalem stood round about,
and laid many and grievous complaints against Paul, which they could not
prove. While he answered for himself, Neither against the law of the
Jews, neither against the temple, nor yet against Cæsar, have I offended
anything at all. But Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure, answered
Paul, and said, Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these things before me”? ([Acts
25.7-9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007)<span id="vi.li-p6.5"></span>.)
Wherefore he too gratifies the Jews, the whole people, and the city.
Such being the case, Paul terrifies him also, using a human weapon for
his defence. “Then said Paul, I stand at Cæsar’s judgment seat, where I
ought to be judged; to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well
knowest. For if I be an offender, or have committed anything worthy of
death, I refuse not to die: but if there be none of these things whereof
these accuse me, no man may deliver me unto them. I appeal unto Cæsar.”
([Acts 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011)<span id="vi.li-p6.6"></span>.)
Some one might say, How is it, that having been told, “Thou must also
bear witness of Me in Rome,” ([Acts
23.11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span id="vi.li-p6.7"></span>),
he, as if unbelieving, did this? God forbid: nay, he did it, because he
so strongly believed. For it would have been a tempting of God to be
bold on account of that declaration, and to cast himself into numberless
dangers, and to say: “Let us see if God is able even thus to deliver
me.” But not so does Paul; no, he does his part, all that in him lies,
committing the whole to God. Quietly also he reproves the governor: for,
“If, says he, I am an offender, thou doest well: but if not, why dost
thou give me up?” “No man,” he says, “may sacrifice me.” He put him in
fear, so that even if he wished, he could not sacrifice him to them;
while also as an excuse to them he had Paul’s appeal to allege. “Then
Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, Hast thou
appealed unto Cæsar? unto Cæsar shalt thou go. And after certain days
king Agrippa and Bernice came unto Cæsarea to salute Festus.” ([Acts
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013)<span id="vi.li-p6.8"></span>.)
Observe, he communicates the matter to Agrippa, so that there should be
other hearers once more, both the king, and the army, and Bernice.
Thereupon a speech in his exculpation. “And when they had been there
many days, Festus declared Paul’s cause unto the king, saying, There is
a certain man left in bonds by Felix: about whom, when I was at
Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me,
desiring to have judgment against him. To whom I answered, It is not the
manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die, before that he which is
accused have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him. Therefore, when they were
come hither, without any delay on the morrow I sat on the judgment seat,
and commanded the man to be brought forth. Against whom when the
accusers stood up, they brought none accusation of such things as I
supposed: but had certain questions against him of their own
superstition, and of one Jesus, which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be
alive. And because I doubted of such manner of questions, I asked him
whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these matters.
But when Paul had appealed to be reserved unto the hearing of Augustus,
I commanded him to be kept till I might send him to Cæsar. Then Agrippa
said unto Festus, I would also hear the man myself. Tomorrow, said he,
thou shalt hear him.” ([Acts
25.14-22](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014)<span
id="vi.li-p6.9"></span>.) And observe a crimination of the Jews, not
from Paul, but also from the governor. “Desiring,” he says, “to have
judgment against him.” To whom I said, to their shame, that “it is not
the manner of the Romans,” before giving an opportunity to speak for
himself, “to sacrifice a man.” But I did give him (such opportunity),
and I found no fault in him. “Because I doubted,” says he, of “such
manner of questions:” he casts a veil also over his own wrong. Then the
other desires to see him. (*b*) But let us look again at what has been
said. <span id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126)

<span id="vi.li-p8"></span>(Recapitulation.) “And when Felix,” etc.
([Acts 24.22](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#022)<span
id="vi.li-p8.1"></span>.) Observe on all occasions how the governors try
to keep off from themselves the annoyance of the Jews, and are often
compelled to act contrary to justice, and seek pretexts for deferring:
for of course it was not from ignorance that he deferred the cause, but
knowing it. And his wife also hears, together with the governor. ([Acts
24.24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024)<span id="vi.li-p8.2"></span>.)
This seems to me to show great honor. For he would not have brought his
wife to be present with him at the hearing, but that he thought great
things of him. It seems to me that she also longed for this. And observe
how Paul immediately discourses not only about faith, nor about
remission of sins, but also about practical points of duty. “Go thy
way,” he says, “for this time: when I have a convenient season, I will
call for thee.” ([Acts 24.25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025)<span
id="vi.li-p8.3"></span>.) Observe his hardness of heart: hearing such
things, “he hoped that he should receive money from him!” ([Acts
24.26](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#026)<span id="vi.li-p8.4"></span>.)
And not only so, but even after conversing with him—for it was towards
the end of his government—he left him bound, “willing to show the Jews a
pleasure” ([Acts 24.27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027)<span
id="vi.li-p8.5"></span>): so that he not only coveted money, but also
glory. How, O wretch, canst thou look for money from a man who preaches
the contrary? But that he did not get it, is evident from his leaving
him bound; he would have loosed him, had he received it. “Of
temperance,” it says, he reasoned; but the other was hankering to
receive money from him who discoursed these things! And to ask indeed he
did not dare: for such is wickedness: but he hoped it. “And when two
years were completed,” etc., so that it was but natural that he showed
them a pleasure, as he had been so long governor there. “Now when Festus
was come into the province,” etc. ([Acts
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#002)<span id="vi.li-p8.6"></span>.) At
the very beginning, the priests came to him, who would not have
hesitated to go even to Cæsarea, unless he had been seen immediately
coming up, since immediately on his arrival they come to him. And he
spends ten days, <span id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) in order, I
suppose, to be open to those who wished to corrupt him with bribes. But
Paul was in the prison. “They besought him,” it says, “that he would
send for him:” why did they desire it as a favor, if he was deserving of
death? But thus their plotting became evident even to him, so that
discoursing of it (to Agrippa), he says, “desiring to have judgment
against him.” They wanted to induce him to pass sentence now
immediately, being afraid of Paul’s tongue. What are ye afraid of? What
are ye in such a hurry? In fact, that expression, “that he should be
kept” <span id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128) ([Acts
25.4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004)<span id="vi.li-p10.8"></span>),
shows this. Does he want to escape? “Let them therefore,” he says,
“which among you are able, accuse him.” ([Acts
25.5](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#005)<span id="vi.li-p10.9"></span>.)
Again accusers, again at Cæsarea, again Paul is brought forth. And
having come, immediately “he sat on the judgment-seat” ([Acts
25.6](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#006)<span id="vi.li-p10.10"></span>);
with all his haste: they so drove, so hurried him. While as yet he had
not got acquainted with the Jews, nor experienced the honor paid to him
by them, he answered rightly: but now that he had been in Jerusalem ten
days, he too wants to pleasure them (by sacrificing Paul to them): then,
also to receive Paul, “Wilt thou,” says he, “be judged there of these
things by me?” ([Acts 25.9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009)<span
id="vi.li-p10.11"></span>.) I am not giving thee up to them—but this was
the fact—and he leaves the point to his own choice, that by this mark of
respect he might get him to yield: since his was the sentence, <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129) and it would have been too
barefaced, when he had been convicted of nothing here, to take him back
thither. “But Paul said, At Cæsar’s tribunal am I standing,” etc. ([Acts
25.10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010)<span id="vi.li-p11.14"></span>):
he did not say, I will not, lest he should make the judge more vehement,
but (here) again is his great boldness: They cast me out once for all,
themselves, and by this they think to condemn me, by their showing that
I have offended against Cæsar: at his bar I choose to be judged, at the
bar of the injured person himself. “To the Jews have I done no wrong, as
thou also very well knowest.” Here now he reproved him, that he too
wished to sacrifice him to the Jews: then, on the other hand, he relaxes
(the sternness of) his speech: “if then I be an offender, or have
committed anything worthy of death, I refuse not to die.” I utter
sentence against myself. For along with boldness of speech there must be
also justness of cause, so as to abash (the hearer). “But if there be
nothing in the things whereof these accuse me, no man”—however he may
wish it—“no man may sacrifice me to please them.” He said, not, I am not
worthy of death, nor, I am worthy to be acquitted, but, I am ready to
take my trial before Cæsar. At the same time too, remembering the dream,
he was the more confident to appeal. ([Acts
23.11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011)<span id="vi.li-p11.15"></span>)
And he said not, Thou (mayest not), but, neither any other man may
sacrifice me, that it might be no affront to him. “Then Festus, when he
had conferred with the council”—do you observe how he seeks to gratify
them? for this is favor—“having conferred,” it says, “with the council,
he said, Hast thou appealed unto Cæsar? unto Cæsar shalt thou go.”
([Acts 25.12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#012)<span
id="vi.li-p11.16"></span>.) See how his trial is again lengthened out,
and how the plot against him becomes an occasion for the preaching: so
that with ease and in safe custody he should be taken away to
Rome, <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130) with none to plot evil
against him: for it was not the same thing his simply coming there, and
his coming on such a cause. For, in fact this was what made the Jews
come together there. ([Acts 28.17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)<span
id="vi.li-p12.7"></span>.) Then again, some time passes while he tarries
at Jerusalem, that you may learn, that, though some time passed, the
evil design against him prevails nothing, God not permitting it. But
this king Agrippa, who was also a Herod, was a different Agrippa, after
him of James’ time, so that this is the fourth (Herod). See how his
enemies coöperate with him against their will. To make the audience
large, Agrippa falls into a desire of hearing: and he does not simply
hear, but with much parade. And see what a vindication (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p12.8"></span>απολογιαν</span>)! So writes
Festus, <span id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131) and the ruthlessness
of the Jews is openly made a show of: for when it is the governor that
says these things, he is a witness above all suspicion: so that the Jews
are condemned by him also. For, when all had pronounced sentence against
them, then, and not sooner, God brings upon them the punishment. But
observe: Lysias gave it against them, Felix against them, Festus against
them—although he wished to gratify them <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132) —Agrippa against them. What
further? The Pharisees—even they gave it against themselves. No evil,
says Festus, “of such things as I supposed: no accusation did they bring
against him.” ([Acts 25.18](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#018)<span
id="vi.li-p14.4"></span>.) And yet they did bring it: true, but they did
not prove it: for their evil design and daring plot against him gave
cause to surmise this, but the examination brought out nothing of the
kind. “And of one Jesus,” he says, “which was dead.” ([Acts
25.19](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#019)<span id="vi.li-p14.5"></span>.)
He says naturally enough, “of one” (Jesus), as being a man in office,
and not caring for these things. “And not knowing, for my part, what to
make of the enquiry concerning these things” ([Acts
25.20](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#020)<span
id="vi.li-p14.6"></span>)—of course, it went beyond a judge’s hearing,
the examining into these matters. If thou art at a loss, why dost thou
drag him to Jerusalem? But the other would not deign this: no, “To
Cæsar” (says he); as in fact it was touching Cæsar that they accused
him. Do you hear the appeal? hear the plotting of the Jews? hear their
factious spirit? All these things provoked him to a desire (of hearing
him): and he gives them the gratification and Paul becomes more
renowned. For such as I said, are the ill designs (of enemies). Had not
these things been so, none of these rulers would have deigned to hear
him, none would have heard with such quietness and silence. And he seems
indeed to be teaching, he seems to be making a defence; but he rather
makes a public harangue with much orderliness. Then let us not think
that ill designs against us are a grievous thing. So long as we do not
make ill designs against ourselves, no one will be able to have ill
designs against us: or rather, people may do this, but they do us no
hurt; nay, even benefit us in the highest degree: for it rests with
ourselves, whether we shall suffer evil, or not suffer evil. Lo! I
testify, and proclaim with a loud voice, more piercing even than the
sound of a trumpet—and were it possible to ascend on high and cry aloud,
I would not shrink from doing it—him that is a Christian, none of all
the human beings that inhabit the earth will have power to hurt. And why
do I say, human beings? Not even the Evil Spirit himself, the tyrant,
the Devil, can do this, unless the man injure himself; be what it may
that any one works, in vain he works it. For even as no human being
could hurt an angel, if he were on earth, so neither can one human being
hurt another human being. But neither again will he himself be able to
hurt another, so long as he is good. What then can be equal to this,
when neither to be hurt is possible, nor to hurt another? For this thing
is not less than the former, the not wishing to hurt another. Why, that
man is a kind of angel, yea, like God. For such is God; only, He indeed
(is such) by nature, but this man, by moral choice: neither to be hurt
is possible (for either), nor to hurt another. But this thing, this “not
possible,” think not that it is for any want of power—for the contrary
to this is want of power—no, I speak of the morally incompatible (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p14.7"></span>τὸ ἀνενδεκτόν</span>). For
the (Divine) Nature is neither Itself susceptible of hurt, nor capable
of hurting another: since this very thing in itself is a hurt. For in no
other way do we hurt ourselves, than by hurting another, and our
greatest sins become such from our doing injury to ourselves. So that
for this reason also the Christian cannot be hurt, namely, because
neither can he hurt. But how in hurting others we hurt ourselves, come,
let us take this saying in hand for examination in detail. Let a man
wrong another, insult, overreach; whom then has he hurt? Is it not
himself first? This is plain to every one. For to the one, the damage is
in money, to himself, it is in the soul; to destruction, and to
punishment. Again, let another be envious: is it not himself he has
injured? For such is the nature of injustice: to its own author first it
does incalculable hurt. “Yes, <span id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133)
but to another also?” True, but nothing worth considering: or rather,
not even a little—nay, it even benefits him. For let there be,—as the
whole matter lies most in these examples,—let there be some poor man,
having but little property and (barely) provided with necessary
food, <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134) and another rich and
wealthy, and having much power, and then let him take the poor man’s
property, and strip him naked, and give him up to starvation, while he
shall luxuriate in what he has unjustly taken from the other: not only
has he not hurt that man at all—he has even benefited him, while himself
he has not only not benefited, but even hurt. For how should it be
otherwise? In the first place, harassed by an evil conscience, and day
by day condemning himself and being condemned by all men: and then,
secondly, in the judgment to come. But the other, how is he benefited?
Because to suffer ill and bear it nobly, is great gain: for it is a
doing away of sins, this suffering of ill, it is a training to
philosophy, it is a discipline of virtue. Let us see which of the two is
in evil case, this man or that. For the one, if he be a man of
well-ordered mind, will bear it nobly: the other will be every day in a
constant tremor and misgiving: which then is hurt, this man or that?
“You talk idly,” say you: “for when a man has nothing to eat, and is
forced to bewail himself and to feel himself very wretched, or comes and
begs, and gets nothing, is not that a ruining of both soul and body?”
No, it is you that talk idly: for I show facts in proof. For say, does
none of the rich feel himself wretched? What then? Is poverty the cause
of his wretchedness? “But he does not starve.” And what of that? The
greater is the punishment, when having riches he does this. For neither
does wealth make a man strong-minded, nor poverty make him weak:
otherwise none of those living in wealth would pass a wretched life, nor
would any of those in poverty (not) curse his fate. But that yours is
indeed the idle talk, I will make manifest to you from hence. Was Paul
in poverty or in wealth? did he suffer hunger, or did he not? You may
hear himself saying, “In hunger and thirst.” ([2 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="vi.li-p16.5"></span>.) Did
the prophets suffer hunger, or did they not? They too had a hard time of
it. “Again, you fetch up Paul to me, again the prophets, some ten or
twenty men.” But whence shall I bring examples? “Show me from the many
some who bear ills nobly.” But <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135) the rare is ever such: however, if
you will, let us examine the matter as it is in itself. Let us see whose
is the greater and sharper care, whose the more easy to be borne. The
one is solicitous about his necessary food, the other about numberless
matters, freed from that care. The rich man is not afraid on the score
of hunger, but he is afraid about other things: oftentimes for his very
life. The poor man is not free from anxiety about food, but he is free
from other anxieties, he has safety, has quietness, has security.

<span id="vi.li-p18"></span>If to injure another is not an evil, but a
good, wherefore are we ashamed? wherefore do we cover our faces?
Wherefore, being reproached, are we vexed and disconcerted? If the being
injured is not a good thing, wherefore do we pride ourselves, and glory
in the thing, and justify ourselves on its account? Would you learn how
this is better than that? Observe those who are in the one condition,
and those who are in the other. Wherefore are laws? Wherefore are courts
of justice? Wherefore punishments? Is it not, on account of those men,
as being diseased and unsound? But the pleasure lies great, you will
say. Let us not speak of the future: let us look into the present. What
is worse than a man who is under such a suspicion as this? what more
precarious? what more unsound? is he not always in a state of shipwreck?
Even if he do any just thing, he is not credited, condemned as he is by
all on account of his power (of injuring): for in all who dwell with him
he has accusers: he cannot enjoy friendship: for none would readily
choose to become the friend of a man who has such a character, for fear
of becoming implicated with him in the opinion held of him. As if he
were a wild beast, all men turn away from him; as from a pest, a foe, a
man-slayer, and an enemy of nature, so they shrink from the unjust man.
If he who has wronged another happen to be brought into a court of
justice, he does not even need an accuser, his character condemns him in
place of any accuser. Not so he who is injured; he has all men to take
his part, to condole with him, to stretch out the hand of help: he
stands on safe ground. If to injure another be a good and a safe thing,
let any one confess that he is unjust: but if he dares not do this, why
then does he pursue it as a good thing? But let us see in our own
persons, if his same be done there, what evils come of it: (I mean,) if
any of the parts or functions within us having overstepped its proper
bounds, grasp at the office of some other. For let the spleen, if it
will, have left its proper place, and seize on the part belonging to
some other organ along with its own, is not this disease? The moisture
within us, let it fill every place, is it not dropsy and gout? <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136) is not this to ruin itself, along
with the other? Again, let the bile seek for a wide room, and let the
blood be diffused throughout every part. But how is it in the soul with
anger, lust, and all the rest, if the food exceed its proper measure?
Again in the body, if the eye wish to take in more, or to see more than
is allotted to it, or admit a greater light than is proper. But if, when
the light is good, yet the eye is ruined, if it choose to see more than
is right: consider what it must be in the case of an evil thing. If the
ear take in a (too) loud voice, the sense is stunned: the mind, if it
reason about things above itself, it is overpowered: and whatever is in
excess, mars all. For this is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.11"></span>πλεονεξία</span>, the wanting to have more than
what is marked off and allotted. So too in respect of money; when we
will needs put upon (us) more burdens (than is meet), although we do not
perceive it, to our sore hurt we are nourishing within ourselves a wild
beast; much having, yet much wanting, numberless the cares we entangle
ourselves withal, many the handles we furnish the devil against
ourselves. In the case of the rich, however, the devil has not even need
of labor, so surely do their very concerns of business of themselves
ruin them. Wherefore I beseech you to abstain from the lust of these
things, that we may be enabled to escape the snares of the evil one, and
having taken hold of virtue, to attain unto the good things eternal,
through the grace and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the
Father and the Holy Ghost together be glory forever. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[i:1125](1110056.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="vi.li-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p5.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p5.2"></span>Ανεσις</span> better rendered “relaxation” or
“indulgence” (R.V.) than “liberty” (A.V.). Meyer understands by this
that he was to be allowed *rest,* “to be spared all annoyance.” Others
(DeWette, Lange) suppose <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p5.3"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p5.4"></span>νεσις</span> to refer to release from *chains,*
the so-called *custodia libera* of the Romans in which the prisoner went
free on bail or upon the responsibility of some magistrate. This view
is, however, inconsistent with the fact that Felix committed Paul to the
keeping of a centurion ([Acts
24.23](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#023)<span id="vi.li-p5.5"></span>) as
well as with his leaving Paul bound ([Acts
24.27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027)<span id="vi.li-p5.6"></span>).
The custody was doubtless the *custodia militaris* and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p5.7"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p5.8"></span>νεσις</span> denotes the
relaxation of the rigors of his imprisonment.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[i:1126](1110056.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="vi.li-p5.10"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p6"></span> Paul’s reasoning “concerning righteousness”
was directed against the well-known injustice of a prince of whom
Tacitus says that he acted as if there were no penalty for villainy. His
reasoning “concerning self-control” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p6.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p6.2"></span>κρατεία</span>) was in opposition to his
sensuality. He had unlawfully married Drusilla who was the wife of
Azizus, the king of Emesa (Jos. *Ant.* xx. 7, 2). His references to the
judgment to come might well have been directed against the governor’s
murder of Jonathan, the high priest.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[i:1127](1110056.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="vi.li-p6.10"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p7"></span> This formula is placed by C and mod. text
just before the text “Go thy way,” etc., [Acts
24.25](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#025)<span id="vi.li-p7.1"></span>, as
if what is said of the wife also hearing, etc., related to the hearing
before Agrippa and his wife Bernice.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[i:1128](1110056.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="vi.li-p8.7"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p9"></span> Mod. text “And having gone down in Cæsarea,
he spends ten days.” Which is evidently false, but so Edd. have
it.—<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p9.1"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p9.2"></span>στε ἐγγενέσθαι</span>,
seemingly, “to give them an opportunity of buying him.” Ben., *ut
prostaret eis qui vellent ipsum corrumpere.*

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[i:1129](1110056.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="vi.li-p9.3"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p10.1"></span>τὸ</span>, “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p10.2"></span>φυλάττεσθαι</span>;” this seems to refer to
[Acts 23.35](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#035)<span
id="vi.li-p10.3"></span>: in [Acts
25.4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004)<span id="vi.li-p10.4"></span>,
the expression is <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p10.5"></span>τηρεῖσθαι</span>. Perhaps Chrys. said, “He was
safe in custody, for Felix had ordered him <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p10.6"></span>φυλάττεσθαι</span>, and there he was still. Then
what needs this fresh order that he should <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p10.7"></span>τηρεῖσθαι</span>? He is not attempting to
escape, is he? It shows the spirit of the governor: ‘we have him safe;
come down and accuse him.’”

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[i:1130](1110056.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="vi.li-p10.12"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.2"></span>πειδὴ ἦν καὶ ἡ ἀπόφασις</span>. Mod. text and
Sav. omit the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.3"></span>καὶ</span>, Ben. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.5"></span>πειδὴ εἰ ἦν ἀπόφασις</span>, with no authority
of <span class="c14"><span id="vi.li-p11.6"></span>mss.</span> We have
marked the clause as corrupt. Possibly, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.7"></span>καλὴ πρόφασις</span> is latent in the words,
with the sense “since some handsome pretext was necessary” (or the
like): or, perhaps, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.8"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.9"></span>πειδὴ Καί</span>\[<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.10"></span>σαρος</span>\] ἦ<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p11.11"></span>ν ἡ ἀπόφασις</span>, as comment upon the
clause, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p11.12"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p11.13"></span>Επὶ τοῦ βήματος Καίσαρος
ἑστώς εἰμι</span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[i:1131](1110056.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="vi.li-p11.17"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p12.1"></span>εἰς τὰ ᾽Ιεροσόλυμα</span> all our <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.li-p12.2"></span>mss.</span>, and so Edd.
without remark. Yet the sense plainly requires <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p12.3"></span>εἰς ῾Ρώμην</span>, and in fact the Catena has
preserved the true reading. In the next sentence, he seems to be
commenting upon the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p12.4"></span>πλείους ἡμέρας</span> of [Acts
25.14](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014)<span id="vi.li-p12.5"></span> to
this effect: “See how his cause is lengthened out by all these delays:
the time (ten days) of Festus’ stay at Jerusalem; then the second
hearing; now again, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p12.6"></span>πλείους ἡμέρας</span>: but for all this, his
enemies are not able to effect their design.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[i:1132](1110056.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="vi.li-p12.9"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p13"></span> Alluding to [Acts
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#027)<span id="vi.li-p13.1"></span>
(which mod. text inserts here): i.e. “to this same effect Festus also
writes, in his report to the Emperor.”

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[i:1133](1110056.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="vi.li-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p14"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p14.1"></span>καὶ οἱ χαριζόμενοι αὐτοῖς</span>, <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.li-p14.2"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. we
restore from the Catena <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p14.3"></span>καίτοι χαριζόμενος αὐτοῖς</span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[i:1134](1110056.htm#fr_1133) <span
id="vi.li-p14.8"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p15.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p15.2"></span>Αλλὰ καὶ ἕτερον· ἀλλ᾽ οὐδὲν ἀξιόπιστον· μᾶλλον
δὲ οὐδὲ μικρόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ ὠφλεῖ</span>. So B. C.; in A. all this is
omitted, Mod. text—“incalculable mischief, but little to another, or
rather not even a little does it hurt, nay even benefits. But I have
said nothing worthy of belief <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p15.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p15.4"></span>λλ᾽ οὐδὲν ἀξιόπιστον εἴρηκα</span>. Well then,
let there be,” etc.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[i:1135](1110056.htm#fr_1134) <span
id="vi.li-p15.5"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p16.1"></span>χρήματα ἔχων ὀλίγα καὶ τῆς ἀναγκαίας εὐπορῶν
τροφῆς, ἕτερος δὲ πλούσιος καὶ εὔπορος</span>. So the <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.li-p16.2"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. without
comment. We assume it to be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p16.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p16.4"></span>πορῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[i:1136](1110056.htm#fr_1135) <span
id="vi.li-p16.6"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p17.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p17.2"></span>Αλλὰ τὸ σπάνιον ἀεὶ τοιοῦτον</span>. One would
expect <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p17.3"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p17.4"></span>Αλλὰ σπάνιον ἀεὶ τὸ
τοιοῦτον</span>.—Mod. text adds, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p17.5"></span>καὶ ὀλίγοι οἱ καλοί</span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[i:1137](1110056.htm#fr_1136) <span
id="vi.li-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.li-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.1"></span>καὶ ποδαλγία</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.2"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.3"></span>οὐχὶ ἑαυτὸν συνδιέφθειρε μετ᾽
ἐκείνου</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.4"></span>;</span>ἡ <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.5"></span>χολὴ πάλιν εὐρυχωρίαν ζητείτω</span>. Mod. text
“is not this dropsy? <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.6"></span>μετ᾽ ἐκείνου ἡ χολὴ κ. τ. λ</span>. and below
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p19.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p19.8"></span>ὰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.li-p19.9"></span>ν ὑπερβῇ τὸ μέτρον, οὐχὶ
ἑαυτὸν συνδιέφθειρε</span>; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.li-p19.10"></span>οὕτω καὶ ἡ τροφή</span>. adding, “if it be
taken beyond what can be digested, it involves the body in diseases. For
whence comes the gout? whence the paralyzing and commotion of the body?
Is it not from the immediate quantity of aliments? Again in the body,”
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily LII on Acts xxv. 23.](1110057)
