[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110045)  [Next](1110047) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.xli"></span> <span id="vi.xli-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.xli-p1.1"></span>Homily XLI.</span>

<span id="vi.xli-p2"></span>[Acts
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)<span id="vi.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p3"></span>“And he went into the synagogue, and spake
boldly for the space of three months, disputing and persuading the
things concerning the kingdom of God. But when divers were hardened, and
believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he
departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the
school of one Tyrannus.”

<span id="vi.xli-p4"></span>(*a*) <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xli-p4.1"></span>See</span> him in every place forcing his way
into the synagogue, and in this manner departing thence. For in every
place, he wished to have the occasion given him by them. <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) (*c*) He wished to separate the
disciples thence, and to have the beginning for ceasing to assemble with
them, given by (the Jews) themselves. And it was not for nothing that he
did this (*b*) which I have said. He was henceforth “provoking them to
jealousy.” For both the Gentiles readily received him, and the Jews,
upon the Gentiles receiving him, repented. (*a*) This is why he
continually made a stir among them, <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) “for three months arguing and
persuading concerning the kingdom of God:” for you must not suppose
because you hear of his “speaking boldly,” that there was any harshness:
it was of good things that he discoursed, of a kingdom: who would not
have heard him? “But when divers were hardened, speaking evil of the
way.” They might well call it “the way;” this was indeed the way, that
led into the kingdom of heaven. “He departed from them, and separated
the disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And this
was done for the space of two years, so that all that were in Asia heard
the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks.” ([Acts
19.10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010)<span id="vi.xli-p6.13"></span>.)
(*a*) Do you mark how much was effected by his persisting? <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) “Both Jews and Greeks heard: (*c*) all
that dwelt in Asia:” it was for this also that the Lord suffered him not
to go into Asia ([Acts 16.6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006)<span
id="vi.xli-p7.8"></span>) (on a former occasion); waiting, as it seems
to me, for this same conjuncture. (Hom. xl. p. 245.) (*b*) “And God
wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his body
were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases
departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.” ([Acts
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#012)<span id="vi.xli-p7.9"></span>.)
Not touched the wearer only (and so were healed), but also receiving
them, they laid them upon the sick (and so healed them). <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) (*g*) “He that believeth on Me,” saith
Christ, “doeth greater works than those which I do.” (<span
id="vi.xli-p8.5"></span>[John xiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#012)<span id="vi.xli-p8.6"></span>.)
This, and the miracle of the shadows is what He meant (in those words).
(*d*) “Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to
call over them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus,
saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.” ([Acts
19.13](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#013)<span id="vi.xli-p8.7"></span>.)
So entirely did they do all by way of trade! Observe: vagabond, or,
itinerant, Jewish exorcists. And to believe indeed, they had no mind;
but by that Name they wished to cast out the demons. “By Jesus, whom
Paul preacheth.” Only see what a name Paul had got! “And there were
seven sons of one Sceva, a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so.
And the evil spirit answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know;
but who are ye? And the man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them,
and overcame them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of
that house naked and wounded.” ([Acts
19.14-16](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xli-p8.8"></span>.) They did it in secret: then their impotence
is publicly exposed. (*f*) Then not the Name does anything, unless it be
spoken with faith. (*h*) See how they used their weapons against
themselves! (*j*) So far were they from thinking Jesus to be anything
great: no, they must needs add Paul, as thinking him to be something
great. Here one may marvel how it was that the demon did not cooperate
with the imposture of the exorcists, but on the contrary exposed them,
and laid open their stage-play. He seems to me (to have done this) in
exceeding wrath: just as it might be, if a person being in uttermost
peril, should be exposed by some pitiful creature, and wish to vent all
his rage upon him. “Jesus I know, and Paul I know.” For, that there may
not seem to be any slight put upon the Name of Jesus, (the demon) first
confesses (Him), and then has permission given him. For, to show that it
was not any weakness of the Name, but all owing to the imposture of
those men, why did not the same take place in the case of Paul? “They
fled out of that house naked and wounded:” he sorely battered their
heads, perhaps rent their garments. (*e*) “And this became known to all,
both Jews and Greeks, that dwelt at Ephesus, and fear fell upon them
all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many of them that
had believed came confessing and making known their practices.” ([Acts
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#018)<span id="vi.xli-p8.9"></span>.)
For since they had got to possess such power as, by means of the demons,
to do such things, well might this be the consequence. “And many of them
that practised curious arts, brought their books together, and burnt
them in the presence of all men;”—having seen that there was no more use
of them now that the demons themselves do these things—“and reckoned up
the price of them, and found the amount fifty thousand pieces of
silver. <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) So mightily grew the
word of God and prevailed.” ([Acts
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020)<span id="vi.xli-p9.4"></span>.)
(*i*) “And” <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) (so) “he disputed,”
in the school of one Tyrannus for two years:” where were believers, and
believers exceedingly (advanced in the faith). Moreover (Paul) writes
(to them) as to great men.

<span id="vi.xli-p11"></span>(Recapitulation.) (*b*) “And having entered
in to the synagogue,” etc. ([Acts
19.8](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#008)<span id="vi.xli-p11.1"></span>.)
But <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) why <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p12.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p12.2"></span>παρρησιάζετο</span>? It
means, he was ready to confront dangers, and disputed more openly, not
veiling the doctrines. (*a*) “But when some were hardened, and spake
evil of the way, having departed from them, he separated the disciples.”
([Acts 19.9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xli-p12.3"></span>.) He put a stop, it means, to their
evil-speaking: he did not wish to kindle their envy, nor to bring them
into more contention. (*c*) Hence let us also learn not to put ourselves
in the way of evil-speaking men, but to depart from them: he did not
speak evil, when himself evil spoken of. “He disputed daily,” and by
this gained the many, that, being evil intreated and (evil) spoken of,
he did not (utterly) break away from them, and keep aloof. (*e*) The
evil-speakers are defeated. They calumniated the doctrine itself;
(therefore) so as neither to rouse the disciples to wrath, nor \* \*
them, he withdrew, <span id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) showing that
everywhere alike they repel salvation from them. Here now he does not
even apologize, seeing that the Gentiles everywhere have believed. “In
the school of one Tyrannus:” it was not that he sought the place, but
without more ado where there was a school (there he discoursed). <span
id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) (*d*) And look, no sooner is the trial
from those without over, than this from the demons begins. Mark the
infatuated Jewish hardness. Having seen his garments working miracles,
they paid no heed to it. What could be greater than this? But, on the
contrary, it resulted in just the opposite effect. If any of the
heathens believe not, having seen the (very) dust working these effects,
let him believe. <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) (*f*)
Wonderful, how great the power of them that have believed! Both Simon
for the sake of merchandise sought the grace of the Spirit, and these
for this object did this. What hardness (of heart)! Why does not Paul
rebuke them? It would have looked like envy, therefore it is so ordered.
This same took place in the case of Christ (<span
id="vi.xli-p15.5"></span>[Mark ix.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036)<span id="vi.xli-p15.6"></span>):
but then the person is not hindered, for it was the beginning of the new
state of things: since Judas also is not hindered, whereas Ananias and
Sapphira were struck dead: and many Jews even for opposing (Christ)
suffered nothing, while Elymas was blinded. “For I am not come,” saith
Christ, “to judge the world, but that the world might be saved.” ([John
iii. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#017)<span
id="vi.xli-p15.7"></span>.) “And seven sons,” etc. ([Acts
19.14](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#014)<span id="vi.xli-p15.8"></span>.)
See the villany of the men! They still continued to be Jews, while
wishing to make a gain of that Name. All that they did was for glory and
profit. (*g*) Look, <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) in every
case, how men are converted not so much in consequence of good things as
of things fearful. In the case of Sapphira, fear fell upon the Church,
and men dared not join themselves to them: here they received
handkerchiefs and aprons, and were healed: and after this, then they
came confessing their sins. (Hereby) the power of the demons is shown to
be a great one, when it is against unbelievers. For why did he not say,
“Who is Jesus?” He was afraid, lest he also should suffer punishment;
but, that it might be permitted him to take revenge upon those who
mocked him, he did this; “Jesus,” says he, “I know,” etc. He was in
dread of Paul. For why did not those wretched men say to him, We
believe? How much more splendid an appearance they would have made had
they said this, that is, if they had claimed Him as their Master? But
instead of that, they spoke even those senseless words, “By Jesus, whom
Paul preacheth.” Do you mark the forbearance (of the writer), how he
writes history and does not call names? This makes the Apostles
admirable. “And the evil spirit,” etc. ([Acts
19.15](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#015)<span id="vi.xli-p16.3"></span>),
for what had happened at Philippi ([Acts
16.16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016)<span id="vi.xli-p16.4"></span>)
had given a lesson to these also. He mentions the name, and the number,
thereby giving to the persons then living a credible proof of what he
wrote. And why were they itinerant? For the sake of merchandise: not
assuredly to bear tidings of the word; how should that be their object?
And <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) how ran they anon, preaching
by the things they suffered? “Insomuch,” it says, “that all that dwelt
in Asia heard the word of the Lord.” Ought not this to have converted
all? And marvel not, for nothing convinces malice. But come now, let us
look at the affair of the exorcists, with what an evil disposition (they
acted). Why the same was not done in the case of Christ, is an inquiry
for another time, and not for the present, save that this also was well
and usefully ordered. It seems to me that they did this also in mockery,
and that in consequence of this (punishment), none dared even at random
to name that Name. Why did this put them upon confession? Because this
was a most mighty argument of God’s omniscience (therefore), before they
should be exposed by the demons, they accused themselves, fearing lest
they should suffer the same things. For when the demons their helpers
are their accusers, what hope is there thenceforth, save the confession
by deeds?

<span id="vi.xli-p18"></span>But see, I pray you, after such signs had
been wrought, what evils within a short space ensue. Such is human
nature: it soon forgets. Or, do ye not remember what has been the case
among ourselves? Did not God last year shake our whole city? <span
id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) Did not all run to baptism? Did not
whoremongers and effeminate and corrupt persons leave their dwellings,
and the places where they spent their time, and change and become
religious? But three days passed, and they returned again to their own
proper wickedness. And whence is this? From the excessive laziness. And
what marvel if, when the things have passed away (this be the case),
seeing that, the images lasting perpetually, the result is such? The
fate of Sodom—say, does it not still last (in its effects)? <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) Well, did the dwellers beside it
become any the better? And what say you to the son of Noah? Was he not
such (as he is represented), did he not see with his eyes so vast a
desolation, and yet was wicked? Then let us not marvel how, when such
things had been done, these Jews (at Ephesus) believe not, when we see
that belief itself often comes round for them into its opposite, <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) into malignity; as, for instance, when
they say that He hath a devil, He, the Son of God! Do you not see these
things even now, and how men are many of them like serpents, both
faithless and thankless, men who, viper-like, when they have enjoyed
benefits and have been warmed by some, then they sting their
benefactors? This we have said, lest any should marvel, how, such signs
having been wrought, they were not all converted. For behold, in our own
times happened those (miracles) relating to the martyr Babylas, <span
id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) those relating to Jerusalem, those
relating to the destruction of the temples, and not all were converted.
Why need I speak of ancient things? I have told you what happened last
year; and none gave heed to it, but again little by little they fell off
and sunk back. The heaven stands perpetually crying aloud that it has a
Master, and that it is the work of an Artificer, all this that we see—I
mean the world—and yet some say that it is not so. What happened to that
Theodorus last year—whom did it not startle? And yet nothing came of it,
but having for a season become religious, they returned to the point
from which they had started in their attempt to be religious. So it was
with the Jews. This is what the Prophet said of them: “When He slew
them, then they sought Him, and turned early unto God.” (<span
id="vi.xli-p22.2"></span>[Ps. lxxviii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)<span id="vi.xli-p22.3"></span>.)
And what need to speak of those things that are common to all? How many
have fallen into diseases, how many have promised, if raised up, to work
so great a change, and yet they have again become the same as ever!
This, if nothing else, shows that we have natural free-will—our changing
all at once. Were evil natural, this would not be: things that are
natural and necessary, we cannot change from. “And yet,” you will say,
“we do change from them. For do we not see some, who have the natural
faculty to see, but are blinded by fear?” (True—) because this also is
natural: \* \* if a different (necessity of) nature come not also into
operation: <span id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) (thus) it is natural
to us, that being terrified we do not see; it is natural to us that when
a greater fear supervenes, the other gives way. “What then,” you will
say, “if right-mindedness <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) be
indeed according to nature, but fear having overpowered it cast it out?”
What then if I shall show that some even then are not brought to a right
mind, but even in these fears are reckless? Is this natural? Shall I
speak of ancient things? Well then, of recent? How many in the midst of
those fears continued laughing, mocking, and experienced nothing of the
sort? Did not Pharaoh change immediately, and (as quickly) run back to
his former wickedness? But here, as if (the demons) knew Him not, they
(the exorcists) added, “Whom Paul preacheth,” whereas they ought to have
said, “the Saviour of the world.” “Him that rose again.” By this they
show that they do know, but they did not choose to confess His glory.
Wherefore the demon exposes them, leaping upon them, and saying, “Jesus
I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye?” So that not ye are believers,
but ye abuse that Name when ye say this. Therefore the Temple is
desolate, <span id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) the implement easy to
be overcome. So that ye are not preachers; mine, says he, ye are. Great
was the wrath of the demon. The Apostles had power to do this to them,
but they did it not as yet. For they that had power over the demons that
did these things to them, much more had power over the men themselves.
Mark how their forbearance is shown, in that they whom they repulsed do
these things, while the demons whom they courted do the contrary.
“Jesus,” says he, “I know.” Be ashamed, ye that are ignorant (of Him).
“And Paul I know.” Well said, “Think not that it is because I despise
them, that I do these things.” Great was the fear of the demon. And why
without these words did he not rend their garments? For so he would both
have sated his wrath, and established the delusion. He feared as I said,
the unapproachable force, and would not have had such power had he not
said this. But observe how we find the demons everywhere more right
minded (than the Jews), not daring to contradict nor accuse the
Apostles, or Christ. There they say, “We know Thee who Thou art” ([Matt.
viii. 29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)<span
id="vi.xli-p25.1"></span>); and, “Why art Thou come hither before the
time to torment us” (<span id="vi.xli-p25.2"></span>[Mark i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#024)<span id="vi.xli-p25.3"></span>):
and again, “I know Thee who Thou art, the Son of God.” And here, “These
men are servants of the most high God” ([Acts
16.17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017)<span id="vi.xli-p25.4"></span>):
and again, “Jesus I know, and Paul I know.” For they exceedingly feared
and trembled before those holy persons. Perhaps some one of you, hearing
of these things, wishes he were possessed of this power, so that the
demons should not be able to look him in the face, and accounts those
saints happy for this, that they had such power. But let him hear Christ
saying, “Rejoice not because the demons are subject unto you” ([Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="vi.xli-p25.5"></span>),
because He knew that all men rejoice most in this, through vainglory.
For if thou seekest that which pleaseth God, and that which is for the
common good, there is another, a greater way. It is not so great to free
from a demon as it is to rescue from sin. A demon hinders not to attain
unto the kingdom of Heaven, nay, even cooperates, unwillingly indeed,
but nevertheless cooperates by making him that has the demon more
sober-minded; but sin casts a man out.

<span id="vi.xli-p26"></span>But it is likely some man will say, “God
forbid it should ever befall me to be sobered in this way!” Nor do I
wish it for you, but a very different way, that you should do all from
love of Christ: if however, which God forbid, it should so befall you,
then even on this behalf I would comfort you. If then the demon does not
cast out (from the kingdom of heaven), but sin does cast out, to free a
man from sin is greater beneficence.

<span id="vi.xli-p27"></span>From this let us study to free our
neighbors, and before our neighbors, our own selves. Let us see to it,
lest we have a demon: let us examine ourselves strictly. More grievous
than a demon is sin, for the demon makes men humble. See ye not those
possessed with a demon, when they have recovered from the attack, how
downcast they are, of how sad a countenance, how fraught with shame
their faces are, how they have not even courage to look one in the face?
See the strange inconsistency! While those are ashamed on account of the
things they suffer, we are not ashamed on account of the things we do;
while they are abashed being wronged, we are not abashed when doing
wrong: and yet their condition is not a subject for shame, but for pity
and tenderness and indulgence: nay, great is the admiration it calls
for, and many the praises, when struggling against such a spirit, they
bear all thankfully: whereas our condition in very deed is a subject for
ridicule, for shame, for accusation, for correction, for punishment, for
the worst of evils, for hell-fire; calling for no compassion whatever.
Seest thou, that worse than a demon is sin? And those indeed, from the
ills they suffer, reap a double profit: first, their being sobered and
brought to more self-control; then, that having suffered here the
chastisement of their own sins, they depart hence to their Master,
purified. For indeed upon this we have often discoursed to you, that
those who are punished here, if they bear it thankfully, may naturally
be supposed to put away thereby many of their sins. Whereas from sins
the mischief resulting is twofold; first, that we offend; secondly, that
we become worse. Attend to what I say. Not this is the only injury we
get from sin, that we commit a sin: but another and a worse is this,
that our soul receives a habit. Just as it is in the case of the
body—for it will be more plain when put in the form of an example—as he
who has taken a fever has got harm not only in this respect, that he is
sick, but also that after the sickness he is become weaker, even though
he may return to health after a long disease: just so in the case of
sin, though we may regain health, yet we are far from having the
strength we need. For <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) take the
case of one who has been insolently abusive: does he not suffer his
deserts for his abusive conduct? Aye, but there is another and a worse
thing to rue (which is), that his soul is become more insensible to
shame. For from each several sin that is committed, even after the sin
has been done and has ceased, there remains a kind of venom instilled
into our souls. Do you not hear people saying, when they are recovered
from sickness, “I dare not drink water now?” And yet the man has
regained his health: aye, but the disease has done him this harm also.
And whereas those (possessed) persons, albeit suffering ill, are
thankful, we, when faring well, blaspheme God, and think ourselves very
ill used: for you will find more persons behaving thus in health and
wealth than in poverty and sickness. For there stands the demon over
(the possessed), like a very hangman, fierce, uttering many (menaces),
even as a schoolmaster brandishing the lash, and not suffering them to
give way to any laxity. And suppose that some are not at all brought to
a sober mind, neither are these liable to punishment; <span
id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) no small thing this: even as fools,
even as madmen and children, are not called to account, so neither are
these: since for things that are done in a state of unconsciousness,
none can be so merciless as to call the doers to account. Why then, in a
far worse condition than those who are possessed of evil sprits are we
that sin. We do not, indeed, foam at the mouth, nor distort our eyes, or
throw about our hands convulsively; but as for this, would that we did
it in our body and not in our soul! Will you that I show you a soul,
foaming, filthy, and a distortion of the mind’s eyes? Think of those who
are in a passion and drunken with rage; can any form be filthier than
the words they discharge? In very deed it is like a sputtering of
noisome slaver. And just as the possessed know none of those who are
present, so neither do these. Their understanding darkened, their eyes
distorted, they see not who is friend, who foe, who worthy of respect,
who contemptible, but they see all alike without a difference. And then,
do you not see them, how they tremble, just like those others? But they
do not fall to the ground, say you? True, but their soul lies on the
ground and falls there in convulsions: since had it stood upright, it
would not have come into the condition it is in. Or think you not that
it betokens a soul abjectly sprawling and lost to all self-possession,
the things men can do and say when drunken with rage? There is also
another form of madness worse than this. What may this be? When men
cannot so much as suffer themselves to vent their anger, but instead of
that nourish within their own bosoms, to their own proper hurt, <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) as it were a very hangman with his
lash, the rancorous remembrance of wrongs. For it is a bane to
themselves first, the malice that they bear. To say nothing of the
things to come, what torture, think you, must that man undergo in the
scourging of his soul, as day by day he looks how he may avenge himself
on his enemy? He chastises himself first, and suffers punishment,
swelling (with suppressed passion), fighting against himself, setting
himself on fire. For needs must the fire be always burning within thee:
while raising the fever to such a height, and not suffering it to wane,
thou thinkest thou art inflicting some evil on the other, whereas thou
art wasting thyself, ever bearing about with thee a flame which is
always at its height, and not letting thy soul have rest, but evermore
being in a state of fury, and having thy thoughts in a turmoil and
tempest. What is more grievous than this madness, to be always smarting
with pain, and ever swelling and inflamed? For such are the souls of the
resentful: when they see him on whom they wish to be revenged,
straightway it is as if a blow were struck them: if they hear his voice,
they cower and tremble: if they be on their bed, they picture to
themselves numberless revenges, hanging, torturing that enemy of theirs:
and if, beside all this, they see him also to be in renown, O! the
misery they suffer! Forgive him the offence, and free thyself from the
torment. Why continue always in a state of punishment, that thou mayest
once punish him, and take thy revenge? Why establish for thyself a
hectic disease? <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) Why, when thy
wrath would fain depart from thee, dost thou keep it back? Let it not
remain until the evening, says Paul. ([Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="vi.xli-p31.11"></span>.)
For like some eating rot or moth, even so does it gnaw through the very
root of our understanding. Why shut up a beast within thy bowels? Better
a serpent or an adder to lie within thy heart, than anger and
resentment: for those indeed would soon have done with us, but this
remains forever fixing in us its fangs, instilling its poison, letting
loose upon us an invading host of bitter thoughts. “That he should laugh
me to scorn,” say you, “that he should despise me!” <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) O wretched, miserable man, wouldest
thou not be ridiculed by thy fellow-servant, and wouldest thou be hated
by thy Master? Wouldest thou not be despised by thy fellow-servant, and
despisest thou thy Master?

<span id="vi.xli-p33"></span>To be despised by him, is it more than thou
canst bear, but thinkest thou not that God is indignant, because thou
ridiculest Him, because thou despisest Him, when thou wilt not do as He
bids thee? But that thine enemy will not even ridicule thee, is manifest
from hence (that), whereas if thou follow up the revenge, great is the
ridicule, great the contempt, for this is a mark of a little mind; on
the contrary, if thou forgive him, great is the admiration, for this is
a mark of greatness of soul. But you will say, he knows not this. Let
God know it, that thou mayest have the greater reward. For He says,
“Lend to those of whom ye hope not to receive.” (<span
id="vi.xli-p33.1"></span>[Luke vi.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034)<span id="vi.xli-p33.2"></span>.) So
let us also do good to those who do not even perceive that one is doing
them good, that they may not, by returning to us praise or any other
thing, lessen our reward. For when we receive nothing from men, then we
shall receive greater things from God. But what is more worthy of
ridicule, what more paltry, than a soul which is always in anger, and
wishing to take revenge? It is womanly, this disposition, it is babyish.
For as the babes are angry even with lifeless things, and unless the
mother beats the ground, they will not let go their anger: <span
id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973) so do these persons wish to revenge
themselves on those who have aggrieved them. Why then, it is they who
are worthy of ridicule: for to be overcome by passion, is the mark of a
childish understanding, but to overcome it, is a sign of manliness. Why
then, not we are the objects of ridicule, when we keep our temper, but
they. It is not this that makes men contemptible—not to be conquered by
passion: what makes them contemptible is this—to be so afraid of
ridicule from without, as on this account to choose to subject one’s
self to one’s besetting passion, and to offend God, and take revenge
upon one’s self. These things are indeed worthy of ridicule. Let us flee
them. Let a man say, that having done us numberless ills, he has
suffered nothing in return: let him say that he might again frantically
assault us, and have nothing to fear. Why, in no other (better) way
could he have proclaimed our virtue; no other words would he have
sought, if he had wished to praise us, than those which he seems to say
in abuse. Would that all men said these things of me: “he is a poor tame
creature; all men heap insults on him, but he bears it: all men trample
upon him, but he does not avenge himself.” Would that they added,
“neither, if he should wish to do so, can he:” that so I might have
praise from God, and not from men. Let him say, that it is for want of
spirit that we do not avenge ourselves. This does us no hurt, when God
knows (all): it does but cause our treasure to be in greater safety. If
we are to have regard to them, we shall fall away from everything. Let
us not look to what they say, but to what becomes us. But, says he, “Let
no man ridicule me,” and some make a boast of this. O! what folly! “No
man,” says he, “having injured me, has ridiculed me:” that is, “I had my
revenge.” And yet for this thou deservest to be ridiculed, that thou
didst take revenge. Whence came these words among us—being, as they are,
a disgrace to us and a pest, an overthrow of our own proper life and of
our discipline? It is in downright opposition to God that thou (so)
speakest. The very thing which makes thee equal to God—the not avenging
thyself—this thou thinkest a subject for ridicule! Are not we for these
things worthy to be laughed at, both by ourselves, and by the heathen,
when we thus speak against God? I wish to tell you a story of a thing
that happened in the old times (which they tell) not on the subject of
anger, but of money. A man had an estate in which there was a hidden
treasure, unknown to the owner: this piece of ground he sold. The buyer,
when digging it for the purpose of planting and cultivation, found the
treasure therein deposited, and came <span
id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) and wanted to oblige the seller to
receive the treasure, urging that he had bought a piece of ground, not a
treasure. The seller on his part repudiated the gift, saying, “The piece
of ground (is not mine), I have sold it, and I have no concern whatever
with this (treasure).” So they fell to altercation about it, the one
wishing to give it, the other standing out against receiving it. So
chancing upon some third person, they argued the matter before him, and
said to him, “To whom ought the treasure to be assigned?” The man could
not settle that question; he said, however, that he would put an end to
their dispute—he would (if they pleased) be master of it himself. So he
received the treasure, which they willingly gave up to him; and in the
sequel got into troubles without end, and learnt by actual experience
that they had done well to have nothing to do with it. So ought it be
done likewise with regard to anger; both ourselves ought to be
emulous <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) not to take revenge, and
those who have aggrieved us, emulous to give satisfaction. But perhaps
these things also seem to be matter of ridicule: for when that madness
is widely prevalent among men, those who keep their temper are laughed
at, and among many madmen he who is not a madman seems to be mad.
Wherefore I beseech you that we may recover (from this malady), and come
to our senses, that becoming pure from this pernicious passion, we may
be enabled to attain unto the kingdom of heaven, through the grace and
mercy of His only-begotten Son, with Whom to the Father, together with
the Holy Spirit, be glory, might, honor, now and ever, world without
end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_949"></span>[i:950](1110046.htm#fr_949) <span
id="vi.xli-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p5"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="vi.xli-p5.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p5.2"></span>Πανταχοῦ γὰρ παῤ αὐτῶν ἐβούλετο λαβεῖν ἀφορμὴν,
ὅπερ ἔφην. Τά τε γὰρ ἔθνη παρεζήλου λοιπὸν καὶ ῥαδίως κ. τ. λ</span>. In
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p5.3"></span>παρεζήλου</span> there
is an allusion to [Rom. xi. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)<span
id="vi.xli-p5.4"></span>, “if by any means I may provoke them to
jealousy:” its subject therefore should be “the Apostle” (*nam et gentes
exstimulabat jam,* Erasm.) “he was henceforth provoking to jealousy,
being what he said to the Romans, “If by any means I may provoke,” etc.,
not “the Gentiles,” as Ben. makes it, *nam gentes jam zelo fervebant.*
Besides transposing the parts *b, c,* we read, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p5.5"></span>Παρεζήλου λοιπόν. Τά τε γὰρ ἔθυη
ῥαδίως</span>.…But perhaps it should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p5.6"></span>Παρεζήλου λοιπὸν, ὅπερ ἔφη</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p5.7"></span>“</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p5.8"></span>Εἰ πῶς παραζηλώσω κ. τ.
λ</span>.”

<span id="fn_950"></span>[i:951](1110046.htm#fr_950) <span
id="vi.xli-p5.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p6.1"></span>Διὰ τοῦτο ἐνοχλεῖ</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.2"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.3"></span>νώχλει</span> Sav.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.4"></span>αὐτοῖς συνεχῶς
μεταπείθων</span>, old text, retained by Saville. He is explaining why
St. Paul still resorted to the synagogues, though an unwelcome visitant.
He wished to separate the Church from the Synagogue: but he would not
himself take the first step towards this. It must be the act of the
Jews. Therefore until they by their outrageous conduct obliged him to
depart, he kept on troubling them with his presence (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.5"></span>εἰσωθοῦντα, ἠνώχλει</span>).
Not that his discourse was harsh: that word, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p6.6"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p6.7"></span>παρρησ</span>., does not mean this, but that he
spoke freely and without reserve. (Recapitulation)—The unusual word
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.8"></span>μεταπείθων</span> is
probably a corruption of the abbreviation of the text-words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.9"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.10"></span>πὶ μῆνας τρεῖς διαλεγ. καὶ
πείθων</span>, which the reporter may have written thus, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.11"></span>μ. τ. πείθων</span>.—Mod.
text substitutes <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p6.12"></span>Διὰ
τοῦτο διελέγετο αὐτοῖς συνεχῶς ὅτι ἔπειθε</span>.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[i:952](1110046.htm#fr_951) <span
id="vi.xli-p6.14"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p7.1"></span>πόσον ἤνυσεν ἡ ἐπιστασία</span>. Cat., <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p7.3"></span>ποστασία</span>, with
reference to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p7.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p7.5"></span>ποστὰς</span> in [Acts
19.9](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#009)<span
id="vi.xli-p7.6"></span>.—The letters marking the order in which the
parts are given in the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xli-p7.7"></span>mss.</span> will show the extreme confusion into
which the notes of this Homily have fallen.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[i:953](1110046.htm#fr_952) <span
id="vi.xli-p7.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p8.1"></span>Οὐχὶ φοροῦντες ἥπτοντο μόνον</span>. Edd. i.e.,
“The process was not only this, that persons bearing these things, by
touching the sick healed them, but the things themselves simply laid
upon the sick were effectual for their healing.” But A. C. Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p8.2"></span>φοροῦντος</span>, which is
much better: “It was not only that they touched him (the Apostle)
wearing these things”—viz. as the woman was healed by touching the hem
of Christ’s garment—“but receiving them, they laid them upon the sick,”
etc.—In the next sentence (*g*), for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p8.3"></span>τοῦτο καὶ τὸ τῶν σκιῶν ἐστιν ὅπερ ἔλεγεν</span>,
(which Sav. gives in marg.), Edd. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p8.4"></span>τοῦτο τὸ τῶν σκιῶν αἰνιττόμενος</span>, which
Ben. renders *has umbras insinuans.* St. Chrys. elsewhere alleges the
miraculous efficacy of St. Paul’s garments and of St. Peter’s shadow, in
illustration of our Lord’s saying, t. i. 537. A. t. ii. 53. C.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[i:954](1110046.htm#fr_953) <span
id="vi.xli-p8.10"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p9"></span> Ephesus was famous for its sorcerers and
magicians. Plutarch and Eustathius speak of Ephesian letters (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p9.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p9.2"></span>Εφέσια γράμματα</span>)
which, written on slips, were carried about as charms and had power to
assure success and avert disaster. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p9.3"></span>περίεργα</span> were arts connected with this
sorcery and the books burned contained, no doubt, mysterious sentences
and symbols which gave to them an extravagant worth in the eyes of the
superstitious. In this way the large price set upon them may be
accounted for.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[i:955](1110046.htm#fr_954) <span
id="vi.xli-p9.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p10"></span> The meaning seems to be, Such was the
effect of his two years’ preaching at Ephesus: and his Epistle shows
what high attainments in the faith were made by the Ephesians.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[i:956](1110046.htm#fr_955) <span
id="vi.xli-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p12"></span> The partial restoration which is here
attempted implies this scheme of the derangement: 2, 1.: 1, 3, 2, 4: see
note 3, p. 252.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[i:957](1110046.htm#fr_956) <span
id="vi.xli-p12.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.1"></span>ὡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.2"></span>ς</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.3"></span>μήτε τοὺς μαθητὰς εἰς θυμὸν ἐγεῖραι, μήτε
ἐκείνους ἀναχωρῆσαι</span>. Mod. text. transposes <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.4"></span>εἰς θ. ἐγεῖραι</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.5"></span>ανδ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.6"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.7"></span>ναχωρ</span>. We read <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.8"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p13.9"></span>νεχώρησε</span>. The verb
either to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.10"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.11"></span>κείνους</span> or to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p13.12"></span>τοὺς μαθητάς</span> is probably lost.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[i:958](1110046.htm#fr_957) <span
id="vi.xli-p13.13"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p14"></span> Some have supposed Tyrannus to have been a
Jewish teacher, who conducted a school in a private synagogue—a Beth
Midrash (so Meyer). In this view, Paul and his companions, on account of
the opposition which they encountered, separated themselves from the
public synagogue, and betook them to this private Jewish school. But
Tyrannus is a Greek name and the more common and preferable opinion is
that he was a teacher of philosophy or rhetoric who had become a
Christian and in whose apartments both Jews and Gentiles could meet
without molestation.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[i:959](1110046.htm#fr_958) <span
id="vi.xli-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p15.1"></span>τὴν κόνιν ταῦτα ἐργαζομένην, πιστευέτω</span>,
B. C. Cat. But A. substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p15.2"></span>κόρην</span>, Mod. text <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p15.3"></span>σκίαν</span>. He seems to
allude here to the miracles effected by the very ashes of the martyrs:
see e.g. t. ii. 494, A.: and perhaps with reference to these he says,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p15.4"></span>Βαβαὶ, πόση τῶν
πιστευσάντων ἡ δύναμις</span>: unless this be meant as an exclamation of
the persons who “took upon them,” etc. i.e. Like Simon, they saw the
wonders wrought in the name of Jesus; “Wonderful (said they)! Why, what
power is exercised by these men who have believed!” namely, by those who
by laying the handkerchiefs, etc., upon the sick restored them to
health.—Mod. text adds, “that to others also there comes (the power) of
doing the same things: and how great the hardness of those who even
after the demonstrations of power yet continue in unbelief.”

<span id="fn_959"></span>[i:960](1110046.htm#fr_959) <span
id="vi.xli-p15.9"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p16"></span> From this point to the end of the
Exposition, having in vain attempted to restore the true order, we take
it as it lies in the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.xli-p16.1"></span>mss.</span> and Edd.—Below, “and after this;”
i.e. “yet after this,” then these itinerant Jewish exorcists took upon
them, etc. and not until after their punishment, when “fear fell upon
them all,” did those of the professed believers (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p16.2"></span>πῶν πεπιστευκότων</span>)
who still practiced magic come forward confessing their sins.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[i:961](1110046.htm#fr_960) <span
id="vi.xli-p16.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.1"></span>Πῶς δὲ ἔτρεχος λοιπὸν κηρύττοντες δἰ ὧν
ἔπασχον</span>. The subject to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.2"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.3"></span>πασχον</span> seems to be “these exorcists” the
sons of Sceva: but to <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.4"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.5"></span>τρεχον</span>it seems to be “the Apostles.”
“This made the Apostles wonderful in men’s eyes:” they had wrought
miracles, and preached two years, “so that all in Asia heard the word of
the Lord,” yet still these practices continued: but (see) how they ran
(what success they had) now, preaching by the things these men were
suffering: “and this became known to all the Jews and Greeks also
dwelling in Asia, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.”—Mod.
text, seemingly referring <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.6"></span>ἔ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p17.7"></span>τρεχον</span>to the exorcists, reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p17.8"></span>καλῶς δὲ ἔτρ</span>. And in
place of [Acts 19.10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010)<span
id="vi.xli-p17.9"></span>, gives, “Whence, showing this, it saith, ‘And
this became known to all,’” etc. [Acts
19.17](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#017)<span id="vi.xli-p17.10"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[i:962](1110046.htm#fr_961) <span
id="vi.xli-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p19"></span> Ben. assigns this to the year 399, and
cites the first of the “Eleven Homilies” t. xii. as having been
delivered according to St. Chrys. thirty days after that great
earthquake, viz., in the year of the fall of Eutropius, therefore <span
class="c14"><span id="vi.xli-p19.1"></span>a.d.</span> 399. But Ed. Par.
justly corrects this mistake: in fact, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p19.2"></span>σεισμὸς</span> of which St. Chrys. there speaks
(t. xii. p. 324. A.) is only a metaphor, meaning the catastrophe of
Eutropius.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[i:963](1110046.htm#fr_962) <span
id="vi.xli-p19.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p20"></span> Perhaps with an allusion to [Jude
7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="vi.xli-p20.1"></span>,
“Sodom and Gomorrah—set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire.”

<span id="fn_963"></span>[i:964](1110046.htm#fr_963) <span
id="vi.xli-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p21"></span> Meaning, perhaps, Even when they believe
the miracles to be real, that which should have brought them to faith
becomes to them an occasion of greater wickedness.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[i:965](1110046.htm#fr_964) <span
id="vi.xli-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p22"></span> The miracles at Antioch, when at the
instigation of the demon (Apollo) the remains of the martyr Babylas were
removed by order of Julian. See the *Hom. de S. Babyla,* t. ii. p.
567.—The Theodorus mentioned below cannot be the lapsed person of that
name to whom St. Chrys. addressed the first of the two *Paræneses, t. i.
init.* But probably <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p22.1"></span>πέρυσι</span> is corrupt, and the allusion may
be to the troubles at Antioch in connection with Theodorus the Sicilian;
see p. 238, note 4.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[i:966](1110046.htm#fr_965) <span
id="vi.xli-p22.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p23"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p23.1"></span>ἂ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p23.2"></span>ν μὴ φύσις ἑτέρα προσέλθῃ</span>. To complete
the sense we must supply, “because this also (the being blinded by fear)
is a natural affection: but what I have said is true, viz. that <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p23.3"></span>τῶν κατὰ φύσιν καὶ ἀνάγκην
οὐ δυνάμεθα μεθίστασθαι, ἂν μὴ κ. τ. λ</span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[i:967](1110046.htm#fr_966) <span
id="vi.xli-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p24.1"></span>τὶ οὖν ἂν καὶ ἡ σωφροσύνη</span>. This is
corrupt or mutilated. The sense requires, “What if in some cases ‘an
evil mind’ be a natural necessity—as much as seeing or any other natural
property or affection, but when there seems to be a change, it is only
that fear casts out the evil mind for a while?”

<span id="fn_967"></span>[i:968](1110046.htm#fr_967) <span
id="vi.xli-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p25"></span> Meaning perhaps, That which should be the
Temple of Christ, the body of the believer.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[i:969](1110046.htm#fr_968) <span
id="vi.xli-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p28"></span> Mod. text, “For look now at some one who
has been abusive and has not been punished: not for this only is it a
subject for weeping, that he does not suffer the punishment for his
abusiveness, but also for another reason it is a subject for mourning.
What may this be? That his soul is now become more shameless.” But
Chrys. is speaking of the immediate evil—here the act of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p28.1"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p28.2"></span>βρις</span> for which the
man suffers, or will have to give account hereafter—and the permanent
effect, the <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p28.3"></span>ἕ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p28.4"></span>ξις</span> which every evil act fixes on the
soul.—<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p28.5"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p28.6"></span>Ετερον</span>here and above
we render in its pregnant sense, “other and worse,” or, “what is quite
another and a more serious thing.”

<span id="fn_969"></span>[i:970](1110046.htm#fr_969) <span
id="vi.xli-p28.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p29"></span> Old text. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p29.1"></span>Εἰ δέ τινες μηδ᾽ ὅλως νήφοιεν, οὐδὲ έκεῖνοι
διδόασι δίκην</span>. Sav. and Ben. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p29.2"></span>οὕτω</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p29.3"></span>δώσουσι</span>. But Par. has resumed the
unintelligible reading of mod. text, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p29.4"></span>εἰ δέ τινες μηδ᾽ οὕτω ν., ἀλλ᾽ οὖν ἐκεῖνοι
διδόασι δίκην</span>.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[i:971](1110046.htm#fr_970) <span
id="vi.xli-p29.5"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p30.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p30.2"></span>λλὰ τρίφωσι παῤ ἑαυτοις οἰκεῖον κακὸν, κἀθάπερ
τινὰ δήμιον τὴν μνησικακίαν</span>. Mod. text <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p30.3"></span>οἰκειακὸν καθ. τ. δ</span>.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[i:972](1110046.htm#fr_971) <span
id="vi.xli-p30.4"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p31"></span> For <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p31.1"></span>τί κατασκευάζεις ἕκτικον σαυτῷ νόσημα</span>;
B. has, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.2"></span>τί κ. ἐκτήκον
σαυτὸν ·τῷ νοσήματι</span>, *quæ lectio non spernanda, te morbo
tabefaciens,* Ben. The reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p31.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p31.4"></span>κτήκον</span> is explained by the etacism; the
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.5"></span>τι</span> in <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.6"></span>νοσήματι</span> is derived
from the following <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.7"></span>τί
βουλόμενον</span>; hence it was necessary to alter <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.8"></span>σαυτῷ</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p31.9"></span>σαυτὸν τῷ</span>. In the
following sentence, B. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p31.10"></span>τί βουλόμενος</span>, “Why when thou wouldest
be quit of it, dost thou keep thine anger?”

<span id="fn_972"></span>[i:973](1110046.htm#fr_972) <span
id="vi.xli-p31.12"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p32"></span> Mod. text weakly, “But this I do that he
may not laugh me to scorn, that he may not despise me.”

<span id="fn_973"></span>[i:974](1110046.htm#fr_973) <span
id="vi.xli-p33.3"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p34"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p34.1"></span>Καθάπερ γὰρ ἐκεῖνα</span> (meaning <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p34.2"></span>τὰ βρέφη</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p34.3"></span>καὶ πρὸς</span> (om. B. C.)
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p34.4"></span>τὰ ἄψυχα ὀργίζεται,
κἂν μὴ πλήξῃ τὸ ἔδαφος ἡ μητὴρ, οὐκ ἀφίησι τὴν ὀργήν</span>.—Mod. text
and Edd. except Sav. omit <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p34.5"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p34.6"></span>μητήρ</span>.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[i:975](1110046.htm#fr_974) <span
id="vi.xli-p34.7"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p35"></span> Mod. text followed by Edd. perverts the
whole story, making the parties contend, not for the relinquishing of
the treasure, but for the possession of it, so making the conclusion
(the willing cession of it by both to the third party) unintelligible,
and the application irrelevant. The innovator was perhaps induced to
make this alteration, by an unseasonable recollection of the Parable of
the Treasure hid in a field.—“The seller having learnt this, came and
wanted to compel the purchaser <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p35.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p35.2"></span>πολαβεῖν τὸν θησαυρὸν</span>,” (retaining <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p35.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p35.4"></span>πολ</span>., in the
unsuitable sense “that he, the seller, should receive back the
treasure.”) “On the other hand, the other (the purchaser) repulsed him,
saying, that he had bought the piece of ground along with the treasure,
and that he made no account of this (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p35.5"></span>καὶ οὐδένα λόγον ποιεῖν ὑπὲρ τούτου</span>.) So
they fell to contention, both of them, the one wishing to receive, the
other not to give,” etc.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[i:976](1110046.htm#fr_975) <span
id="vi.xli-p35.6"></span>

<span id="vi.xli-p36"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p36.1"></span>καὶ ἡμᾶς φιλονεικεῖν μὴ ἀμύνασθαι, καὶ τοὺς
λελυπηκότας φιλονεικεῖν δοῦναι δίκην</span>: as in the story, the
parties <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p36.2"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p36.3"></span>φιλονείκουν</span>, the one
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.xli-p36.4"></span>μὴ λαβεῖν τὸν
θ</span>., the other <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.xli-p36.5"></span>δοῦναι</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily XLII on Acts xix. 21, 23.](1110047)
