[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1110011)  [Next](1110013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vii"></span> <span id="vi.vii-p0.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Homily VII.</span>

<span id="vi.vii-p2"></span>[Acts II.
37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="vi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p3"></span>“Now when they heard these words (E.V.
‘this,’) they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to
the rest of the Apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?”

<span id="vi.vii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="vi.vii-p4.1"></span>Do</span> you see what a great thing gentleness
is? More than any vehemence, it pricks our hearts, inflicts a keener
wound. For as in the case of bodies which have become callous, the man
that strikes upon them does not affect the sense so powerfully, but if
he first mollify them and make them tender, then he pierces them
effectually; so in this instance also, it is necessary first to mollify.
But that which softens, is not wrath, not vehement accusation, not
personal abuse; it is gentleness. The former indeed rather aggravate the
callousness, this last alone removes it. If then you are desirous to
reprove any delinquent, approach him with all possible mildness. For see
here; he gently reminds them of the outrages they have committed, adding
no comment; he declares the gift of God, he goes on to speak of the
grace which bore testimony to the event, and so draws out his discourse
to a still greater length. So they stood in awe of the gentleness of
Peter, in that he, speaking to men who had crucified his Master, and
breathed murder against himself and his companions, discoursed to them
in the character of an affectionate father and teacher. Not merely were
they persuaded; they even condemned themselves, they came to a sense of
their past behavior. For he gave no room for their anger to be roused,
and darken their judgment, but by means of humility he dispersed, as it
were, the mist and darkness of their indignation, and then pointed out
to them the daring outrage they had committed. For so it is; when we say
of ourselves that we are injured, the opposite party endeavor to prove
that they have not done the injury; but when we say, we have not been
injured, but have rather done the wrong, the others take the contrary
line. If, therefore, you wish to place your enemy (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p4.2"></span>εἰς ἀγώνα</span>) in the
wrong, beware of accusing him; nay (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p4.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p4.4"></span>γώνισαι</span>), plead for him, he will be sure
to find himself guilty. There is a natural spirit of opposition in man.
Such was the conduct of Peter. He did not accuse them harshly; on the
contrary, he almost endeavored to plead for them, as far as was
possible. And this was the very reason that he penetrated into their
souls. You will ask, where is the proof that they were pricked? In their
own words; for what say they? “Men and brethren, what shall we do?” Whom
they had called deceivers, they call “brethren:” not that hereby they
put themselves on an equality with them, but rather by way of attracting
their brotherly affection and kindness: and besides, <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) because the Apostles had deigned to
call them by this title. And, say they, “What shall we do?” They did not
straightway say, Well then, we repent; but they surrendered themselves
to the disciples. Just as a person on the point of shipwreck, upon
seeing the pilot, or in sickness the physician, would put all into his
hands, and do his bidding in everything; so have these also confessed
that they are in extreme peril, and destitute of all hope of salvation.
They did not say, How shall we be saved? but, “What shall we do?” Here
again Peter, though the question is put to all, is the man to answer.
“Repent,” says he, “and be baptized every one of you, in the name of
Jesus Christ.” ([Acts 2.38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span
id="vi.vii-p5.1"></span>.) He does not yet say, Believe, but, “Be
baptized every one of you.” For <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)
this they received in baptism. Then he speaks of the gain; “For the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.” If
you are to receive a gift, if baptism conveys remission, why delay? He
next gives a persuasive turn to his address, adding, “For the promise is
unto you” ([Acts 2.39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039)<span
id="vi.vii-p6.5"></span>): for he had spoken of a promise above. “And to
your children,” he says: the gift is greater, when these are to be heirs
of the blessings. “And to all,” he continues, “that are afar off:” if to
those that are afar off, much more to you that are near: “even as many
as the Lord our God shall call.” Observe the time he takes for saying,
“To those that are afar off.” It is when he finds them conciliated and
self-accusing. For when the soul pronounces sentence against itself, no
longer can it feel envy. “And with many other words did he testify, and
exhort, saying.” ([Acts 2.40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040)<span
id="vi.vii-p6.6"></span>.) Observe how, throughout, the writer studies
brevity, and how free he is from ambition and display. “He testified and
exhorted, saying.” This is the perfection of teaching, comprising
something of fear and something of love. “Save yourselves from this
untoward generation.” He says nothing of the future, all is about the
present, by which indeed men are chiefly swayed; he shows that the
Gospel releases from present <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176)
evils as well. “Then they that gladly received his word were baptized;
and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.”
([Acts 2.41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span
id="vi.vii-p7.9"></span>.) Think you not this cheered the Apostles more
than the miracle? “And they continued steadfastly and with one accord in
the Apostles’ doctrine and fellowship.” <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) ([Acts
2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span id="vi.vii-p8.6"></span>.)
Here are two virtues, perseverance and concord. “In the Apostles’
doctrine,” he says: for they again taught them; “and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayer.” All in common, all with perseverance.
“And fear came upon every soul” ([Acts
2.43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043)<span id="vi.vii-p8.7"></span>):
of those that believed. For they did not despise the Apostles, like
common men, nor did they fix their regard on that which was visible
merely. Verily, their thoughts were kindled into a glow. <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) And as Peter had before spoken much,
and declared the promises, and the things to come, well might they be
beside themselves with fear. The wonders also bore witness to the words:
“Many wonders and signs were done by the Apostles.” As was the case with
Christ; first there were signs, then teaching, then wonders; so was it
now. “And all that believed were together, and had all things common.”
([Acts 2.44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span
id="vi.vii-p9.4"></span>.) Consider what an advance was here
immediately! For the fellowship was not only in prayers, nor in doctrine
alone, but also in (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p9.5"></span>πολιτεία</span>) social relations. “And sold
their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man
had need.” See what fear was wrought in them! “And they parted them,” he
says, showing the (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p9.6"></span>τὸ
οἰκονομικὸν</span>) wise management: “As every man had need.” Not
recklessly, like some philosophers among the Greeks, of whom some gave
up their land, others cast into the sea great quantities of money; but
this was no contempt of riches, but only folly and madness. For
universally the devil has made it his endeavor to disparage the
creatures of God, as if it were impossible to make good use of riches.
“And continuing daily with one accord in the temple” ([Acts
2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span id="vi.vii-p9.7"></span>),
they enjoyed the benefit of teaching. Consider how these Jews did
nothing else great or small, than assiduously attend at the temple. For,
as having become more earnest, they had increased devotion also to the
place. For the Apostles did not for the present pluck them away from
this object, for fear of injuring them. “And breaking bread from house
to house, did take their portion of food with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people.” ([Acts
2.47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047)<span id="vi.vii-p9.8"></span>.)
It seems to me that in mentioning “bread,” he here signifies fasting and
hard life; for they “took their portion of food,” not of dainty fare.
“With gladness,” he says. Seest thou that not the dainty fare, but the
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p9.9"></span>τροφἥς οὐ
τρυφἥς</span>) food made the enjoyment. For they that fare daintily are
under punishment and pain; but not so these. Do you see that the words
of Peter contain this also, namely, the regulation of life? \[“And
singleness of heart.”\] For no gladness can exist where there is no
simplicity. How had they “favor with all the people?” On account of
their alms deeds. For do not look to the fact, that the chief priests
for envy and spite rose up against them, but rather consider that “they
had favor with the people.”—“And the Lord added to the Church daily
(<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p9.10"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p9.11"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτό</span>)
\[together\] such as should be saved.—And <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) all that believed were together.” Once
more, the unanimity, the charity, which is the cause of all good
things! <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180)

<span id="vi.vii-p12"></span>\[“Now when they heard this,” etc. “Then
Peter said unto them,” etc.\] (Recapitulation, [Acts
2.37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="vi.vii-p12.1"></span>.)
What had been said was not enough. For those sayings indeed were
sufficient to bring them to faith; but these are to show what things the
believer behooves to do. And he said not, In the Cross, but, “In the
name of Jesus Christ let every one of you be baptized.” ([Acts
2.38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)<span id="vi.vii-p12.2"></span>.)
And he does not put them continually in mind of the Cross, that he may
not seem to reproach them, but he says simply, “Repent:” and why? That
we may be punished? No: “And let each of you be baptized in the name of
Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins.” And yet quite other is the
law; of this world’s tribunals: but in the case of the Gospel
proclamation (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p12.3"></span>κηρύγματος</span>); when the delinquent has
confessed, then is he saved! Observe how Peter does not instantly hurry
over this, but he specifies also the conditions, and adds, “Ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost;” an assertion accredited by the
fact, that the Apostles themselves had received that gift. \[“For the
promise,” etc.\] ([Acts 2.39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039)<span
id="vi.vii-p12.4"></span>.) “The promise,” i.e. the gift of the Holy
Ghost. <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) So far, he speaks of the
easy part, and that which has with it a great gift; and then he leads
them to practice: for it will be to them a ground of earnestness, to
have tasted already of those so great blessings \[“and with many other
words did he testify,” etc.\] ([Acts
2.40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040)<span id="vi.vii-p13.18"></span>).
Since, however, the hearer would desire to learn what was the sum and,
substance of these further words, he tells us this: \[“Saying, save
yourselves from this untoward generation.”\] \[“They then, that gladly
received his words,” etc.\] ([Acts
2.41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041)<span id="vi.vii-p13.19"></span>)
they approved of what had been said, although fraught with terror, and
after their assent given, proceed at once to baptism. <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) “And they continued” it is written,
“steadfastly in the doctrine” (or, “teaching”) “of the Apostles” ([Acts
2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span id="vi.vii-p14.3"></span>):
for it was not for one day, no nor for two or three days that they were
under teaching as being persons who had gone over to a different course
of life. <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) \[“And they continued
with one accord in the Apostles’ doctrine,” etc.\] The expression is
not, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p15.3"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p15.4"></span>μοὕ</span> “together,” but
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p15.5"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p15.6"></span>μοθυμαδὸν</span>, “with one
accord;” (“and daily,” he says \[afterwards\], “they were continuing
with one accord in the temple,”) i.e. with one soul. <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) And here again in his conciseness, he
does not relate the teaching given; for as young children, the Apostles
nourished them with spiritual food. “And fear came upon every soul”
([Acts 2.43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043)<span
id="vi.vii-p16.22"></span>): clearly, of those, as well, who did not
believe; namely, upon seeing so great a change all at once effected, and
besides in consequence of the miracles. \[“And all that believed were
together, and had all things in common,” etc.\] ([Acts
2.44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span id="vi.vii-p16.23"></span>.)
They are all become angels on a sudden; all of them continuing in prayer
and hearing, they saw that spiritual things are *common,* and no one
there has more than other, and they speedily came together (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.24"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.25"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτὸ</span>), to the
same thing in common, even to the imparting to all. <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) “And all the believing” ([Acts
2.44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span id="vi.vii-p17.12"></span>),
it says, were <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.13"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.14"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτὸ</span>: and to see that this does
not mean that they were together in place, observe what follows \[“And
had all things common”\]. “All,” it says: not one with the exception of
another. This was an angelic commonwealth, not to call anything of
theirs their own. Forthwith the root of evils was cut out. By what they
did, they showed what they had heard: this was that which he said, “Save
yourselves from this untoward generation.”—“And daily continuing with
one accord in the temple.” ([Acts
2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span id="vi.vii-p17.15"></span>.)
Since they are become three thousand, they take them abroad now:
and <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) withal, the boldness
imparted by the Spirit being great: and daily they went up as to a
sacred place, as frequently we find Peter and John doing this: for at
present they disturbed none of the Jewish observances. And this honor
too passed over to the place; the eating in the house. In what house? In
the Temple. <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) Observe the increase
of piety. They cast away their riches, and rejoiced, and had great
gladness, for greater were the riches they received without labor (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p19.7"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p19.8"></span>πονα</span> Cat. al. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p19.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p19.10"></span>γαθά</span>). None
reproached, none envied, none grudged; no pride, no contempt was there.
As children they did indeed account themselves to be under teaching: as
new born babes, such was their disposition. Yet why use this faint
image? If you remember how it was when God shook our city with an
earthquake, how subdued all men were. (*Infra,* Hom. xli. §2.) Such was
the case then with those converts. No knavery, no villany then: such is
the effect of fear, of affliction! No <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) talk of “mine” and “thine” then. Hence
gladness waited at their table; no one seemed to eat of his own, or of
another’s;—I grant this may seem a riddle. Neither did they consider
their brethren’s property foreign to themselves; it was <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) the property of a Master; nor again
deemed they aught their own, all was the brethren’s. The poor man knew
no shame, the rich no haughtiness. This is gladness. The latter deemed
himself the obliged and fortunate party; the others felt themselves as
honored herein, and closely were they bound together. For indeed,
because when people make doles of money, there are apt to be insults,
pride, grudging; therefore says the Apostle, “Not grudgingly, or of
necessity.”—( [2 Cor. ix. 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span
id="vi.vii-p21.2"></span>.) \[“With gladness and simplicity of heart,”
etc.\] See of how many things he bears witness to them! Genuine faith,
upright conduct, perseverance in hearing, in prayers, in singleness, in
cheerfulness. \[“Praising God.”\] ([Acts.
2.47](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#047)<span id="vi.vii-p21.3"></span>.)
Two things there were which might deject them; their abstemious living,
and the loss of their property. Yet on both these accounts did they
rejoice. \[“And having favor with all the people.”\] For who but must
love men of this character, as common fathers? They conceived no malice
toward each other; they committed all to the grace of God. \[“With all
the people.”\] Fear there was none; yea, though they had taken their
position in the midst of dangers. <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) By *singleness,* however, he denotes
their entire virtue, far surpassing their contempt of riches, their
abstinence, and their preseverance in prayer. For thus also they offered
pure praise to God: this is to praise God. But observe also here how
they immediately obtain their reward. “Having favor with all the
people.” They were engaging, and highly beloved. For who would not prize
and admire their simplicity of character; who would not be linked to one
in whom was nothing underhand? To whom too does salvation belong, but to
these? To whom those great marvels? Was it not to shepherds that the
Gospel was first preached? and to Joseph, <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) being a man of simple mind, insomuch
that he did not let a suspicion of adultery frighten him into doing
wrong? Did not God elect rustics, those artless men? For it is written,
“Blessed is every simple soul.” ([Prov. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025)<span id="vi.vii-p23.1"></span>.)
And again, “He that walketh simply, walketh surely.” (<span
id="vi.vii-p23.2"></span>[Prov. x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#009)<span id="vi.vii-p23.3"></span>.)
“True,” you will say, “but prudence also is needed.” Why, what is
simplicity, I pray you, but prudence? For when you suspect no evil,
neither can you fabricate any: when you have no annoyances, neither can
you remember injuries. Has any one insulted you? You were not pained.
Has any one reviled you? You were nothing hurt. Has he envied you? Still
you had no hurt. Simplicity is a high road to true philosophy. None so
beautiful in soul as the simple. For as in regard of personal
appearance, he that is sullen, and downcast, and reserved (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p23.4"></span>σύννους</span>), even if he
be good-looking, loses much of his beauty; while he that relaxes his
countenance, and gently smiles, enhances his good looks; so in respect
of the soul, he that is reserved, if he have ten thousand good points,
disfigures them; but the frank and simple, just the reverse. A man of
this last description may be safely made a friend, and when at variance
easily reconciled. No need of guards and outposts, no need of chains and
fetters with such an one; but great is his own freedom, and that of
those who associate with him. But what, you will say, will such a man do
if he fall among wicked people? God, Who has commanded us to be
simple-minded, will stretch out His hand. What was more guileless than
David? What more wicked than Saul? Yet who triumphed? Again, in Joseph’s
case; did not he in simplicity approach his master’s wife, she him with
wicked art? Yet what, I pray, was he the worse? Furthermore, what more
simple than was Abel? what more malicious than Cain? And Joseph again,
had he not dealt artlessly with his brethren? Was not this the cause of
his eminence, that he spoke out unsuspiciously, while they received his
words in malice? He declared once and again his dreams unreservedly; and
then again he set off to them carrying provisions; he used no caution;
he committed all to God: nay, the more they held him in the light of an
enemy, the more did he treat them as brothers. God had power not to have
suffered him to fall into their hands; but that the wonder might be made
manifest, how, though they do their worst, he shall be higher than they:
though the blow do come upon him, it comes from another, not from
himself. On the contrary, the wicked man strikes himself first, and none
other than himself. “For <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) alone,”
it is said, “shall he bear his troubles.” (<span
id="vi.vii-p24.2"></span>[Prov. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#012)<span id="vi.vii-p24.3"></span>.)
Ever in him the soul is full of dejection, his thoughts being ever
entangled: whether he must hear aught or say aught, he does all with
complaints, with accusation. Far, very far from such do friendship and
harmony make their abode: but fightings are there, and enmities, and all
unpleasantness. They that are such suspect even themselves. To these not
even sleep is sweet, nor anything else. And have they a wife also, lo,
they are enemies and at war with all: what endless jealousies, what
unceasing fear! Aye, the wicked, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p24.4"></span>πονηρὸς</span> has his name from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p24.5"></span>πονεἵν</span>, “to have
trouble.” And, indeed, thus the Scripture is ever calling “wickedness”
by the name of labor; as, for instance, “Under his tongue is toil and
labor;” and again, “In the midst of them is toil and labor.” ([Ps.
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007), [Ps.
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010), [Ps.
55:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#011)<span
id="vi.vii-p24.6"></span>[Ps. x.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)<span id="vi.vii-p24.7"></span>; xc.
10; and lv. 11.)

<span id="vi.vii-p25"></span>Now if any one should wonder, whence those
who had at first been of this last class, now are so different, let him
learn that affliction was the cause, affliction, that school-mistress of
heavenly wisdom, that mother of piety. When riches were done away with,
wickedness also disappeared. True, say you, for this is the very thing I
am asking about; but whence comes all the wickedness there is now? How
is it that it came into the minds of those three thousand and five
thousand straightway, to choose virtue, and that they simultaneously
became Christian philosophers, whereas now hardly one is to be found?
how was it that they then were in such harmony? What was it, that made
them resolute and active? What was it that so suddenly inflamed them?
The reason is, that they drew near with much piety; that honors were not
so sought after as they are now; that they transferred their thoughts to
things future, and looked for nothing of things present. This is the
sign of an ardent mind, to encounter perils; this was their idea of
Christianity. We take a different view, we seek our comfort here. The
result is, that we shall not even obtain this, when the time is come.
“What are we to do?” asked those men. We, just the contrary—“What shall
we do?” What behooved to be done, they did. We, quite the reverse. <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) Those men condemned themselves,
despaired of saving themselves. This is what made them such as they
were. They knew what a gift they had received. But how can you become
like them, when you do everything in an opposite spirit? They heard, and
were forthwith baptized. They did not speak those cold words which we do
now, nor did they contrive delays (p. 47, note 3); and yet they had
heard all the requirements: but that word, “Save yourselves from this
generation,” made them to be not sluggish; rather they welcomed the
exhortation; and that they did welcome it, they proved by their deeds,
they showed what manner of men they were. They entered at once the
lists, and took off the coat; whereas we do enter, but we intend to
fight with our coat on. This is the cause that our antagonist has so
little trouble, for we get entangled in our own movements, and are
continually thrown down. We do precisely the same thing as he who,
having <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) to cope with a man
frantic, breathing fire; and seeing him, a professed wrestler, covered
with dust, tawny, stripped, clotted with dirt from the sand and sun, and
running down with sweat and oil and dirt; himself, smelling of perfumes,
should put on his silken garments, and his gold shoes, and his robe
hanging down to his heels, and his golden trinkets on the head, and so
descend into the arena, and grapple with him. Such a one will not only
be impeded, but being taken up with the sole idea of not staining or
rending his fine clothes, will tumble at the very first onset, and
withal will suffer that which he chiefly dreaded, the damage of those
his fond delights. The time for the contest is come, and say, are you
putting on your silks? It is the time of exercise, the hour of the race,
and are you adorning yourself as for a procession? Look not to outward
things, but to the inward. For by the thoughts about these things the
soul is hampered on all sides, as if by strong cords, so that she cannot
let you raise a hand, or contend against the adversary; and makes you
soft and effeminate. One may think himself, even when released from all
these ties, well off, to be enabled to conquer that impure power. And on
this account Christ too did not allow the parting with riches alone to
suffice, but what saith He? “Sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the
poor, and come and follow Me.” ([Mark x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021)<span id="vi.vii-p27.2"></span>.)
Now if, even when we cast away our riches, we are not yet in a safe
position, but stand still in need of some further art and close
practice; much more, if we retain them, shall we fail to achieve great
things, and, instead thereof, become a laughing-stock to the spectators,
and to the evil one himself. For even though there were no devil, though
there were none to wrestle with us, yet ten thousand roads on all sides
lead the lover of money to hell. Where now are they who ask why the
devil was made (<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p27.3"></span>διατί
ὁ δ. γέγονεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p27.4"></span>;</span>)? Behold here the devil has no hand in
the work, we do it all ourselves. Of a truth they of the hills might
have a right to speak thus, who after they had given proof of their
temperance, their contempt of wealth and disregard of all such things,
have infinitely preferred to abandon father, and houses, and lands, and
wife, and children. Yet, they are the last to speak so: but the men who
at no time ought to say it, these do say it. Those are indeed wrestlings
with the devil; these he does not think worth entering into. You will
say, But it is the devil who instils this same covetousness. Well, flee
from it, do not harbor it, O man. Suppose now, you see one flinging out
filth from some upper story, and at the same time a person seeing it
thrown out, yet standing there and receiving it all on his head: you not
only do not pity him, but you are angry, and tell him it serves him
right; and, “Do not be a fool,” everyone cries out to him, and lays the
blame not so much on the other for shooting out the filth, as on him for
letting it come on him. But now, you know that covetousness is of the
devil; you know that it is the cause of ten thousand evils; you see him
flinging out, like filth, his noisome imaginations; and do you not see
that you are receiving on your bare head his nastiness, when it needed
but to turn aside a little to escape it altogether? Just as our man by
shifting his position would have escaped; so, do you refuse to admit
such imaginations, ward off the lust. And how am I to do this? you will
ask. Were you a Gentile, and had eyes for things present alone, the
matter perhaps might be one of considerable difficulty, and yet even the
Gentiles have achieved as much; but you—a man in expectation of heaven
and heavenly bliss—and you to ask, “How am I to repel bad thoughts?”
Were I saying the contrary, then you might doubt: did I say, covet
riches, “How shall I covet riches,” you might answer, “seeing such
things as I do?” Tell me, if gold and precious stones were set before
you, and I were to say, Desire lead, would there not be reason for
hesitation? For you would say, How can I? But if I said, Do not desire
it; this had been plainer to understand. I do not marvel at those who
despise, but at those who despise not riches. This is the character of a
soul exceeding full of stupidity, no better than flies and gnats, a soul
crawling upon the earth, wallowing in filth, destitute of all high
ideas. What is it you say? Are you destined to inherit eternal life; and
do you say, how shall I despise the present life for the future? What,
can the things be put in competition? <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) You are to receive a royal vest; and
say you, How shall I despise these rags? You are going to be led into
the king’s palace; and do you say, How shall I despise this present
hovel? Of a truth, we ourselves are to blame in every point, we who do
not choose to let ourselves be stirred up ever so little. For the
willing have succeeded, and that with great zeal and facility. Would
that you might be persuaded by our exhortation, and succeed too, and
become imitators of those who have been successful, through the grace
and mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, with Whom to the Father and the Holy
Ghost together be glory, and power, and honor, now and ever, and world
without end. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[i:175](1110012.htm#fr_174) <span
id="vi.vii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p5"></span> This is strangely rendered by Ben. *At
alioquin, postquam illos sic appellare dignati fuerant, et dixerant.*
Erasmus rightly, *Et aliter: quoniam illi eos primum ita appellare
dignati fuerunt.* Œcumen. “And because Peter in the beginning of his
discourse had so addressed them, hence they themselves had a handle for
so addressing the Apostles.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[i:176](1110012.htm#fr_175) <span
id="vi.vii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p6.1"></span>Τοῦτο γὰρ ἐν τῷ βαπτίσματι παρέλαβον</span>. St.
Chrysostom cannot mean to say that they received the gift of faith in
baptism, not having it before: (see <span id="vi.vii-p6.2"></span>[Mark
xvi. 16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016)<span id="vi.vii-p6.3"></span>,
[Acts viii. 37](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#037)<span
id="vi.vii-p6.4"></span>.) But the meaning seems to be, with allusion to
the *traditio symboli* in baptism, “He does not as yet say, “Believe:”
the question, “Dost thou believe?” would be put to them in their
baptism, when the Creed was delivered to them. So that the injunction
“Believe” is in fact included in the “Be baptized.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[i:177](1110012.htm#fr_176) <span
id="vi.vii-p6.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p7"></span> We adopt the reading of A. N. The other
<span class="c14"><span id="vi.vii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> have <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p7.2"></span>καὶ τῶν παρόντων καὶ τῶν
μελλόντων ἀπαλλάττει κακῶν</span>, “both from present and from future
evils.” Below, [Acts 2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span
id="vi.vii-p7.3"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p7.4"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p7.5"></span>μοθυμαδὸν</span>, which Chrys. seems to have had
in his copy, was probably derived into this verse after <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p7.6"></span>προσκαρτ</span>. from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p7.7"></span>προσκαρτ. ὁμοθ</span>. [Acts
2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span id="vi.vii-p7.8"></span>.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[i:178](1110012.htm#fr_177) <span
id="vi.vii-p7.10"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p8"></span> The exact force of <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p8.1"></span>κοινωνία</span> here has
been much disputed. By many it is thought to mean *communication* (to
the needy) in the having all things common (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p8.2"></span>κοινά</span>), Ols., Lechler, et al. By others
it is understood to refer to the Lord’s Supper, but against this view is
the fact that <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p8.3"></span>κοινωνία</span> did not become a name for the
sacrament until the third or fourth century. Others render: *fellowship*
understanding either the participation in common meals (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p8.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p8.5"></span>γάπαι</span>) or the
enjoyment of mutual sympathy, helpfulness and encouragement—the
fellowship of Christian friendship. So Bengel, Mey., Hack., Gloag. This
view is the preferable one.—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[i:179](1110012.htm#fr_178) <span
id="vi.vii-p8.8"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p9"></span> Of our <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vii-p9.1"></span>mss.</span> N. E. have the true reading, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p9.2"></span>πεπύρωτο</span>, which is
attested by the Catena: the rest, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p9.3"></span>πεπώρωτο</span> “were hardened.”

<span id="fn_179"></span>[i:180](1110012.htm#fr_179) <span
id="vi.vii-p9.12"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p10"></span> This citation from [Acts
2.44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span id="vi.vii-p10.1"></span>.
is not misplaced: it refers to the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p10.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p10.3"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτὸ</span> with which in Chrysostom’s
copy and many considerable authorities, this verse ended. (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p10.4"></span>῾</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p10.5"></span>Ο Κύριος προσε. τ. σωζ.
καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτο. Πέτρος δὲ καὶ ᾽Ι. ἀνέβαινον κ. τ. λ</span>.
Lachm.)—In the opening of the next paragraph, the modern text has: “And
with many other words he testified. This he says, showing that what had
been said,” etc. But it is evident that the recapitulation begins here,
with [Acts 2.37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span
id="vi.vii-p10.6"></span>. and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p10.7"></span>τὰ λεχθέντα</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p10.8"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p10.9"></span>κεῖνα</span>, mean the
preceding discourse, [Acts
2.14-36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014)<span
id="vi.vii-p10.10"></span>.; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p10.11"></span>ταῦτα</span>, not “the many other words,”
[Acts 2.40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040)<span
id="vi.vii-p10.12"></span>. but, “Repent and be baptized.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[i:181](1110012.htm#fr_180) <span
id="vi.vii-p10.13"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p11"></span> The main lines of the picture which Luke
here draws of the Apostolic community are: (1) Constant teaching and
exhortation on the part of the Apostles. (2) Christian fellowship, with
prayer and the regular observance of the Lord’s Supper. (3) The doing of
miracles. (4) The contribution of all to the common fund—not all at
once, but gradually and as occasion required—as the imperfects and <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p11.1"></span>καθότι ἄν τις χρείαν
ειχεν</span> ([Acts 2.44](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#044)<span
id="vi.vii-p11.2"></span>) show. (5) The confident hope and exultant joy
with which the work of the new kingdom was carried forward in the
conviction that the gospel was for all ([Acts
2.39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039)<span id="vi.vii-p11.3"></span>).
The <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p11.4"></span>πᾶσιν τοῖς εἰς
μακράν</span> must, we think, refer to the heathen (Calv., Beng., Lech.,
De W., Lange, Alf., Hack., Gl.) and not merely to distant members of the
Jewish nation (Baumg., Mey.).—G.B.S.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[i:182](1110012.htm#fr_181) <span
id="vi.vii-p12.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p13"></span> In the old text (<span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.1"></span>mss.</span> and Catena) after <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.2"></span>τῶν πλειόνων λόγων τὸ
κεφάλαιον</span> comes the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.3"></span>τοῦτό ἐστι, φησὶν, ἡ δωρεὰ τοῦ ῾Α. Πν</span>.
where it is clearly misplaced: for <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.4"></span>τὸ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.5"></span>εὕκολον κ. τ. λ</span>. is, “Be baptized, and
ye shall receive,” etc., and <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.6"></span>τότε ἐπὶ τὸν βίον ἄγει</span> refers to [Acts
2.40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040)<span id="vi.vii-p13.7"></span>.:
“And with many other words,” of which <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.8"></span>πλειόνων λόγων</span> the <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.9"></span>κεφάλαιον</span> is, “Save
yourselves,” etc. Hence the clause must belong to [Acts
2.39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039)<span id="vi.vii-p13.10"></span>.
and accordingly the Catena gives the whole passage from <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.11"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.12"></span>Αξιόπιστος ὁ λόγος</span>
to <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.13"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.14"></span>πὶ τὸ βαπτ.
ἐξέρχονται</span>. as the comment on [Acts
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#039)<span id="vi.vii-p13.15"></span>.
We have restored the proper order, and supplied the omitted
citations.—The modern text after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p13.16"></span>τὸ κεφάλαιον</span>, has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p13.17"></span>καὶ τοῦτο προστίθησι,
δεικνὺς, ὅτι ἡ δωρεὰ τοῦ ῾Α. Πν</span>. “Since the hearer, etc. this
also he adds, showing that it is the gift of the Holy Ghost.”—But the
“hearer” is the person hearing or reading the narrative.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[i:183](1110012.htm#fr_182) <span
id="vi.vii-p13.20"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p14"></span> Here E. strangely inserts the formula of
recapitulation, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p14.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p14.2"></span>Αλλ᾽ ἴδωμεν ἄνωθεν τὰ λεγόμενα</span>: received
by Sav., Ben. but bracketted by Morel.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[i:184](1110012.htm#fr_183) <span
id="vi.vii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p15"></span> Here the <span class="c14"><span
id="vi.vii-p15.1"></span>mss.</span> have: “And fear came,” etc., [Acts
2.43](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#043)<span id="vi.vii-p15.2"></span>,
with its comment, which we have restored to its proper place.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[i:185](1110012.htm#fr_184) <span
id="vi.vii-p15.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.1"></span>Οὐχὶ ὁμοῦ δὲ, ἀλλ᾽ ὁμοθυμαδὸν ἦσαν·</span>
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.2"></span>“</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.3"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμέραν τε φησὶν,
προσκαρτ. ὁμοθυμ. ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ,</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.4"></span>”</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.5"></span>τουτέστι, μιᾷ ψυχῇ</span>. B. C. F. D. St.
Chrys. here returns to [Acts 2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span
id="vi.vii-p16.6"></span>. in which he read in his copy the word <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.7"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.8"></span>μοθυμαδόν</span>.
Commenting on that expression, he refers to [Acts
2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span id="vi.vii-p16.9"></span>
(as his remark on that verse above was that they were taught, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.10"></span>τῆς διδασκαλίας
ἀπέλαυον</span>, in the Temple). Or perhaps this clause may have been
added by the scribe, because he did not find <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.11"></span>προσκαρτ. ὁμοθ</span>. in [Acts
2.42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042)<span id="vi.vii-p16.12"></span>,
but did find it in [Acts 2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span
id="vi.vii-p16.13"></span>.—E. “But he says not <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.14"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.15"></span>μοῦ</span>, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.16"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p16.17"></span>μοθ</span> since it is
possible to be <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.18"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.19"></span>μοῦ</span> yet not <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.20"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p16.21"></span>μοθ</span>., when people are divided in
opinion. And with words he exhorted. And here again,” etc. So Edd.

<span id="fn_185"></span>[i:186](1110012.htm#fr_185) <span
id="vi.vii-p16.26"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.2"></span>Επὶ τοῦτο, ἐπὶ τὸ πᾶσι μεταδοῦναι</span> B. C
D. F. N. Cat. on [Acts 2.46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046)<span
id="vi.vii-p17.3"></span>, but on [Acts
2.45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045)<span id="vi.vii-p17.4"></span>,
Cat. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.5"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.6"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτὶ</span>, which is doubtless the true
reading: for which the innovator, not understanding it, has <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p17.7"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p17.8"></span>πὶ τὸ τὰ αὐτῶν πᾶσι
διαδοῦναι</span>. On <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.9"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p17.10"></span>πὶ τὸ αὐτὸ</span> compare the comment on [Acts
4.32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="vi.vii-p17.11"></span>.
in Hom. xi. §1.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[i:187](1110012.htm#fr_186) <span
id="vi.vii-p17.16"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p18.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p18.2"></span>μα τῆς τούτων</span> (N. and Cat. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p18.3"></span>τοῦ Πνεύματος</span>) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p18.4"></span>παρρησίας</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p18.5"></span>παρουσίας</span> B.) <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p18.6"></span>πολλῆς οὔσης, καθ᾽ ἡμέραν
τε κ. τ. λ</span>. B. C. D. F. N. Cat. We have adopted the reading
preserved by N. and the Catena.—E. and Edd. “Who also with boldness,
seeing there was great boldness now, daily went up and continued in the
Temple.”

<span id="fn_187"></span>[i:188](1110012.htm#fr_187) <span
id="vi.vii-p18.7"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p19.1"></span>καὶ αὐτὴ</span> (l. <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p19.2"></span>αὕτη δὲ ἡ τιμὴ εἰς τὸν τόπον διέβαινε τὸ ἐν τῷ
οἴκῳ ἐσθίειν· ποί& 251· οἴκω</span>; ἐ<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p19.3"></span>ν τῷ ἱερῷ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p19.4"></span>;</span> B. C. D. F. Cat. This “eating in the
house” refers to the clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p19.5"></span>κλῶντες τε κατ᾽ οἶκον ἄρτον</span>. If the
passage be sound, Chrys. here represents that the Temple was honored by
the breaking of bread (the Holy Eucharist?), there—Edd. from E. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p19.6"></span>καὶ αὐτὴ δὲ ἡ εἰς τὸν τόπον
τιμὴ διέβαινε πρὸς τὸν τοῦ ἱεροῦ Δεσπότην</span>· “And the honor itself
paid to the place passed over to the Lord of the Temple.”

<span id="fn_188"></span>[i:189](1110012.htm#fr_188) <span
id="vi.vii-p19.11"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p20"></span> Edd. add, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p20.1"></span>τὸ ψυχρὸν ῥ& 210·μα</span>, “That cold
expression.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[i:190](1110012.htm#fr_189) <span
id="vi.vii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p21"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p21.1"></span>Δεσποτικὰ</span>, i.e. of Christ their common
Master. But Erasm. *Erant enim ut dominorum,* and so Ben.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[i:191](1110012.htm#fr_190) <span
id="vi.vii-p21.4"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p22"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p22.1"></span>καὶ ταῦτα ἐν μέσοις κινδύνοις ἐμβεβληκότων
αὐτῶν</span>. Erasm. omits the two last words: Ben. in *media pericula
conjectis.* The meaning is: “Not even in the midst of dangers, which
they themselves had boldly charged, or, invaded.”

<span id="fn_191"></span>[i:192](1110012.htm#fr_191) <span
id="vi.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p23"></span> Although he speaks below of Joseph the
Patriarch, it seems that the husband of Mary is meant here.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[i:193](1110012.htm#fr_192) <span
id="vi.vii-p23.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p24"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p24.1"></span>Μόνος γὰρ, φησὶν, ἀντλήσει τὰ κακά</span>. A.
omits this and the next clause: E. substitutes, “so is he even to
himself an enemy. Of such an one the soul is,” etc. so Edd.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[i:194](1110012.htm#fr_193) <span
id="vi.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p26"></span> We adopt the reading preserved by A. N.
(what is also contained in the modern text with additions meant for
explanation.) “<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.1"></span>Τί
ποιήσωμεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.2"></span>;”</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.3"></span>ἠρώτων ἐκεῖνοι. ῾Ημεῖς δὲ τὸ ἐναντίον· Τί
ποιήσομεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.4"></span>;</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.5"></span>῞</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.6"></span>Απερ ἔδει γενέσθαι ἐποίουν. ῾Ημεῖς δε
τοὐναντίον</span>. The modern text, after <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.7"></span>ἠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.8"></span>ρ. ἐκεῖνοι</span>, inserts, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.9"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.10"></span>πογινώσκοντες
ἑαυτῶν·</span> “despairing of themselves:” and, after the second
question, <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.11"></span>λέγομεν,
ἐπιδεικνύμενοι πρὸς τοὺς παρόντας, καὶ μέγα φρονοῦντες ἐφ᾽
ἑαυτοῖς·</span> “Say (we), showing off ourselves to those present, and
thinking great things of ourselves.” B. C. omit, perhaps by oversight,
the clauses between, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.12"></span>Τί ποιήσωμεν</span> (B. <span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.13"></span>τί ποιήσομεν</span>); and,
<span class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.14"></span>῞</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.vii-p26.15"></span>Απερ ἔδεἵ</span>. In the
following sentences, the force of the verbs <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p26.16"></span>κατέγνωσαν, ἀπέγνωσαν, ἔγνωσαν</span> might be
rendered thus: “They knew themselves guilty, knew that in them was no
power to save themselves—knew what a gift they received.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[i:195](1110012.htm#fr_194) <span
id="vi.vii-p26.17"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p27.1"></span>πρὸς ἄνδρα μαινόμενον ἔχων, πῦρ πνέοντα</span>.
E. F. D. and Edd. omit these words.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[i:196](1110012.htm#fr_195) <span
id="vi.vii-p27.5"></span>

<span id="vi.vii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.vii-p28.1"></span>μὴ γὰρ ἀμφηριστὰ τὰ πράγματο</span>; Erasm.
negligently, *non sunt æque amabiles illæ res:* Ben. *num res sunt mutuo
comparabiles?*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Homily VIII on Acts iii. 1.](1110013)
