<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ettt14)  [Next](ettt16) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Esoteric Teachings of the Tibetan Tantra*, by C.A. Musés, \[1961\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

### CHAPTER SIX

### THE PRACTICE OF THE ILLUSORY BODY

### OR DREAM YOGA,

### DEPENDING ON FOREGOING HEAT YOGA

This is to be explained in two parts. First, following the Heat Yoga,
other Yogas are to be discussed in general. Second, each of these Yogas
will be individually considered. Now, the first:

Of this school, the teaching on Entering-into-the-Central Channel
through the practice of Dumo is very clear, but, the practices and
instructions on the Illusory Body and Light are very obscure. These
teachings are very difficult to understand; however, I shall reveal some
unique pith-instructions that I have obtained.

These instructions on the Illusory Body and Light Yoga are obtained from
the source of Gsan *A*dus given by *A*pags-pa, father and son. According
to their teaching, before the process of entering, remaining, and
dissolving into the Central Channel by the life-Prana, the three steps
of the Manifestation, Augmentation, and Attainment of the Peaceful-Mind
Samadhi[74](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:74)<span id="an_r_nar:74"></span> can
never be attained.

The mind-prana that perfects the genuine wisdom of the
Peaceful-Mind-State is also the means through which the genuine Illusory
Body is practiced. These teachings are clearly given in the
pith-instructions on the Gsan *A*dus and are also found in the teaching
of the Five Steps of the Marpa School. Therefore, though the teaching of
Light Yoga and Illusory Body are not clearly given in Naropa's Six
Yogas, relying on the instructions of *A*pags-pa, the explanations are
given here:

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

In the *Commentary of the Epitome of the Five Steps of the Marpa
School*, the stanza says:

"At first, (the yogi will) see the mirage-like visions  
 With the five-coloured light shining.  
 The next vision he will see is a moon.  
 The third one is the flowing light of the sun.  
 Then the vision of the brink appears.  
 Through this process manifests the Illusory-Body  
 That is manifested by the mind-prana."

The vision of moonlight shining from a cloudless sky appears; this is a
stage of Manifestation. Then the glowing light of the sun shines in the
sky; this is the stage of Augmentation. Then the brink period that
appears like the dark sky before dawn comes in sight; this is the stage
of Attainment. After the emergence of these stages, the real Illusory
Body-with-light that is produced by the Mind-Prana of the Peaceful-Mind
Teaching (will come to pass); but this point is not clearly stated in
the Six Yogas.

Among the numerous teachings of the Illusory Body, one is to meditate on
the shadow-like nature of the self-body. First let someone praise and
then insult you and observe the reactions of pleasure and resentment.
Thus the crude form of the delusory
thoughts[75](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:75)<span id="an_r_nar:75"></span> are
subdued; this is the practice of the Impure Illusory Body. Another
practice is called the Pure Illusory Body Yoga. That is to meditate on
the illusory-like self-Buddha figure and let another person praise and
insult you and observe the reaction of pleasure and displeasure, until
an indifferent feeling toward both praise and insult arises. But this
practice is not a special practice; it is the common practice of the
highest Yoga and other general teachings.

Other teachings of the Illusory Body are the Three-Steps

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Illusory Body, or
the Secret Illusory Body; and the Two-in-One Illusory Body of the Five
Steps. However, the discriminations and differences among these
Illusory-Body teachings are not even briefly mentioned here.
Nevertheless the teaching of Illusory Body (in the Six Yogas) is an
uncommon teaching of the Perfecting Yoga of the Anuttara Tantra. The
former one \[the practice of The Impure Illusory Body. *Ed*.\] does not,
however, fulfill all the qualifications of the *real* Illusory Body; the
second one \[the Pure Illusory Body Yoga. *Ed*.\] is also common because
this teaching can also be found in the lower Tantras.

(Through the practice of the above teachings), the thoughts of anger and
lust are subdued and the mind-state of unconcern is attained. Then
combining the decisive understanding of the Voidness of the Middle Way
with the Innate-Bliss and the essence of meditation practice, the yogi
should carefully remember this state of mind. If he can practice well in
such manner, immediately after the arising of the Yi-Dam figure (or the
completion of the Arising Yoga period) through the power of Samadhi, all
the manifestations appear to him as insubstantial and delusory like the
mirage. With this teaching of identifying the manifestations with the
Mandala, one does not have to meditate on the non-self nature of the
divine manifestation purposely; such feeling will arise naturally
without effort.

A teaching of the pith-instruction of the Marpa School is that the yogi
should stare at a mirror …and see whether his own image reflects from
the mirror as the true Buddha's image. This teaching is designed for
promoting the meditation of Arising Yoga. According to the
pith-instructions given by gurus at the time of the bestowal of the
Third

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Initiation, the
image of the Vajrasattva reflected from a mirror is shown to the
disciple to point out the non-self aspect of the Illusory Body and to
illustrate its mirage-like nature.

Following carefully the teaching of the Five Steps, the instructions are
given \[by the guru\]. A comprehensive survey of the
[*A*pags-pa](errata.htm#46) pith-instruction is thus afforded, and the
incompleteness of the Illusory-Body teaching of the Marpa School is also
discussed fully.

Again, there are instructions such as given here: the teaching of the
Two-in-One-with-Learning, the teaching of the
Two-in-One-without-Learning, the principle of the four steps:
Manifestation, Augmentation, Attainment and Great Light. Especially, the
instructions on the following steps are given: How the illusory body is
transformed from the mind-prana; how one can enter into the Absolute
Light after making the Illusory Body; in what manner the Manifestation,
Augmentation, Voidness, etc., come in sight; how the
Two-in-One-with-Learning[76](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:76)<span
id="an_r_nar:76"></span> (Body) is transformed after the Absolute-Light
is stabilized and how through it the Two-in-One-without-Learning Body
can be established how, if the Yogi practices the Light-of-Sleep, he is
able to make the prana enter into the Central Channel during the
awakening state; then how the four Voids will successively appear as
light through his capability of gathering the prana of Roma and
Rkyang-ma in the Heart Center (after the light state); and how the
Illusory Body of Buddha will appear in the dream—in this stage, even if
the Illusory Body of Buddha does not appear in the dream, the yogi will
have no doubt.

Through the power of the prana's entrance into the Central Channel, one
is able to hold the light of sleep;

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

or, if one has attained the general Samadhis of Mahayana or Hinayana,
one can also apply his Samadhi's power in the sleeping state. Thus, the
deep-sleep-Samadhi state can be brought into the weaker-sleeping-state
Samadhi. There is no clear explanation here on the differences of these
various experiences though the various approaches. Therefore, one should
carefully discriminate between the holding-of-dream through prana power
and the holding-of-dream through desire; and between the coming of
death-light and sleep-light through the prana power and through the
power of the strong will. How the Sambhogakaya is manifested in the
Bardo state should also be studied. If one wants to know this in detail,
one may study the instructions of [*A*pags-pa](errata.htm#47) who
provides much information.

In the practice of holding the Light-of-Sleep and the practice of
holding the dream state, though the power of prana, the first step is to
grasp the Light-of-Sleep and then manipulate the dream state.

If one is not able to gather the prana into the Central Channel, but
with a very strong will or intention sets one's mind upon the
recognizing of the dream state during the awakening time, throughout
exertion of will power a Samadhi of sleeping state will arise. However,
this cannot be called a decisive or actual Light-of-Sleep state.

If through both the inner and outer daytime practice, one is able to
proceed with the entering, remaining, and dissolving process in the
Central Channel, the well-known Four Blisses and Four Voids will arise.
Then the identity of Bliss-Void during the emergence of the Innate-Born
can be practised. Eventually the Illusory Body will arise. By means of
this practice, one will be able to impress the Bliss-Void feeling on all
manifestations at all times. Thus the

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (identity) of
manifestation and Mandala (practice of Tantrism) is exercised.

What is the reason for relying on the remaining two Wheels to practice
the Sleep-Light and Illusory-Dream? Because in sleep the pranas will
naturally gather in the Heart Center, and with the power of gathering
the prana in the Central Channel and through the mental concentration on
the Central Channel Heart-Center, the prana of Ro-ma and Rkyang-ma will
gather in the Central Channel-Heart Center, and its power will be very
great. Consequently, the Four Voids, especially the All-Void, will
appear. If one can guard this light of Samadhi for a long period,
through its power in daytime, one will be able to gather a greater
portion of prana in the Central Channel where it will become more steady
than before.

If the light-of-sleep becomes steady, it will help the path greatly.
With it, the power of meditation will increase, without it, the power
will decrease. This is extremely important for those who have not
attained the ultimate accomplishment in this life and expect to attain
the ultimate enlightenment at the time of death. This practice is
superior to the teaching of (merely) recognizing the Light-of Death.

After the emergence of the light-of-sleep, if one knows how to radiate
or raise up the superb Illusory Dream-Body, through its power the
daytime practice on the Illusory Body will become more powerful and
steady. If one cannot attain the ultimate
[accomplishment](errata.htm#48) in this life and puts his hope in the
moment of death, he must have the ability of holding the light with
prana and must practice this teaching of Illusory Body of Dream. Thus he
will be able to identify the Illusory Body of Bardo. Without these
practices

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

it would be impossible to do so; therefore, these two instructions are
unique and of great importance.

The instructions on the actual practice of the Illusory Body and the
Light Yoga follow:

In addition to the teachings given in the last chapter—the Tantric
teaching of the perfect Illusory Body, the teaching of the
light-of-awakening-from sleep, the teachings for the time of the
reversed processes, there are other ways of practice found in the
commentaries of the great teachers, which I will now relate in this
chapter. First the instruction on the Illusory Body practice; second,
the instructions on the Light Yoga.

The teaching of the Illusory Body will be discussed in three steps: the
Illusory Body practice on the manifestations; the Illusory Body practice
on the dream state; and the Illusory Body practice on the Bardo state.

With a decisive understanding or View on Sūnyatā, the yogi associates
this view with the Innate-Born Bliss in meditation. After the meditation
period, through remembering the View and remembering that all
manifestations are [Buddhahood](errata.htm#49), the yogi will naturally
experience, in all daily activities, the feeling that all manifestations
are immanently illusory. He will also see all manifestations
illustrating themselves in the forms of Mandalas. For these (capable)
yogis, of course, there is no need for any visualization practices.

But in order to benefit those who cannot do the same in their
meditation, the following practice is advised: In the after-meditation
period, the yogi should observe the non-self nature of all Dharmas—the
sentient beings and the material world—and identify his body with his
image reflected from the mirror. Through this practice, the common

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

visions of sentient being and universe[77](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:77)<span
id="an_r_nar:77"></span> will appear as mirage without any substance or
self-nature. [If](errata.htm#50) this experience can be stabilized, all
manifestations [will](errata.htm#51) appear in the form of the two
Mandalas[78](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:78)<span id="an_r_nar:78"></span>. With
an [understanding](errata.htm#52) of the mirage-like nature, or with the
view of the identity of non-self-nature Voidness and manifestation, the
yogi observes the pure Mandala. And then he looks into the mirror and
identifies the godly image there with his own body. In this way, the
mirage-like nature of Buddha's body is observed.

With such an understanding, the yogi observes the Buddha's body in the
mirror and concentrates upon it. Then he should think that this image of
Buddha projects itself and merges with him. Since the former practice is
a complete process, its power is much greater than that of the latter.

As instructed in *The Five Steps*, the picture of an image of
Vajrasattva is reflected in a mirror so that by looking at this
reflection, the yogi may observe the nature of the Illusory Body.
Following this instruction, the two gurus, Marpa and *A*gog Lodrawa,
have established this teaching to benefit those disciples who cannot
quite understand the illusory nature of beings merely through hearing it
explained. For that reason, this seeing-practice is given. To practice
this teaching in the Arising Yoga, a specially constructed house is
required; many different drugs and other materials are also needed.
After all the preparations are arranged, the yogi then proceeds to
observe the reflection of the image in the mirror. These instructions
are found in both Marpa's and *A*gog's teachings.

(Generally speaking) there are two different aspects of the
illusory-like and dream-like nature of all
Dharmas:[79](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:79)<span id="an_r_nar:79"></span> the
existent-but-not-real aspect, and the manifesting-yet-void aspect.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

Here, the latter aspect which refers to the Illusory Body is stressed.

The manifestation and the manifestation-void should also be
distinguished; and two different kinds of
voidness[80](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:80)<span id="an_r_nar:80"></span> the
voidness of the utter non-existent such as the never coming-into-being
of the horn of the rabbit or the son of a barren woman; and the voidness
of the manifesting-yet-empty. (If one has not realized the latter, one
will not be able to understand the illusory nature of manifestations.)

The illusory nature of beings is illustrated through analogies. For
example, the phantasm of horses and cattle conjured by the magicians
does not exist in reality, but one cannot deny the apparent reality of
these phenomena (as one sees them). The same holds true in the case of
sentient beings (and objects, etc.) as people see them. Although there
is no immanent actuality in the self-nature of beings, (through their
illusory thoughts) people see manifestations as having real existence.

The manifestations considered (by ordinary beings) as things having
Dharma-form (color, shape, sound, taste, etc.) have never existed.
Nevertheless, the actor and the action, the hearer and the sound, the
seer and the vision, etc., are continuously manifesting themselves
freely. If one realizes the Two-in-One View of "existence in voidness
and voidness in existence,"[81](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:81)<span
id="an_r_nar:81"></span> there will be no danger of falling into the
extreme Realistic or Nihilistic views. Since all Dharmas are immanently
void in nature, realizing their nature as void is quite sufficient;
there is no need for creating a voidness through one's mind-effort, or a
voidness of day, month, or year (past, present, and future).

If one meditates on this principle, all attachments and clinging to the
actuality of beings will be subdued. This

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

profound principle (of voidness) is by no means imperceptible or
unobservable. During the practice of the meditation on Reality Śūnyatā,
and during the contemplation of the Right View, it (the Voidness) can
definitely serve as an object of observation. It is utterly erroneous to
say that the reality of Voidness cannot be seen or known, that it can
never be practiced in the path, and that nothing of it can be
understood, as claimed by some scholars of the old schools of Tibet.

The origin of all the conceptions of skandhas, self-natures, and
symbols, is the very thought of *I am!* Therefore one should stress
practicing the non-existence of the self-nature of beings. As the yogi
perceives the "becomings" with his mind, he should appreciate the
existence of manifestations in the mundane category. The existence of
causations—the existence of the doer and receiver—should be confirmed
within own mind. Though these causations are devoid of self-nature, they
still manifest freely without any hindrances. Should a conflict between
the two—the voidness and existence—appear in his mind, he should think
on the principle of delusiveness, reflected by the parables of shadow,
dream, etc., and reconcile the conflict.

We know that the reflection of the face in the mirror is in reality
void. We also know that the reflection is caused by the conjunction of
the face and mirror, and that the withdrawal of either of them will end
the reflection. But the disappearance of the reflection does not mean
the annihilation of the face and mirror
themselves[82](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:82)<span id="an_r_nar:82"></span>. In
the same way, though there is not one atom existing in sentient beings,
the Karma-doer, the Karma-receiver, and the ripening of Karma through
one's previous deeds can still take

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

place. We should ponder on and practice this principle; when its
understanding is stabilized one may proceed to work on the practice of
the Beyond-Measure-Palace, outwardly, and the Yi-Dam image (in the
Mandala). Then, he should contemplate the View of the Identity of the
Bliss and Void.

Through these practices, the yogi will experience all manifestations as
the Bodies of Buddha, will realize these Bodies as delusory, and will
find this delusiveness absorbed in the Great Bliss. These realizations
will take place successively as three steps. If the yogi attains the
Great Bliss in his main-meditation stage, he should pay especial
attention to the observation of Śūnyatā. Thus, by concentration on
Śūnyatā-Bliss the non-discriminating Wisdom will arise.

The yogi should practice the main-meditation and after-meditation
stages, alternatively.[83](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:83)<span
id="an_r_nar:83"></span>

 

The instruction on the Dream-Illusory Body Practice falls into four
divisions: (1) how to recognize the dream; (2) how to purify and develop
the dream; (3) how to overcome the rambling type of dreams and recognize
them as illusory manifestations; (4) how to practice on the real nature
of dream.

\(1\) There are two different ways to recognize or to hold the dream.
The first way is recognizing and holding the dream through the power of
Prana. That is, through the power which is produced by the gathering and
dissolving of Prana in the Central Channel during the waking stage, the
Four Voidnesses will arise. At the outset, when the light of the dream
stage is realized, the yogi will be able to recognize the Four
Voidnesses clearly. Through this realization, he will automatically
recognize the dream (as

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

such). In this case, there is no need for him to practice any teachings
for recognizing the dream. The second way is recognizing the dream by
intention. These teachings are provided for those who do not have the
power over Prana, as mentioned before. This practice is carried out by
creating, in the daytime, a strong intention for recognizing the dream
and concentrating on the Throat Center, etc.

Of these two (methods), the former is the unique teaching of recognizing
the dream given by Tantra. The latter practice, however, is a common and
general one. Here, I want to mention the so-called teaching of Matsur,
of recognising the dream through concentration on the Heart Center, and
the teaching of Mestson of accomplishing the same purpose by
concentration on the Throat Center. Some claim that concentration on the
Heart Center is for the practice of Light Yoga and that concentration on
the Throat Center is for the practice of Dream Yoga. However, I think
that, through the arising of the Four Voidnesses of sleep, before the
dream appears, the power of Prana—which is produced by concentration on
the Heart Center—will enable one to recognize the dream. Therefore it is
permissible to say that concentration on the Heart Center will enable
one to recognize the dream. In the case of practice through intensive
intention, the yogi is not able to see the Four Voidnesses before the
dream appears; therefore, concentration on the Throat Center is the
right method.

In this connection, one may ask: "Since concentrating on the Throat
Center is the right teaching, should we stick to it and disregard the
others?" A brief discussion on this point may be helpful. Consider the
case of the yogi who is able to hold (the dream) through Prana power; if
he concentrates on the Throat Center during the time just

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

before falling into the stage of sleep, the Pranas will gather and
dissolve in the Central Channel at the Throat Center. Though the yogi
has raised the Four Voidnesses beforehand, (because of the diversified
attention placed on the Throat Center) the Prana is neither concentrated
(completely) in the Heart Center nor gathered at the Throat Center.
Since the Four Voidnesses can never be revealed through practices other
than meditation in the Heart Center, the yogi should concentrate on the
Heart Center just on the verge of falling asleep.

However, there is an advantage in concentrating on the Throat Center. If
one concentrates at the Throat Center or at the forehead, the gathering
of Prana in the Heart Center will become lesser and weaker;
consequently, the sleep will become very light and the awareness of mind
will become clearer. If a dream is produced through meditating on the
Throat Center during sleep, this dream will last longer than usual (or
be more steady than the usual dream.) Furthermore, if the yogi raises a
desire to have a longer dream in his sleeping state after a certain
dream he has experienced, he will shortly be able, through the power
derived from previous concentration on the Throat Center (during
repose), to hold his mind (and produce) a dream wherein he is able to
practice the meritorious (Dream Yoga) for a longer. period. For these
reasons, the instruction for concentrating on the Throat Center is
given.

Generally speaking, if the yogi has a sound foundation of the practice
of the path, his dream is clear and he is able to recognize it
frequently. In this case, he does not have to depend on the infrequent
clear dreams (as do those who practice with intention). If he has strong
desires in the

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

daytime, these will usually be (represented) in his dreams. Based on
this principle, if he creates a strong desire during the day to
recognize his dream, and repeatedly strengthens this desire while awake,
he will, when asleep, be able to recognize the dream. This is not a very
difficult practice.

If no dream whatsoever appears, there is then no way for the yogi to
practice the Dream Yoga; therefore, he must use all methods to produce a
dream as given in the Tantric instructions. If the dream takes place but
is not clear, it will still be difficult for the yogi to practice Dream
Yoga. Therefore, it is necessary to have a clear dream—clear to the
point that the yogi can relate it when he awakes. To dwell in a solitary
place helps to purify mind so that it will be as clear in the evening as
in the morning. Then it is easy to recognize the dream. In short, this
intentional practice requires a very strong desire directed toward
recognizing the dream in the daytime, and only by such strong habitual
thinking and awareness can the dream be recognized. Therefore, the
practice in the daytime is important. Besides this, there are many
teachings such as concentrating on the Throat Center, on the point
between the eyebrows, visualizing certain objects and shapes, some
special Prana practices, etc. Through these methods, the clearness and
awareness of the mind is strengthened.

Thus, the yogi should follow these Pith-instructions of Dream Yoga,
study them, and learn them well. He should rely on a guru who possesses
the unmistakable experience of Dream Yoga; otherwise (if he follows the
wrong instruction from the wrong guru), he may have some experiences in
the beginning, but will have nothing but confusion in the end.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

Once the dream is recognized, the yogi should visualize himself as his
Patron Buddha, or practice the Guru Yoga together with offering-prayers.
(In the dream state) the yogi should make an effort to create many
clear, auspicious dreams at his own will, try to recognize them, expand
them, and utilize them as an opportunity to practice various benevolent
devotions. If any ominous dream occur the yogi should transform it into
an auspicious one. He should pray to his Guru with great earnestness to
grant him the ability to do so. In the dream state, the yogi should
perform the ritual of offering the Gtormas to the Yi-Dam and protective
deities, pray them to grant his wishes, etc. In his
retreat-confinement,[84](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:84)<span
id="an_r_nar:84"></span> the yogi should work hard on these practices.

Practice during the daytime should put emphasis mainly on dwelling upon
or retaining the memory of the desire (to recognize the dream at night).
The yogi should think that all manifestations he beholds and all that
cross his way in the waking state are (actually) in the dream state.
This he does by reminding himself, "This is a dream. I now recognize it.
I know that I am dreaming." With great earnestness the yogi should
strengthen his wish by enhancing the desire. Thus, eventually, when the
dreams appear, he will be able to recognize them and also to utilize
them as a basis to exercise (the Dream Yoga practices). The yogi should
not only strengthen his intention by repeatedly reminding himself of the
desire during the day, but also strengthen the desire just before sleep.
This will greatly [increase](errata.htm#53) the chance of recognizing
the dream.

The instructions on the intensive practice at night are given in three
divisions: first, to visualize the word-symbols in the Throat Center.
When the yogi feels that he is

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

about to go to sleep, he should visualize that he becomes the Patron
Buddha and also prays many times to his guru who is sitting upon his
head. Then he should visualize a red *Ah* word or *Oṃ* word situated in
the center of a red lotus with four leaves in the Central Channel of the
Throat Center, This *Ah* or *Oṃ* word is the symbol of the essence of
Buddha's expression upon which the yogi should concentrate without
distraction. In such a manner, the yogi should enter into the state of
sleep (keeping these visualizations in mind).

There is another instruction on performing this practice, i.e. to
visualize five words—*Oṃ*, *Ah*, *Nu*, *Da*, *Ra*—in a successive order,
in contrast to meditating on one red *Ah* word alone. This method is
quite different. *The (Tantra) of the Non-Twofold Victorious
Illusoriness* says, "Meditating on the four words—*Ah*, *Nu*, *Da*,
*Ra*—in a successive order does not increase more power. It helps
little; therefore, this practice may be dispensed with." To meditate on
the *Oṃ* word at the central point is in accord with the saying of
Sambhudra and other Tantras[85](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:85)<span
id="an_r_nar:85"></span>. However, visualizing a red *Ah* word is also
acceptable. The extremely important point is to meditate on the word at
the "central point"; i.e., to meditate on the word in the Throat Center
in the Central Channel. Should he be unable to recognize the dream
through this visualization, he must practice many, many times. If he
still cannot hold the dream, he should visualize a *Thig-le* \[here in
the sense of bindu or seed of power\] at the point between the eyebrows
and hold on to it.

It is difficult to recognize the dream after midnight and before dawn,
for this is a period in which sleep is very deep. In the time after
daybreak into and through dawn, the

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

sleep is usually light. During this period it is easy to recognize the
dream. Then the yogi should pray to his guru, remind himself of the
desire (to hold onto the dream),visualize a white glittering *Thig-le*
at the central point between the eyebrows on his self-Yi-Dam body, and
hold onto the visualization. He should also practice the Vase-Breathing
exercise seven times; then he will fall asleep again. If he stresses
visualizing the glittering *Thig-le* too much, he will not be able to
sleep, or will be prone to awaken easily. In this case, he should
visualize the *Thig-le* as a little darker in hue.

Some say that if he cannot fall into sleep because of meditating on the
Throat Center, he should concentrate on the forehead, visualizing a
white *Thig-le* there. This is very erroneous, because the forehead is a
place that, if concentrated upon, causes dreams to arise, (puts
consciousness in operation in opposition to the tendency to sleep). This
foolish statement is akin to saying that concentration upon the Sleeping
Center will make one awake. If he concentrates on the Throat Center at
dawn and twilight for a long period and still cannot hold the dream, he
must be a person who requires a sound, heavy sleep. For him, meditating
on the Eyebrow Center will help. If by doing this, the sleep then
becomes too light and he is liable to awake, or he can not fall into
sleep at all, he should visualize a *Thig-le* within the reproductive
organ and also repeatedly strengthen his desire for recognizing the
dream during the daytime as mentioned before. Before sleep, he should
visualize a black [*Thig-le*](errata.htm#54) in the center of the organ
and practice the breathing exercise twenty-one times. Thus the
destructive thoughts will be halted, and he can fall into sleep more
easily. One should know that meditating on that organ is a cure for
light sleep.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

If through the practice \[of meditating on the frontal sinus center\]
one still cannot subdue or overcome heavy sleep, one may follow such
instructions as meditating on the month and year (visualizing the moon
and sun). If by doing so, the yogi still cannot practice the Dream Yoga,
he should know that only through the power of the (Wisdom)-Prana
produced by the arising of the Innate Born Wisdom through the process of
gathering, entering, and dissolving in the Central Channel of the Heat
Yoga practice, one is able to hold a dream properly. Through the
practice of intensive intention, no matter how hard one tries, he may
still not be able to practice properly. Therefore, he should work hard
on the superb Heat Yoga and try to lead the Pranas into the Central
Channel. This is the primary practice, others being secondary.

 

\(2\) How to purify and develop the dream: There are two ways to develop
the dream: the mundane way and the Buddhistic way. The principle of
developing the dream is to create a dream or to transform it. The yogi
may think in the dream stage that he rides on the rays of the sun and
moon and journeys to the thirty-three heavens or to any place in this
world. To enlarge his visions and experiences, he may conceive that he
walks or flies in the sky. The Buddhistic way is to conceive that in the
dream state one goes to the Pure Land of Amitabha or the heaven-land of
Maitreya or the *A*og-min Pure Land, etc., visiting the Buddhas and
Bodhisattvas, rendering one's offerings, and hearing the Dharma from
them. To be able to do this, one must have attained the mastery of Prana
power. Only through the Prana power is one able to transform or create
any dream state at one's own will. For those who have this mastery

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

these things are not difficult. For the ordinary person, however, a
great deal of practice is required.

In both cases (through intensive intention and through the Prana power),
the yogi sees the Buddha's Pure Land in his dream vision; however, these
visions are merely the pictures the (reflections) of the Buddha's Pure
Land and cannot be considered as real. In the latter case (through the
exercise of Prana's power), one may receive some revelations or
prophecies in dream that prove to be true. Most of them, however, are
not reliable. In the former case (through intensive intention), the yogi
should rely on the meritorious instructions together with some breathing
exercises to practice the Dream Yoga.

The following instruction will improve the practice of Dream Yoga: When
the yogi sees a man, an animal, a pillar, a vase or any other object in
a dream, he should transform them by multiplying them from one to two,
from two to four, to eight—up to hundreds and thousands.

 

\(3\) How to overcome the rambling type of dreams and recognize them as
illusory manifestations: When the yogi one sees a fire or flood in a
dream and becomes frightened, he should think to himself, recognizing
the dream, "How can the fire and water of dream ever harm me?" Also, he
should try to jump the fire and cross the flood. To learn the illusory
nature of dream means to realize the non-existent nature of the vase,
and other objects of dream-visions. This is accomplished by recognizing
the dream. But one is not able, merely through the understanding, to
realize the non-existence Śūnyatā of the self-nature of the dream. For
instance, in the waking state, when he sees the reflection in a mirror,
though he knows that the reflection

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

is illusory, he still cannot realize the Suchness of the reflection.

One's incapacity for recognizing the dream is like that of a child who
believes the reflection of his face to be his true face; while in
recognizing the dream, one is like an adult who knows the reflection is
unreal although it appears to be his actual face. This example is an
illustration of the underlying principle, and is a good one to express
the principle of the Voidness-as-Reflection (literally the Voidness of
the face-like reflection in the sense of the nonexistence of the "true"
face in the reflection). According to this principle, one should know
that all Dharmas are Void in their self-nature—self-nature in the sense
of real self-existence. One should also understand that all Dharmas are
dream-like and have no substantiality whatsoever.

With this understanding definitely in mind, the yogi should acquaint
himself with the nature, manner and characteristics of the
Clinging-of-Existence, and also [familiarize](errata.htm#55) himself
with the reasons for the non-existence of this (illusory) Clinging. With
such an understanding, the yogi learns that all the visions, objects,
and subjects that he sees in the dream are identical with (Buddha) and
the Two Mandalas; they are void in nature yet manifest (freely) as
conjurations. Further, the yogi should understand that all these visions
are absorbed in the bliss-void, as one has experienced during the
daytime.

 

\(4\) The Practice on the real nature of dream: This is a teaching
combining the Light Yoga with Dream Yoga. In the practice of this
teaching, the yogi clearly visualizes (in the dream state) the self-body
becoming his Yidam. From his heart, the *Hūṃ* word emanates rays of
light that gather

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

all the visions in the dream and draw them back into the *Hūṃ* word.
Then both the lower and upper part of his body melt and become absorbed
into the *Hūṃ* word. Then the *Hūṃ* word also vanishes into the
non-discriminating Light, upon which the yogi should concentrate his
mind.

The perception-of-mind[86](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:86)<span
id="an_r_nar:86"></span> of the dream state is much easier to absorb
than the perception-of-mind of the waking state. In the dream state,
when some portion of the very coarse kind of Prana dissolves itself and
gathers at the Heart Center, the dream will vanish, and one will fall
into the sleeping state. This is the time in which one may recognize the
Voidness; if not, through repeated practices, one will definitely be
able to see the Voidness of sleep clearly. If the absorbing
process[87](ettt22.htm#an_n_nar:87)<span id="an_r_nar:87"></span> and
Void-holding become stable, this will greatly help meditation—Prana
exercise, visualization, Mahamudra—in the daytime. 1f the yogi cannot
recognize the Voidness-of-Sleep at the beginning stage when he first
falls into sleep, he will be able through the power of recognizing the
dream, to see the special Voidness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Seven: On the Bardo Realm](ettt16)

</div>
