[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo16.md) 
[Next](theo18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 6. THOUGHT-FORMS AND THE HUMAN AURA

It has become evident that the formations of any one of the three worlds
can have reality for a man only when he has the capacities or the organs
for perceiving them. A man perceives certain occurrences in space as
light phenomena only because he has a correctly-constructed eye. It
depends on the receptivity of a being how much of what really is,
reveals itself to it. Never therefore may a man say that only what he
can perceive is real. There can be much that is real, for the perception
of which he has no organs. Now the soul world and the spirit world are
just as real as the sensible world, indeed they are real in a much
higher sense. No physical eye can see feelings and ideas; but they are
real. And as man

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

by means of his outer senses has the corporal world before him as an
object of perception, so do feelings, impulses, instincts, thoughts,
etc., become objects of perception for his spiritual senses. Exactly as
occurrences in space can be seen with the sensible eye as color
phenomena, the above-named soul and spiritual occurrences can become, by
means of the inner senses, perceptions which are analogous to the
sensible color phenomena. To understand perfectly in what way this is
meant is only possible for one who has trod the path of knowledge
described in the following chapter and has thereby developed his inner
senses. For such a one the soul phenomena in the soul region around him
and the spiritual phenomena in the spiritual region become
super-sensibly visible. For him, feelings ray out from the feeling being
as light phenomena; thoughts surge through the spiritual space. For him,
the thought of one man about another is not something imperceptible but
a perceptible occurrence. The thought streams out as an actual reality
from one human being and flows to the other. And the way in which this
thought acts on the other person becomes

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

similarly a perceptible occurrence in the spiritual world. Thus the
physically perceptible human being is only part of the whole man for him
whose spiritual senses are unfolded. This physical man becomes the
center of soul and spiritual outpourings. It is impossible to do more
than faintly indicate the richly varied world which discloses itself
here to the seer. A human thought, for example, appears as a spiritually
perceptible color phenomenon. Its color corresponds with the character
of the thought. A thought which springs forth from a sensual impulse in
a person has a different color from a thought conceived in the service
of pure knowledge, noble beauty, or the eternal good. Thoughts which
spring from the sensual life course through the soul world in red shades
of color. A thought by which the thinker rises to higher knowledge
appears in beautiful light yellow. A thought which springs from devoted
and unselfish love rays out in glorious rose pink. And just as the
content of a thought comes into expression in its supersensibly visible
form, so also does the greater or less degree of its definiteness. The
precise thought of the thinker shows itself as

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

a formation with definite outlines; the confused idea appears as a
wavering, cloudy formation.

In this way the soul and spirit being of man appears as the
supersensible part of the <span class="smallcaps">whole</span> human
being.

The color effects which the "spiritual eye" can perceive raying out
round the physical man and enveloping him like a cloud (somewhat
egg-shaped) are called the <span class="smallcaps">human</span> aura.
The size of this aura differs in different people. But one can form an
idea of it by picturing that the <span class="smallcaps">whole</span>
man is in the average twice as long and four times as broad as the
physical man.

The most varied tones of colors surge in the aura. And this surging is a
true picture of the inner life of the man. Single color-tones are just
as changing. But certain permanent qualities, such as talents, habits,
traits of character, express themselves in a foundation of permanent
color-tones.

The aura varies greatly according to the different temperaments and
dispositions of people; it varies also in accordance with the stages of
spiritual development. A man who

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

yields completely to his animal impulses has an entirely different aura
from one who lives much in the world of thought. The aura of a nature
with a religious tone differs essentially from one that expends itself
on the trivial experiences of the day. In addition to this, all varying
moods, all inclinations, joys and pains, find their expression in the
aura.

One has to compare the auras of different human types with each other in
order to learn to understand the meaning of the color-tones. Take, to
begin with, people who have strongly marked passions. They may be
divided into two kinds; those who are impelled to these feelings by the
animal nature chiefly, and those with whom these passions take a more
subtle form in which they are, so to speak, strongly influenced by
thought. In the first kind of person brown and brown-red streams of
color in every shade surge through the aura in definite places. In
persons with more subtle passions there appear in the same places tones
of brighter red and green. One can notice that as intelligence increases
the green tones become more and more abundant. Persons who are very
intelligent, but who quite

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

give themselves over to the satisfying of their animal impulses, have
much green in their aura. But this green will always have more or less
of an admixture of brown or brownish red. Unintelligent people show a
great part of their aura coursed through by brownish red or even by dark
blood-red streams.

The auras of quiet, deliberate, thoughtful people are essentially
different from those of such passionate natures. The brownish and
reddish tones become less prominent, and different shades of green come
out. With thoughtful natures the aura shows a pleasing green undertone.
This is to an especial degree the appearance of those natures of whom
one can say, "They know how to adapt themselves to every condition of
life."

Blue tones of color appear in natures full of devotion. The more a man
places his Self in the service of a thing the more pronounced become the
blue shades. In this class, also, one finds two quite different kinds of
people. There are natures with a mediocre power of thought, passive
souls who, as it were, have nothing to throw into the stream of events
in the world but their "good nature." Their aura

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

glimmers with beautiful blue. One observes the same in the auras of
religious and devotional natures. Compassionate souls and those who find
pleasure in giving themselves up to a life of benevolence have similar
auras. If such people are intelligent in addition to this, green and
blue currents alternate, or the blue itself perhaps take a greenish
shade. It is the peculiarity of the active souls in contrast to the
passive, that their blue saturates itself from within with bright
color-tones. Richly inventive natures, such as have fruitful thoughts,
ray out bright tones of color as if from an inner point. This is the
case in the highest degree with those persons whom one calls "wise," and
especially with those full of fruitful ideas. Generally speaking, all
that implies spiritual activity takes more the form of rays which spread
out from within, while everything that arises from the animal life has
the form of irregular clouds which surge through the aura.

Auric formations show colorings which differ according to whether the
conceptions which spring up in an active soul are placed at the service
of the person's own animal

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

impulses or of an idealistic interest outside of himself. The inventive
person who applies all his thoughts to the satisfaction of his sensual
passions shows dark, blue-red shades; he, on the contrary, who places
his thoughts selflessly at the service of an interest outside of
himself, shows light reddish-blue color-tones. A spiritual life combined
with noble devotion and capacity for sacrifice shows rose pink or light
violet colors.

Not only does the fundamental disposition of the soul show its color
surgings in the aura but also transient passions, moods, and other inner
experiences. An anger that breaks out suddenly creates red streams.
Feelings of injured dignity which expend themselves in a sudden welling
up can be seen appearing in dark green clouds. Color phenomena, however,
do not appear only in [irregular](errata.htm#7.md) cloud forms but also in
distinctly defined, regularly shaped figures. A fit of terror, for
example, shows the aura lined from top to bottom by undulating stripes
of blue color suffused with a reddish shimmer. In a person who expects
with anxiety some particular event, one can see continuous red-blue

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

stripes like rays streaming from within the aura to the circumference.

Every sensation which a man receives from without can be observed by one
who has developed a faculty of exact spiritual perception. Persons who
are greatly excited by every external impression show a continuous
flickering of small reddish spots and flecks in the aura. In people who
do not feel intensely, these flecks have an orange yellow or even a
beautiful yellow coloring. So called "absentminded" people show bluish
flecks more or less changing in form.

A highly developed spiritual seer can distinguish three species of color
phenomena within the aura, radiating and surging round a man. First
there are the colors which bear more or less the character of opaqueness
and dullness, although if we compare them with those that our physical
eyes see, they appear in comparison fugitive and transparent. But within
the supersensible world itself they make the space which they fill
comparatively opaque; they fill it like mist forms. The second species
of colors consists of those which are, as it were, light itself. They
light up the

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

space which they fill so that it becomes itself, through them, a shining
or lighted space. The third kind of color phenomena is quite different
from these two. They have a raying, sparkling, glittering character.
They fill space not merely with light but with glistening, glittering
rays. There is something active and inherently mobile in these colors.
The others are somewhat quiet and lack brilliance. These on the contrary
continuously produce themselves out of themselves, as it were. By the
two first species of colors, the space is filled up with a subtle fluid
which remains quietly in it. By the third it is filled with life ever
enflaming itself anew with never-resting activity.

Now these three species of colors are not ranged, as it were, strictly
alongside each other in the human aura; they are not each enclosed in a
separate section of space. On the contrary, they interpenetrate and
suffuse each other in the most varied ways. One can see all three
species playing through each other in one region of the aura, just as
one can simultaneously hear and see a physical body such as a bell. The
aura thereby becomes an

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

exceedingly complicated phenomenon, for one has, as it were, to do with
three auras within each other and interpenetrating each other. One can,
however, overcome the difficulty by directing one's attention to the
three species alternately. One then does in the supersensible world
something similar to what one does in the sensible, for example, when
one closes one's eyes in order to give oneself up fully to the
impression of a piece of music. The "seer" has, as it were, three
different organs for the three species of colors. And, in order to
observe undisturbed, he can open or close to impressions any one of the
organs. As a rule only the one kind of organ can at first be developed
by a "seer," namely for the first kind of colors. A person at this stage
can see only the one aura. The other two remain invisible to him. In the
same way a person may be accessible to impressions from the two first
but not the third. The higher stage of the "gift of seeing" consists in
a person's being able to see all three auras and, for the purpose of
study, to direct his attention to the one or the other.

The threefold aura is the supersensibly

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

visible expression of the being of man. The three members, body, soul,
and spirit, come to expression in it.

The first aura is a mirror of the influence which the body exercises on
the soul of man; the second signifies the life of the soul itself, the
soul that has raised itself above what affects the senses directly, but
is not yet devoted to the service of the eternal; the third mirrors the
lordship which the eternal spirit has won over the transitory man. When
descriptions of the aura are given, as here, it must be emphasized that
these things are not only difficult to observe but above all difficult
to describe. No one, therefore, should see in a description like this
anything more than a stimulus to thought.

The "seer" therefore can judge the stage of development of a person by
the nature of his aura. When an undeveloped person approaches him, one
who is given up entirely to his impulses, passions, and momentary
external incitements, he sees the first aura in the loudest colors. The
second, on the contrary, is only slightly developed. He sees in it only
scanty color formations, while the third is barely indicated. Only, here
and there, a

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

small, glittering spark of color shows itself, indicating that even in
this human being the eternal already lives as a germ, but that it will
require a long course of evolution, extending over many incarnations,
before it can gain a predominating influence on the outer life of its
bearer. The more the man puts from him his lower impulses, the less
obtrusive becomes the first part of the aura. The second part grows
larger and larger, filling the color body within which the physical man
lives, ever more and more completely, with its illumining force. And the
highly developed persons, "Servants of the Eternal," show the wonderful
third aura, that part which bears witness how far the human being has
become a citizen of the spiritual world. For the divine Self rays
through this part of the human aura into the earthly world. Persons in
whom this aura is developed are the flames through whom the Divine
illumines this world. They have learned to live not for themselves but
for the eternally True, the nobly Beautiful and Good; they have wrung
from their narrower self the power to offer themselves up on the altar
of the great World Work.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Thus there comes to expression in the aura what the man has made of
himself in the course of his incarnations.

All three parts of the aura contain colors of the most varied shades.
But the character of these shades changes with the stage of development
of the man. One can see in the first part of the aura of the undeveloped
man of impulse all shades from red to blue. With him these shades have a
dull, dirty character. The obtrusive red shades point to the sensual
desires, to the fleshly lusts, to the passion for the enjoyments of the
palate and the stomach. Green shades appear to be found especially in
those lower natures that incline to obtuseness and indifference,
greedily giving themselves over to each enjoyment but nevertheless
shunning the exertions necessary to satisfy them. Where the desires are
passionately bent on any goal beyond the reach of the capacities already
acquired, brownish-green and yellowish-green colors appear. Certain
modern modes of life actually breed this kind of aura.

A personal conceit which is entirely rooted in low inclinations, that is
to say the lowest stage of egoism, shows itself in tones from

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

dirty yellow to brown. Now it is clear that even the animal life of
impulse can take on a pleasing character. There is a purely natural
capacity for self-sacrifice, a high form of which is to be found in the
animal kingdom. This development of an animal impulse finds its most
beautiful consummation in the natural mother love. These selfless
natural impulses come to expression in the first aura in light reddish
to rose-red shades of color. Cowardly fear and timidity in the face of
external causes show themselves in the aura in brown-blue and gray-blue
colors.

The second aura also shows the most varied grades of colors. Brown and
orange colored formations point to strongly developed conceit, pride,
and ambition. Inquisitiveness also announces its presence through
red-yellow flecks. A bright yellow mirrors clear thinking and
intelligence, green expresses understanding of life and the world.
Children who learn easily have much green in this part of their aura. A
green yellow in the second aura seems to betoken a good memory. Rose-red
indicates a well-meaning affectionate nature. Blue is the sign of piety.
The more

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

the piety approaches to religious fervor, the more does blue pass over
into violet. Idealism and an earnest view of life in a higher sense one
sees as indigo blue.

The fundamental colors of the third aura are yellow, green, and blue.
<span class="smallcaps">Yellow</span> appears here if the thinking is
filled with lofty, wide-reaching ideas that comprehend the details as
part of the whole of the divine World Order. If the thinking is
intuitive and is also completely purified of all conceptions springing
from the world of the senses, the yellow has a golden brilliance. <span
class="smallcaps">Green</span> indicates love toward all beings; <span
class="smallcaps">blue</span> is the sign of a capacity for selfless
sacrifice for all beings. If this capacity for sacrifice is brought to
the height of the strong Willing, which devotes itself to the active
service of the world, the blue brightens to light violet. If pride and
desire for honor as last remnants of personal egoism are still present
in a more highly developed person there appear beside the yellow shades
others verging on orange. It must, however, be remarked that in <span
class="smallcaps">this</span> part of the aura the colors are very
different from the shades one

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

is accustomed to see in the world of the senses. It displays to the
"seer" a beauty and an exaltedness with which nothing in the ordinary
world can be compared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. The Path of Knowledge](theo18.md)
