[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### NOTES AND AMPLIFICATIONS

1\. To page [23](theo10.htm#page_23.md). To speak of "life-force"
(*Lebenskraft*) was regarded a short time back as the mark of an
unscientific mind. But one begins to find here and there in science
to-day a tendency which is not averse from the idea of a "life-force"
such as was accepted in former times. Anyone who really understands the
course of contemporary science will, however, recognize that the
superior logic lies with those who in considering this tendency refuse
to find any trace of "life-force." "Life-force" is by no means the same
as what is to-day called the "forces of nature (*Naturkrafte*)," and he
who will not pass over from the modes of thought and conception
characteristic of modern science to higher modes ought not to speak of
"life-force." Only the mode of thinking and the presuppositions of
spiritual science (*Geisteswissenschaft*) or Theosophy make it possible
to deal with such things without inconsistency.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

2\. To page [26](theo10.htm#page_26.md). When the "sense of touch" of the
lower organisms is spoken of here, it is not intended to convey what is
expressed by this phrase in the ordinary expositions of the "Senses."
From the theosophical point of view much could, in fact, be urged in
objection to the use of this expression. What is meant here by "sense of
touch" is rather a <span class="smallcaps">general becoming aware</span>
of an external impression, in contrast to the <span
class="smallcaps">special</span> becoming aware which consists in
seeing, hearing, etc.

3\. To page [35](theo10.htm#page_35.md). It is necessary to read
theosophical presentations of a subject with strict accuracy. For it is
only in the accurate statement of ideas that they have a value. For
example in the statement, "They (the sensations, etc.) do not in its
case (namely, that of the animal) become interwoven with independent
thoughts transcending the immediate experience," one could easily fall
into the mistake of thinking that it was claimed here that there are no
thoughts contained in the sensations or the instincts of animals. Now
Theosophy is actually based on a knowledge which says that all inner
experience on the part of animals (and all existence of any kind) is

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

interwoven with thought. But the thoughts of the animal are not those of
an independent I, or ego, living in the animal, but are those of the
animal group ego, which must be regarded as a being governing the animal
from without. This group ego is not present in the physical world as is
the I, or ego, of a man, but works down into the animal from the soul
world described on pages [87](theo12.htm#page_87.md) *et seq*. (Further
details regarding this are to be found in my "Outline of Occult
Science.") The real point at issue in the case of man is that thoughts
attain to an independent existence <span class="smallcaps">in
him</span>—that thoughts are not experienced immediately in sensation,
but mediately as thoughts which are experienced also in the soul.

4\. To page [42](theo10.htm#page_42.md). When it is said that little
children say, "Charles is good," "Mary wishes to have this," it must be
carefully noted that the important point is not so much how soon
children use the word "I" but when they connect the proper conception
with that word. When children hear adults use the word, they can
continually use it without having the conception of the "I."
Nevertheless, the fact that the use of the word begins late as a rule
points

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

to an important feature of evolution, namely the gradual unfolding of
the I-concept out of the vague I-feeling.

5\. To pages [47](theo10.htm#page_47) and [48](theo10.htm#page_48.md). A
description of the intrinsic nature of "Intuition" is to be found in my
books "A Way of Initiation" and "Occult Science." One might through
inaccurate observation of the matter detect a contradiction between the
use of this word in those books and what is said in this book on page
[47](theo10.htm#page_47.md). This, however, will be found not to exist when
one takes into account that what reveals itself through intuition in
full reality to supersensible knowledge makes itself known, in its <span
class="smallcaps">lowest</span> revelation, to the spirit-self, even as
the external existence of the physical world makes itself known in
sensation.

6\. To page [91](theo12.htm#page_91.md). The subject of the spiritual
organs of perception which is only alluded to shortly in the later
chapter in this book on The Path of Knowledge, is more fully dealt with
in my books "A Way of Initiation" and "Occult Science." (Berlin,
*Philosophisch-Theosophischer Verlag*. Motz Strasse 17.)

7\. To page [132](theo14.htm#page_132.md). It would be incorrect to imagine
a ceaseless <span class="smallcaps">unrest</span> in the spiritual

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

world because there is not in it "a state of rest, a remaining in one
place, as in the physical world." There, where the Beings are who create
the Archetypes, there is not indeed what can be called "rest in one
place," but there is that rest which is spiritual in its nature, and
consistent with active mobility. It may be likened to the restful
satisfaction and bliss of the spirit which is revealed in deeds and not
in a state of inaction.

8\. To page [139](theo14.htm#page_139.md). One is obliged to use the word
"Purposes" in regard to the impelling or motive Powers of the world
evolution, although it opens the door to a temptation to conceive of
these Powers simply as human purposes. In the case of such words—which
had naturally to be taken from the sphere of human life—this temptation
can be averted only by the raising of oneself when using them to a
significance from which every connection with human limitation is
banished, and there is assigned to them what man approximately imbues
them with on those occasions in his life when he, to a certain degree,
rises above himself.

9\. To page [139](theo14.htm#page_139.md). Further particulars in

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

regard to the "Spiritual Word" are to be found in my "Outline of Occult
Science."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="smallcaps">Munich</span>, August 28, 1910.

</div>

 

 

 

 

 
