[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo03) 
[Next](theo05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

### PREFACE

#### TO THE THIRD EDITION

<span class="smallcaps">On</span> the appearance of the second edition
of this book occasion was taken to preface a few remarks which may also
be said with regard to this third edition. "Amplifications and
extensions," which seem to me important for the more exact description
of what is being presented, have again been inserted; but in no case
have essential alterations of what was contained in the first and second
editions seemed necessary. What was said on the first appearance of the
book regarding its aim, and what was added to this in the second
edition, also require, at present, no alteration. In the preface to the
second edition the following supplementary remarks were inserted.

Anyone who at the present time gives a description of supersensible
facts ought to be quite clear on two points. The first is that our age
<span class="smallcaps">requires</span> the cultivation of the different
branches of supersensible knowledge. The

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

other is that the intellectual and spiritual life of the day is full of
ideas and feelings which make such a description appear to many an
absolute chaos of fantastic notions and dreams. The present age requires
knowledge of the supersensible because all that a man can come to know
by current methods about the world and life arouses in him numerous
questions which can only be answered by means of supersensible truths.
For one ought not to deceive oneself in regard to the fact that the
information concerning the fundamental truths of existence given within
the intellectual and spiritual currents of to-day is, for the souls that
feel deeply, a source not of answers but of <span
class="smallcaps">questions</span> regarding the great problems of the
universe and of life. Some people may, for a time, hold firmly to the
opinion that they can find a solution of the problems of existence
within the "results of strictly scientific facts," and within the
conclusions of this or that thinker of the day. But when the soul goes
into those depths into which it must go if it is to understand itself,
what at first seemed to be a solution becomes evident as being only the
incentive to the true question. And an answer

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

to <span class="smallcaps">this</span> question is not intended to be
brought forward merely as a response to human curiosity; on it, rather,
depend the inner calm and completeness of the soul life. The attainment
of such an answer does not satisfy merely the thirst for knowledge; it
makes a man capable of practical work and fitted for the duties of life,
while the lack of a solution of these questions lames his soul, and
finally his body also. In fact, the knowledge of the supersensible is
not merely something that meets a theoretical requirement; it supplies a
method for leading a truly practical life. Exactly on account of the
nature of the intellectual and spiritual life of the present time,
therefore, theosophy is a domain of knowledge indispensable for our age.

On the other hand, it is an evident fact that many to-day reject most
strongly what they most sorely need. The dominating influence exercised
by many theories built up on the basis of "exact scientific experience"
is so great on some people that they cannot do otherwise than regard the
contents of a book like this as a boundless absurdity. The exponent of
supersensible truths can view such facts entirely

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

free from any illusions. People will certainly be prone to demand from
him that he should give "irrefutable proofs" for what he states. But
they do not realize that in doing this they are the victims of a
misconception, for they demand, although unconsciously, not the proofs
lying within the things themselves, but those which they personally are
willing to recognize or are in a condition to recognize. The author of
this work knows that it contains nothing that any person taking his
stand on the basis of the natural science of the present day will be
unable to accept. He knows that all the requirements of natural science
can be complied with, and <span class="smallcaps">for this very
reason</span> the method adopted here of presenting the facts of the
supersensible world supplies its own justification. In fact, the manner
in which a true natural science approaches and deals with a subject is
the very one in full harmony with this presentation. And anyone
accustomed to think in that manner will be moved by many a discussion to
feel in the way characterized in Goethe's deep and true saying, "A false
teaching does not offer any opening to refutation, for it is, in fact,
based on the conviction that

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

the false is true." Discussions are fruitless with those who allow only
such proofs to weigh with them as fit in with their own manner of
thinking. He who knows the true essence of what is called "proving" a
matter sees clearly that the human soul finds truth by other ways than
discussion. It is with these thoughts in mind that the author hands over
this book for publication in its second edition.

Unfortunately, too long a time has elapsed between the date at which the
second edition was exhausted and the appearance of this third edition.
Pressing work of other kinds, in the domain to which this book is
devoted, delayed the author in the examination he wished to give to the
book, and prevented its appearing as soon as he had hoped.

<span class="smallcaps">Rudolf Steiner</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](theo05)
