[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo06) 
[Next](theo08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### 1. THE CORPOREAL BEING OF MAN

One learns to know the body of man through the bodily senses. And the
way of observing it can differ in no way from that by which one learns
to know other objects perceived by the senses. As one observes minerals,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

plants, animals, so can one observe man also. He is related to these
three forms of existence. Like the minerals he builds his body out of
the materials in nature; like the plants he grows and propagates his
species; he perceives the objects around him and, like the animals,
forms on the basis of the impressions they make his inner experiences.
One may therefore ascribe to man a mineral, a plant, and an animal
existence.

The difference in the structure of minerals, plants, and animals
corresponds with these three forms of existence. And it is this
structure, this shape which one perceives through the senses, and which
alone one can call body. But the human body is different from that of
the animal. This difference everybody must recognize whatever may be his
opinion in other respects regarding the relationship of man to animals.
Even the most radical materialist who denies all soul will not be able
to avoid agreeing with the following sentence which Carus utters in his
"*Organon der Natur and des Geistes*". "The finer, inner construction of
the nervous system, and especially of the brain, remains as yet an
unsolved problem to the

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

physiologist and the anatomist; but that this concentration of the
structure increases more and more in the animal, and in man reaches a
stage unequaled in any other being, is a fully established fact, a fact
which is of the deepest significance in regard to the spiritual
evolution of man, of which, indeed, we may frankly say it is a
sufficient explanation. Where, therefore, the structure of the brain has
not developed properly, where its smallness and poverty show themselves,
as in the case of microcephali and idiots, it goes without saying that
one can as little expect the appearance of original ideas and of
knowledge, as one can expect propagation of species in persons with
completely stunted organs of generation. On the other hand, a strong and
beautiful construction of the whole person, especially of the brain,
will certainly not in itself take the place of genius, but it will at
any rate supply the first and indispensable requirement for higher
knowledge." Just as one ascribes to the human body the three forms of
existence, mineral, plant, animal, one must now ascribe to it yet a
fourth, the distinctively <span class="smallcaps">human</span> form.
Through his mineral form of existence man

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

is related to everything visible, through his plant-like form of
existence to all beings that grow and propagate their species, through
his animal existence to all those that perceive their surroundings, and
by means of external impressions have inner experiences. Through his
human form of existence he constitutes, even in regard to his body
alone, a kingdom by himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Soul Being of Man](theo08)
