[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo10) 
[Next](theo12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

### CHAPTER II

### RE-EMBODIMENT OF THE SPIRIT AND DESTINY

#### REINCARNATION AND KARMA

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the midst between body and spirit
lives the <span class="smallcaps">soul</span>. The impressions which
come to it through the body are transitory. They are present only as
long as the body opens its organs to the things of the outer world. My
eye perceives the color of the rose only so long as the rose is opposite
to it and my eye is itself open. The <span
class="smallcaps">presence</span> of the things of the outer world as
well as of the bodily organs is necessary in order that an impression, a
sensation, or a perception can take place. But what I have recognized in
my spirit as <span class="smallcaps">truth</span> concerning the rose
does not pass with the present moment. And, as regards its truth, it is
not in the least dependent on me. It would be true even although I had

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

never stood in front of the rose. What I know through the spirit is
timeless or <span class="smallcaps">eternal</span>. The soul is placed
between the present and eternity, in that it holds the middle place
between body and spirit. But it is also the <span
class="smallcaps">intermediary</span> between the present and eternity.
It preserves the present for the <span
class="smallcaps">remembrance</span>. It thereby rescues it from
impermanence, and brings it nearer to the eternity of the spiritual. It
stamps eternity on the temporal and impermanent by not merely yielding
itself up to the transitory incitements, but by determining things from
out its own initiative, and embodying its own nature in them by means of
the actions it performs. By remembrance the soul preserves the
yesterday, by action it prepares the to-morrow.

My soul would have to perceive the red of the rose always afresh if it
could not store it up in remembrance. What remains after an external
impression, what can be retained by the soul, is the <span
class="smallcaps">conception</span>. Through the power of forming
conceptions the soul makes the corporal outer world so far into its own
inner world that it can then retain the latter

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

in the memory for remembrance and, independent of the gained
impressions, lead with it thereafter a life of its own. The soul-life
thus becomes the enduring result of the transitory impressions of the
external world.

But an action also receives permanence when once it is stamped on the
outer world. If I cut a branch from a tree something has taken place by
means of my soul which completely changes the course of events in the
outer world. Something quite different would have happened to the branch
of the tree if I had not interfered by my action. I have called forth
into life a series of effects which, without my existence, would not
have been present. What I have done <span
class="smallcaps">to-day</span> endures for <span
class="smallcaps">to-morrow</span>; it becomes permanent through the
<span class="smallcaps">deed</span>, as my impressions of yesterday have
become permanent for my soul through memory.

Let us first consider memory. How does it originate? Evidently in quite
a different way from sensation or perception, because these are made
possible by the corporality. Without the eye I cannot have the sensation
"blue." But in no way do I have the

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

remembrance of "blue" through the eye. If the eye is to give me this
sensation now, a blue thing must come before it. The corporality would
always allow impressions to sink back into nothingness if it alone
existed. I remember; that is, I experience something which is itself no
longer present. I unite a past experience with my present life. This is
the case with every remembrance. Let us say, for instance, that I meet a
man and recognize him again because I met him yesterday. He would be a
complete stranger to me were I not able to unite the picture perception
with my impression of him to-day. The picture of to-day is given me by
the perception, that is to say, by my corporality. But who conjures that
of yesterday into my soul? It is the same being in me that was present
during my experience yesterday, and that is also present in that of
to-day. In the previous explanations it has been called <span
class="smallcaps">soul</span>. Were it not for this faithful preserver
of the past each external impression would be always new to a man.

As preserver of the past the soul continually gathers treasures for the
spirit. That

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I can distinguish
right from wrong follows because I, as a human being, am a thinking
being, able to grasp the truth in my spirit. Truth is eternal; and it
could always reveal itself to me again in things, even if I were always
to lose sight of the past and each impression were to be a new one to
me. But the spirit within me is not restricted to the impressions of the
present alone; the soul extends its horizon over the past. And the more
it is able to bring to the spirit out of the past, the richer does it
make the spirit. In this way the soul transmits to the spirit what it
has received from the body. The spirit of man therefore carries each
moment of its life a twofold possession within itself, firstly, the
eternal laws of the good and the true; secondly, the remembrance of the
experiences of the past. What he does, he accomplishes under the
influence of these two factors. If we wish to understand a human spirit
we must therefore know two different things about him, first, how much
of the eternal has revealed itself to him; second, how much treasure
from the past is stored up within him.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

The treasure by no means remains in the spirit in an unchanged shape.
The conceptions which man extracts from his experiences fade gradually
from the memory. Not so, however, their fruits. One does not remember
all the experiences one had during childhood when acquiring the arts of
reading and writing. But one could not read or write if one had not had
the experiences, and if their fruits had not been preserved in the form
of abilities. And that is the transmutation which the spirit effects on
the treasures of memory. It consigns the pictures of the separate
experiences to their fate, and only extracts from them the force
necessary for enhancing and increasing its abilities. Thus not one
experience passes by unused; the soul preserves each one as memory, and
from each the spirit draws forth all that can enrich its abilities and
the whole content of its life. The human spirit <span
class="smallcaps">grows</span> through assimilated experiences. And,
although one cannot find the past experiences in the spirit preserved as
if in a storeroom, one nevertheless finds their effects in the abilities
which the man has acquired.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

Thus far spirit and soul have been considered only within the period
lying between life and death. One cannot rest there. Anyone wishing to
do that would be like the man who observes the human body also within
the same limits only. Much can certainly be discovered within these
limits. But the <span class="smallcaps">human form</span> can never be
explained by what lies between birth and death. It cannot build itself
up unaided out of mere physical matter and forces. It takes rise in a
form like its own, which has been passed on to it by propagation.
Physical materials and forces build up the body during life; the forces
of propagation enable another body, inheriting its form, to proceed from
it; that is to say, one which is able to be the bearer of the same
life-body. Each life-body is a repetition of its forefathers. Only <span
class="smallcaps">because</span> it is such does it appear, not in any
chance form, but in that passed on to it. The forces which have given me
human form lay in my forefathers. But the spirit also of a man appears
in a definite form. And the forms of the spirit are the most varied
imaginable in different persons. No two men have the same spiritual

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

form. One ought to make investigations in this region in just as quiet
and matter-of-fact a manner as in the physical world. It cannot be said
that the differences in human beings in spiritual respects arise only
from the differences in their environment, their upbringing, etc. No,
this is by no means the case, for two people under similar influences as
regards environments, upbringing, etc., develop in quite different ways.
One is therefore forced to admit that they have entered on their path of
life with quite different predispositions. Here one is brought face to
face with an important fact which, when its full bearing is recognized,
sheds light on the nature of man.

Human beings differ from their animal fellow-creatures on the earth as
regards their physical form. But among each other human beings are,
within certain limits, the same in regard to their physical form. There
is only one human species. However great may be the differences between
races, peoples, tribes, and personalities as regards the physical body,
the resemblance between man and man is greater than between man and any

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

brute species. All that expresses itself as human species passes on from
forefather to descendants. And the human form is bound to this heredity.
As the lion can inherit its physical form from lion forefathers only, so
the human being inherits his physical body from human forefathers only.

Just as the physical similarity of men is quite evident to the eye, the
<span class="smallcaps">difference</span> of their spiritual forms
reveals itself to the unprejudiced spiritual gaze. There is one very
evident fact which shows this clearly. It consists in the existence of
the biography of a human being. Were a human being merely a member of a
species, no biography could exist. A lion, a dove, lay claim to interest
in so far as they belong to the lion, the dove genus. One has understood
the separate being in all its <span class="smallcaps">essentials</span>
when one has described the genus. It matters little whether one has to
do with father, son, or grandson. What is of interest in them, father,
son, and grandson have in common. But what a human being signifies
begins, not where he is a mere member of a genus, but only where he is a
separate being. I have not in the least understood the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

nature of Mr. Smith of Crowcorner if I have described his son or his
father. I must know his own biography. Anyone who reflects accurately on
the essence of biography becomes aware that in regard to spiritual
things <span class="smallcaps">each man is a species by himself</span>.

Those people, to be sure, who regard a biography merely as a collection
of external incidents in the life of a person, may claim that they can
write the biography of a dog in the same way as that of a man. But
anyone who depicts in a biography the real individuality of a man,
grasps the fact that he has in the biography of <span
class="smallcaps">one</span> human being something that corresponds to
the description of a whole genus in the animal kingdom.

Now if genus or species in the physical sense becomes intelligible only
when one understands it as the result of heredity, the spiritual being
can be intelligible only through a similar <span
class="smallcaps">spiritual heredity</span>. I have received my physical
human form from my forefathers. Whence have I that which comes to
expression in my biography? As physical man, I repeat the shape of my
forefathers. What do I repeat as spiritual

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

man? Anyone claiming that what is comprised in my biography requires no
further explanation has to be regarded as having no other course open to
him than to claim equally that he has seen, somewhere, an earth mound on
which the lumps of matter have aggregated quite by themselves into a
living man.

As physical man I spring from other physical men, for I have the same
shape as the whole human species. The qualities of the species,
accordingly, could be bequeathed to me within the genus. As spiritual
man I have my own shape as I have my own biography. I therefore can have
obtained this shape from no one but myself. Since I entered the world
not with undefined but with defined predispositions; and since the
course of my life as it comes to expression in my biography is
determined by these predispositions, my work on myself cannot have begun
with my birth. I must, as spiritual man, have existed before my birth.
In my forefathers I have certainly not been existent, for they as
spiritual human beings are different from me. My biography is not
explainable through

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

theirs. On the contrary, I must, as spiritual being, be the repetition
of one through whose biography mine can be explained. The physical form
which Schiller bore he inherited from his forefathers. But just as
little as Schiller's physical form can have grown out of the earth, so
little can his spiritual being have done so. It must be the repetition
of another spiritual being through whose biography his will be
explainable as his physical human form is explainable through human
propagation. In the same way, therefore, that the physical human form is
ever again and again a repetition, a reincarnation of the distinctively
human species, the spiritual human being must be a reincarnation of the
<span class="smallcaps">same</span> spiritual human being. For as
spiritual human being, each one is in fact his own species.

It might be said in objection to what has been stated here that it is
pure spinning of thoughts, and such external proof might be demanded as
one is accustomed to in ordinary natural science. The reply to this is
that the reëmbodiment of the spiritual human being is, naturally, a
process which does not belong to the region of external physical facts,
but

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

is one that takes place entirely in the spiritual region. And to this
region no other of our <span class="smallcaps">ordinary</span> powers of
intelligence has entrance, save that of <span
class="smallcaps">thinking</span>. He who is unwilling to trust to the
power of thinking cannot, in fact, enlighten himself regarding higher
spiritual facts. For him whose spiritual eye is opened the above train
of thoughts acts with exactly the same force as does an event that takes
place before his physical eyes. He who ascribes to a so-called "proof,"
constructed according to the methods of natural science, greater power
to convince than the above observations concerning the significance of
biography, may be in the ordinary sense of the word a great scientist,
but from the paths of true <span class="smallcaps">spiritual</span>
investigation he is very far distant.

One of the gravest prejudices consists in trying to explain the
spiritual qualities of a man by inheritance from father, mother, or
other ancestors. He who contracts the prejudice, for example, that
Goethe inherited what constitutes his essential being from father or
mother will at first be hardly approachable with arguments, for there
lies

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

within him a deep antipathy to unprejudiced observation. A materialistic
spell prevents him from seeing the relations of phenomena in the true
light.

In such observations as the preceding, the presuppositions are supplied
for following the human being beyond birth and death. Within the
boundaries formed by birth and death the human being belongs to the
three worlds, of corporality, of soul, and of spirit. The soul forms the
link between body and spirit because it penetrates the third member of
the body, the soul-body, with a capacity for sensation, and because it
permeates the first member of the spirit, the spirit-self, as
consciousness-soul. In this way it takes part and lot during life with
the body as well as with the spirit. This comes to expression in its
whole existence. It will depend on the construction of the soul-body how
the sentient-soul can unfold its capabilities. And, on the other hand,
it will depend on the life of the consciousness-soul to what extent the
spirit-self can develop itself in it. The more highly developed the
soul-body is, the more complete is the intercourse which the sentient-

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

soul will be able to develop with the outer world. And the spirit-self
will become so much the richer and more powerful, the more the
consciousness-soul brings it nourishment. It has been shown that during
life this nourishment is supplied to the spirit-self through assimilated
experiences, and the fruits of these experiences. For the interaction of
soul and spirit described above, can, of course, only take place where
soul and spirit are within each other, penetrating each other, that is,
within the union of "spirit-self" with "consciousness-soul."

Let us consider, first, the interaction of the soul-body and
sentient-soul. The soul-body is, as has become evident, the most finely
elaborated part of the corporality; but it, nevertheless, belongs to it
and is dependent on it. Physical-body, ether-body, and soul-body
compose, in a certain sense, one whole. Hence the soul-body is also
drawn within the laws of physical heredity through which the body
receives its shape. And since it is the most mobile and, so to speak,
volatile form of corporality, it must also exhibit the most mobile,
volatile manifestations of heredity. While,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

therefore, the difference in the physical body is smallest,
corresponding to races, peoples, and tribes; and while the ether-body
presents, on the whole, a preponderating likeness although a greater
divergence in single individuals, in the soul-body the difference is a
very great one. In it is expressed what one already feels to be the
<span class="smallcaps">external</span>, <span
class="smallcaps">personal</span>, uniqueness of a man. It is therefore
also the bearer of that part of this personal uniqueness which is passed
on from parents, grand-parents, etc., to descendants. The soul as such
leads, as has been explained, a completely self-contained life of its
own; it shuts itself up with its inclinations and disinclinations, its
feelings and passions; but, as a whole being, it is nevertheless active,
and therefore this whole comes to expression also in the sentient-soul.
And because the sentient-soul penetrates and, as it were, fills up the
soul-body, the latter forms itself according to the nature of the soul
and can in this way, as the bearer of heredity, pass on tendencies,
passions, etc., from forefathers to children. On this fact rests what
Goethe says: "From my father I have stature and the serious manner of
life,

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

from the little mother the joyous disposition and the love of romance."
Genius, of course, he did not receive from either. In this way we are
shown what part of a man's soul qualities he hands over, as it were, to
the line of physical heredity.

The matter and forces of the physical body are in the whole external
physical nature around us. They are continually being taken from it and
given back to it. In the space of a few years the matter which composes
our physical body is entirely renewed. That this matter takes the form
of the human body, and that it always renews itself again within this
body, is due to the fact that it is held together by the ether-body. And
the form of the latter is not determined by events between birth—or
conception—and death alone, but is dependent on the laws of heredity
which extend beyond birth and death. That soul qualities also can be
transmitted by heredity, that is, that the process of physical heredity
receives an infusion from the soul, is due to the fact that the
soul-body can be influenced by the sentient-soul.

Now how does the interaction between body

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

and soul proceed? During life the spirit is bound up with the soul in
the way shown above. The soul receives from it the power of living in
the Good and the True, and of thereby bringing in its own life, in its
tendencies, impulses, and passions, the spirit itself to expression. The
spirit-self brings to the I, from the world of the spirit, the eternal
laws of the True and the Good. These link themselves through the
consciousness-soul with the experiences of the soul's own life. These
experiences themselves pass away, but their fruits remain. The
spirit-self receives an abiding impression by having been linked with
them. When the human spirit approaches an experience similar to one with
which it has already been linked, it sees in it something familiar, and
is able to take up a different attitude toward it than if it were facing
it for the first time. This is the basis of all learning. And the fruits
of learning are acquired capacities. The fruits of the transitory life
are in this way graven on the eternal spirit. And do we not see these
fruits? Whence spring the innate predispositions and talents described
above as characteristic of the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

spiritual man? Surely only from capacities of one kind or another which
the human being brings with him when he begins his earthly life. These
capacities, in certain respects, resemble exactly those which we can
also acquire for ourselves during life. Take the case of a genius. It is
known that Mozart, when a boy, could write out from memory a long
musical composition after hearing it only once. He was able to do this
only because he could survey the whole at one glance. Within certain
limits a man is also able during life to increase his capacity of rapid
survey, of grasping combinations to such an extent that he then
possesses new faculties. Lessing, indeed, has said of himself that by
means of a talent for critical observation he had acquired for himself
something that came near to being genius. One has either to regard such
abilities founded on innate capacities with wonder as miracles, or one
must consider them as fruits of experiences which the spirit-self has
had through a soul. They have been graven on the spirit-self. And since
they have not been implanted in this life, they have been in a former
one. The human spirit is

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

its own species. And just as roan as a physical being belonging to a
species bequeaths his qualities within the species, so does the <span
class="smallcaps">spirit</span> within <span
class="smallcaps">its</span> species, that is, within itself. <span
class="smallcaps">In each life the human spirit appears as a repetition
of itself with the fruits of its former experiences in previous
lives</span>. This life is consequently the repetition of another, and
brings with it what the spirit-self has, by work, acquired for itself in
the previous life. When the spirit-self absorbs something that can
develop into fruit, it penetrates itself with the life-spirit. Just as
the life-body reproduces the form, from genus to genus, so does the
life-spirit reproduce the soul from personal existence to personal
existence.

Thus the experiences of the soul become enduring not only within the
boundaries of birth and death, but out beyond death. But the soul does
not stamp its experiences only on the spirit which flashes up in it, it
stamps them, as has been shown, on the outer world, also, through the
<span class="smallcaps">deed</span>. What a man did yesterday is to-day
still present in its effects. A picture of the connection between cause
and effect is given in the simile of sleep and death.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sleep has often
been called the younger brother of death. I get up in the morning. Night
has interrupted my consecutive activity. Now, under ordinary
circumstances, it is not possible for me to begin my activity again just
as I like. I must connect it with my doings of yesterday if there is to
be order and coherence in my life. My actions of yesterday are the
conditions predetermining those I have to do to-day. I have created my
fate of to-day by what I did yesterday. I have separated myself for a
while from my activity; but this activity belongs to me and draws me
again to itself after I have withdrawn myself from it for a while. My
past remains bound up with me; it lives on in my present, and will
follow me into my future. If the effects of my deeds of yesterday were
not to be my fate to-day, I should have had, not to <span
class="smallcaps">awake</span> this morning, but to be newly created out
of nothing. It would be absurd if under ordinary circumstances I were
not to occupy a house that I have had built for me.

The human spirit is just as little newly created when it begins its
earthly life as is a man newly created every morning. Let us try

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

to make clear to ourselves what happens when an entrance into this life
takes place. A physical body, receiving its form through the laws of
heredity, comes upon the scene. This body becomes the bearer of a spirit
which repeats a previous life in a new form. Between the two stands the
soul, which leads a self-contained life of its own. Its inclinations and
disinclinations, its wishes and desires minister to it; it takes thought
into its service. As sentient-soul it receives the impressions of the
outer world and carries them to the spirit, in order that the spirit may
extract from them the fruits that are for eternity. It plays, as it
were, the part of intermediary; and its task is fully accomplished when
it is able to do this. The body forms impressions for the sentient-soul
which transforms them into sensations, retains them in the memory as
conceptions, and hands them over to the spirit to hold throughout
eternity. The soul is really that through which man belongs to his
earthly life. Through his body he belongs to the physical human species.
Through it he is a <span class="smallcaps">member</span> of this
species. With his spirit he lives in a higher world.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The soul binds the
two worlds for a time together.

But the physical world on which the human spirit enters is no strange
field of action to it. On it the traces of its actions are imprinted.
Something in this field of action belongs to the spirit. It bears the
impress of its being. It is related to it. As the soul formerly
transmitted the impressions from the outer world to the spirit in order
that they might become enduring in it, so now the soul, as the spirit's
organ, converts the capacities bestowed by the spirit into deeds which
are also enduring through their effects. Thus the soul has actually
flowed into these actions. In the effects of his actions man's soul
lives on in a second independent life. And it is inevitable that the
human spirit should meet again the effect of these actions. For only the
one part of my deed is in the outer world; the other is in myself. Let
us make this clear by a simple example taken from natural science.
Animals that once could see migrated to the caves of Kentucky, and have,
through their life in them, lost their powers of sight. The existence in
darkness has caused the eyes to

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

be inactive. Consequently the physical and chemical activity that is
present when seeing takes place is no longer carried on in these eyes.
The stream of nourishment which was formerly expended on this activity
now flows to other organs. These animals <span class="smallcaps">can
now</span> live only in these caves. They have by their act, by the
immigration, created the conditions of their later lives. The
immigration has become a part of their fate. A being that once acted has
united itself with the results of the action. It is so also with the
human spirit. It is only by having been active that the soul could have
transmitted certain capacities to it. And these capacities correspond to
the actions.

By means of his actions, therefore, the human spirit has really carved
his fate. In a new life he finds himself linked to what he did in a
former one. One may ask, "How can that be, when the human spirit on
reincarnating finds itself in an entirely different world from that
which it left at some earlier time?" This question is based on a very
superficial conception of the linkings of fate. If I change my scene of
action from Europe to America I find myself in entirely new
surroundings.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nevertheless, my
life in America depends entirely on my previous life in Europe. If I
have been a mechanic in Europe, my life in America will shape itself
quite differently from the way in which it would had I been a bank
clerk. In the one case I should probably be surrounded in America by
machinery, in the other by bank offices. In each case it is my previous
life that decides my environment; it attracts to itself, as it were, out
of the whole surrounding world, those things that are related to it. So
it is with the spirit-self. It inevitably surrounds itself in a new life
with that to which it is related from previous lives. And it is on this
account that sleep is a good likeness for death. For the man during
sleep is withdrawn from the field of action in which his fate waits for
him. While one sleeps events in this field of action pursue their
course. One has for a time no influence on this course of events.
Nevertheless, our life on a new day depends on the effects of the deeds
of the previous one. Our personality actually embodies or incarnates
itself anew every morning in our world of action. What was separated
from us at night is on the next

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

day, as it were, spread out around us. So it is with the actions of the
former embodiments or incarnations of man. They are bound to him as his
destiny, as the life in the dark caves remains bound up with the animals
who, through migration into them, have lost their powers of sight. Just
as these animals can only live in the surroundings in which they have
placed themselves, so the human spirit <span
class="smallcaps">can</span> only live in the surroundings which by its
acts it has created for itself. There can be no more appropriate
comparison than that of sleep with death. That I find in the morning a
state of affairs which I on the previous day created, is brought about
by the immediate progress of the events themselves. That I, when I
reincarnate myself, find surroundings which correspond with the results
of my deeds in a previous life, is brought about by the relationship of
my reincarnated spirit with the things in the world around. From this it
stands out clearly how the <span class="smallcaps">soul</span> forms a
member of the constitution of man. The physical body is subject to the
laws of heredity. The human spirit, on the contrary, has to incarnate
over and over again, and its law consists in its

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

bringing over the fruits of the former lives into the following ones.
The soul lives in the present. But this life in the present is not
independent of the previous lives. For the incarnating spirit brings its
destiny with it from its previous incarnations, and this destiny decides
the kind of life. Whatever impressions the soul will be able to have,
with what wishes it will be able to be gratified, what sorrows and joys
spring forth for it, depend on the nature of the actions in the past
incarnations of the spirit. The life of the soul is therefore the result
of the self-created destiny of the human spirit. The course of man's
life between birth and death is therefore determined in a threefold way.
And he is by these means dependent in a threefold way on factors which
lie <span class="smallcaps">on the other side</span> of birth and death.
The body is subject to the laws of heredity; the soul is subject to the
self-created fate. One calls this fate created by the man himself his
<span class="smallcaps">karma</span>. The spirit is under the law of
reëmbodiment or reincarnation. One can accordingly express the
relationship between spirit, soul, and body in the following way as
well. The spirit is <span class="smallcaps">eternal</span>; birth and
death have dominion

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

over the corporality according to the laws of the physical world; the
soul-life, which is subject to destiny, links them together during an
earthly life.

All further knowledge of the being of man has to be preceded by
acquaintance with the "three worlds" to which he belongs. They are dealt
with in the following chapters.

Thinking which takes up an unprejudiced attitude toward the phenomena of
life, not afraid to follow the thoughts resulting to their final
consequences, can, by pure logic, arrive at the conviction of the law of
karma and reincarnation. Just as it is true that for the seer with the
opened "spiritual eye," past lives, like an opened book, face him as
<span class="smallcaps">experience</span>, so is it true that the <span
class="smallcaps">truth</span> of it all becomes obvious to the
unprejudiced <span class="smallcaps">reason</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1. The Soul World](theo12)
