[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Theosophy](../../the/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](theo02.md) 
[Next](theo04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564598063/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Theosophy*, by Rudolf Steiner, \[1910\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### PREFACE

#### TO THE FIRST EDITION

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> book will give a description of some
of the regions of the supersensible world. The reader who is willing to
admit the existence of the sensible world only will regard this
delineation as a mere unreal production of the imagination. He, however,
who looks for paths that lead beyond this world of the senses will soon
learn to understand that human life only gains in worth and significance
through sight into another world. Such a man will not, as many fear, be
estranged from the "real" world through this new power of vision. For
only through it does he learn to stand fast and firm in this life. He
learns to know the <span class="smallcaps">causes</span> of life, while
without it he gropes like a blind man through their <span
class="smallcaps">effects</span>. Only through the understanding of the
supersensible does the sensible "real" acquire meaning. One therefore
becomes more, and not less, fit for life through this understanding.
Only he who

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

understands life can become a truly practical man.

The author of this book describes nothing to which he cannot bear
witness from experience, that kind of experience which one has in these
regions. Only that which in this sense has been personally experienced
will be dealt with.

One cannot read this book as one is accustomed ordinarily to read books
at the present day. In certain respects every page, and even many a
sentence, will have to be <span class="smallcaps">worked out</span> by
the reader. This has been intentionally aimed at. For only in this way
can the book become to the reader what it ought to become. He who merely
reads it through will not have read it at all. Its truths must be
experienced, lived. Only in this sense has theosophy any value.

The book cannot be judged from the standpoint of science if the point of
view adopted in forming such a judgment is not gained from the book
itself. If the critic will adopt this point of view, he will certainly
see that the presentation of the facts given in this book will in no way
conflict with the truly scientific

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

methods. The author is satisfied that he has been on the alert not to
come into conflict with his own scientific scrupulousness, even by a
single word.

Those who feel more drawn to another method of searching after the
truths here set forth will find one in my "*Philosophie der Freiheit*"
(Philosophy of Freedom), Berlin, 1892. The lines of thought taken in
these two books, though different, lead to the same goal. For the
understanding of the one the other is by no means necessary, although
undoubtedly helpful for some persons.

He who looks for "ultimate" truths in this book will, perhaps, lay it
aside unsatisfied. The primary intention of the author has been to give
the <span class="smallcaps">fundamental truths</span> underlying the
whole domain of theosophy. It lies in the very nature of man to ask at
once about the beginning and the end of the world, the purpose of
existence, and the nature and being of God. Anyone, however, who looks,
not for mere phrases and concepts for the <span
class="smallcaps">intellect</span>, but for a real understanding of
life, knows that in a work which' deals with the elements of wisdom,
things <span class="smallcaps">may</span> not be said which belong

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

to the higher stages of wisdom. It is, indeed, only through a
comprehension of these elements that it becomes clear how higher
questions should be asked. In another work forming a continuation of
this one, namely, in the author's "*Die Geheimwissenschaft im Umriss*"
(An Outline of Occult Science), further particulars on the subject here
dealt with will be found.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface to the Third Edition](theo04.md)
