[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odd02)  [Next](odd04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE COLLECTOR'S APOLOGY.

THE collection of these legends was commenced with the object alluded to
in the Dedication. It was continued, as they appeared in themselves
curious illustrations of Indian popular tradition, and in the hope that
something might thus be done to rescue them from the danger of oral
transmission.

Though varied in their imagery, the changes between the different
legends are rung upon very few themes, as if purposely confined to what
was most familiar to the people. The similarity between the incidents in
some of these and in favourite European stories is curious; and the
leading characteristics peculiar to all orthodox fairy tales are here
preserved intact. Step-mothers are always cruel, and step-sisters their
willing instruments; giants and ogres always stupid; youngest daughters
more clever than their elder sisters; and the Jackal (like his European
cousin the Fox) usually overcomes every difficulty, and proves a bright
moral example of the success of wit against brute force--the triumph of
mind over matter.

It is remarkable that in the romances of a country where women are
generally supposed by us to be regarded as mere slaves or intriguers,
their influence (albeit most frequently put to proof behind the scenes)
should be made to appear so great, and, as a rule, exerted wholly for
good; and that, in a land where despotism has such a firm hold on the
hearts of the people, the liberties of the subject should be so boldly
asserted as by the old Milk-woman to the Rajah in 'Little Surya
Bai, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) or the Malee to the Rajah in
'Truth's Triumph'; and few, probably, would have expected to find the
Hindoos owning such a romance as 'Brave Seventee Bai'; or to meet with
such stories as 'The Valiant Chatteemaker,' and 'The Blind Man, the Deaf
Man, and the Donkey,' among a nation which, it has been constantly
asserted, possesses no humour, no sense of the ridiculous, and cannot
understand a joke.

In 'The Narrator's Narrative' Anna Liberata de Souza's own story is
related, as much as possible, in her own words of expressive but broken
English. She did not, however, tell it in one continuous narrative; it
is the sum of many conversations I had with her, during the eighteen
months that she was with us.

The legends themselves are altered as little as possible; half their
charm, however, consisted in the Narrator's eager, flexible voice and
graphic gestures.

I often asked her if there were no stories of elephants having done
wonderful deeds (as from their strength and sagacity one would have
imagined them to possess all the qualifications requisite to heroes of
romance); but, strange to say, she knew of none in which elephants
played any part whatsoever.

As regards the Oriental names, they have generally been written as Anna
pronounced them. It was frequently not possible to give the true
orthography, and the correctly spelt name does not always give a clue to
the popular pronunciation. So with the interpretations and geography.
Where it is possible to identify what is described, an attempt has been
made to do so; but for other explanations. Anna's is the sole authority:
she was quite sure that 'Seventee Bai' meant the 'Daisy Lady,' though no
botanist would acknowledge the plant under that name, and she was
satisfied that all gentlemen who have travelled know where 'Agra Brum'
is, though she had never been there, and no such province appears in any
ordinary Gazetteer or description of the city of Akbar.

These few legends, told by one old woman to her grandchildren, can only
be considered as representatives of a class. 'That world,' to use her
own words, 'is gone'; and those who can tell us about it in this
critical and unimaginative age are fast disappearing too, before the
onward march of civilisation; yet there must be in the country many a
rich gold-mine unexplored. Will no one go to the diggings?

M. F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[1](odd03.htm#fr_1) Was this narrative of
feminine sagacity invented by some old woman, who felt aggrieved at the
general contempt entertained for her sex?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Narrator's Narrative](odd04)
