[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odd08)  [Next](odd10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# V.

# RAMA AND LUXMAN; OR, THE LEARNED OWL

<span id="img_13"></span> ![](img/13.jpg)

ONCE upon a time there was a Rajah whose name was Chandra Rajah,  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) and he had a learned Wuzeer or Minister,
named Butti. Their mutual love was so great that they were more Like
brothers than master and servant. Neither the Rajah nor the Wuzeer had
any children, and both were equally anxious to have a son. At last, in
one day and one hour\~ the wile of the Rajah and the wife of the Wuzeer
had each a little baby boy. They named the Rajah's son Rama, and the son
of the Wuzeer was called Luxman, and there were great rejoicings at the
birth of both. The boys grew up and loved each other tenderly; they were
never happy unless together; together they went to daily school,
together bathed and played, and they would not eat except from off one
piate. One day, when Rama Rajah was fifteen years Did, his mother, the
Ranee, said to Chandra Rajab, 'Husband, our son associates too much with
low people; for instance, he is always at play with the Wuzeer's son,
Luxman, which is not befitting his rank. I wish you would endeavour to
put an end to their friendship, and find him better playmates.'

Chandra Rajah replied, 'I cannot do it; Luxman's father is ray very good
friend and Wuzeer, as his father's father was to my rather; let the sons
be the same.' This answer annoyed the Ranee, but she said no more to her
husband; she sent, however, for all the wise people and seers and
conjurors in the land, and inquired of them whether there existed no
means of dissolving the children's affection for each other; they
answered they knew of none. At last one old Nautch woman came to the
Ranee and said, 'I can do this thing that you wish, but for it you must
give me a great reward.' Then the Ranee gave the old woman an enormous
bag full of gold mohurs, and said, 'This I give you now, and if you
succeed in the undertaking I will give you as much again.' So this
wicked old woman disguised herself in a very rich dress, and went to a
garden-house which Chandra Rajah had built for his son, and where Rama
Rajah and Luxman, the young Wuzeer, used to spend the greater part of
their playtime. Outside the house was a large well and a fine garden.
When the old woman arrived, the two boys were playing cards together in
the garden close to the well. She drew near, and began drawing water
from it. Rama Rajah, looking up, saw her, and said to Luxman, 'Go, see
who that richly dressed woman is, and bring me word.' The Wuzeer's son
did as he was bidden, and asked the woman what she wanted. She answered,
'Nothing, oh nothing,' and nodding her head went away; then, returning
to the Ranee, she said, 'I have done as you wished, give me the promised
reward,' and the Ranee gave her the second bag of gold. On Luxman's
return, the young Rajah said to him, 'What did the woman want?' Luxman
answered, 'She told me she wanted nothing.' 'It is not true,' replied
the other angrily; 'I feel certain she must have told you something. Why
should she come here for no purpose? It is some secret which you are
concealing from me; I insist on knowing it.' Luxman vainly protesting
the contrary, they quarrelled and then fought, and the young Rajah ran
home very angry to his father. 'What is the matter, my son?' said he.
'Father,' he answered, 'I am angry with the Wuzeer's son. I hate that
boy; kill him, and let his eyes be brought to me in proof of his death,
or I will not eat my dinner.' Chandra Rajah was very much grieved at
this, but the young Rajah would eat no dinner, and at last his father
said to the Wuzeer, 'Take your son away, and hide him, for the boys have
had a quarrel.' Then he went out and shot a deer, and showing its eyes
to Rama, said to him, 'See, my son, the good Wuzeer's son has by your
order been deprived of life;' and Rama Rajah was merry, and ate his
dinner. But a while after he began to miss his kind playmate; there was
nobody he cared for to tell him stories and amuse him. Then for four
nights running he dreamed of a beautiful Glass Palace, in which dwelt a
Princess white as marble, and he sent for all the wise people in the
kingdom to interpret his dream, but none could do it; and, thinking upon
this fair Princess and his lost friend, he got more and more sad, and
said to himself, 'There is nobody to help me in this matter. Ah! if my
Wuzeer's son were here now, how quickly would he interpret the dream! O
my friend, my friend, my dear lost friend!' and when Chandra Rajah, his
father, came in, he said to him, 'Show me the grave of Luxman, son of
the Wuzeer, that I also may die there.' His father replied, 'What a
foolish boy you are! You first begged that the Wuzeer's son might be
killed, and now you want to die on his grave. What is all this about?
Rama Rajah replied, 'Oh! why did you give the order for him to be put to
death? In him I have lost my friend and all my joy in life; show me now
his grave, for thereon, I swear, will I kill myself.' When the Rajah saw
that his son really grieved for the loss of Luxman, he said to him, 'You
have to thank me for disregarding your foolish wishes; your old playmate
is living, therefore be friends again, for what you thought were his
eyes were but the eyes of a deer.' So the friendship of Rama and Luxman
was resumed on its former footing. Then Rama said to Luxman, 'Four
nights ago I dreamed a strange dream. I thought that for miles and miles
I wandered through a dense jungle, after which I came upon a grove of
Cocoa. nut trees, passing through which I reached one composed entirely
of Guava trees, then one of Supari  <span id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37)
trees, and lastly one of Copal trees. Beyond this lay a garden of
flowers, of which the Malee's wife gave me a bunch; round the garden ran
a large river, and on the other side of this I saw a fair palace
composed of transparent glass, and in the centre of it sat the most
lovely Princess I ever saw, white as marble, and covered with rich
jewels; at the sight of her beauty I fainted--and so awoke. This has
happened now four times, and as yet I have found no one capable of
throwing any light on the vision.' Luxman answered, 'I can tell you.
There exists a Princess exactly like her you saw in your dreams, and, if
you like, you can go and marry her.' 'How can I?' said Rama; 'and what
is your interpretation of the dream?' The Wuzeer's son replied, 'Listen
to me, and I will tell you. In a country very far away from this, in the
centre of a great Rajah's kingdom, there dwells his daughter, a most
fair Princess; she lives in a glass palace. Round this palace runs a
large river, and round the river is a garden of flowers. Round the
garden are four thick groves of trees, one of Copal trees, one of Supari
trees, one of Guava trees, and one of Cocoa-nut trees. The Princess is
twenty-four years old, but she is not married, for she has determined
only to marry whoever can jump this river and greet her in her crystal
palace, and though many thousand kings have essayed to do so, they have
all perished miserably in the attempt, having either been drowned in the
river, or broken their necks by falling; thus all that you dreamed of is
perfectly true.' 'Can we go to this country?' asked the young Rajah. 'Oh
yes,' his friend replied; 'this is what you must do. Go tell your father
you wish to see the world. Ask him for neither elephants nor attendants,
but beg him to lend you for the journey his old war-horse.'

Upon this Rama went to his father, and said, 'Father, I pray you give me
leave to go and travel with the Wuzeer's son; I desire to see the
world.' 'What would you have for the journey, my son?' said Chandra
Rajah; 'will you have elephants, and how many?--attendants, how many?'
'Neither, father,' he answered; 'give me rather, I pray you, your old
war-horse, that I may ride him during the journey.' 'So be it, my son,'
he answered; and with that Rama Rajah and Luxman set forth on their
travels. After going many, many thousands of miles, to their joy one day
they came upon a dense grove of Cocoa-nut trees, and beyond that to a
grove of Guava trees, then to one of Supari trees, and lastly to one of
Copal trees; after which they entered a beautiful garden, where the
Malee's wife presented them with a large bunch of flowers. Then they
knew that they had nearly reached the place where the fair Princess
dwelt. Now it happened that, because many kings and great people had
been drowned in trying to jump over the river that ran round the Glass
Palace where the Princess lived, the Rajah, her father, had made a law
that, in future, no aspirants to her hand were to attempt the jump,
except at stated times, and with his knowledge and permission, and that
any Rajahs or Princes found wandering there, contrary to this law, were
to be imprisoned. Of this the young Rajah and the Wuzeer's son knew
nothing, and having reached the centre of the garden they found
themselves on the banks of a large river, exactly opposite the wondrous
Glass Palace, and were just debating what further steps to take when
they were seized by the Rajah's guard, and hurried off to prison.

'This is a hard fate,' said Luxman. 'Yes,' sighed Rama Rajah, 'a dismal
end, in truth, to all our fine schemes. Would it be possible, think you,
to escape?' 'I think so,' answered Luxman, 'at all events I will try.'
With that he turned to the sentry who M as guarding them, and said, 'We
are shut in here and can't get out; here is money for you if you will
only have the goodness to call out that the Malee's cow has strayed
away.' The sentry thought this a very easy way of making a fortune, so
he did as he was bidden, and took the money. The result answered
Luxman's anticipations. The Malee's wife hearing the sentry calling out,
thought to herself, 'What, sentries round the guard-room again! then
there must be prisoners: doubtless they are those two young Rajah's I
met in the garden this morning; I will at least endeavour to release
them.' So she asked two old beggars to accompany her, and, taking with
her offerings of flowers and sweetmeats, started as if to go to a little
temple which was built within the quadrangle where the prisoners were
kept. The sentries, thinking she was only going with two old friends to
visit the temple, allowed her to pass without opposition. As soon as she
got within the quadrangle she unfastened the prison-door, and told the
two young men (Rama Rajah and Luxman) to change clothes with the two old
beggars, which they instantly did. Then leaving the beggars in the cell,
she conducted Rama and Luxman safely to her house. When they had reached
it she said to them, 'Young Pnnces, you must know that you did very
wrong in going down to the river before having made a salaam to our
Rajah, and gained his consent; and so strict is the law on this subject
that had I not assisted your escape, you might have remained a long time
in prison; though, as I felt certain you only erred through ignorance, I
was the more willing to help you; but to-morrow morning early you must
go and pay your respects at Court.'

Next day the guards brought their two prisoners to the Rajah, saying,
'See, O King, here are two young Rajahs whom we caught last night
wandering near the river contrary to your law and commandment.' But when
they came to look at the prisoners, lo and behold! they were only two
old beggars whom everybody knew and had often seen at the palace gate.

Then the Rajah laughed and said, 'You stupid fellows, you have been over
vigilant for once; see here your fine young Rajahs. Don't you yet know
the looks of these old beggars?' Whereupon the guards went away much
ashamed of themselves.

Having learnt discretion from the advice of the Malee's wife, Rama and
Luxman went betimes that morning to call at the Rajah's palace. The
Rajah received them very graciously, but when he heard the object of
their journey he shook his head, and said, 'My pretty fellows, far be it
from me to thwart your intentions, if you are really determined to win
my daughter the Princess Bargaruttee,  <span
id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38)--but as a friend I would counsel you to
desist from the attempt,--you can find a hundred Princesses elsewhere
willing to marry you; why, therefore, come here, where already a
thousand Princes as fair as you have lost their lives? Cease to think of
my daughter, she is a headstrong girl.' But Rama Rajah still declared
himself anxious to try and jump the dangerous river, whereupon the Rajah
unwillingly consented to his attempting to do so, and caused it to be
solemnly proclaimed round the town that another Prince was going to risk
his life, begging all good men and true to pray for his success. Then
Rama having dressed gorgeously, and mounted his father's stout
war-horse, put spurs to it and galloped to the river. Up, up in the air,
like a bird, jumped the good war-horse, right across the river and into
the very centre courtyard of the Glass Palace of the Princess
Bargaruttee: and as if ashamed of so poor an exploit, this feat he
accomplished three times. At this the heart of the Rajah was glad, and
he ran and patted the brave horse, and kissed Rama Rajah, and said,
'Welcome, my son-in-law!' The wedding took place amid great rejoicings,
with feasts, illuminations, and much giving of presents, and there Rama
Rajah and his wife, the Ranee Bargaruttee, lived happily for some time.
At last, one day, Rama Rajah said to his father-in-law, 'Sire, I have
been very happy here, but I have a great desire to see my father, and my
mother, and my own land again.' To which the Rajah replied, 'My son, you
are free to go; but I have no son but you, nor daughter but your wife:
therefore as it grieves me to lose sight of you, come back now and then
to see me and rejoice my heart. My doors are ever open to you; you will
be always welcome.'

Rama Rajah promised to return occasionally; and then, being given many
rich gifts by the old Rajah, and supplied with all things needful for
the journey, he, with his beautiful wife Bargaruttee, his friend the
young Wuzeer, and a great retinue, set out to return home.

Before going Rama Rajah and Luxman richly rewarded the kind Malee's
wife, who had helped them so ably.

On the first evening of their march the travellers reached the borders
of the Cocoa-nut grove, on the outskirts of the jungle; here they
determined to halt and rest for the night. Rama Rajah and the Ranee
Bargaruttee went to their tent; but Luxman (whose tender love for them
was so great, that he usually watched all night through at their door)
was sitting under a large tree close by, when two little owls flew over
his head, and perching on one of the highest branches, began chatting to
each other.  <span id="fr_39"></span>[4](#fn_39) The Wuzeer's son, who
was in many ways wiser than most men, could understand their language.
To his surprise he heard the little lady owl say to her husband, 'I wish
you would tell me a story, my dear, it is such a long time since I have
heard one.' To which her husband, the other little owl, answered, 'A
story! what story can I tell you? Do you see these people encamped under
our tree? Would you like to )iear their story?' She assented; and he
began, 'See first this poor Wuzeer, he is a good and faithful man, and
has done much for this young Rajah, but neither has that been to his
advantage heretofore, nor will it be hereafter.' At this Luxman listened
more attentively, and taking out his writing tablets, determined to note
down all he heard. The little owl commenced with the story of the birth
of Rama and Luxman, of their friendship, their quarrel, the young
Rajah's dream, and their reconciliation, and then told of their
subsequent adventures in search of the Princess Bargaruttee, down to
that very day on which they were journeying home. 'And what more has
Fate in store for this poor Wuzeer?' asked the lady owl. 'From this
place,' replied her husband, 'he will journey on with the young Rajah
and Ranee, until they get very near Chandra Rajah's dominions; there, as
the whole cavalcade is about to pass under a large banyan tree, this
Wuzeer Luxman will notice some of the topmost branches swaying about j\~
a dangerous manner; he will hurry the Rajah and Ranee away from it, and
the tree (which would otherwise have inevitably killed them) will fall
to the ground with a tremendous crash; but even his having thus saved
the Rajah's life shall not avert his fate.' (All this the Wuzeer noted
down.) 'And what next?' said the wife, 'what next?' 'Next,' continued
the wise little story-teller, 'next, just as the Rajah Rama and the
Ranee Bargaruttee and all their suite are passing under the palace
doorway, the Wuzeer will notice that the arch is insecure, and by
dragging them quickly through prevent their being crushed in its fall'
'And what will he do after that, dear husband?' she asked. 'After that,'
he went on, 'when the Rajah and Ranee are asleep, and the Wuzeer Luxman
keeping guard over them, he will perceive a large cobra slowly crawling
down the wall and drawing nearer and nearer to the Ranee. He will kill
it with his sword, but a drop of the cobra's blood shall fall on the
Ranee's white forehead. The Wuzeer will not dare to wipe the blood off
her forehead with his hand, and shall instead cover his face With a
cloth that he may lick it off with his tongue, but for this the Rajah
will be angry with him, and his reproaches will turn this poor Wuzeer
into stone.'

'Will he always remain stone?' asked the lady owl. 'Not for ever,'
answered her husband, 'but for eight long years he will remain so.' 'And
what then?' demanded she. 'Then,' answered the other, 'when the young
Rajah and Ranee have a baby, it shall come to pass that one day the
child shall be playing on the floor, and to help itself along shall
clasp hold of the stony figure, and at that baby's touch the Wuzeer will
come to life again. But I have told you enough for one night; come, let
's catch mice,--tuwhit, tuwhoo, tuwhoo,' and away flew the owls. Luxman
had written down all he heard, and it made him heavy-hearted, but he
thought, 'Perhaps, after all, this may not be true.' So he said nothing
about it to any living soul. Next day they continued their journey, and
as the owl had prophesied, so events fell out. For whilst the whole
party were passing under a large banyan tree, the Wuzeer noticed that it
looked unsafe. 'The owl spake truly,' he thought to himself, and seizing
the Rajah and Ranee he hurried them from under it, just as a huge limb
of the tree fell prone with a fearful crash.

A little while after, having reached Chandra Rajah's dominions, they
were going under the great arch of the palace court-yard when the Wuzeer
noticed some of the stones tottering. 'The owl was a true prophet,'
thought he again, and catching hold of the hands of Rama Rajah and
Bargaruttee Ranee, he pulled them rapidly through, just in time to save
their lives. 'Pardon me,' he said to the Rajah, 'that unbidden I dared
thus to touch your hand and that of the Ranee, but I saw the danger
imminent.' So they reached home, where they were joyfully welcomed by
Chandra Rajah, the Ranee, the Wuzeer (Luxman's father), and all the
Court.

A few nights afterwards, when the Rajah and Ranee were asleep, and the
young Wuzeer keeping guard over them as he was wont, he saw a large
black cobra stealthily creeping down the wall just above the Ranee's
head. 'Alas!' he thought, 'then such is my fate, and so it must be;
nevertheless, I will do my duty;' and, taking from the folds of his
dress the history of his and the young Rajah's life, from their boyhood
down to that very time (as he had written it from the owl's narrative),
he laid it beside the sleeping Rama, and, drawing his sword, killed the
cobra. A few drops of the serpent's blood fell on the Ranee's
forehead--the Wuzeer did not dare to touch it with his hand, but, that
her sacred brow might not be defiled with the vile cobra's blood, he
reverently covered his face and mouth with a cloth to lick the drops of
blood away. At this moment the Rajah started up, and seeing him, said,
'O Wuzeer, Wuzeer, is this well done of you? O Luxman, who have been to
me as a brother, who have saved me from so many difficulties, why do you
treat me thus? to kiss her holy forehead. If indeed you loved her (as
who could help it?), could you not have told me when we first saw her in
that Glass Palace, and I would have exiled myself that she might be your
wife. O my brother, my brother, why did you mock me thus?' The Rajah had
buried his face in his hands; he looked up, he turned to the Wuzeer, but
from him came neither answer nor reply. He had become a senseless stone.
Then Rama for the first time perceived the roll of paper which Luxman
had laid beside him, and when he read in it of what Luxman had been to
him from boyhood, and of the end, his bitter grief broke through all
bounds, and falling at the feet of the statue, he clasped its stony
knees and wept aloud. When daylight dawned Chandra Rajah and the Ranee
found Rama still weeping and hugging the stone, asking its forgiveness
with penitent cries and tears. Then they said to him, 'What is this you
have done?' When he told them, the Rajah his father was very angry, and
said, 'Was it not enough that you should have once before unjustly
desired the death of this good man, but that now by your rash reproaches
you should have turned him into stone? Go to, you do but continually
what is evil.'

Now eight long years rolled by without the Wuzeer returning to his
original form, although every day Rama Rajah and Bargaruttee Ranee would
watch beside him, kissing his cold hands, and adjuring him by all
endearing names to forgive them and return to them again. When eight
years had expired, Rama and Bargaruttee had a child; and from the time
it was nine months old and first began to try and crawl about, the
father and mother would sit and watch beside it, placing it near the
Wuzeer's statue, in hopes that the baby would some day touch it as the
owl had foretold.

But for three months they watched in vain. At last, one day when the
child was a year old, and was trying to walk, it chanced to be close to
the statue, and tottering on its unsteady feet, stretched out its tiny
hands and caught hold of the foot of the stone. The Wuzeer instantly
came back to life, and stooping down seized in his arms the little baby
who had rescued him, and kissed it. It is impossible to describe the
delight of Rama Rajah and his wife at regaining their long-lost friend.
The old Rajab and Ranee rejoiced also, with the Wuzeer (Luxman Wuzeer's
father), and his mother.

Then Chandra Rajah said to the Wuzeer, 'Here is my boy happy with his
wife and child, while your son has neither; go fetch him a wife, and we
will have a right merry wedding.' So the Wuzeer fetched for his son a
kind and beautiful wife, and Chandra Rajah and Rama Rajah caused the
wedding of Luxman to be grander than that of any great Rajah before or
since, even as if he had been a son of the royal house, and they all
lived very happy ever after, as all good fathers, and mothers, and
husbands, and wives, and children do.

<span id="img_14"></span> ![](img/14.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[1](odd09.htm#fr_36) Moon-King.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[2](odd09.htm#fr_37) Areca Catechu, the
Betel-Nut Palm.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[3](odd09.htm#fr_38) A name of the Ganges.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[4](odd09.htm#fr_39) See Notes at the end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Little Surya Bai](odd10)
