[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](odd19)  [Next](odd21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XVI.

# THE VALIANT CHATTEE-MAKER.

<span id="img_34"></span> ![](img/34.jpg)

LONG, long ago, in a violent storm of thunder, lightning, wind, and
rain, a tiger crept for shelter close to the wall of an old woman's hut.
This old woman was very poor, and her hut was but a tumble-down place,
through the roof of which the rain came drip, drip, drip, on more sides
than one. This troubled her much, and she went running about from side
to side, dragging first one thing and then another out of the way of the
leaky places in the roof, and as she did so, she kept saying to herself,
'Oh dear! oh dear I how tiresome this is! I 'm sure the roof will come
down! If an elephant, or a lion, or a tiger were to walk in, he wouldn't
frighten me half as much as this perpetual dripping.' And then she would
begin dragging the bed and all the other things in the room about again,
to get them out of the way of the rain. The Tiger, who was crouching
down just outside, heard all that she said, and thought to himself,
'This old woman says she would not be afraid of an elephant, or a lion,
or a tiger, but that this perpetual dripping frightens her more than
all. What can this "perpetual dripping" be? it must be something very
dreadful.' And, hearing her immediately afterwards dragging all the
things about the room again, he said to himself, 'What a terrible noise!
Surely that must be the *"perpetual dripping*."

At this moment a Chattee-maker,  <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) who
was in search of his donkey which had strayed away, came down the road.
The night being very cold, he had, truth to say, taken a little more
toddy  <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66.md)than was good for him, and
seeing, by the light of a flash of lightning, a large animal lying down
close to the old woman's hut, mistook it for the donkey he was looking
for. So, running up to the Tiger, he seized hold of it by one ear, and
commenced beating, kicking, and abusing it with all his might and main.

'You wretched creature,' he cried, 'is this the way you serve me,
obliging me to come out and look for you in such pouring rain, and on
such a dark night as this? Get up instantly, or I'll break every bone in
your body;' and he went on scolding and thumping the Tiger with his
utmost power, for he had worked himself up into a terrible rage. The
Tiger did not know what to make of it all, but he began to feel quite
frightened, and said to himself, 'Why, this must be the "perpetual
dripping"; no wonder the old woman said she was more afraid of it than
of an elephant, a lion, or a tiger, for it gives most dreadfully hard
blows.'

The Chattee-maker, having made the Tiger get up, got on his back, and
forced him to carry him home, kicking and beating him the whole way (for
all this time he fancied he was on his donkey), and then he tied his
fore feet and his head firmly together, and fastened him to a post in
front of his house, and when he had done this he went to bed.

Next morning, when the Chattee-maker's wife got up and looked out of the
window, what did she see but a great big Tiger tied up in front of their
house, to the post to which they usually fastened the donkey; she was
very much surprised, and running to her husband, awoke him, saying, 'Do
you know what animal you fetched home last night? '--' Yes, the donkey,
to be sure,' he answered. 'Come and see,' said she, and she showed him
the great Tiger tied to the post. The Chattee-maker at this was no less
astonished than his wife, and felt himself all over to find out if the
Tiger had not wounded him. But no there he was, safe and sound, and
there was the Tiger tied to the post, just as he had fastened it up the
night before.

News of the Chattee-maker's exploit soon spread through the village, and
all the people came to see him and hear him tell how he had caught the
Tiger and tied it to the post; and this they thought so wonderful, that
they sent a deputation to the Rajah, with a letter to tell him how a man
of their village had, alone and unarmed, caught a great Tiger, and tied
it to a post.

When the Rajah read the letter he also was much surprised, and
determined to go in person and see this astonishing sight. So he sent
for his horses and carriages, his lords and attendants, and they all set
off together to look at the Chattee-maker and the Tiger he had caught.

Now the Tiger was a very large one, and had long been the terror of all
the country round, which made the whole matter still more extraordinary;
and this being represented to the Rajah, he determined to confer every
possible honour on the valiant Chattee-maker. So he gave him houses and
lands, and as much money as would fill a well, made him lord of his
court, and conferred on him the command of ten thousand horse.

It came to pass, shortly after this, that a neighbouring Rajab, who had
long had a quarrel with this one, sent to announce his intention of
going instantly to war with him; and tidings were at the same time
brought that the Rajah who sent the challenge had gathered a great army
together on the borders, and was prepared at a moment's notice to invade
the country.

In this dilemma no one knew what to do. The Rajah sent for all his
generals, and inquired which of them would be willing to take command of
his forces and oppose the enemy. They all replied that the country was
so ill-prepared for the emergency, and the case was apparently so
hopeless, that they would rather not take the responsibility of the
chief command. The Rajah knew not whom to appoint in their stead. Then
some of his people said to him, 'You have lately given command of ten
thousand horse to the valiant Chattee-maker who caught the Tiger, why
not make him Commander-in-Chief? A man who could catch a Tiger and tie
him to a post must surely be more courageous and clever than most.'--'
Very well,' said the Rajah, 'I will make him Commander-in-Chief.' So he
sent for the Chattee-maker and said to him, 'In your hands I place all
the power of the kingdom; you must put our enemies to flight.'--' So be
it,' answered the Chattee-maker, 'but, before I lead the whole army
against the enemy, suffer me to go by myself and examine their position;
and, if possible, find out their numbers and strength.'

The Rajah consented, and the Chattee-maker returned home to his wife,
and said, 'They have made me Commander-in-Chief which is a very
difficult post for me to fill, because I shall have to ride at the head
of all the army, and you know I never was on a horse in my life. But I
have succeeded in gaining a little delay, as the Rajah has given me
permission to go first alone, and reconnoitre the enemy's camp. Do you,
therefore, provide a very quiet pony, for you know I cannot ride, and I
will start to-morrow morning.'

But before the Chattee-maker had started, the Rajah sent over to him a
most magnificent charger, richly caparisoned, which he begged he would
ride when going to see the enemy's camp. The Chattee-maker was
frightened almost out of his life, for the charger that the Rajah had
sent him was very powerful and spirited, and he felt sure that, even if
he ever got on it, he should very soon tumble off; however, he did not
dare to refuse it, for fear of offending the Rajah by not accepting his
present. So he sent him back a message of dutiful thanks, and said to
his wife, 'I cannot go on the pony now that the Rajah has sent me this
fine horse, but how am I ever to ride it? '--' Oh, don't be frightened,'
she answered, 'you 'ye only got to get upon it, and I will tie you
firmly on, so that you cannot tumble off, and if you start at night no
one will see that you are tied on.'--' Very well,' he said. So that
night his wife brought the horse that the Rajah had sent him to the
door. 'Indeed,' said the Chattee-maker, 'I can never get into that
saddle, it is so high up.'--' You must jump,' said his wife. Then he
tried to jump several times, but each time he jumped he tumbled down
again. 'I always forget when I am jumping,' said he, 'which way I ought
to turn.'--' Your face must be towards the horse's head,' she answered.
'To be sure, of course,' he cried, and giving one great jump he jumped
into the saddle, but with his face towards the horse's tail. 'This won't
do at all,' said his wife as she helped him down again; 'try getting on
without jumping.'--'I never can remember,' he continued, 'when I have
got my left foot in the stirrup, what to do with my right foot, or where
to put it.'--' That must go in the other stirrup,' she answered; 'let me
help you.' So, after many trials, in which he tumbled down very often,
for the horse was fresh and did not like standing still, the
Chattee-maker got into the saddle; but no sooner had he got there than
he cried, 'O wife, wife! tie me very firmly as quickly as possible, for
I know I shall jump down if I can.' Then she fetched some strong rope
and tied his feet firmly into the stirrups, and fastened one stirrup to
the other, and put another rope round his waist, and another round his
neck, and fastened them to the horse's body, and neck, and tail.

When the horse felt all these ropes about him he could not imagine what
queer creature had got upon his back, and he began rearing, and kicking,
and prancing, and at last set off full gallop, as fast as he could tear,
right across country. 'Wife, wife,' cried the Chattee-maker, 'you forgot
to tie my hands.'--'Never mind,' said she; 'hold on by the mane.' So he
caught hold of the horse's mane as firmly as he could. Then away went
horse, away went Chattee-maker, away, away, away, over hedges, over
ditches, over rivers, over plains, away, away, like a flash of
lightning, now this way, now that, on, on, on, gallop, gallop, gallop,
until they came in sight of the enemy's camp.

The Chattee-maker did not like his ride at all, and when he saw where it
was leading him he liked it still less, for he thought the enemy would
catch him and very likely kill him. So he determined to make one
desperate effort to be free, and stretching out his hand as the horse
shot past a young banyan-tree, seized hold of it with all his might,
hoping the resistance it offered might cause the ropes that tied him to
break. But the horse was going at his utmost speed, and the soil in
which the banyan-tree grew was loose, so that when the Chattee-maker
caught hold of it and gave it such a violent pull, it came up by the
roots, and on he rode as fast as before, with the tree in his hand.

All the soldiers in the camp saw him coming, and having heard that an
army was to be sent against them, made sure that the Chattee-maker was
one of the vanguard. 'See,' cried they, 'here comes a man of gigantic
stature on a mighty horse! He rides at full speed across the country,
tearing up the very trees in his rage! He is one of the opposing force;
the whole army must be close at hand. If they are such as he, we are all
dead men.' Then, running to their Rajah, some of them cried again, 'Here
comes the whole force of the enemy' (for the story had by this time
become exaggerated); 'they are men of gigantic stature, mounted on
mighty horses; as they come they tear up the very trees in their rage;
we can oppose men, but not monsters such as these.' These were followed
by others, who said, 'It is all true,' for by this time the
Chattee-maker had got pretty near the camp, 'they 're coming! they 're
coming! let us fly! let us fly! fly, fly for your lives!' And the whole
panic stricken multitude fled from the camp (those who had seen no cause
for alarm going because the others did, or because they did not care to
stay by themselves) after having obliged their Rajah to write a letter
to the one whose country he was about to invade, to say that he would
not do so, and propose terms of peace, and to sign it, and seal it with
his seal. Scarcely had all the people fled from the camp, when the horse
on which the Chattee-maker was came galloping into it, and on his back
rode the Chattee-maker, almost dead from fatigue, with the banyan-tree
in his hand. Just as he reached the camp the ropes by which he was tied
broke, and he fell to the ground. The horse stood still, too tired with
its long run to go further. On recovering his senses, the Chattee-maker
discovered, to his surprise, that the whole camp, full of rich arms,
clothes, and trappings, was entirely deserted. In the principal tent,
moreover, he found a letter addressed to his Rajah, announcing the
retreat of the invading army, and proposing terms of peace.

So he took the letter, and returned home with it as fast as he could,
leading his horse all the way, for he was afraid to mount him again. It
did not take him long to reach his house by the direct road, for whilst
riding he had gone a more circuitous journey than was necessary, and he
got there just at nightfall. His wife ran out to meet him, overjoyed at
his speedy return. As soon as he saw her, he said, 'Ah, wife, since I
saw you last I've been all round the world, and had many wonderful and
terrible adventures. But never mind that now, send this letter quickly
to the Rajah by a messenger, and also the horse that he sent for me to
ride. He will then see, by the horse looking so tired, what a long ride
I 'ye had, and if he is sent on beforehand, I shall not be obliged to
ride him up to the palace-door to-morrow morning, as I otherwise should,
and that would be very tiresome, for most likely I should tumble off.'
So his wife sent the horse and the letter to the Rajah, and a message
that her husband would be at the palace early next morning, as it was
then late at night And next day he went down there as he had said he
would, and when the people saw him coming, they said, 'This man is as
modest as he is brave; after having put our enemies to flight, he walks
quite simply to the door, instead of riding here in state; as any other
man would.'

<span id="img_35"></span> ![](img/35.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[1](odd20.htm#fr_65.md) Potter.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[2](odd20.htm#fr_66.md) An intoxicating drink made
of palm juice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. The Raksha's Palace](odd21.md)
