[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zan10)  [Next](zan12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1595478779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zanoni*, by Edward Bulwer Lytton, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER VII.

     Qui donc t'a donne la mission s'annoncer au peuple que la  
     divinite n'existe pas? Quel avantage trouves-tu a persuader a  
     l'homme qu'une force aveugle preside a ses destinees et frappe au  
     hasard le crime et la vertu?—Robespierre, "Discours," Mai 7,  
     1794.

     (Who then invested you with the mission to announce to the people  
     that there is no God? What advantage find you in persuading man  
     that nothing but blind force presides over his destinies, and  
     strikes haphazard both crime and virtue?)

It was some time before midnight when the stranger returned home. His
apartments were situated in one of those vast abodes which may be called
an epitome of Paris itself,—the cellars rented by mechanics, scarcely
removed a step from paupers, often by outcasts and fugitives from the
law, often by some daring writer, who, after scattering amongst the
people doctrines the most subversive of order, or the most libellous on
the characters of priest, minister, and king, retired amongst the rats,
to escape the persecution that attends the virtuous; the ground-floor
occupied by shops; the entresol by artists; the principal stories by
nobles; and the garrets by journeymen or grisettes.

As the stranger passed up the stairs, a young man of a form and
countenance singularly unprepossessing emerged from a door in the
entresol, and brushed beside him. His glance was furtive, sinister,
savage, and yet timorous; the man's face was of an ashen paleness, and
the features worked convulsively. The stranger paused, and observed him
with thoughtful looks, as he hurried down the stairs. While he thus
stood, he heard a groan from the room which the young man had just
quitted; the latter had pulled to the door with hasty vehemence, but
some fragment, probably of fuel, had prevented its closing, and it now
stood slightly ajar; the stranger pushed it open and entered. He passed
a small anteroom, meanly furnished, and stood in a bedchamber of meagre
and sordid discomfort. Stretched on the bed, and writhing in pain, lay
an old man; a single candle lit the room, and threw its feeble ray over
the furrowed and death-like face of the sick person. No attendant was
by; he seemed left alone, to breathe his last. "Water," he moaned
feebly,—"water:—I parch,—I burn!" The intruder approached the bed, bent
over him, and took his hand. "Oh, bless thee, Jean, bless thee!" said
the sufferer; "hast thou brought back the physician already? Sir, I am
poor, but I can pay you well. I would not die yet, for that young man's
sake." And he sat upright in his bed, and fixed his dim eyes anxiously
on his visitor.

"What are your symptoms, your disease?"

"Fire, fire, fire in the heart, the entrails: I burn!"

"How long is it since you have taken food?"

"Food! only this broth. There is the basin, all I have taken these six
hours. I had scarce drunk it ere these pains began."

The stranger looked at the basin; some portion of the contents was yet
left there.

"Who administered this to you?"

"Who? Jean! Who else should? I have no servant,—none! I am poor, very
poor, sir. But no! you physicians do not care for the poor. I AM RICH!
can you cure me?"

"Yes, if Heaven permit. Wait but a few moments."

The old man was fast sinking under the rapid effects of poison. The
stranger repaired to his own apartments, and returned in a few moments
with some preparation that had the instant result of an antidote. The
pain ceased, the blue and livid colour receded from the lips; the old
man fell into a profound sleep. The stranger drew the curtains round the
bed, took up the light, and inspected the apartment. The walls of both
rooms were hung with drawings of masterly excellence. A portfolio was
filled with sketches of equal skill,—but these last were mostly subjects
that appalled the eye and revolted the taste: they displayed the human
figure in every variety of suffering,—the rack, the wheel, the gibbet;
all that cruelty has invented to sharpen the pangs of death seemed yet
more dreadful from the passionate gusto and earnest force of the
designer. And some of the countenances of those thus delineated were
sufficiently removed from the ideal to show that they were portraits; in
a large, bold, irregular hand was written beneath these drawings, "The
Future of the Aristocrats." In a corner of the room, and close by an old
bureau, was a small bundle, over which, as if to hide it, a cloak was
thrown carelessly. Several shelves were filled with books; these were
almost entirely the works of the philosophers of the time,—the
philosophers of the material school, especially the Encyclopedistes,
whom Robespierre afterwards so singularly attacked when the coward
deemed it unsafe to leave his reign without a God.

("Cette secte (les Encyclopedistes) propagea avec beaucoup de zele
l'opinion du materialisme, qui prevalut parmi les grands et parmi les
beaux esprits; on lui doit en partie cette espece de philosophie
pratique qui, reduisant l'Egoisme en systeme regarde la societe humaine
comme une guerre de ruse, le succes comme la regle du juste et de
l'injuste, la probite comme une affaire de gout, ou de bienseance, le
monde comme le patrimoine des fripons adroits."—"Discours de
Robespierre," Mai 7, 1794. (This sect (the Encyclopaedists) propagate
with much zeal the doctrine of materialism, which prevails among the
great and the wits; we owe to it partly that kind of practical
philosophy which, reducing Egotism to a system, looks upon society as a
war of cunning; success the rule of right and wrong, honesty as an
affair of taste or decency: and the world as the patrimony of clever
scoundrels.))

A volume lay on a table,—it was one of Voltaire, and the page was opened
at his argumentative assertion of the existence of the Supreme Being.
("Histoire de Jenni.") The margin was covered with pencilled notes, in
the stiff but tremulous hand of old age; all in attempt to refute or to
ridicule the logic of the sage of Ferney: Voltaire did not go far enough
for the annotator! The clock struck two, when the sound of steps was
heard without. The stranger silently seated himself on the farther side
of the bed, and its drapery screened him, as he sat, from the eyes of a
man who now entered on tiptoe; it was the same person who had passed him
on the stairs. The new-comer took up the candle and approached the bed.
The old man's face was turned to the pillow; but he lay so still, and
his breathing was so inaudible, that his sleep might well, by that
hasty, shrinking, guilty glance, be mistaken for the repose of death.
The new-comer drew back, and a grim smile passed over his face: he
replaced the candle on the table, opened the bureau with a key which he
took from his pocket, and loaded himself with several rouleaus of gold
that he found in the drawers. At this time the old man began to wake. He
stirred, he looked up; he turned his eyes towards the light now waning
in its socket; he saw the robber at his work; he sat erect for an
instant, as if transfixed, more even by astonishment than terror. At
last he sprang from his bed.

"Just Heaven! do I dream! Thou—thou—thou, for whom I toiled and
starved!—THOU!"

The robber started; the gold fell from his hand, and rolled on the
floor.

"What!" he said, "art thou not dead yet? Has the poison failed?"

"Poison, boy! Ah!" shrieked the old man, and covered his face with his
hands; then, with sudden energy, he exclaimed, "Jean! Jean! recall that
word. Rob, plunder me if thou wilt, but do not say thou couldst murder
one who only lived for thee! There, there, take the gold; I hoarded it
but for thee. Go! go!" and the old man, who in his passion had quitted
his bed, fell at the feet of the foiled assassin, and writhed on the
ground,—the mental agony more intolerable than that of the body, which
he had so lately undergone. The robber looked at him with a hard
disdain. "What have I ever done to thee, wretch?" cried the old
man,—"what but loved and cherished thee? Thou wert an orphan,—an
outcast. I nurtured, nursed, adopted thee as my son. If men call me a
miser, it was but that none might despise thee, my heir, because Nature
has stunted and deformed thee, when I was no more. Thou wouldst have had
all when I was dead. Couldst thou not spare me a few months or
days,—nothing to thy youth, all that is left to my age? What have I done
to thee?"

"Thou hast continued to live, and thou wouldst make no will."

"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!"

"TON DIEU! Thy God! Fool! Hast thou not told me, from my childhood, that
there is NO God? Hast thou not fed me on philosophy? Hast thou not said,
'Be virtuous, be good, be just, for the sake of mankind: but there is no
life after this life'? Mankind! why should I love mankind? Hideous and
misshapen, mankind jeer at me as I pass the streets. What hast thou done
to me? Thou hast taken away from me, who am the scoff of this world, the
hopes of another! Is there no other life? Well, then, I want thy gold,
that at least I may hasten to make the best of this!"

"Monster! Curses light on thy ingratitude, thy—"

"And who hears thy curses? Thou knowest there is no God! Mark me; I have
prepared all to fly. See,—I have my passport; my horses wait without;
relays are ordered. I have thy gold." (And the wretch, as he spoke,
continued coldly to load his person with the rouleaus). "And now, if I
spare thy life, how shall I be sure that thou wilt not inform against
mine?" He advanced with a gloomy scowl and a menacing gesture as he
spoke.

The old man's anger changed to fear. He cowered before the savage. "Let
me live! let me live!—that—that—"

"That—what?"

"I may pardon thee! Yes, thou hast nothing to fear from me. I swear it!"

"Swear! But by whom and what, old man? I cannot believe thee, if thou
believest not in any God! Ha, ha! behold the result of thy lessons."

Another moment and those murderous fingers would have strangled their
prey. But between the assassin and his victim rose a form that seemed
almost to both a visitor from the world that both denied,—stately with
majestic strength, glorious with awful beauty.

The ruffian recoiled, looked, trembled, and then turned and fled from
the chamber. The old man fell again to the ground insensible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](zan12)
