[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zan54)  [Next](zan56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1595478779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zanoni*, by Edward Bulwer Lytton, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II.

     Faust: Wohin soll es nun gehm?  
     Mephist: Wohin es Dir gefallt.  
     Wir sehn die kleine, dann die grosse Welt.  
     "Faust."

     (Faust: Whither go now!  
     Mephist: Whither it pleases thee.  
     We see the small world, then the great.)

Draw your chair to the fireside, brush clean the hearth, and trim the
lights. Oh, home of sleekness, order, substance, comfort! Oh, excellent
thing art thou, Matter of Fact!

It is some time after the date of the last chapter. Here we are, not in
moonlit islands or mouldering castles, but in a room twenty-six feet by
twenty-two,—well carpeted, well cushioned, solid arm-chairs and eight
such bad pictures, in such fine frames, upon the walls! Thomas Mervale,
Esq., merchant, of London, you are an enviable dog!

It was the easiest thing in the world for Mervale, on returning from his
Continental episode of life, to settle down to his desk,—his heart had
been always there. The death of his father gave him, as a birthright, a
high position in a respectable though second-rate firm. To make this
establishment first-rate was an honourable ambition,—it was his! He had
lately married, not entirely for money,—no! he was worldly rather than
mercenary. He had no romantic ideas of love; but he was too sensible a
man not to know that a wife should be a companion,—not merely a
speculation. He did not care for beauty and genius, but he liked health
and good temper, and a certain proportion of useful understanding. He
chose a wife from his reason, not his heart, and a very good choice he
made. Mrs. Mervale was an excellent young woman,—bustling, managing,
economical, but affectionate and good. She had a will of her own, but
was no shrew. She had a great notion of the rights of a wife, and a
strong perception of the qualities that insure comfort. She would never
have forgiven her husband, had she found him guilty of the most passing
fancy for another; but, in return, she had the most admirable sense of
propriety herself. She held in abhorrence all levity, all flirtation,
all coquetry,—small vices which often ruin domestic happiness, but which
a giddy nature incurs without consideration. But she did not think it
right to love a husband over much. She left a surplus of affection, for
all her relations, all her friends, some of her acquaintances, and the
possibility of a second marriage, should any accident happen to Mr. M.
She kept a good table, for it suited their station; and her temper was
considered even, though firm; but she could say a sharp thing or two, if
Mr. Mervale was not punctual to a moment. She was very particular that
he should change his shoes on coming home,—the carpets were new and
expensive. She was not sulky, nor passionate,—Heaven bless her for
that!—but when displeased she showed it, administered a dignified
rebuke, alluded to her own virtues, to her uncle who was an admiral, and
to the thirty thousand pounds which she had brought to the object of her
choice. But as Mr. Mervale was a good-humoured man, owned his faults,
and subscribed to her excellence, the displeasure was soon over.

Every household has its little disagreements, none fewer than that of
Mr. and Mrs. Mervale. Mrs. Mervale, without being improperly fond of
dress, paid due attention to it. She was never seen out of her chamber
with papers in her hair, nor in that worst of dis-illusions,—a morning
wrapper. At half-past eight every morning Mrs. Mervale was dressed for
the day,—that is, till she re-dressed for dinner,—her stays well laced,
her cap prim, her gowns, winter and summer, of a thick, handsome silk.
Ladies at that time wore very short waists; so did Mrs. Mervale. Her
morning ornaments were a thick, gold chain, to which was suspended a
gold watch,—none of those fragile dwarfs of mechanism that look so
pretty and go so ill, but a handsome repeater which chronicled Father
Time to a moment; also a mosaic brooch; also a miniature of her uncle,
the admiral, set in a bracelet. For the evening she had two handsome
sets,—necklace, earrings, and bracelets complete,—one of amethysts, the
other topazes. With these, her costume for the most part was a
gold-coloured satin and a turban, in which last her picture had been
taken. Mrs. Mervale had an aquiline nose, good teeth, fair hair, and
light eyelashes, rather a high complexion, what is generally called a
fine bust; full cheeks; large useful feet made for walking; large, white
hands with filbert nails, on which not a speck of dust had, even in
childhood, ever been known to a light. She looked a little older than
she really was; but that might arise from a certain air of dignity and
the aforesaid aquiline nose. She generally wore short mittens. She never
read any poetry but Goldsmith's and Cowper's. She was not amused by
novels, though she had no prejudice against them. She liked a play and a
pantomime, with a slight supper afterwards. She did not like concerts
nor operas. At the beginning of the winter she selected some book to
read, and some piece of work to commence. The two lasted her till the
spring, when, though she continued to work, she left off reading. Her
favourite study was history, which she read through the medium of Dr.
Goldsmith. Her favourite author in the belles lettres was, of course,
Dr. Johnson. A worthier woman, or one more respected, was not to be
found, except in an epitaph!

It was an autumn night. Mr. and Mrs. Mervale, lately returned from an
excursion to Weymouth, are in the drawing-room,—"the dame sat on this
side, the man sat on that."

"Yes, I assure you, my dear, that Glyndon, with all his eccentricities,
was a very engaging, amiable fellow. You would certainly have liked
him,—all the women did."

"My dear Thomas, you will forgive the remark,—but that expression of
yours, 'all the WOMEN'—"

"I beg your pardon,—you are right. I meant to say that he was a general
favourite with your charming sex."

"I understand,—rather a frivolous character."

"Frivolous! no, not exactly; a little unsteady,—very odd, but certainly
not frivolous; presumptuous and headstrong in character, but modest and
shy in his manners, rather too much so,—just what you like. However, to
return; I am seriously uneasy at the accounts I have heard of him
to-day. He has been living, it seems, a very strange and irregular life,
travelling from place to place, and must have spent already a great deal
of money."

"Apropos of money," said Mrs. Mervale; "I fear we must change our
butcher; he is certainly in league with the cook."

"That is a pity; his beef is remarkably fine. These London servants are
as bad as the Carbonari. But, as I was saying, poor Glyndon—"

Here a knock was heard at the door. "Bless me," said Mrs. Mervale, "it
is past ten! Who can that possibly be?"

"Perhaps your uncle, the admiral," said the husband, with a slight
peevishness in his accent. "He generally favours us about this hour."

"I hope, my love, that none of my relations are unwelcome visitors at
your house. The admiral is a most entertaining man, and his fortune is
entirely at his own disposal."

"No one I respect more," said Mr. Mervale, with emphasis.

The servant threw open the door, and announced Mr. Glyndon.

"Mr. Glyndon!—what an extraordinary—" exclaimed Mrs. Mervale; but before
she could conclude the sentence, Glyndon was in the room.

The two friends greeted each other with all the warmth of early
recollection and long absence. An appropriate and proud presentation to
Mrs. Mervale ensued; and Mrs. Mervale, with a dignified smile, and a
furtive glance at his boots, bade her husband's friend welcome to
England.

Glyndon was greatly altered since Mervale had seen him last. Though less
than two years had elapsed since then, his fair complexion was more
bronzed and manly. Deep lines of care, or thought, or dissipation, had
replaced the smooth contour of happy youth. To a manner once gentle and
polished had succeeded a certain recklessness of mien, tone, and
bearing, which bespoke the habits of a society that cared little for the
calm decorums of conventional ease. Still a kind of wild nobleness, not
before apparent in him, characterised his aspect, and gave something of
dignity to the freedom of his language and gestures.

"So, then, you are settled, Mervale,—I need not ask you if you are
happy. Worth, sense, wealth, character, and so fair a companion deserve
happiness, and command it."

"Would you like some tea, Mr. Glyndon?" asked Mrs. Mervale, kindly.

"Thank you,—no. I propose a more convivial stimulus to my old friend.
Wine, Mervale,—wine, eh!—or a bowl of old English punch. Your wife will
excuse us,—we will make a night of it!"

Mrs. Mervale drew back her chair, and tried not to look aghast. Glyndon
did not give his friend time to reply.

"So at last I am in England," he said, looking round the room, with a
slight sneer on his lips; "surely this sober air must have its
influence; surely here I shall be like the rest."

"Have you been ill, Glyndon?"

"Ill, yes. Humph! you have a fine house. Does it contain a spare room
for a solitary wanderer?"

Mr. Mervale glanced at his wife, and his wife looked steadily on the
carpet. "Modest and shy in his manners—rather too much so!" Mrs. Mervale
was in the seventh heaven of indignation and amaze!

"My dear?" said Mr. Mervale at last, meekly and interogatingly.

"My dear!" returned Mrs. Mervale, innocently and sourly.

"We can make up a room for my old friend, Sarah?"

The old friend had sunk back on his chair, and, gazing intently on the
fire, with his feet at ease upon the fender, seemed to have forgotten
his question.

Mrs. Mervale bit her lips, looked thoughtful, and at last coldly
replied, "Certainly, Mr. Mervale; your friends do right to make
themselves at home."

With that she lighted a candle, and moved majestically from the room.
When she returned, the two friends had vanished into Mr. Mervale's
study.

Twelve o'clock struck,—one o'clock, two! Thrice had Mrs. Mervale sent
into the room to know,—first, if they wanted anything; secondly, if Mr.
Glyndon slept on a mattress or feather-bed; thirdly, to inquire if Mr.
Glyndon's trunk, which he had brought with him, should be unpacked. And
to the answer to all these questions was added, in a loud voice from the
visitor,—a voice that pierced from the kitchen to the attic,—"Another
bowl! stronger, if you please, and be quick with it!"

At last Mr. Mervale appeared in the conjugal chamber, not penitent, nor
apologetic,—no, not a bit of it. His eyes twinkled, his cheek flushed,
his feet reeled; he sang,—Mr. Thomas Mervale positively sang!

"Mr. Mervale! is it possible, sir—"

"'Old King Cole was a merry old soul—'"

"Mr. Mervale! sir!—leave me alone, sir!"

"'And a merry old soul was he—'"

"What an example to the servants!"

"'And he called for his pipe, and he called for his bowl—'"

"If you don't behave yourself, sir, I shall call—"

"'Call for his fiddlers three!'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](zan56)
