[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](zan86) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1595478779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zanoni*, by Edward Bulwer Lytton, \[1842\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### "ZANONI EXPLAINED."

BY—."

MEJNOUR:—Contemplation of the Actual,—SCIENCE. Always old, and must last
as long as the Actual. Less fallible than Idealism, but less practically
potent, from its ignorance of the human heart.

ZANONI:—Contemplation of the Ideal,—IDEALISM. Always necessarily
sympathetic: lives by enjoyment; and is therefore typified by eternal
youth. ("I do not understand the making Idealism less undying (on this
scene of existence) than Science."—Commentator. Because, granting the
above premises, Idealism is more subjected than Science to the
Affections, or to Instinct, because the Affections, sooner or later,
force Idealism into the Actual, and in the Actual its immortality
departs. The only absolutely Actual portion of the work is found in the
concluding scenes that depict the Reign of Terror. The introduction of
this part was objected to by some as out of keeping with the fanciful
portions that preceded it. But if the writer of the solution has rightly
shown or suggested the intention of the author, the most strongly and
rudely actual scene of the age in which the story is cast was the
necessary and harmonious completion of the whole. The excesses and
crimes of Humanity are the grave of the Ideal.—Author.) Idealism is the
potent Interpreter and Prophet of the Real; but its powers are impaired
in proportion to their exposure to human passion.

VIOLA:—Human INSTINCT. (Hardly worthy to be called LOVE, as Love would
not forsake its object at the bidding of Superstition.) Resorts, first
in its aspiration after the Ideal, to tinsel shows; then relinquishes
these for a higher love; but is still, from the conditions of its
nature, inadequate to this, and liable to suspicion and mistrust. Its
greatest force (Maternal Instinct) has power to penetrate some secrets,
to trace some movements of the Ideal, but, too feeble to command them,
yields to Superstition, sees sin where there is none, while committing
sin, under a false guidance; weakly seeking refuge amidst the very
tumults of the warring passions of the Actual, while deserting the
serene Ideal,—pining, nevertheless, in the absence of the Ideal, and
expiring (not perishing, but becoming transmuted) in the aspiration
after having the laws of the two natures reconciled.

(It might best suit popular apprehension to call these three the
Understanding, the Imagination, and the Heart.)

CHILD:—NEW-BORN INSTINCT, while trained and informed by Idealism,
promises a preter-human result by its early, incommunicable vigilance
and intelligence, but is compelled, by inevitable orphanhood, and the
one-half of the laws of its existence, to lapse into ordinary
conditions.

AIDON-AI:—FAITH, which manifests its splendour, and delivers its
oracles, and imparts its marvels, only to the higher moods of the soul,
and whose directed antagonism is with Fear; so that those who employ the
resources of Fear must dispense with those of Faith. Yet aspiration
holds open a way of restoration, and may summon Faith, even when the cry
issues from beneath the yoke of fear.

DWELLER OF THE THRESHOLD:—FEAR (or HORROR), from whose ghastliness men
are protected by the opacity of the region of Prescription and Custom.
The moment this protection is relinquished, and the human spirit pierces
the cloud, and enters alone on the unexplored regions of Nature, this
Natural Horror haunts it, and is to be successfully encountered only by
defiance,—by aspiration towards, and reliance on, the Former and
Director of Nature, whose Messenger and Instrument of reassurance is
Faith.

MERVALE:—CONVENTIONALISM.

NICOT:—Base, grovelling, malignant PASSION.

GLYNDON:—UNSUSTAINED ASPIRATION: Would follow Instinct, but is deterred
by Conventionalism, is overawed by Idealism, yet attracted, and
transiently inspired, but has not steadiness for the initiatory
contemplation of the Actual. He conjoins its snatched privileges with a
besetting sensualism, and suffers at once from the horror of the one and
the disgust of the other, involving the innocent in the fatal conflict
of his spirit. When on the point of perishing, he is rescued by
Idealism, and, unable to rise to that species of existence, is grateful
to be replunged into the region of the Familiar, and takes up his rest
henceforth in Custom. (Mirror of Young Manhood.)

....

ARGUMENT.

Human Existence subject to, and exempt from, ordinary conditions
(Sickness, Poverty, Ignorance, Death).

SCIENCE is ever striving to carry the most gifted beyond ordinary
conditions,—the result being as many victims as efforts, and the striver
being finally left a solitary,—for his object is unsuitable to the
natures he has to deal with.

The pursuit of the Ideal involves so much emotion as to render the
Idealist vulnerable by human passion, however long and well guarded,
still vulnerable,—liable, at last, to a union with Instinct. Passion
obscures both Insight and Forecast. All effort to elevate Instinct to
Idealism is abortive, the laws of their being not coinciding (in the
early stage of the existence of the one). Instinct is either alarmed,
and takes refuge in Superstition or Custom, or is left helpless to human
charity, or given over to providential care.

Idealism, stripped of in sight and forecast, loses its serenity, becomes
subject once more to the horror from which it had escaped, and by
accepting its aids, forfeits the higher help of Faith; aspiration,
however, remaining still possible, and, thereby, slow restoration; and
also, SOMETHING BETTER.

Summoned by aspiration, Faith extorts from Fear itself the saving truth
to which Science continues blind, and which Idealism itself hails as its
crowning acquisition,—the inestimable PROOF wrought out by all labours
and all conflicts.

Pending the elaboration of this proof,

CONVENTIONALISM plods on, safe and complacent;

SELFISH PASSION perishes, grovelling and hopeless;

INSTINCT sleeps, in order to a loftier waking; and

IDEALISM learns, as its ultimate lesson, that self-sacrifice is true
redemption; that the region beyond the grave is the fitting one for
exemption from mortal conditions; and that Death is the everlasting
portal, indicated by the finger of God,—the broad avenue through which
man does not issue solitary and stealthy into the region of Free
Existence, but enters triumphant, hailed by a hierarchy of immortal
natures.

The result is (in other words), THAT THE UNIVERSAL HUMAN LOT IS, AFTER
ALL, THAT OF THE HIGHEST PRIVILEGE.

 
