[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17135)  [Next](sbe17137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

#### V. THE UKKHEPANIYA-KAMMAS (ACTS OF SUSPENSION)

for not acknowledging, and for not atoning for, an offence <span
id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_656).

### 25.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was dwelling at Kosambî, in the
Ghosita Ârâma. And at that time the venerable *Kh*anna <span
id="fr_671"></span>[2](#fn_657), when he had committed a fault, was not
willing to acknowledge the fault. Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were
annoyed, murmured, and became indignant, saying, 'How can the venerable
*Kh*anna act so?' And those Bhikkhus told the matter to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One on that occasion, and in that connection, after he
had convened a meeting of the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha, asked the Bhikkhus:

'Is it true, O Bhikkhus, as they say, that *Kh*anna

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

when he has committed a fault, is not willing to acknowledge the fault?'

'It is true, Lord!'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked him, saying, 'How, O Bhikkhus, can that
foolish one act so? This will not conduce either to the conversion of
the unconverted, or to the increase of the converted; but rather to
those who have not been converted being not converted, and to the
turning back of those who have been converted.'

And when the Blessed One had so rebuked him, and had delivered a
religious discourse, he addressed the Bhikkhus and said: 'Let therefore
the Sa*m*gha, O Bhikkhus, carry out against *Kh*anna the Bhikkhu the
âpattiyâ adassane Ukkhepaniya-kamma (the Act of Suspension which follows
on not acknowledging a fault) to the intent that he shall not eat or
dwell together with the Sa*m*gha <span id="fr_672"></span>[1](#fn_658).

'Now thus, O Bhikkhus, should it be carried out.' \[Here follow the
formal words of' the Kammavâ*k*â as in chapter 1, 4, with the necessary
alterations owing to the difference of the fault and of the K am ma
following on it. And at the end of the Kammavâ*k*â (after the words
'Thus I understand') the following sentence is added.\]

'And send a proclamation, O Bhikkhus, from residence to residence <span
id="fr_673"></span>[2](#fn_659); saying, "*Kh*anna the Bhikkhu has been
subjected by the Sa*m*gha to the Ukkhepaniya-kamma for not acknowledging
a fault."'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_656"></span>[370:1](sbe17136.htm#fr_670) There is no
mention in the Pâtimokkha of any such proceeding. At the close of each
of the four Pâ*t*idesaniya Rules there is a form of confession to be
observed. It would seem from the following chapters, which are nowhere
expressly confined to these four cases, that a similar confession was
expected after the commission of an offence against any of the
Pâtimokkha Rules. In the closing words of the Sa*m*ghâdisesa Rules, an
older proceeding is mentioned, under which an offending Bhikkhu who has
not confessed any breach of either of those thirteen Rules is to remain
on probation for as many days he has allowed to go by without
confessing,

<span id="fn_657"></span>[370:2](sbe17136.htm#fr_671) On *Kh*anna's
character, see also below, IV, 14, I, XI, I, 12-14, and Mahâ-parinibbâna
Sutta VI, 4.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[371:1](sbe17136.htm#fr_672) Compare Mahâvagga
I, 79 generally, and § 2 of that chapter on the last clause
(asambhoga*m* sa*m*ghena).

<span id="fn_659"></span>[371:2](sbe17136.htm#fr_673) On this phrase the
Samanta Pâsâdikâ says, Âvâsa-parampara*ñ* *k*a bhikkhave sa*m*sathâ ti
sabbâvâsesu âro*k*etha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26](sbe17137)
