[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17004)  [Next](sbe17006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 4.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed One walked up and down in the open
air <span id="fr_37"></span>[3](#fn_37) unshod. Noticing that, 'The
Master walks unshod,' the Elders (the Thera Bhikkhus) also went unshod
when they were walking up and down <span id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_37).
But though the Master and the Thera Bhikkhus went unshod, the
*Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus walked up and down with coverings on their feet.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

The temperate Bhikkhus were annoyed, murmured, and became angry, saying,
'How can these *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus walk shod, when the Master and the
Thera Bhikkhus walk unshod?'

2\. Then those Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

'Is it true, what they say, O Bhikkhus, that the *Kh*abbaggiya Bhikkhus
walk shod, though the Master and the Elders walk unshod?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying,

'How, O Bhikkhus, can these foolish persons walk shod, though (&c., as
in §§ 1, 2). For even the lay-men, O Bhikkhus, who are clad in white,
for the sake of some handicraft that may procure them a living, will be
respectful, affectionate, hospitable to their teachers. \[3.\] Do you,
therefore, O Bhikkhus, so let (your light) shine forth, that you having
left the world (to enter into) so well taught a doctrine and discipline
may be respectful, affectionate, hospitable to your teachers
(â*k*ariyas), or those who rank as teachers <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_38), and to your superiors (upa*ggh*âyas), or
those who rank as superiors <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_39). This
will not conduce, O Bhikkhus, to the conversion of the unconverted, and
to the augmentation of the number of the converted:

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

but it will result, O Bhikkhus, in the unconverted being repulsed (from
the faith), and in many of the converted becoming estranged.' Having
thus rebuked them, and having delivered a religious discourse, he thus
addressed the Bhikkhus:

None of you, O Bhikkhus, is to walk shod, when your teachers or those
who rank as teachers, or your superiors, or those who rank as superiors,
are walking unshod. Whosoever does so, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.

'And no one of you, O Bhikkhus, is to wear shoes in the open Ârâma.
Whosoever does so, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[17:3](sbe17005.htm#fr_38) This walking up and
down thinking is represented as a constant habit of the early Buddhist
Sama*n*as.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[18:1](sbe17005.htm#fr_39) Avassikassa
*kh*abbasso â*k*ariyamatto. So hi *k*atuvassakâle ta*m* nissâya
va*kkh*ati (Mahâvagga I, 35). Eva*m* ekavassassa sattavasso, duvassassa
a*tth*avasso, tivassassa dasavasso (B.).

<span id="fn_39"></span>[18:2](sbe17005.htm#fr_40) Upa*ggh*âyassa
samdi*tth*a-sa*m*bhattâ pana sahâyâ bhikkhû, ye vâ pana ke*k*i dasahi
vassehi mahantatarâ, te sabbe pi upa*ggh*âyamattâ nâma. This confirms
the view expressed in a note to the first Book (chap. 32. I), that the
Upa*ggh*âya is a more important person than the Â*k*ariya. The former
must have ten years, the latter need only have six years, seniority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](sbe17006)
