[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17067)  [Next](sbe17069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

# EIGHTH KHANDHAKA.

#### (THE DRESS OF THE BHIKKHUS.)

### 1.

1\. At that time the blessed Buddha dwelt at Râ*g*agaha, in the
Ve*l*uvana, in the Kalandaka-nivâpa. At that time Vesâlî was an opulent,
prosperous town, populous, crowded with people, abundant with food <span
id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_331); there were seven thousand seven hundred
and seven storeyed buildings, and seven thousand seven hundred and seven
pinnacled buildings, and seven thousand seven hundred and seven pleasure
grounds (Ârâmas), and seven thousand seven hundred and seven
lotus-ponds. There was also the courtezan Ambapâlikâ <span
id="fr_337"></span>[2](#fn_332), who was beautiful, graceful, pleasant,
gifted with the highest beauty of complexion, well versed in dancing,
singing, and lute-playing, much visited by desirous people. She asked
fifty (kahâpa*n*as) for one night. Through that person Vesâlî became
more and more flourishing.

2\. Now a merchant from Râ*g*agaha went to Vesâlî on a certain business.
That Râ*g*agaha merchant saw what an opulent, prosperous town Vesâlî
was, how populous, crowded with people, and abundant with food, and the
seven thousand seven

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

hundred and seven storeyed buildings . . . . and the courtezan Ambapâlî,
who was beautiful . . . . and through whom Vesâlî became more and more
flourishing. And the Râ*g*agaha merchant, after having done his business
in Vesâlî, returned to Râ*g*agaha and went to the place where the
Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra was. Having approached him, he said to
the Mâgadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra: 'Vesâlî, Your Majesty, is an
opulent, prosperous town (&c., as in § 1, down to:) Through that person
Vesâlî becomes more and more flourishing. May it please Your Majesty,
let us also install a courtezan.'

(The king replied), 'Well, my good Sir, look for such a girl whom you
can install as courtezan.'

3\. Now at that time there was at Râ*g*agaha a girl Sâlavatî by name,
who was beautiful, graceful, pleasant, and gifted with the highest
beauty of complexion. That girl Sâlavatî the Râ*g*agaha merchant
installed as courtezan. And before long the courtezan Sâlavatî was well
versed in dancing, singing, and lute-playing, and much visited by
desirous people, and she asked one hundred (kahâpa*n*as) for one night.
And before long the courtezan Sâlavatî became pregnant. Now the
courtezan Sâlavatî thought: 'Men do not like a pregnant woman. If
anybody should find out regarding me that "The courtezan Sâlavatî is
pregnant," my whole position will be lost. What if I were to have the
people told that I am sick.'

And the courtezan Sâlavatî gave orders to the door-keeper (saying), 'Let
no man enter here, my good door-keeper, and if a man calls for me, tell
him that I am sick.' The door-keeper accepted

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

this of the courtezan Sâlavatî (by saying), Yes, Madam.'

4\. And the courtezan Sâlavatî, when the child in her womb had reached
maturity, gave birth to a boy. And the courtezan Sâlavatî gave orders to
her maid-servant (saying), 'Go, my girl, put this boy into an old
winnowing basket, take him away, and throw him away on a dust-heap.' The
servant accepted this order of the courtezan Sâlavatî (by saying), 'Yes,
Madam,' put that boy into an old winnowing basket, took him away, and
threw him away on a dust-heap.

At that time a royal prince, Abhaya by name <span
id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_333), went betimes to attend upon the king,
and saw that boy, around whom crows were gathering. When he saw that, he
asked the people: 'What is that, my good Sirs, around which the crows
are gathering?'

It is a boy, Your Highness  <span id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_334).'

'Is he alive, Sirs?'

'He is alive, Your Highness.'

'Well, my good Sirs, bring that boy to our palace and give him to the
nurses to nourish him.'

And those people accepted that order of the royal prince Abhaya (by
saying), 'Yes, Your Highness,' brought that boy to the palace of the
royal prince Abhaya, and gave him to the nurses (saying),

'Nourish (this boy).'

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

Because (the people had said about this boy to Abhaya), 'He is alive'
(*g*îvati), they gave him the name of *G*îvaka; because he had been
caused to be nourished by the royal prince (kumârena posâpito), they
gave him the name of Komârabha*kk*a <span
id="fr_340"></span>[1](#fn_335).

5\. And ere long *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a came to the years of
discretion. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where the
royal prince Abhaya was; having approached him he said to the royal
prince Abhaya: 'Who is my mother, Your Highness, and who is my father?'

'I do not know your mother, my good *G*îvaka, but I am your father, for
I have had you nourished.'

Now *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'In these royal families it is not
easy to find one's livelihood without knowing an art. What if I were to
learn an art.'

6\. At that time there lived at Takkasilâ (Τάξιλα) a world-renowned
physician. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a without asking leave of the royal
prince Abhaya set out for Takkasilâ. Wandering from place to place he
came to Takkasilâ and to the place where

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

that physician was. Having approached him he said to that physician, 'I
wish to learn your art, doctor.

'Well, friend *G*îvaka, learn it.'

And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a learnt much, and learnt easily, and
understood well, and did not forget what he had learnt. And when seven
years had elapsed, *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'I learn much, and
learn easily, and I understand well, and I do not forget what I have
learnt. I have studied now seven years, and I do not see the end of this
art. When shall I see the end of this art?'

7\. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where that physician
was; having approached him he said to that physician: 'I learn much,
doctor, and I learn easily; I understand well, and do not forget what I
have learnt. I have studied now seven years, and I do not see the end of
this art. When shall I see the end of this art?'

'Very well, my dear *G*îvaka, take this spade, and seek round about
Takkasilâ a yo*g*ana on every side, and whatever (plant) you see which
is not medicinal, bring it to me.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of that physician (saying),
'Yes, doctor,' took a spade, and went around about Takkasilâ a yo*g*ana
on every side, but he did not see anything that was not medicinal. Then
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where that physician was;
having approached him he said to that physician: 'I have been seeking,
doctor, all around Takkasilâ a yo*g*ana on every side, but I have not
seen anything that is not medicinal.'

(The physician replied), 'You have done your learning, my good *G*îvaka;
this will do for acquiring your livelihood.' Speaking thus he gave to
*G*îvaka

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Komârabha*kk*a a
little (money) for his journey (home).

8\. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a took that little money, given to him for
his journey, and set out for Râ*g*agaha. And on the way at Sâketa that
little money of *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a was spent. Now *G*îvaka
Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'These ways are wild, and there is but little
water and little food; it is difficult to travel here without money for
the journey. What if I were to try to get some money for my journey.'

At that time the se*tth*i's <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_336) wife
at Sâketa had been suffering for seven years from disease in the head;
many very great and world-renowned physicians came, but they could not
restore her to health; they received much gold, and went away.

And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, when he had entered Sâketa, asked the
people: 'Who is sick here, my good Sirs? Whom shall I cure?'

'That se*tth*i's wife, doctor, has been suffering for seven years from a
disease in the head; go, doctor, and cure that se*tth*i's wife.'

9\. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the house of that householder,
the se*tth*i; and when he had reached it, he gave orders to the
door-keeper (saying), 'Go, my good door-keeper, and tell the se*tth*i's
wife: "A physician has come in, Madam, who wants to see you."'

That door-keeper accepted this order of *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a
(saying), 'Yes, doctor,' went to the place where the se*tth*i's wife
was, and having approached her, he said to the se*tth*i's wife: 'A
physician has come in, Madam, who wants to see you.'

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

'What sort of man is that physician, my good door-keeper?'

'He is a young man, Madam.'

'Nay, my good door-keeper, what can a young physician help me? Many very
great and world-renowned physicians have come and have not been able to
restore me to health; they have received much gold, and have gone away.'

10\. Thus that door-keeper went to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a; having
approached him he said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'The se*tth*i's wife
has said, doctor: "Nay, my good door-keeper (&c., as in § 9)."'

(*G*îvaka replied), 'Go, my good door-keeper, and tell the se*tth*i's
wife: "The physician, Madam, says: 'Do not give me anything beforehand,
Madam when you shall have been restored to health, then you may give me
what you like."'

The door-keeper accepted this order of *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a (saying),
'Yes, doctor,' went to the place where the se*tth*i's wife was, and
having approached her he said to the se*tth*i's wife: 'The physician,
Madam, says (&c., as above).'

'Well, my good door-keeper, let the physician enter.'

The door-keeper accepted this order of the se*tth*i's wife (saying),
'Yes, Madam,' went to the place where *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a was, and
having approached him he said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'The
se*tth*i's wife calls you, doctor.'

11\. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where the se*tth*i's
wife was; having approached her, and having carefully observed the
change in the appearance of the se*tth*i's wife, he said to the

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

se*tth*i's wife: 'We want one pasata <span
id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_337) of ghee, Madam.' Then the se*tth*i's
wife ordered one pasata of ghee to be given to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a.
And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a boiled up that pasata of ghee with various
drugs, ordered the se*tth*i's wife to lie down on her back in the bed,
and gave it her through her nose. And the butter given through the nose
came out through the mouth. And the se*tth*i's wife spat it out into the
spittoon, and told the maid-servant: 'Come, my girl, take this ghee up
with a piece of cotton.'

12\. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'It is astonishing how
niggardly this house-wife is, in that she has this ghee, which ought to
be thrown away, taken up with a piece of cotton. I have given her many
highly precious drugs. What sort of fee will she give me?'

And the se*tth*i's wife, when she observed the change of demeanour in
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'Why are you
perplexed, doctor?'

'I thought: "It is astonishing, &c."'

'Householders like us, doctor, know why to economize thus; this ghee
will do for the servants or workmen to anoint their feet with, or, it
can be poured into the lamp. Be not perplexed, doctor, you will not lose
your fee.'

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

13\. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a drove away the disease in the head
which the se*tth*i's wife had had for seven years, by once giving her
medicine through the nose. Then the se*tth*i's wife, who had been'
restored to health, gave four thousand (kâhâpa*n*as) to *G*îvaka
Komârabha*kk*a; her son (thinking), 'My mother stands there restored,'
gave him four thousand; her daughter-in-law (thinking), 'My
mother-in-law stands there restored,' gave him four thousand; the
se*tth*i, the householder, (thinking), 'My wife stands there restored,'
gave him four thousand and a man-servant and a maid-servant and a coach
with horses.

Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a took those sixteen thousand (kâhâpa*n*as)
and the man-servant, the maid-servant, and the coach with the horses,
and set out for Râ*g*agaha. In due course he came to Râ*g*agaha, and to
the place where the royal prince Abhaya was; having approached him he
said to the royal prince Abhaya: 'This, Your Highness, (have I received
for) the first work I have done, sixteen thousand and a man-servant and
a maid-servant and a coach with horses; may Your Highness accept this as
payment for my bringing up.'

'Nay, my dear *G*îvaka, keep it, but do not get a dwelling for yourself
elsewhere than in our residence.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the royal prince Abhaya
(saying), 'Yes, Your Highness,' and got himself a dwelling in the
residence of the royal prince Abhaya.

14\. At that time the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra suffered from a
fistula; his garments were stained with blood. When the queens saw that,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

they ridiculed (the king, and said): 'His Majesty is having his courses.
His Majesty will bring forth!' The king was annoyed at that. And the
Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra said to the royal prince Abhaya: 'I am
suffering, my dear Abhaya, from such a disease that my garments are
stained with blood; and the queens, when they see it, ridicule (me by
saying), "His Majesty is, &c." Pray, my dear Abhaya, find a physician
for me, able to cure me.'

'This excellent young physician of ours, Sire, *G*îvaka, he will cure
Your Majesty.'

'Then pray, my dear Abhaya, give orders to the physician *G*îvaka, and
he shall cure me.'

15\. Then the royal prince Abhaya gave orders to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a
(saying), 'Go, my dear *G*îvaka, and cure the king.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the royal prince Abhaya
(by saying), 'Yes, Your Highness,' took some medicament in his nail, and
went to the place where the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra was. Having
approached him, he said to the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra: 'Let us
see your disease, Your Majesty.' And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a healed the
fistula of the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra by one anointing.

Then the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra, having been restored to
health, ordered his five hundred wives to put on all their ornaments;
then he ordered them to take their ornaments off and to make a heap of
them, and he said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'All these ornaments, my
dear *G*îvaka, of my five hundred wives shall be thine.'

'Nay, Sire, may Your Majesty remember my office.'

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

'Very well, my dear *G*îvaka, you can wait upon me and my seraglio and
the fraternity of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the Magadha king Se*n*iya
Bimbisâra (by saying), 'Yes, Your Majesty.'

16\. At that time the se*tth*i at Râ*g*agaha had been suffering for
seven years from a disease in the head. Many very great and
world-renowned physicians came, and were not able to restore him to
health; they received much gold and went away. And a prognostication had
been made by the physicians to him, to wit: Some of the physicians said:
'The se*tth*i, the householder, will die on the fifth day;' other
physicians said: 'The se*tth*i, the householder, will die on the seventh
day.'

Now (a certain) Râ*g*agaha merchant thought: 'This se*tth*i, this
householder, does good service both to the king and to the merchants'
guild. Now the physicians have made prognostication to him(&c., as
above). There is *G*îvaka, the royal physician, an excellent young
doctor. What if we were to ask the king for his physician *G*îvaka to
cure the se*tth*i, the householder?'

17\. And the Râ*g*agaha merchant went to the place where the Magadha
king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra was; having approached him, he said to the
Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra: That se*tth*i, Sire, that householder,
does good service both to Your Majesty and to the merchants' guild. Now
the physicians have made prognostication to him, &c. May it please Your
Majesty to order the physician *G*îvaka to cure the se*tth*i, the
householder.'

Then the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra gave

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

orders to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a (saying), 'Go, my dear *G*îvaka, and
cure the se*tth*i, the householder.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the Magadha king Se*n*iya
Bimbisâra (by saying), 'Yes, Your Majesty,' went to the place where the
se*tth*i, the householder, was, and having approached him, and having
carefully observed the change in his appearance, he said to the
se*tth*i, the householder: 'If I restore you to health, my good
householder, what fee will you give me?'

'All that I possess shall be yours, doctor, and I will be your slave.'

18\. 'Well, my good householder, will you be able to lie down on one
side for seven months?'

'I shall be able, doctor, to lie down on one side for seven months.'

'And will you be able, my good householder, to lie down on the other
side for seven months?'

'I shall be able, doctor, to lie down on the other side for seven
months.'

'And will you be able, my good householder, to lie down on your back for
seven months?'

'I shall be able, doctor, to lie down on my back for seven months.'

Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a ordered the se*tth*i, the householder, to
lie down on his bed, tied him fast to his bed, cut through the skin of
the head, drew apart the flesh on each side of the incision, pulled two
worms out (of the wound), and showed them to the people (saying), 'See,
Sirs, these two worms, a small one and a big one. The doctors who said,
"On the fifth day the se*tth*i, the householder, will die," have seen
this big worm, and how it would penetrate on the fifth day to the brain
of

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

the se*tth*i, the householder, and that when it had penetrated to the
brain, the se*tth*i, the householder, would die. Those doctors have seen
it quite rightly. And the doctors who said, "On the seventh day the
se*tth*i, the householder, will die," have seen this small worm, and how
it would penetrate on the seventh day to the brain of the se*tth*i, the
householder, and that when it had penetrated to the brain, the se*tth*i,
the householder, would die. Those doctors have seen it quite rightly.'
(Speaking thus) he closed up the sides of the wound, stitched up the
skin on the head, and anointed it with salve.

19\. And when seven days had elapsed, the se*tth*i, the householder,
said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'I am not able, doctor, to lie down on
one side for seven months.'

'Did you not tell me, my good householder: "I shall be able, doctor, to
lie down on one side for seven months?"'

'It is true, doctor, I told you so indeed, but I shall die (if I do); I
cannot lie down on one side for seven months.'

'Well, my good householder, then you must lie down on the other side for
seven months.'

And when seven days had elapsed, the se*tth*i, the householder, said to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'I am not able, doctor, to lie down on the
other side for seven months.'

'Did you not tell me, &c.'

It is true, doctor, I told you so indeed, &c.'

'Well, my good householder, then you must lie down on your back for
seven months.'

And when seven days had elapsed, the se*tth*i, the householder, said to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'I am

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

not able, doctor, to lie down on my back for seven months.'

Did you not tell me, &c.?'

It is true, doctor, I told you so indeed, &c.'

20\. 'If I had not spoken thus to you, my good householder, you would
not have lain down even so long a time. But I knew beforehand, "After
three times seven days the se*tth*i, the householder, will be restored
to health." Arise, my good householder, you are restored; look to it
what fee you give me.'

'All that I possess shall be yours, doctor, and I will be your slave.'

'Nay, my good householder, do not give me all that you possess, and do
not be my slave; give one hundred thousand (kâhâpa*n*as) to the king,
and one hundred thousand to me.'

Then the se*tth*i, the householder, having regained his health, gave a
hundred thousand (kâhâpa*n*as) to the king, and a hundred thousand to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a.

21\. At that time the son of the se*tth*i at Benares, who used to amuse
himself by tumbling (mokkha*k*ikâ <span
id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_338)), brought upon himself an entanglement
of his

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

intestines, in consequence of which he could digest neither the
rice-milk which he drank, nor the food of which he partook, nor was he
able to ease himself in the regular way. In consequence of that he grew
lean, he looked disfigured and discoloured, (his complexion became) more
and more yellow, and the veins stood out upon his skin.

Now the se*tth*i of Benares thought: 'My son is suffering from such and
such a disease: he neither can digest the rice-milk which he drinks
(&c., as above, down to:) and the veins stand out upon his skin. What if
I were to go to Râ*g*agaha and to ask the king for his physician
*G*îvaka to cure my son.'

And the se*tth*i of Benares went to Râ*g*agaha and repaired to the place
where the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra was; having approached him he
said to the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra: 'My son, Your Majesty, is
suffering from such and such a disease: he neither can digest the
rice-milk which he drinks (&c., as above, down to:) and the veins stand
out upon his skin. May it please Your Majesty to order the physician
*G*îvaka to cure my son.'

22\. Then the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra gave orders to *G*îvaka
Komârabha*kk*a (saying), 'Go, my dear *G*îvaka; go to Benares, and cure
the se*tth*i's son at Benares.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the Magadha king Se*n*iya
Bimbisâra (by saying), 'Yes, Your Majesty,' went to Benares, and
repaired to the place where the son of the Benares se*tth*i was; having
approached him, and having carefully

<span id="page_r86">p. r86</span>

observed the change in his appearance, he ordered the people to leave
the room, drew the curtain, tied him fast to a pillar, placed his wife
in front of him, cut through the skin of the belly, drew the twisted
intestines out, and showed them to his wife (saying), 'Look here what
the disease was, from which your husband was suffering. This is the
reason why he neither can digest the rice-milk which he drinks, nor can
digest the food of which he partakes, nor is able to ease himself in the
regular way, and why he has grown lean, and looks disfigured and
discoloured, and (why his complexion has become) more and more yellow,
and the veins have stood out upon his skin.' (Speaking thus), he
disentangled the twisted intestines, put the intestines back (into their
right position), stitched the skin together, and anointed it with salve.
And before long the Benares se*tth*i's son regained his health.

Then the se*tth*i of Benares (saying to himself), 'My son stands here
restored to health,' gave sixteen thousand (kâhâpa*n*as) to *G*îvaka
Komârabha*kk*a. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a took those sixteen thousand
(kâhâpa*n*as), and went back again to Râ*g*agaha.

23\. At that time king Pa*gg*ota (of U*gg*enî) was suffering from
jaundice. Many very great and world-renowned physicians came and were
not able to restore him to health; they received much gold and went
away. Then king Pa*gg*ota sent a messenger to the Magadha king Se*n*iya
Bimbisâra (with the following message): 'I am suffering from such and
such a disease; pray, Your Majesty <span
id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_339), give

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

orders to the physician *G*îvaka; he will cure me.' Then the Magadha
king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra gave orders to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a (saying),
'Go, my dear *G*îvaka; go to U*gg*enî, and cure king Pa*gg*ota.'

*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a accepted this order of the Magadha king Se*n*iya
Bimbisâra (by saying), 'Yes, Your Majesty,' went to U*gg*enî and to the
place where king Pa*gg*ota was, and having approached him, and having
carefully observed the change in his appearance, he said to king
Pa*gg*ota:

24\. 'I will boil up some ghee, Sire, which Your Majesty must drink.'

'Nay, my good *G*îvaka; do what you can for restoring me without giving
me ghee; I have an aversion and a distaste for ghee.'

Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'The disease of this king is such
a one that it cannot be cured without ghee. What if I were to boil up
ghee so that it takes the colour, the smell, and the taste of an
astringent decoction <span id="fr_345"></span>[1](#fn_340).'

Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a boiled some ghee with various drugs so as
to give it the colour, the smell, and the taste of an astringent
decoction. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'When this king will
shall have taken the butter and digested it, it will  make him vomit.
This king is cruel; he might have me killed. What if I were to take
leave before

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

hand.' And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where king
Pa*gg*ota was; having approached him he said to king Pa*gg*ota:

25\. 'We physicians, Sire, draw out roots and gather medical drugs at
such an hour as this. May it please Your Majesty to send the following
order to the (royal) stables, and to the gates (of the town): "Let
*G*îvaka ride out on what animal he likes; let him leave (the town) by
what gate he likes; let him leave at what hour he likes; let him enter
again at what hour he likes."'

And king Pa*gg*ota sent the following order to the (royal) stables and
to the gates (of the town): 'Let *G*îvaka ride out on what animal he
likes, &c.'

At that time king Pa*gg*ota had a she-elephant, called Bhaddavatikâ,
which could travel fifty yoga*n*as (in one day). And *G*îvaka
Komârabha*kk*a gave the ghee to king Pa*gg*ota (saying), 'May Your
Majesty drink this decoction.' Then, having made king Pa*gg*ota drink
the ghee, *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the elephant stable, and
hasted away from the town on the she-elephant Bhaddavatikâ.

26\. And when king Pa*gg*ota had drunk that ghee and was digesting it,
it made him vomit. Then king Pa*gg*ota said to his attendants: 'That
wicked *G*îvaka, my good Sirs, has given me ghee to drink. Go, my good
Sirs, and seek the physician *G*îvaka.'

(The attendants answered), 'He has run away from the town on the
she-elephant Bhaddavatikâ.'

At that time king Pa*gg*ota had a slave, Kâka by name, who could travel
sixty yoga*n*as (in one day), who had been begotten by a non-human
being. To this slave Kâka; king Pa*gg*ota gave the order: 'Go, my good
Kâka, and call the physician *G*îvaka back

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (saying), "The
king orders you to return, doctor." But those physicians, my good Kâka,
are cunning people; do not accept anything from him.'

27\. And the slave Kâka overtook *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a on his way, at
Kosambî, when he was taking his breakfast. And the slave Kâka said to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'The king orders you to return, doctor.'

(*G*îvaka replied), 'Wait, my good Kâka, until we have taken our meal;
here, my good Kâka, eat.'

(Kâka said), 'Nay, doctor, the king has told me, "Those physicians, my
good Kâka, are cunning people; do not accept anything from him."'

At that time *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, who had cut off some drug with his
nail, was eating an emblic myrobalan fruit and drinking water. And
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a said to the slave Kâka: 'Here, my good Kâka, eat
of this myrobalan fruit and take some water.'

28\. Then the slave Kâka thought: 'This physician eats the myrobalan and
drinks the water; there cannot be any harm in it;' so he ate half of the
myrobalan and drank some water. And that half myrobalan which (*G*îvaka)
had given him to eat, opened his bowels on the spot.

Then the slave Kâka said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'Can my life be
saved, doctor?'

(*G*îvaka replied), 'Be not afraid, my good Kâka, you will be quite
well. But the king is cruel; that king might have me killed; therefore
do I not return.'

Speaking thus he handed over to Kâka the she-elephant Bhaddavatikâ and
set out for Râ*g*agaha. Having reached Râ*g*agaha in due course, he went
to

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

the place where the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra was; having
approached him he told the whole thing to the Magadha king Bimbisâra.

(Bimbisâra said), 'You have done right, my good *G*îvaka, that you have
not returned; that king is cruel; he might have had you killed.'

29\. And king Pa*gg*ota, being restored to health, sent a messenger to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a (with this message), 'May *G*îvaka come to me; I
will grant him a boon.'

(*G*îvaka replied), 'Nay, Sir, may His Majesty remember my office.'

At that time king Pa*gg*ota had a suit of Siveyyaka cloth <span
id="fr_346"></span>[1](#fn_341), which was the best, and the most
excellent, and the first, and the most precious, and the noblest of many
cloths, and of many suits of cloth, and of many hundred suits of cloth,
and of many thousand suits of cloth, and of many hundred thousand suits
of cloth. And king Pa*gg*ota sent this suit of Siveyyaka cloth to
*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'This
suit of Siveyyaka cloth which king Pa*gg*ota has sent me, is the best
and the most excellent (&c., down to:) and of many hundred thousand
suits of cloth. Nobody else is worthy to receive it but He the blessed,
perfect

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arahat-Buddha, or
the Magadha king Se*n*iya Bimbisâra.'

30\. At that time a disturbance had befallen the humors of the Blessed
One's body. And the Blessed One said to the venerable Ânanda: 'A
disturbance, Ânanda, has befallen the humors of the Tathâgata's body;
the Tathâgata wishes to take a purgative.' Then the venerable Ânanda
went to the place where *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a was; having approached
him he said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a:

'My good *G*îvaka, a disturbance has befallen the humors of the
Tathâgata's body; the Tathâgata wishes to take a purgative.'

(*G*îvaka replied), 'Well, venerable Ânanda, you ought to rub the
Blessed One's body with fat for a few days.'

And the venerable Ânanda, having rubbed the Blessed One's body with fat
for some days, went to the place where *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a was;
having approached him he said to *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a: 'I have
rubbed, my good *G*îvaka, the Tathâgata's body with fat; do you now what
you think fit.'

31\. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a thought: 'It is not becoming that I
should give a strong purgative to the Blessed One.' (Thinking thus), he
imbued three handfuls of blue lotuses with various drugs and went
therewith to the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him
he offered one handful of lotuses to the Blessed One (saying), 'Lord,
may the Blessed One smell this first handful of lotuses; that will purge
the Blessed One ten times.' Thus he offered also the second handful of
lotuses to the Blessed One (saying), 'Lord, may the Blessed One smell
this second handful of lotuses;

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

that will purge the Blessed One ten times.' Thus he offered also the
third handful of lotuses to the Blessed One (saying), 'Lord, may the
Blessed One smell this third handful of lotuses; that will purge the
Blessed One ten times. Thus the Blessed One will have purged full thirty
times.' And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, having given to the Blessed One a
purgative for full thirty times, bowed down before the Blessed One, and
passed round him with his right side towards him, and went away.

32\. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, when he was out of doors, thought: 'I
have given indeed to the Blessed One a purgative for full thirty times,
but as the humors of the Tathâgatha's body are disturbed, it will not
purge the Blessed One full thirty times; it will purge the Blessed One
only twenty-nine times. But the Blessed One, having purged, will take a
bath; the bath will purge the Blessed One once; thus the Blessed One
will be purged full thirty times.'

And the Blessed One, who understood by the power of his mind this
reflection of *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, said to the venerable Ânanda:
'*G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, Ânanda, when he was out of doors, has thought:
"I have given indeed (&c., as above, down to:) thus the Blessed One will
be purged full thirty times." Well, Ânanda, get warm water ready.'

The venerable Ânanda accepted this order of the Blessed One (saying),
'Yes, Lord,' and got warm water ready.

33\. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a went to the place where the Blessed One
was; having approached him and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he
sat down near him; sitting near him *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a said to the
Blessed One: 'Lord, has the

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Blessed One
purged?' (Buddha replied), 'I have purged, *G*îvaka' (*G*îvaka said),
'When I was out of doors, Lord, I thought: "I have given indeed, &c."
Lord, may the Blessed One take a bath, may the Happy One take a bath.'
Then the Blessed One bathed in that warm water; the bath purged the
Blessed One once; thus the Blessed One was purged full thirty times.

And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a said to the Blessed One: 'Lord, until the
Blessed One's body is completely restored, you had better abstain from
liquid food.' And ere long the Blessed One's body was completely
restored.

34\. Then *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a took that suit of Siveyyaka cloth and
went to the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him, and
having respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he sat down near him.
Sitting near him, *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a said to the Blessed One:
'Lord, I ask one boon of the Blessed One.' (Buddha replied), 'The
Tathâgatas, *G*îvaka, are above granting boons (before they know what
they are).' (*G*îvaka said), 'Lord, it is a proper and unobjectionable
demand.'--'Speak, *G*îvaka.'

'Lord, the Blessed One wears only pa*m*sukûla robes (robes made of rags
taken from a dust heap or a cemetery <span
id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_342)), and so does the fraternity of
Bhikkhus. Now, Lord, this suit of Siveyyaka cloth has been sent to me by
king Pa*gg*ota, which is the best, and the most excellent, and the
first, and the most precious, and the noblest of many cloths and of

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

many suits of cloth, and of many hundred suits of cloth, and of many
thousand suits of cloth, and of many hundred thousand suits of cloth.
Lord, may the Blessed One accept from me this suit of Siveyyaka cloth,
and may he allow to the fraternity of Bhikkhus to wear lay robes <span
id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_343).'

The Blessed One accepted the suit of Siveyyaka cloth. And the Blessed
One taught, incited, animated, and gladdened *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a by
religious discourse. And *G*îvaka Komârabha*kk*a, having been taught,
incited, animated, and gladdened by the Blessed One by religious
discourse, rose from his seat, respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
passed round him with his right side towards him, and went away.

35\. And the Blessed One, after having delivered a religious discourse
in consequence of that, thus addressed the Bhikkhus:

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wear lay robes. He who likes may wear
pa*m*sukûla robes; he who likes may accept lay robes. Whether you are
pleased with the one or with the other sort <span
id="fr_349"></span>[2](#fn_344) of robes, I approve it.'

Now the people at Râ*g*agaha heard, The Blessed One has allowed the
Bhikkhus to wear lay robes.' Then those people became glad and delighted
(because they thought), 'Now we will bestow gifts (on the Bhikkhus) and
acquire merit by good works,

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

since the Blessed One has allowed the Bhikkhus to wear lay robes.' And
in one day many thousands of robes were presented at Râ*g*agaha (to the
Bhikkhus).

And the people in the country heard, 'The Blessed One has allowed the
Bhikkhus to wear lay robes.' Then those people became glad (&c., as
above, down to:) And in one day many thousands of robes were presented
through the country also (to the Bhikkhus).

36\. At that time the Sa*m*gha had received a mantle. They told this
thing to the Blessed One.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wear a mantle.'

They had got a silk mantle.

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to wear a silk mantle.'

They had got a fleecy counterpane <span id="fr_350"></span>[1](#fn_345).

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, to use a fleecy counterpane.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the first Bhâ*n*avâra.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_331"></span>[171:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_336) Compare
Mahâ-sudassana Sutta I, 3, and Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta V, 42.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[171:2](sbe17068.htm#fr_337) See above, VI, 30,
6; Mahâ-parinibbâna Sutta II, 16 seq.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[173:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_338) This royal prince
Abhaya' (Abhaya kumâra) is mentioned by the *G*ainas under the name of
Abhayakumâra as the son of Se*n*iya, i.e. Bimbisâra. See Jacobi,
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morg. Gesellschaft, vol. xxxiv, p. 187.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[173:2](sbe17068.htm#fr_339) The word which we
have translated 'Your Highness' (deva, lit. 'God') is the same which is
used by all persons except by Sama*n*as in addressing a king.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[174:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_340) Evidently the
redactors of this passage referred the first part of the compound
Komârabha*kk*a to the royal prince (kumâra) Abhaya, and intended
Komârabha*kk*a to be understood as 'a person whose life is supported by
a royal prince.' So also the name Kumâra-Kassapa is explained in the
*G*âtaka commentary (Rh. D., 'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 204). The true
meaning of the name, however, appears to have been different, for in
Sanskrit kumârabh*ri*tyâ and kaumârabh*ri*tya are technical terms for
the part of the medical science which comprises the treatment of infants
(see Wise, 'Commentary on the Hindu System of Medicine,' p. 3). We
believe, therefore, that this surname Komârabha*kk*a really means,'
Master of the kaumârabh*ri*tya science.'

<span id="fn_336"></span>[176:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_341) See the note at I,
7, 1.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[178:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_342) One pras*ri*ta or
pras*ri*ti ('handful') is said by the Sanskrit lexicographers to be
equal to two palas. About the pala, which according to the ghee measure
(gh*ri*tapramâ*n*a) of Magadha was the thirty-second part of a prastha,
see the Atharva-pari*s*ish*t*a 35, 3, ap. Weber, Ueber den Vedakalender
namens Jyotisham, p. 82. Compare also Rh. D., 'Ancient Coins and
Measures of Ceylon,' pp. 18, 19.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[184:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_343) Mokkha*k*ikâ is
explained in a passage quoted by Childers sub voce and taken from the
Sumaṅgala Vilâsinî on the 4th Ma*ggh*ima Sîla. (Compare Rh. D.,
'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,' p. 193.) The passage from Buddhaghosa
is however not devoid of ambiguity. He says: 'Mokkha*k*ikâ is the feat
of turning over and over. One gets hold of a staff in the air, and
places his head on the ground; turning himself upside down. This is what
is meant (by the word mokkha*k*ikâ).' It is not clear whether the
performer suspends himself by his feet from a horizontal bar fixed at a
height above the ground; or whether he turns a sommersault, holding at
the same time a stick in his hands. The latter seems <span
id="page_185">p. 185</span> more in accordance with the phrase 'holding
a stick in the air' (âkâse da*nd*a*m* gahetvâ) and with the phrase
'turning over and over' (sampariva*tt*ana*m*).

<span id="fn_339"></span>[r86:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_344) This passage in
which king Pa*gg*ota is represented as addressing king Bimbisâra by the
respectful expression 'deva' may in our <span id="page_187">p.
187</span> opinion be brought forward against Professor Jacobi's
conjecture (Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morg. Gesellschaft, vol. xxxiv, p.
188) that Bimbisâra was merely a feudal chief under the supreme rule of
king Pa*gg*ota. The Pi*t*aka texts are always very exact in the
selection of the terms of respect in which the different persons address
each other.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[187:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_345) See, about the
decoctions used in medicine, VI, 4.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[190:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_346) Buddhaghosa gives
two explanations of Siveyyaka*m* dussayuga*m*. 'Either Siveyyaka cloth
means the cloth used in the Uttarakuru country for veiling the dead
bodies when they are brought to the burying-ground (sivathikâ). (A
certain kind of birds take the bodies to the Himavat mountains in order
to eat them, and throw the cloths away. When eremites find them there,
they bring them to the king.) Or Siveyyaka cloth means a cloth woven
from yarn which skilful women in the Sivi country spin.' No doubt the
latter explication is the right one.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[193:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_347) Buddhaghosa: 'To
the Blessed One during the twenty years from his Sambodhi till this
story happened no one had presented a lay robe.'

<span id="fn_343"></span>[194:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_348) Gahapati*k*îvâra
may be translated also, as Buddhaghosa explains it, 'a robe presented by
lay people.'

<span id="fn_344"></span>[194:2](sbe17068.htm#fr_349) Itarîtara ('the
one or the other') clearly refers to the two sorts of robes mentioned
before, not, as Childers (s.v. itarîtaro) understands it, to whether the
robes are good or bad. Compare also chap. 3, § 2.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[195:1](sbe17068.htm#fr_350) See Abhidhânapp.
v. 312.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17069)
