[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17043)  [Next](sbe17045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 30.

1\. Now the courtezan Ambapâlî heard that the Blessed One had arrived at
Ko*t*igâma. And the courtezan Ambapâlî ordered a number of magnificent
vehicles to be made ready, mounted one of these vehicles, and left
Vesâlî with her magnificent vehicles in order to visit the Blessed One.
She

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

went in the carriage as far as the ground was passable for carriages;
there she alighted; and she proceeded on foot to the place where the
Blessed One was. Having approached him and respectfully saluted the
Blessed One, she sat down near him.

2\. When she was sitting near him, the Blessed One taught, incited,
animated, and gladdened the courtezan Ambapâlî by religious discourse.
And the courtezan Ambapâlî, having been taught, &c., by the Blessed One
by religious discourse, said to the Blessed One: 'Might the Blessed One,
Lord, consent to take his meal with me to-morrow together with the
fraternity of Bhikkhus.'

The Blessed One expressed his consent by remaining silent.

Then the courtezan Ambapâlî, when she understood that the Blessed One
had accepted her invitation, rose from her seat, respectfully saluted
the Blessed One, and, passing round him with her right side towards him,
went away.

3\. Now the Li*kkh*avis of Vesâlî heard that the Blessed One had arrived
at Ko*t*igâma. And the Li*kkh*avis of Vesâlî ordered a number of
magnificent vehicles to be made ready, mounted these vehicles, and left
Vesâlî with their magnificent vehicles in order to visit the Blessed
One. Some of the Li*kkh*avis were dark, dark in colour, and wearing dark
clothes and ornaments; some of them. were fair, fair in colour, and
wearing light clothes and ornaments; some of them were red, ruddy in
colour, and wearing red clothes and ornaments; some of them were white,
pale in colour, and wearing white colours and ornaments. And the
courtezan Ambapâlî drove up against the young

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Li*kkh*avis, pole
to pole, yoke to yoke, wheel to wheel, axle to axle. \[4.\] And those
Li*kkh*avis said to the courtezan Ambapâlî: 'How is it, Ambapâlî, that
you drive up against the young Li*kkh*avis, pole to pole, &c.?'

My Lords, I have just invited the Blessed One with the fraternity of
Bhikkhus for their morrow's meal.'

'Ambapâlî! give up this meal to us for a hundred thousand.'

'My Lords, were you to offer all Vesâlî with its subject territory, I
would not give up this meal.' Then the Li*kkh*avis snapped their fingers
(exclaiming), 'We are outdone by this woman <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_193)! we are out-reached by this woman <span
id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_193)!'

4\. Then the Li*kkh*avis went to the place where the Blessed One was.
And the Blessed One saw the Li*kkh*avis coming from afar; when he saw
them, he addressed the Bhikkhus and said: 'O Bhikkhus, let those of the
Bhikkhus who have never seen the Tâvati*m*sa gods, gaze upon this
company of the Li*kkh*avis, behold this company of the Li*kkh*avis,
compare this company of the Li*kkh*avis, even as a company of
Tâvati*m*sa gods!' And the Li*kkh*avis went in the carriages as far as
the ground was passable for carriages (&c., as in §§ 1, 2, down to:)
'Might the Blessed One, Lord, consent to take his meal with us to-morrow
together with the fraternity of Bhikkhus.'

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

'I have promised, O Li*kkh*avis, to dine to-morrow with Ambapâlî the
courtezan.'

5\. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at Ko*t*igâma as long as he
thought fit, went to *Ñ*âtikâ. There the Blessed One dwelt at *Ñ*âtikâ,
in the Brick Hall (Gi*ñg*akâvasatha). And when the night had elapsed,
the courtezan Ambapâlî ordered in her park excellent food (&c., as in
chap. 28. 10 <span id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_194), down to:) she sat
down near him. Sitting near him the courtezan Ambapâlî said to the
Blessed One: 'I give up this Ambapâlî grove, Lord, to the fraternity of
Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head.' The Blessed One accepted the
Ârâma. Then the Blessed One, after having taught, incited, animated, and
gladdened the courtezan Ambapâlî by religious discourse, rose from his
seat and went to the Mahâvana. There the Blessed One dwelt at Vesâlî, in
the Mahâvana, in the Kû*t*âgâra-sâlâ.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the Li*kkh*avi Bhâ*n*avâra.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[107:1](sbe17044.htm#fr_197) Ambakâya, which
Buddhaghosa explains by itthikâya, comp. the well-known Mantra,
Vâ*g*asaneyi Sa*m*hitâ 23. 18: Ambe ambike ’mbâlike, &c. Probably the
word ambakâ is a contemptuous form intended here at the same time to
convey an allusion to the mango- (amba-) gardens which Ambapâlî
possessed, and from which she was named. Comp. Rh. D.'s note at
Mahâparinibbâna Sutta II, 19.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[108:1](sbe17044.htm#fr_198) Replace 'the
Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra' by the courtezan Ambapâlî,' and
instead of 'Reverend Gotama,' read 'Lord.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 31](sbe17045)
