[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17081)  [Next](sbe17083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 15.

1\. Now when the Blessed One had remained at Benares as long as he
thought fit, he went onwards on his journey toward Sâvatthi. And in due
course journeying 'straight on he arrived at Sâvatthi; and there, at
Sâvatthi, he stayed at the *G*etavana, Anâtha-pi*nd*ika's Ârâma. And
Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra went up to the place where the Blessed One
was; and when she had come there, she saluted the Blessed One, and took
her seat on one side. And the Blessed One taught Visâkhâ the mother of
Migâra seated thus: and incited, and aroused, and gladdened her with
religious discourse. And Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra when she had been
thus taught, &c., spake thus to the Blessed One: 'Will my Lord the
Blessed One consent to accept his morrow's meal at my hands, together
with the company of the Bhikkhus?' The Blessed One, by remaining silent,
granted his consent; and Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra, perceiving that
the Blessed One had consented, rose from her seat, and saluted the
Blessed One, and keeping him on her right side as she passed him, she
departed thence.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

2\. Now at that time, when the night was far spent, there was a great
storm of rain over the whole world <span
id="fr_404"></span>[1](#fn_396). And the Blessed One said to the
Bhikkhus:

'Just as it is raining in the *G*etavana, O Bhikkhus, so is it raining
over the whole world. Let yourselves, O Bhikkhus, be rained down upon,
for this is the last time there will be a mighty storm of rain over the
whole world.'

'Even so, Lord,' said those Bhikkhus in assent to the Blessed One; and
throwing off their robes they let themselves be rained down upon.

3\. And Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra having provided sweet food, both
hard and soft, gave command to a slave girl, saying,

'Go thou <span id="fr_405"></span>[2](#fn_397) to the Ârâma; and when
you are there, announce the time, saying, "The time, Sirs, has arrived,
and the meal is ready."'

'Even so, my Lady,' said the slave girl in assent to Visâkhâ, the mother
of Migâra; and going to the Ârâma she beheld there the Bhikkhus, with
their robes thrown off, letting themselves be rained down upon. Then
thinking, 'These are not Bhikkhus in the Ârâma, they are naked ascetics
letting the r tin fall on them,' she returned to the place where Visâkhâ
the mother of Migâra was, and said to her:

There are no Bhikkhus in the Ârâma; there are

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

naked ascetics there, letting the rain fall on themselves.'

Then it occurred to Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra--she being learned,
expert, and wise--'For a certainty the venerable ones must have thrown
off their robes in order to let themselves be rained down upon, and this
foolish girl thinks therefore that there are no Bhikkhus in the Ârâma,
but only naked ascetics letting the rain fall on them.' And she again
gave command to the slave girl, saying,

'Go thou to the Ârâma; and when you are there, announce the time,
saying, "The time, Sirs, has arrived, and the meal is ready."'

4\. Now the Bhikkhus when they had cooled their limbs, and were
refreshed in body, took their robes, and entered each one into his
chamber, When the slave girl came to the Ârâma, not seeing any Bhikkhus,
she thought: 'There are no Bhikkhus in the Ârâma. The Ârâma is empty.'
And returning to Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra she said so.

Then it occurred to Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra--she being learned,
expert, and wise--'For a certainty the venerable ones, when they had
cooled their limbs and were refreshed in body, must have taken their
robes, and entered each one into his chamber.' And she again gave
command to the slave girl, saying,

'Go thou to Ârâma; and when you are there announce the time, saying,
"The time, Sirs, has arrived, and the meal is ready."'

5\. And the Blessed One said to the Bhikkhus: 'Make yourselves ready, O
Bhikkhus, with bowl and robe; the hour for the meal has come.'

'Even so, Lord,' said the Bhikkhus in assent to

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the Blessed One. And in the morning the Blessed One, having put on his
under-garment, and being duly bowled and robed, vanished from the
*G*etavana as quickly as a strong man would stretch forth his arm when
it was drawn in, or draw it in again when it was stretched forth, and
appeared in the mansion <span id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_398) of Visâkhâ
the mother of Migâra. And the Blessed One took his seat on the seat
spread out for him, and with him the company of the Bhikkhus.

6\. Then said Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra: Most wonderful, most
marvellous is the might and the power of the Tathâgata, in that though
the floods are rolling on knee-deep, and though the floods are rolling
on waist-deep, yet is not a single Bhikkhu wet, as to his feet, or as to
his robes.' And glad and exalted in heart she served and offered with
her own hand to the company of the Bhikkhus, with the Buddha at their
head, sweet food, both hard and soft. And when the Blessed One had
finished his meal, and had cleansed his hands and the bowl, she took her
seat on one side. And, so sitting, she spake thus to the Blessed One:

'Eight are the boons, Lord, which I beg of the Blessed One.'

'The Tathâgatas, O Visâkhâ, are above granting boons (before they know
what they are) <span id="fr_407"></span>[2](#fn_399).'

'Proper, Lord, and unobjectionable are the boons I ask.'

'Speak then, O Visâkhâ.'

7\. 'I desire, Lord, my life long to bestow robes

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

for the rainy season on the Sa*m*gha, and food for in-coming Bhikkhus,
and food for out-going Bhikkhus, and food for the sick, and food for
those who wait upon the sick, and medicine for the sick, and a constant
supply of congey, and bathing robes for the nuns.'

'But what circumstance is it, O Visâkhâ, that you have in view in asking
these eight boons of the Tathâgata?'

'I gave command, Lord, to my slave girl, saying, "Go thou to the Ârâma;
and when you are there, announce the time, saying, 'The time, Sirs, has
arrived, and the meal is ready.'" And the slave girl went, Lord, to the
Ârâma; but when she beheld there the Bhikkhus with their robes thrown
off, letting themselves be rained down upon, she thought: "These are not
Bhikkhus in the Ârâma, they are naked ascetics letting the rain fall on
them," and she returned to me and reported accordingly. Impure, Lord, is
nakedness, and revolting. It was this circumstance, Lord, that I had in
view in desiring to provide the Sa*m*gha my life long with special
garments for use in the rainy season <span
id="fr_408"></span>[1](#fn_400).

8\. 'Moreover, Lord, an in-coming Bhikkhu, not being able to take the
direct roads, and not knowing the places where food can be procured,
comes on his way wearied out by seeking for an alms. But when he has
partaken of the food I shall have provided for in-coming Bhikkhus, he
will come on his way without being wearied out by seeking for an alms,
taking the direct road, and knowing the place where food can be
procured. It was this circumstance

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

that I had in view in desiring to provide the Sa*m*gha my life long with
food for in-coming Bhikkhus.

'Moreover, Lord, an out-going Bhikkhu, while seeking about for an alms
for himself, may be left behind by the caravan <span
id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_401), or may arrive too late at the place
whither he desires to go, and will set out on the road in weariness. But
when he has partaken of the food I shall have provided for out-going
Bhikkhus, he will not be left behind by the caravan; he will arrive in
due time at the place whither he desires to go, and he will set out on
the road when he is not weary. It was this circumstance, Lord, that I
had in view in desiring to provide the Sa*m*gha my life long with food
for out-going Bhikkhus.

9\. 'Moreover, Lord, if a sick Bhikkhu does not obtain suitable foods
his sickness may increase upon him, or he may die. But if a Bhikkhu have
taken the diet that I shall have provided for the sick, neither will his
sickness increase upon him, nor will he die. It was this circumstance,
Lord, that I had in view in desiring to provide the Sa*m*gha my life
long with diet for the sick.

'Moreover, Lord, a Bhikkhu who is waiting upon the sick, if he has to
seek out food for himself, may bring in the food (to the invalid) when
the sun is already far on his course <span
id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_402), and he will lose his

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

opportunity of taking his food <span id="fr_411"></span>[1](#fn_403).
But when he has partaken of the food I shall have provided for those who
wait upon the sick, he will bring in food to the invalid in due time,
and he will not lose his opportunity of taking his food. It was this
circumstance, Lord, that I had in view in desiring to provide the
Sa*m*gha my life long with food for those who wait upon the sick.

10\. 'Moreover, Lord, if a sick Bhikkhu does not obtain suitable
medicines his sickness may increase upon him, or he may die. But if a
Bhikkhu have taken the medicines which I shall have provided for the
sick, neither will his sickness increase upon him, nor will he die. It
was this circumstance, Lord, that I had in view in desiring to provide
the Sa*m*gha my life long with medicines for the sick.

'Moreover, Lord, the Blessed One when at Andhakavinda, having in view
the ten advantages thereof, allowed the use of congey <span
id="fr_412"></span>[2](#fn_404). It was those advantages I had in view,
Lord, in desiring to provide the Sa*m*gha my life long with a constant
supply of congey.

11\. 'Now, Lord, the Bhikkhunîs are in the habit of bathing in the river
A*k*iravatî with the courtesans, at the same landing-place, and naked.
And the courtesans, Lord, ridiculed the Bhikkhunîs, saying, "What is the
good, ladies, of your maintaining <span id="fr_413"></span>[3](#fn_405)
chastity when you are young? are not the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

passions things to be indulged? When you are old, maintain chastity
then; thus will you be obtainers of both ends." Then the Bhikkhunîs,
Lord, when thus ridiculed by the courtesans, were confused. Impure,
Lord, is nakedness for a woman, disgusting, and revolting. It was this
circumstance, Lord, that I had in view in desiring to provide the
Bhikkhunî-sa*m*gha my life long with dresses to bathe in.'

12\. 'But what was the advantage you had in view for yourself, O
Visâkhâ, in asking these eight boons of the Tathâgata?'

'Bhikkhus who have spent the rainy seasons in various places will come,
Lord, to Sâvatthi, to visit the Blessed One. And on coming to the
Blessed One they will ask, saying, "Such and such a Bhikkhu, Lord, has
died. Where has he been re-born, and what is his destiny?" Then will the
Blessed One explain that he had attained to the fruits of conversion, or
of the state of the Sakadâgâmins, or of the state of the Anâgâmins, or
of Arahatship <span id="fr_414"></span>[1](#fn_406). And I, going up to
them, shall ask, "Was that brother, Sirs, one of those who had formerly
been at Sâvatthi?"

13\. 'If they should reply to me, "He had formerly been at Sâvatthi,"
then shall I arrive at the conclusion, "For a certainty did that brother
enjoy either the robes for the rainy season, or the food for the
in-coming Bhikkhus, or the food for the out-going Bhikkhus, or the food
for the sick, or the food for those that wait upon the sick, or the

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

medicine for the sick, or the constant supply of congey." Then will
gladness spring up within me on my calling that to mind; and joy will
arise to me thus gladdened; and so rejoicing all my frame will be at
peace; and being thus at peace I shall experience a blissful feeling of
content; and in that bliss my heart will be at rest; and that will be to
me an exercise of my moral sense, an exercise of my moral powers, an
exercise of the seven kinds of wisdom <span
id="fr_415"></span>[1](#fn_407)! This, Lord, was the advantage I had in
view for myself in asking those eight boons of the Blessed One.'

14\. 'It is well, it is well, Visâkhâ. Thou hast

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

done well in asking eight boons of the Tathâgata with such advantages in
view.'

And the Blessed One gave thanks to Visâkhâ the mother of Migâra in these
verses;

'Whatsoever woman, upright in life, a disciple of the Happy One, gives,
glad at heart and overcoming avarice, both food and drink--a gift,
heavenly, destructive of sorrow, productive of bliss,--

'A heavenly life does she attain, entering upon the Path that is free
from corruption and impurity;

'Aiming at good, happy does she become, and free from sickness, and long
does she rejoice in a heavenly body.'

And when the Blessed One had given thanks to Visâkhâ the mother of
Migâra in these verses, he arose from his seat, and departed thence.

15\. Then the Blessed One on that occasion, after he had delivered a
religious discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

I allow you, O Bhikkhus, garments for the rainy season <span
id="fr_416"></span>[1](#fn_408), and food for in-coming Bhikkhus, and
food for out-going Bhikkhus, and diet for the sick, and food for those
that wait upon the sick, and medicine for the sick, and a constant
supply of congey, and bathing robes for the sisterhood.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here ends the chapter called the Visâkhâ-bhâ*n*avâra.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_396"></span>[217:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_404) *K*âtuddîpiko,
literally, 'over the four continents,' into which the world was supposed
to be divided. Compare Genesis vii. 44.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[217:2](sbe17082.htm#fr_405) Ga*kkh*a *g*e;
where *g*e is the appropriate form of address invariably used to a
female slave or maid-servant. Compare Childers, in the 'Dictionary,' p.
617.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[219:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_406) Ko*tth*aka does
not only mean a room, as given by Childers: it signifies here, as at
*G*âtaka I, 227, a battlemented dwelling, the house of a person of rank.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[219:2](sbe17082.htm#fr_407) See our note on
this phrase at I, 54, 4.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[220:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_408) See below, the
note on § 15.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[221:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_409) Compare sukhâ
vihâyati in the Sigâlovâda Sutta at p. 302 of Grimblot's 'Sept Suttas
Pâlis.'

<span id="fn_402"></span>[221:2](sbe17082.htm#fr_410) Compare
Ussûra-seyyo in the Sigâlovâda Sutta at p. 302 of Grimblot's 'Sept
Suttas Pâlis;' and Böhtlingk-Roth, under utsûra.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[222:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_411) Bhatta*kkh*eda*m*
karissati, because he may not eat solid food after sun-turn.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[222:2](sbe17082.htm#fr_412) See Mahâvagga VI,
24. The ten advantages are enumerated in § 5 there.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[222:3](sbe17082.htm#fr_413) In the text read
*k*i*nn*ena. Compare Bhikkhunî-vibhaṅga, Pâ*k*ittiya XXI, 1, where the
whole passage recurs. The first sentence also recurs ibid., Pâ*k*ittiya
II.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[223:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_414) A conversation of
the kind here referred to is related, as having actually taken place at
Nâdika, in the 'Book of the Great Decease,' II, 5-8.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[224:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_415) The succession of
ideas in this paragraph is very suggestive, and throws much light both
upon the psychological views and upon the religious feelings of the
early Buddhists. The exact rendering of course of the abstract terms
employed in the Pâli text is no doubt, as yet, beset with difficulty,
for the reasons pointed out in Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas from the Pâli,'
pp. xxv, xxvi; but the general sense of the passage is already
sufficiently clear. For one or two words we have no real and adequate
equivalent.

Kâya is neither 'body' nor 'faculties;' it is the whole frame, the whole
individuality, looked at rather objectively than subjectively, and
rather from the outward and visible than from the inner, metaphysical,
stand-point. Compare the use of Sakkâya-di*tth*i and of Kâyena passati.

Sukha is not so much 'happiness,' simply and vaguely, as the serenity of
the bliss which follows on happiness. It is contrasted with, and follows
after, pâmo*gg*a and pîti, in the same way as in this passage, in the
standing description of the *Gh*ânas (translated by Rh. D. in the
Mahâ-sudassana Sutta II, 5-8, in the 'Buddhist Suttas,' p. 272). Its
opposite, Dukkha, is a positive state of pain, and in comparison with
this, sukha is negative, the absence of pain.

*K*itta is always more emotional than intellectual. It has the
connotation, not of 'mind,' as is usually and erroneously supposed, but
of 'heart.'

<span id="fn_408"></span>[225:1](sbe17082.htm#fr_416) The size of such a
garment is limited by the 91st Pâ*k*ittiya to six spans by
two-and-a-half--that is just enough to go round the loins from the waist
half down to the knee. It would be decent, and yet avoid the
disadvantage of wearing the robes in the rain, where they would become
wet and heavy in the manner described, for instance, at Mahâvagga VII,
1, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 16](sbe17083)
