[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17183)  [Next](sbe17185) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

### 31.

1\. In case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who is undergoing probation is guilty
meanwhile of a number of Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, and without concealing
them then throws off the robes, and he, when he has again received the
upasampadâ, does not conceal those offences-that Bhikkhu ought to be
thrown back to the commencement (of his term of probation).

'And in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu (&c., as before, down to) and he,
when he has again received the upasampadâ, does conceal those
offences--that Bhikkhu ought to be thrown back to the commencement (of
his term of probation), and an inclusive probation ought to be imposed
upon him (corresponding to the time which has elapsed since) the first
offence among those offences which he has concealed.

'And in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who is undergoing probation is
guilty meanwhile of a number of Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, and, concealing
them, throws off the robes; and he, when he has again received the
upasampadâ, does not conceal those offences--that Bhikkhu ought to be
thrown back to the commencement of his term of probation, and an
inclusive probation ought to be imposed upon him (corresponding to the
period which has elapsed since) the first offence among those offences
which he has concealed.'

\[The same judgment if he has concealed the offences before he throws
off the robes, and also after he has again received the
upasampadâ.\] <span id="fr_759"></span>[1](#fn_737)

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

2\. 'And in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who is undergoing probation is
guilty meanwhile of a number of Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, and some of
them he has concealed and some of them he has not concealed; and after
he has thrown off the robes and again received the upasampadâ, he does
not afterwards conceal those offences which previously he had concealed,
and he does not afterwards conceal those offences which previously he
had. not concealed--\[the judgment is the same as in the last paragraph
of § 1\].'

\[In the same case down to\] he does not afterwards conceal those
offences which previously he had concealed, and he does afterwards
conceal those offences which previously he had not concealed \[the
judgment is the same\].

\[In the same case, down to\] he does afterwards conceal those offences
which previously he had concealed, and he does not afterwards conceal
those offences which previously he had not concealed \[the judgment is
the same\].

\[In the same case, down to\] he does afterwards conceal those offences
which previously he had concealed, and he does afterwards conceal those
offences which previously he had not concealed \[the judgment is the
same\] <span id="fr_760"></span>[1](#fn_738).

3\. 'And in case, O Bhikkhus, a Bhikkhu who is undergoing probation is
guilty meanwhile of a number of Sa*m*ghâdisesa offences, and he is aware
of some of those offences, and not aware of others; and he conceals
those offences of which he is aware, but does not conceal those offences
of which. he is

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

not aware. After having thrown off the robes and again received the
upasampadâ, those offences of which he had previously \[&c., as in
chapter 29, section 3, down to\] on that Bhikkhu \[the penalty is the
same as in the last section, chapter 31, § 2\].'

\[The rest of this chapter corresponds exactly to chapter 29, §§ 4, 5,
and chapter 30; the penalty being always the same.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_737"></span>[428:1](sbe17184.htm#fr_759) This section
corresponds to chap. 29, section 1.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[429:1](sbe17184.htm#fr_760) This section
corresponds to chap. 29, section 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](sbe17185)
