[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17145)  [Next](sbe17147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

# SECOND KHANDHAKA.

#### PROBATION AND PENANCE.

### 1.

1\. Now at that time the Blessed Buddha was staying at Sâvatthi, in the
*G*etavana, Anâthapi*nd*ika's Grove. And at that time Bhikkhus who had
been placed on probation <span id="fr_696"></span>[1](#fn_678) used to
accept reverence and service and salutation and respect from regular
Bhikkhus; and to allow them to provide a seat, or a sleeping-place, or
water for the feet, or a foot-stool, or a foot-towel for them; and to
carry their bowl or their robe, and to shampoo them <span
id="fr_697"></span>[2](#fn_679).

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

Those Bhikkhus who were moderate were annoyed, murmured, and became
indignant, saying, 'How can Bhikkhus who have been placed on probation
accept reverence (&c., as above, down to) shampoo them?'

And those Bhikkhus told this thing to the Blessed One.

Then the Blessed One on that occasion, and in that connection, convened
a meeting of the Bhikkhusa*m*gha, and asked the Bhikkhus: 'Is it true, O
Bhikkhus, as they say, that Bhikkhus who have been placed on probation
accept reverence (&c., as before, down to) shampoo them?'

'It is true, Lord.'

The Blessed Buddha rebuked them, saying, 'How can those Bhikkhus (&c.,
as before, down to) shampoo them? This will not conduce, O Bhikkhus
(&c., as usual, down to) <span id="fr_698"></span>[1](#fn_680) turning
back of those who have been converted.'

And when he had rebuked them, and had delivered a religious discourse,
he addressed the Bhikkhus, saying, 'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on
probation ought not to accept reverence (&c., as before, down to)
shampoo them. Whosoever does so, shall be guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.
I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, to those Bhikkhus who have been placed on
probation to do \[all the courtesies, duties, and services mentioned
above <span id="fr_699"></span>[2](#fn_681)\] for one another, according
to their seniority. I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, five things (as
permissible) to Bhikkhus who have been placed on probation,

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

according to their seniority; (that is to say), the Uposatha ceremony,
the Pavâra*n*â ceremony, the share in robes for the rainy season, in
things dedicated to the Sa*m*gha <span id="fr_700"></span>[1](#fn_682),
and in food.

2\. 'Therefore, O Bhikkhus, do I make known to you a rule of conduct for
Bhikkhus who have been placed on probation, according to which they
ought to conduct themselves aright. And herein this is the right
conduct. He ought not to confer the Upasampadâ (&c., as above, in I, 1,
5, down to the end) <span id="fr_701"></span>[2](#fn_683).

A. Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O Bhikkhus, to
walk in front of, or to sit down in front of, a regular Bhikkhu.
Whichever belonging to that company of Bhikkhus shall be the worst
seat <span id="fr_702"></span>[3](#fn_684), or the worst sleeping-place,
or the worst room <span id="fr_703"></span>[4](#fn_685), that shall be
given to that Bhikkhu, and there-

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

with shall he content himself. A Bhikkhu who has been placed under
probation ought not, O Bhikkhus, to visit the families who support a
regular Bhikkhu (by officiating, in order to do so, as the companion who
precedes or follows that regular Bhikkhu)--he ought riot to devote
himself to a forest life--he ought not to devote himself to living on
alms personally received <span id="fr_704"></span>[1](#fn_686)--he ought
not to cause an alms to be brought out to him with the object of
escaping an extension of his probationary term <span
id="fr_705"></span>[2](#fn_687), thinking, "Let them not recognise me"
(as one who has been placed under probation) <span
id="fr_706"></span>[3](#fn_688).

'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought, O Bhikkhus, to
announce the fact of his having been so placed when he arrives at a
residence as an incoming Bhikkhu--he ought to announce the fact to an
incoming Bhikkhu--he ought to announce the fact at an Uposatha
meeting--he ought to announce the fact at a Pavâra*n*â meeting--and, if
he be sick, he ought to announce the fact at such meetings by means of a
messenger <span id="fr_707"></span>[4](#fn_689).

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

3\. 'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O Bhikkhus,
to go away from a residence in which Bhikkhus are living to a residence
in which no Bhikkhus are living, unless with a regular Bhikkhu, or in
time of danger. A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O
Bhikkhus, to go away from a residence in which Bhikkhus are living to a
place which is not a residence <span id="fr_708"></span>[1](#fn_690) and
where no Bhikkhus are living, unless with a regular Bhikkhu, or in time
of danger. A Bhikkhu (&c., as before) ought not to go away from a
residence in which Bhikkhus are living, either to a residence or to a
place which is not a residence, and where Bhikkhus are not living,
unless (&c., as before) <span id="fr_709"></span>[2](#fn_691). . . .
from a place which is not a residence, but where Bhikkhus are living, to
a place which is a residence, but where Bhikkhus are not living . . . .
from a place which is not a residence, but where Bhikkhus are living, to
a place which is not a residence and where Bhikkhus are not living . . .
. from a place which is no residence, but where Bhikkhus are living,
either to a place which is not a residence or to a residence where no
Bhikkhus are living . . . . from a place which is either a residence or
not a residence, to a place which is a residence, but where no Bhikkhus
are living . . . . from a place which is either a residence or no
residence, but where Bhikkhus are living, to a place

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

which is not a residence and where no Bhikkhus are living . . . . from a
place which is either a residence or not a residence, but where Bhikkhus
are living, to a place which is either a residence or not a residence,
but where no Bhikkhus are living, unless with a regular Bhikkhu or in
time of danger.

'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O Bhikkhus, to go
away from a residence where Bhikkhus are living to a residence where
Bhikkhus are living, but where there may be Bhikkhus of different
communities from his own (unless, &c., as before). \[The same changes as
in the last series are here rung upon this inhibition, down to\] . . . .
from a place which is either a residence or not a residence, but where
Bhikkhus. are living, to a place which is either a residence or not a
residence, and where Bhikkhus are living, but where there may be
Bhikkhus of different communities from his own (unless, &c., as before).

'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought to go, O Bhikkhus,
from a residence where Bhikkhus are living to a residence where Bhikkhus
are living, and where there are Bhikkhus of the same community (with
himself), if he knows, "This very day I can go there." \[Here follow the
same permutations and combinations as in the last two series.\]

4\. 'A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O Bhikkhus,
to dwell with a regular Bhikkhu in a residence under one and the same
roof--nor in a place which is not a residence under one and the same
roof--nor in a place which is either a residence or not a residence
under one and the same roof. On seeing a regular Bhikkhu he

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

ought to rise from his seat <span id="fr_710"></span>[1](#fn_692); and
he ought to offer his seat to a regular Bhikkhu. He ought not to sit
down on one and the same seat with a regular Bhikkhu; when a regular
Bhikkhu is seated on a low seat he ought not to sit down on a high
seat <span id="fr_711"></span>[2](#fn_693); when a regular Bhikkhu is
seated on the ground he ought not to sit down on a seat <span
id="fr_712"></span>[3](#fn_694); he ought not to walk up and down on the
same *k*aṅkama <span id="fr_713"></span>[4](#fn_695) with a regular
Bhikkhu; when a regular Bhikkhu is walking up and down on a low
*k*aṅkama he ought not to walk up and down on a higher *k*aṅkama; when a
regular Bhikkhu is walking up and down on the ground he ought not to
walk up and down on a (properly prepared) *k*aṅkama.

A Bhikkhu who has been placed on probation ought not, O Bhikkhus, to
dwell (&c., all the other acts mentioned in the last paragraph being
here repeated down to the end) with a Bhikkhu senior to himself who has
been placed on probation . . . . with a Bhikkhu who has been thrown back
to the commencement of his term of probation . . . . with a Bhikkhu who
has rendered himself liable to the Mânatta discipline <span
id="fr_714"></span>[5](#fn_696) . . . . with a Bhikkhu undergoing the
Mânatta discipline . . . . with a Bhikkhu who is in a position to
receive rehabilitation'.

If a meeting of four Bhikkhus, of whom one is

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

a probationer, should place a Bhikkhu on probation, or throw him back to
the beginning of his probationary= course, or subject him to the Mânatta
discipline--or if a meeting of twenty Bhikkhus, of whom one is a
probationer, should rehabilitate a Bhikkhu, that, O Bhikkhus, is an
invalid act, and need not be obeyed <span
id="fr_715"></span>[1](#fn_697):

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Here end the ninety-four duties encumbent on a probationer.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_678"></span>[384:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_696) There are four
principal kinds of probation; the first of which was required when the
follower of another of the reforming sects was received into the
Buddhist Order, and is described in Mahâvagga I, 38. The other three,
which follow on the commission of a Sa*m*ghâdisesa offence, are more
particularly described below in the third Khandhaka. The Pâli names of
these four are respectively apa*t*i*kkh*anna-parivâsa,
pa*t*i*kkh*anna-parivâsa, suddhanta-parivâsa, and samodhâna-parivâsa.

No conclusion should be drawn against this statement from the passage
above at I, 9, 1; though Seyyasaka's conduct, as there described, would
not have rendered him liable to any one of these four principal
probationary proceedings. For he is said to have been guilty of many
offences (âpatti-bahulo). The accompanying enumeration must be taken,
not as a description of those offences, but as additional to them. And
the probation imposed upon him must have been for concealing one or more
of the many offences not particularly specified.

<span id="fn_679"></span>[384:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_697) All these
expressions recur above, I, 27, 1.

<span id="fn_680"></span>[385:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_698) See I, 1, 2, down
to the end.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[385:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_699) That is, in the
lists recurring in the previous paragraphs, and given in full at I, 27,
1.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[386:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_700) Ono*g*anam, which
the Samanta Pâsâdikâ explains by 'visa*gg*ana*m*: Compare the use of
ono*g*esi at Dîpava*m*sa XIII, 29. The etymology of the word is unknown
to us.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[386:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_701) The Samanta
Pâsâdikâ has here the following note on sava*k*aniya*m*, which should be
compared with the shorter note on the same word given above, I, it, 5:
Na sava*k*aniya*m* kâtabban ti palibodhatthâya pakkosanatthâya vâ
sava*k*aniya*m* na kâtabba*m*. Palibodhatthâya hi karonto, aham
âyasmanta*m* imasmi*m* vatthusmi*m* sava*k*aniya*m* karomi, imamhâ âvâsâ
ekapada*m* pi mâ pakkami yâva na tam adhikara*n*a*m* vûpasanta*m*
hotîti; evam karoti. Pakkosanatthâya karonto, aha*m* te sava*k*aniya*m*
karomi, ehi mayâ saddhi*m* vinaya-dharâna*m* sammukhibhâva*m* ga*kkh*âmâ
ti: eva*m* karoti.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[386:3](sbe17146.htm#fr_702) Buddhaghosa says
here, Âsanapariyanto bhattaggâdîsu sa*m*gha-navak-âsana*m* vu*kk*ati,
svassa dâtabbo. Pariyanta is used here in the same sense as in the 22nd
Nissaggiya.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[386:4](sbe17146.htm#fr_703) Vihârâ, In later
times this word is no doubt always, or almost always, used to designate
the whole of a building in which several or many Bhikkhus resided. In
the older literature it always, <span id="page_387">p. 387</span> or
almost always, denotes the dwelling-place, the private apartment, of a
single Bhikkhu.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[387:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_704) That is, to
refrain from salâka-bhatta, &c.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[387:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_705) The Samanta
Pâsâdikâ says, Tappa*kk*ayâ ’ti niha*t*abhatto hutvâ vihâren’ eva
nisiditvâ bhu*ñg*anto vattiyo ga*n*ayissâmi ga*kkh*ato me bhikkhû disvâ
anâro*k*entassa ratti*kkh*edo (cap. 2) siyâ ’ti iminâ kâra*n*ena
pi*nd*apâto na niharâpetabbo.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[387:3](sbe17146.htm#fr_706) Mâ ma*m*
*g*âni*m*sû ’ti mâ ma*m* ekabhikkhu pi *g*ânâtû ’ti *k*a iminâ
a*ggh*âsayena vihâre sâma*n*erehi pa*k*âpetvâ bhu*ñg*itum labbhati.
Gâma*m* pi*nd*âya pavisitabbam eva. Gilânassa pana navakamma*m*
â*k*ariyupa*ggh*âyaki*kk*âdipasu (sic) tassa vâ vihâre yeva a*kkh*itu*m*
va*tt*ati. Sa*k*e pi gâme anekasatâ bhikkhû vi*k*aranti na sakkâ hoti
âro*k*etu*m* gâmakâvâsa*m* gantvâ sabhâga*tth*âne vasitu*m* va*tt*ati.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[387:4](sbe17146.htm#fr_707) This paragraph, it
will be seen, is omitted in three out of the four following cases, which
are otherwise similar in every respect, <span id="page_388">p.
388</span> as regards the right conduct which is laid down for them, to
the present case of the Bhikkhus who have been placed on probation.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[388:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_708) The Samanta
Pâsâdikâ says, (Abhikkhuko âvâso) na hi tattha vuttharattiyo
ga*n*anupikâ honti. pakatattena pana saddhi*m* va*tt*ati. Anâvâso nâma
*k*etiyaghara*m* bodhighara*m* samma*ñg*ania*tt*ako dârua*tt*ako
pâniyamâ*l*o va*kk*aku*t*i dvârako*tth*ako ’ti evamâdi.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[388:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_709) In the text read
âvâso vâ anâvâso vâ.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[390:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_710) This recurs in
Khandhaka I, chapter 27.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[390:2](sbe17146.htm#fr_711) Compare the 69th
Sekhiya.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[390:3](sbe17146.htm#fr_712) Compare the 68th
Sekhiya.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[390:4](sbe17146.htm#fr_713) A narrow space of
open ground, levelled and cleared of jungle, for the purpose of being
used to walk up and down upon when meditating. See our note on Mahayana
V, 1, 14.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[390:5](sbe17146.htm#fr_714) On these
disciplines and on rehabilitation, see the following Khandhaka.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[391:1](sbe17146.htm#fr_715) Compare
[Mahâvagga](errata.htm#2) IX, 4, I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](sbe17147)
