[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17044)  [Next](sbe17046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 31.

1\. At that time many distinguished Li*kkh*avis were sitting together
assembled in the town-hall and spoke in many ways in praise of the
Buddha, of the Dhamma, and of the Sa*m*gha. At that time Sîha, the
general-in-chief (of the Li*kkh*avis), a disciple of the Niga*nth*a
sect, was sitting in that assembly. And Sîha, the general, thought:
'Truly

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

he, the Blessed One, must be the Arahat Buddha, since these many
distinguished Li*kkh*avis, who are sitting here together assembled in
the town-hall, speak in so many ways in praise of the Buddha, of the
Dhamma, and of the Sa*m*gha. What if I were to go and visit him, the
Arahat Buddha.'

2\. And Sîha, the general, went to the place where the Niga*nth*a
Nâtaputta <span id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_195) was; having approached
him, he said to the Niga*nth*a Nâtaputta: 'I wish, Lord, to go and visit
the Sama*n*a Gotama.'

'Why should you, Sîha, who believe in the result of actions <span
id="fr_200"></span>[2](#fn_196) (according to their moral merit), go to
visit the Sama*n*a Gotama, who denies the result of actions? For the
Sama*n*a Gotama, Sîha, denies the result of actions; he teaches the
doctrine of non-action; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples.'

Then the desire to go and to visit the Blessed One, which had arisen in
Sîha, the general, abated in him.

3\. And a second time many distinguished Li*kkh*avis were sitting
together (&c., as in §§ 1, 2, down to the end).

And a third time many distinguished Li*kkh*avis were sitting together,
&c. And a third time Sîha, the general, thought: 'Truly he, the Blessed
One, must be the Arahat Buddha, since these many distinguished
Li*kkh*avis, who are sitting here together assembled in the town-hall,
speak in so many ways

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

in praise of the Buddha, of the Dhamma, and of the Sa*m*gha. What are
the Niga*nth*as to me, whether they give their consent or not? What if I
were to go without asking the Niga*nth*as for their consent, to visit
him, the Blessed One, the Arahat Buddha.'

4\. And Sîha, the general, went out of Vesâlî with five hundred vehicles
at broad daylight in order to visit the Blessed One. He went in the
carriage as far as the ground was passable for carriages; there he
alighted; and he proceeded on foot to the place where the Blessed One
was. Having approached him, and respectfully saluted the Blessed One, he
sat down near him. When he was sitting near him, Sîha, the general, said
to the Blessed One: 'I have heard, Lord, that the Sama*n*a Gotama denies
the result of actions; he teaches the doctrine of non-action, and in
this doctrine he trains his disciples. Now, Lord, those who speak thus:
"The Sama*n*a Gotama denies the result of actions," &c.--do they say the
truth of the Blessed One, and do they not bear false witness against the
Blessed One and pass off a spurious Dhamma as your Dhamma? And there is
nothing blameworthy in a discourse and dispute like this regarding
matters of the Dhamma; for it is our intention, Lord, to avoid bringing
false accusations against the Blessed One.'

5 <span id="fr_201"></span>[1](#fn_197). 'There is a way, Sîha, in which
one speaking truly could say of me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama denies
action <span id="fr_202"></span>[2](#fn_198); he teaches the doctrine of
non-action; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples."

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

'And again, Sîha, there is a way in which one speaking truly could say
of me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama maintains action <span
id="fr_203"></span>[1](#fn_199); he teaches the doctrine of action; and
in this doctrine he trains his disciples."

'And again, Sîha, there is a way in which one speaking truly could say
of me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama maintains annihilation <span
id="fr_204"></span>[2](#fn_200); he teaches the doctrine of
annihilation; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples."

'And again, Sîha, there is a way in which one speaking truly could say
of me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama proclaims contemptibleness <span
id="fr_205"></span>[3](#fn_201); he teaches the doctrine of
contemptibleness; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples."

'And again, &c.: "The Sama*n*a Gotama proclaims Vinaya <span
id="fr_206"></span>[4](#fn_202); he teaches the doctrine of Vinaya; and
in this doctrine he trains his disciples."

'And again, &c.: "The Sama*n*a Gotama proclaims Tapas <span
id="fr_207"></span>[5](#fn_203), &c."

'And again, &c.: "The Sama*n*a Gotama is apagabbha <span
id="fr_208"></span>[6](#fn_204); he teaches the doctrine of apagabbhatâ,
&c."

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

'And again, &c.: "The Sama*n*a Gotama is confident <span
id="fr_209"></span>[1](#fn_205); he teaches the doctrine of confidence,
&c."

6\. 'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of
me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama denies action; he teaches the doctrine of
non-action; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples?" I teach,
Sîha, the not-doing of such actions as are unrighteous, either by deed,
or by word, or by thought; I teach the not bringing about of the
manifold conditions (of heart) which are evil and not good. In this way,
Sîha, one speaking truly could say of me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama, &c."

'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of me:
"The Sama*n*a Gotama maintains action; he teaches the doctrine of
action; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples?" I teach, Sîha,
the doing of such actions as are righteous, by deed, by word, and by
thought; I teach the bringing about of the manifold conditions (of
heart) which are good and not evil. In this way, &c."

7\. 'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of
me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama maintains annihilation; he teaches the doctrine
of annihilation; and in this doctrine he trains his disciples?" I
proclaim, Sîha, the annihilation of lust, of ill-will, of delusion; I
proclaim the annihilation of the manifold conditions (of heart) which
are evil and not good. In this way, &c."

'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of me:
"The Sama*n*a Gotama

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

proclaims contemptibleness, &c.?" I deem, Sîha, unrighteous actions
contemptible, whether they be performed by deed, or by word, or by
thought; I proclaim the doctrine of the contemptibleness of falling into
the manifold conditions (of heart) which are evil and not good. In this
way, &c.

8\. 'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of
me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama proclaims Vinaya, &c.?" I teach, Sîha, the
doing away <span id="fr_210"></span>[1](#fn_206) with lust, with
ill-will, with delusion; I teach the doing away with the manifold
conditions (of heart) which are evil and not good. In this way, &c.

'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of me:
"The Sama*n*a Gotama proclaims Tapas, &c.?" I teach, Sîha, that all the
conditions (of heart) which are evil and not good, unrighteous actions
by deed, by word, and by thought must be burnt away <span
id="fr_211"></span>[2](#fn_207). He who has freed himself, Sîha, from
all conditions (of heart) which are evil and not good, which ought to be
burnt away, who has rooted them out, and has done away with them as a
palm tree is rooted out <span id="fr_212"></span>[3](#fn_208), so that
they are destroyed <span id="fr_213"></span>[4](#fn_209) and cannot grow
up again--such a

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

person do I call accomplished in Tapas. Now the Tathâgata, Sîha, has
freed himself from all conditions, &c. In this way, &c.

9\. 'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of
me: "The Sama*n*a Gotama is apagabbha (irresolute <span
id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_210)), &c.?" He who has freed himself, Sîha,
from the necessity of returning in future into a mother's womb <span
id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_211), and of being reborn into new
existences, who has rooted out (his being subject to) rebirth, and has
done away with it as a palm tree is rooted out, so that it is destroyed
and cannot grow up again--such a person do I call apagabbha. Now the
Tathâgata, Sîha, has freed himself, &c. In this way, &c.

'And in which way is it, Sîha, that one speaking truly could say of me:
"The Sama*n*a Gotama is confident, &c.?" I am confident, Sîha, by the
highest confidence; and thus I teach the doctrine of confidence and
train my disciples in it. In this way, &c.'

10\. When he had spoken thus, Sîha, the general, said to the Blessed
One: 'Glorious, Lord! glorious, Lord! (&c., as in chap. 26. 9, down to:)
may the Blessed One receive me from this day forth while my life lasts
as a disciple who has taken his refuge in him.'

'Consider first, Sîha, what you are doing. It is becoming that
well-known persons like you should do nothing without due
consideration.'

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

'By this, Lord, my joy and my faith in the Blessed One has still
increased, in that the Blessed One says to me: "Consider first, &c." Had
the other Titthiya teachers, Lord, got me as their disciple, they would
carry around their banners through the whole of Vesâlî (and cry): "Sîha,
the general, has become our disciple!" But the Blessed One says to me:
"Consider first, &c." For the second time, Lord, I take my refuge in.
the Blessed One, and in the Dhamma, and in the Bhikkhu-sa*m*gha: may the
Blessed One receive me from this day forth while my life lasts as a
disciple who has taken his refuge in him.'

11\. 'For a long time, Sîha, drink has been offered to the Niga*nth*as
in your house <span id="fr_216"></span>[1](#fn_212). You should
therefore deem it right (also in the future) to give them food when they
come (to you on their alms-pilgrimage).'

'By this, Lord, my joy and my faith in the Blessed One has still
increased, in that the Blessed One says to me: "For a long time, &c." I
have been told, Lord: "The Sama*n*a Gotama says: 'To me alone gifts
should be given; to nobody else gifts should be given. To my pupils
alone gifts should be given; to no one else's pupils gifts should be
given. Only what is given to me has great reward; what is given to
others has not great reward. Only what is given to my pupils has great
reward; what is given to the pupils of others has not great reward.'"
But the Blessed One exhorts me to give also to the Niga*nth*as. Well,
Lord, we will see what will be seasonable.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For the third
time, Lord, I take my refuge in the Blessed One, &c.'

12\. And the Blessed One preached to Sîha, the general, in due course;
that is to say, he talked about the merits obtained by almsgiving, about
the duties of morality (&c., in the usual way; see, for instance, I, 8,
2, 3, down to:) dependent on nobody else for knowledge of the doctrine
of the Teacher, he said to the Blessed One; 'Lord, may the Blessed One
consent to take his meal with me to-morrow, together with the fraternity
of Bhikkhus.'

The Blessed One expressed his consent by remaining silent. Then Sîha,
the general, when he understood that the Blessed One had accepted his
invitation, rose from his seat, respectfully saluted the Blessed One,
and, passing round him with his right side towards him, went away.

And Sîha, the general, gave order to a certain man (among his
subalterns, saying), 'Go, my friend, and see if there is any meat to be
had <span id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_213): And when that night had
elapsed, Sîha, the general, ordered excellent food (&c., as in chap. 23.
5, down to the end).

13\. At that time a great number of Niga*nth*as (running) through
Vesâlî, from road to road and from cross-way to cross-way <span
id="fr_218"></span>[2](#fn_214), with outstretched arms, cried: 'To-day
Sîha, the general, has killed a great ox and has made a meal for the
Sama*n*a Gotama; the Sama*n*a Gotama knowingly eats this meat of an
animal killed for this very purpose, and has thus become virtually the
author of that deed (of killing the animal)!'

Then a certain man went to the place where Sîha,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

the general, was. Having approached him he said to Sîha, the general,
into his ear: 'Please, Lord, have you noticed that a great number of
Niga*nth*as (running) through Vesâlî, &c.?'

'Do not mind it, my good Sir. Long since those venerable brethren are
trying to discredit the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sa*m*gha; and those
venerable brethren do not become tired of telling false, idle, vain lies
of the Blessed One. Not for our life would we ever intentionally kill a
living being.'

14\. And Sîha, the general, served and offered with his own hands
excellent food, both hard and soft, to the fraternity of Bhikkhus with
the Buddha at its head; and when the Blessed One (&c., as in chap. 23.
7, down to the end).

In consequence of that the Blessed One, having delivered a religious
discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus and said:

'Let no one, O Bhikkhus, knowingly eat meat (of an animal) killed for
that purpose. Whosoever does so, is guilty of a dukka*t*a offence.

'I prescribe, O Bhikkhus, that fish is pure to you in three cases: if
you do not see, if you have not heard, if you do not suspect (that it
has been caught specially to be given to you).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_195"></span>[109:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_199) The founder of the
Niga*nth*a sect, who is, according to the important discovery of
Professors Bühler and Jacobi, identical with the Mahâvira of the *G*ain
legends. See Jacobi's Preface to the Kalpasûtra, pp. 1 seq.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[109:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_200) Kiriyavâda.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[110:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_201) A part of the
following discourse is the same as Suttavibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*. I, 1, 3.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[110:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_202) 'The doctrine of
non-action,' and 'the doctrine of action,' <span id="page_111">p.
111</span> taken in the ordinary sense of the words, are the doctrines
that the actions of sentient beings receive not, or receive, their
reward according to the law of moral retribution. In this discourse,
however, a peculiar meaning is attached to these two terms; see § 6.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[111:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_203) See note 2, p.
110.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[111:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_204) U*kkh*edavâda (
the doctrine of annihilation') is the doctrine that death is the
annihilation of existence ('u*kkh*edavâda sato sattassa u*kkh*eda*m*
vinâsa*m* vibhava*m* pa*ññ*âpenti.' Brahma*g*âlasutta). But in this
discourse the word is taken in a peculiar sense; comp. § 7.

<span id="fn_201"></span>[111:3](sbe17045.htm#fr_205) Gegu*kkh*itâ. See
§ 7.

<span id="fn_202"></span>[111:4](sbe17045.htm#fr_206) 'Right conduct.'
But in this discourse it is also taken in the sense of 'putting away'
(scil. evil); see § 8.

<span id="fn_203"></span>[111:5](sbe17045.htm#fr_207)
'Self-mortification,' literally, 'burning,' in which sense the word is
taken in § 8.

<span id="fn_204"></span>[111:6](sbe17045.htm#fr_208) Apagabbha
(apragalbha) and apagabbhatâ ordinarily mean <span id="page_112">p.
112</span> 'irresolute' and 'irresolution.' But here the words are taken
in quite another sense, with a pun that cannot be rendered in English;
see § 9.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[112:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_209) See § 9.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[113:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_210) Vinayâya.

<span id="fn_207"></span>[113:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_211) Tapanîya,
connected with tapas.

<span id="fn_208"></span>[113:3](sbe17045.htm#fr_212) Tâlâ vatthukatâ.
See Buddhaghosa's explanation of this phrase in Vinaya Pi*t*aka, vol.
iii, p. 267.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[113:4](sbe17045.htm#fr_213) Anabhâva*m* gatâ
(see the correction, Vinaya Pi*t*aka, vol. ii, p. 363), literally, 'They
are gone to non-existence.' Buddhaghosa takes great pains in explaining
anabhâva; and he quotes also a various reading anubhâva; see Vinaya
Pi*t*aka, vol. iii, p. 267. But anabhâva is correct, and must be
understood as a synonym of abhâva. As to ana-, equal to a-, compare S.
Goldschmidt, Zeitschr. der Deutschen Morg. Ges. vol. xxxii, pp, 100
seq.; Weber, Hâla, p. 16; Pischel's note on Hema*k*andra II, 190;
Curtius, Griechische <span id="page_114">p. 114</span> Etymologie, 5th
edition, p. 306 (ἀνάεδνοσ, &c.). Another Pali word containing this
prefix ana- is anamata, anamatagga; see, for instance, *G*âtaka II, p.
56.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[114:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_214) See § 5 with our
note.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[114:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_215) Into a 'gabbha.'
'Apagabbha' is taken here as 'not subject to returning to a gabbha.'

<span id="fn_212"></span>[115:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_216) Literally,' your
house has been an opâna to the Niga*nth*as: Opâna may be either avapâna
or, as Buddhaghosa seems to understand it, udapâna (compare oka =
udaka).

<span id="fn_213"></span>[116:1](sbe17045.htm#fr_217) About
pavattama*m*sa, see the note at chap. 23. 2.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[116:2](sbe17045.htm#fr_218) See X, 1, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 32](sbe17046)
