[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17062)  [Next](sbe17064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9.

1\. 'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held, goes away
with the expectation of getting

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

a robe (presented), thinking, "I will come back." And when he has got
beyond the boundary, he devotes himself to the realisation of his
expectation, and he obtains a robe where he had expected it, and does
not obtain one where he had not expected it. And he thinks, "I will have
the robe made up here, and will never go back," &c. <span
id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_318)

2\. 'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held, goes away
with the expectation of getting a robe (presented), thinking, "I will
come back." And when he has got beyond the boundary, he hears the news:
"The Ka*th*ina, they say, has been suspended in that district." And he
thinks, "Since the Ka*th*ina has been suspended in that district, I will
devote myself here to obtaining the gift I am expecting." And he adopts
such action as may lead to the realisation of his expectation, and he
obtains a robe where he had expected it, and does not obtain one where
he had not expected it. And he thinks, "I will have the robe made up
here, and will never go back," &c. <span id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_319)

3\. 'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held, goes away
with the expectation of getting a robe (presented), thinking, "I will
come back." And when he has got beyond the boundary, he adopts such
action as may lead to the realisation of his expectation, and he obtains
a robe where he had expected it, and does not obtain one where he had
not expected it, and he has that robe made up.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When that robe has
thus been made up he hears the news, "The Ka*th*ina, they say, has been
suspended in that district."

That Bhikkhu's Ka*th*ina privileges are suspended on the ground of his
having heard that news.

'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held, goes away with
the expectation of getting a robe, thinking, "I will come back." And
when he has got beyond the boundary, he thinks, "I will devote myself to
obtaining that expected gift, and will never go back." And he cares for
that expected gift, but his expectation collapses.

That Bhikkhu's Ka*th*ina privileges are suspended on the ground of the
lapse of that expectation.

'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held, goes away with
the expectation of getting a robe, thinking, "I will come back." And
when he has got beyond the boundary, he devotes himself to the
realisation of his expectation, and he obtains a robe where he had
expected it, and does not obtain one where he had not expected it, and
he has that robe made up. And then, after it has been made up, he
postpones his return until the (general) suspension of privileges has
taken place.

'That Bhikkhu's Ka*th*ina privileges are suspended on the ground of his
being beyond the boundary.

'A Bhikkhu, after the Ka*th*ina ceremony has been held (&c., as in the
preceding case, down to:) And then, after it has been made up, he
postpones his return until the very moment when the (general) suspension
of privileges takes place.

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

'That Bhikkhu's Ka*th*ina privileges are suspended on the ground of the
common suspension.'

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

End of the section entitled Âsâ-do*l*asaka <span
id="fr_325"></span>[1](#fn_320).

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_318"></span>[164:1](sbe17063.htm#fr_323) Here follows the
same development into the four cases of ni*tth*ânantika,
sanni*tth*ânantika, nâsanantika, and âsâva*kkh*edika ka*th*inuddhâra, as
in chap. 8. 1.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[164:2](sbe17063.htm#fr_324) Supply here the
same four cases as in the preceding paragraph or in chap. 8. 1.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[166:1](sbe17063.htm#fr_325) 'The twelve cases
(in which the robe is received) as expected.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10](sbe17064)
