[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17041)  [Next](sbe17043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 28 <span id="fr_190"></span>[1](#fn_187).

1\. And the Blessed One, after having dwelt at Râ*g*agaha as long as he
thought fit, went forth to Pâ*t*aligâma, accompanied by a great number
of Bhikkhus, by twelve hundred and fifty Bhikkhus. Wandering from place
to place the Blessed One came to Pâ*t*aligâma.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

Now the lay-devotees at Pâ*t*aligâma heard: 'The Blessed One has arrived
at Pâ*t*aligâma.' And the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees went to the place
where the Blessed One was; having approached him and respectfully
saluted the Blessed One, they sat down near him. When they were seated
near him, the Blessed One taught, incited, animated, and gladdened the
Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees by religious discourse.

2\. And the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees, having been taught, incited,
animated, and gladdened by the Blessed One by religious discourse, said
to the Blessed One: 'Might the Blessed One, Lord, consent to come to our
rest house together with the fraternity of Bhikkhus.' The Blessed One
expressed his consent by remaining silent. Then the Pâ*t*aligâma
lay-devotees, when they understood that the Blessed One had accepted
their invitation, rose from their seats, respectfully saluted the
Blessed One, and passing round him with their right side towards him,
went away to the rest house. When they had arrived there, they strewed
the whole floor of the rest house <span id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_188),
placed seats in it, set up a water-pot, and fixed an oil lamp. Then they
went to the place where the Blessed One was; having approached him and
respectfully saluted the Blessed One, they stationed themselves near
him.

3\. Standing near him the Pâ*t*aliputta lay-devotees said to the Blessed
One: 'We have strewn the whole floor of the rest house, Lord, (with
sand), we have placed seats in it, set up a water-pot, and

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

fixed an oil lamp. May the Blessed One, Lord, do now what he thinks
fit.'

And in the forenoon the Blessed One, having put on his under-robes, took
his alms-bowl, and, with his *k*îvara on, went to the rest house
together with the Bhikkhus who followed him. When he had arrived there,
he washed his feet, entered the rest house, and took . his seat against
the centre pillar, with his face towards the east. And the Bhikkhus also
washed their feet, entered the rest house, and took their seats against
the western wall, with their faces towards the east, having the Blessed
One before their eyes. And the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees also washed
their feet, entered the rest house, and took their seats against the
eastern wall, with their faces towards the west, having the Blessed One
before their eyes.

4\. Then the Blessed One thus addressed the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees:
'Fivefold, O householders, is the loss of the wrong-doer through his
want of rectitude. And which is this fivefold loss? In the first place,
O householders, the wrong-doer, devoid of rectitude, falls into great
poverty through sloth; this is the first loss of the wrong-doer through
his want of rectitude. And again, O householders, of the wrong-doer,
devoid of rectitude, evil repute gets noised abroad; this is the second
&c. And again, O householders, whatever society the wrong-doer, devoid
of rectitude, enters--whether of noblemen, Brâhma*n*as, heads of houses,
or Sama*n*as--he enters shyly and confused; this is the third &c. And
again, O householders, the wrong-doer, devoid of rectitude, is full of
anxiety when he dies; this is the fourth &c. And again, O householders,
the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

wrong-doer, devoid of rectitude, on the dissolution of his body, after
death, is reborn into some state of distress and punishment, a state of
woe, and hell; this is the fifth &c. This is the fivefold loss, O
householders, of the wrong-doer through his want of rectitude.

5\. 'Fivefold, O householders, is the gain of the well-doer through his
practice of rectitude. And which is this fivefold gain? In the first
place, O householders, the well-doer, strong in rectitude, acquires
great wealth through his industry; this is the first gain of the
well-doer through his practice of rectitude. And again, O householders,
of the well-doer, strong in rectitude, good reports are spread abroad;
this is the second &c. And again, O householders, whatever society the
well-doer, strong in rectitude, enters--whether of noblemen,
Brâhma*n*as, heads of houses, or Sama*n*as--he enters confident and
self-possessed; this is the third &c. And again, O householders, the
well-doer, strong in rectitude, dies without anxiety; this is the fourth
&c. And again, O householders, the well-doer, strong in rectitude, on
the dissolution of his body, after death, is reborn into some happy
state in heaven; this is the fifth &c. This is the fivefold gain, O
householders, of the well-doer through his practice of rectitude.'

6\. When the Blessed One had thus taught, incited, animated, and
gladdened the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees far into the night with
religious discourse, he dismissed them, saying, 'The night is far spent,
O householders. May you do now what you think fit.' The Pâ*t*aligâma
lay-devotees accepted the Blessed One's word by saying, 'Yes, Lord,'
rose from their

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

seats, respectfully saluted the Blessed One, and passing round him with
their right side towards him, went away.

7\. And the Blessed One, not long after the Pâ*t*aligâma lay-devotees
had departed thence, went to an empty place <span
id="fr_192"></span>[1](#fn_189) (in order to give himself to
meditation).

At that time Sunîdha and Vassakâra, two ministers of Magadha, were
building a (fortified) town at Pâ*t*aligâma in order to repel the
Va*gg*is. And the Blessed One, rising up early in the morning, at dawn's
time, saw with his divine and clear vision, surpassing that of ordinary
men, great numbers of fairies who haunted the ground there at
Pâ*t*aligâma. Now, wherever ground is occupied by powerful fairies, they
bend the hearts of powerful kings and ministers to build dwelling-places
there. Wherever ground is occupied by fairies of middling power, &c.; of
inferior power, they bend the hearts of middling kings and ministers,
&c., of inferior kings and ministers to build dwelling-places there.

8\. And the Blessed One said to the venerable Ânanda: 'Who are they,
Ânanda, who are building a town at Pâ*t*aligâma?'

'Sunîdha and Vassakâra, Lord, the two ministers of Magadha, are building
a town at Pâ*t*aligâma in order to repel the Va*gg*is.'

'As if they had consulted, Ânanda, with the Tâvati*m*sa gods, so (at the
right place), Ânanda, the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra build
this town at Pâ*t*aligâma in order to repel the Va*gg*is. When I had
risen up early in the morning, Ânanda, at dawn's time, I saw with my
divine

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

and clear vision (&c., as in § 7, down to:) they bend the hearts of
inferior kings and ministers to build dwelling-places there. As far,
Ânanda, as Aryan people dwell, as far as merchants travel, this will
become the chief town, the city of Pâ*t*aliputta. But danger of
destruction, Ânanda, will hang over Pâ*t*aliputta in three ways, by
fire, or by water, or by internal discords <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_190).'

9\. And the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra went to the place
where the Blessed One was.; having approached him, they exchanged
greeting with the Blessed One; having exchanged with him greeting and
complaisant words, they stationed themselves near him; then standing
near him the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra said to the Blessed
One: 'Might the reverend Gotama consent to take his meal with us to-day
together with the fraternity of Bhikkhus.'

The Blessed One expressed his consent by remaining silent. Then the
Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra, when they understood that the
Blessed One had accepted their invitation, went away.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

10\. And the Magadha. ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra ordered excellent
food, both hard and soft, to be prepared, and had meal-time announced
(&c. <span id="fr_194"></span>[1](#fn_191), down to:) on seats laid out
for them. And the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra with their own
hands served and offered excellent food, both hard and soft, to the
fraternity of Bhikkhus with the Buddha at its head; and when the Blessed
One had finished his meal and cleansed his bowl and his hands, they sat
down near him. When they were sitting near him, the Blessed One
gladdened the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra by these stanzas:

11\. 'Wheresoe’er the prudent man shall take up his abode, let him
support there good and upright men of self-control.

'Let him make offerings to all such deities as may be there. Revered,
they will revere him; honoured, they honour him again;

'Are gracious to him as a mother to the son of her womb. And a man who
has the grace of the gods, good fortune he beholds.'

And the Blessed One, having gladdened the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and
Vassakâra by these stanzas, rose from his seat and went away.

12\. And the Magadha ministers Sunîdha and Vassakâra followed the
Blessed One from behind, saying, The gate the Sama*n*a Gotama goes out
by to-day shall be called Gotama's gate, and the ferry at which he
crosses the river Ganges shall be called Gotama's ferry.' And the gate
the Blessed One went out by

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

was called Gotama's gate. And the Blessed One went on to the river. At
that time the river Ganges was brimful and overflowing <span
id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_192); and wishing to cross to the opposite
bank, some began to seek for boats, some for rafts of wood, while some
made rafts of basket-work.

13\. And the Blessed One saw those people who wished to cross to the
opposite bank, some seeking for boats, some for rafts of wood, and some
making rafts of basket-work. When he saw them, he vanished as quickly as
a strong man might stretch his bent arm out, or draw back his
outstretched arm, from this side of the river Ganges, and stood on the
further bank with the company of the Bhikkhus.

And the Blessed One, perceiving all this, on this occasion, pronounced
this solemn utterance:

'They who cross the ocean's floods making a solid path across the
pools--

'Whilst the vain world ties its basket rafts: these are the wise, these
are the saved indeed.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_187"></span>[97:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_190) Chaps. 28--30 are,
with a few unimportant variations, word for word the same as
Mahâparinibbâna Sutta I, 19-II, 3; II, 16-24. See Rh. D.'s Introduction
to his translation of the Mahâparinibbâna Sutta, pp. xxxiv seq., and his
note there at II, 16.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[98:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_191) Perhaps we are to
supply 'with sand.' Comp. Dîpava*m*sa VI, 64; XII, 71, &c.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[101:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_192) Su*ññ*âgâra. Comp.
I, 78, 5; Suttavibhaṅga, Pârâ*g*. IV, 4, 1.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[102:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_193) The event
prophesied here, Pâ*t*aliputta's becoming the capital of the Magadha
empire, is placed by the various authorities under different kings. Hwen
Thsang and the Burmese writer quoted by Bishop Bigandet ('Legend of the
Burmese Buddha,' third edition, vol. ii, p. 183) say that it was
Kâlâsoka who removed the seat of the empire to Pâ*t*aliputta. The Gains,
on the other hand, state that it was Udâyi, the son of A*g*âtasattu.
Most probably the latter tradition is the correct one, as even king
Mu*nd*a is mentioned in the Aṅguttara Nikâya as having resided at
Pâ*t*aliputta. Comp. Rh. D.'s 'Buddhist Suttas,' Introd. pp. xv seq.; H.
O.'s Introduction to the Mahâvagga, p. xxxvii; and the remarks of
Professor Jacobi and of H. O. in Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morg.
Gesellschaft, vol. xxxiv, pp. 185, 751, 752, note 2.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[103:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_194) See chap. 23. 5,
&c. Instead of 'Lord,' read here, 'Reverend Gotama.'

<span id="fn_192"></span>[104:1](sbe17042.htm#fr_195) Samatitthikâ. This
word is replaced by samatîrthikâ at Lal. Vist. pp. 501, 528. Compare,
however, Rh. D.'s note on Tevi*gg*a Sutta I, 24 ('Buddhist Suttas,' p.
178).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 29](sbe17043)
