[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe17049)  [Next](sbe17051) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 36.

1\. Now when the Blessed One had stayed at Âpa*n*a as long as he thought
fit, he went on, on his pilgrimage, to Kusinârâ, with a great company

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

of Bhikkhus, with two hundred and fifty Bhikkhus. And the Mallas of
Kusinârâ heard, saying, 'The Blessed One, they say, is coming to
Kusinârâ with a great company of Bhikkhus, with two hundred and fifty
Bhikkhus.' And they established a compact to the effect that whosoever
went not forth to welcome the Blessed One, should pay a fine of five
hundred (pieces <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_244)).

Now at that time there was a certain Malla, by name Ro*g*a, who was a
friend of the venerable Ânanda's. And the Blessed One, continuing in due
course his pilgrimage, arrived at Kusinârâ.

2\. Then the Mallas of Kusinârâ went forth to welcome the Blessed One.
And Ro*g*a the Malla, having gone forth to welcome the Blessed One, went
on to the place where the venerable Ânanda was: and when he had come
there, he saluted the venerable Ânanda, and stood by on one side. And to
him, so standing, the venerable Ânanda spake thus:

'This is most excellent of thee, friend Ro*g*a, that thou hast come
forth to welcome the Blessed One!'

'It is not I, O Ânanda, who am much moved <span
id="fr_249"></span>[2](#fn_245) by the Buddha, or the Dhamma, or the
Sa*m*gha. But by the clansmen a compact was made to the effect that
whosoever went not forth to welcome the Blessed One should pay a fine of
five hundred (pieces). So that it was through fear of being fined

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

by my clansmen that even I went forth to welcome the Blessed One.'

Then the venerable Ânanda was filled with sorrow, thinking, 'How can
Ro*g*a the Malla speak thus?'

3\. And the venerable Ânanda went up to the place where the Blessed One
was: and when he had come there, he saluted the Blessed One, and took
his seat on one side, and so sitting the venerable Ânanda spake to the
Blessed One thus:

'This Ro*g*a the Malla, Lord, is a very distinguished and well-known
person. Great would be the efficacy <span
id="fr_250"></span>[1](#fn_246) of the adherence given by well-known
persons like him to this doctrine and discipline. May the Blessed One be
pleased so to act, that Ro*g*a the Malla shall become devoted to this
doctrine and discipline.'

'Now that, Ânanda, is not a hard thing for the Tathâgata--so to act that
Ro*g*a the Malla should become devoted to this doctrine and discipline.'

4\. Then the Blessed One suffused Ro*g*a the Malla with the feeling of
his love <span id="fr_251"></span>[2](#fn_247), and rising from his seat
he entered into his dwelling-place. And Ro*g*a the Malla, overcome by
the Blessed One by the sense of his love, just as a young calf follows
the kine, so did he go on from dwelling-place to dwelling-place, and
from apartment to apartment, asking the Bhikkhus:

'Where then, Sirs, is that Blessed One dwelling now, the Arahat Buddha?
For we desire to visit that Blessed One, the Arahat Buddha.'

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

'This, friend, is his dwelling-place, the door of which is shut. Go up
therefore quietly, and without crossing the threshold, enter into the
verandah, and knock at the cross-bar. The Blessed One will open the door
to thee.'

5\. So Ro*g*a the Malla did so, and the Blessed One opened the door. And
Ro*g*a the Malla entered into the dwelling-place, and saluted the
Blessed One and took his seat on one side. And to Ro*g*a the Malla
sitting there the Blessed One preached in due course: that is to say, he
talked to him of giving; of moral conduct; of heaven; of the danger of
vanity, of the corruption of lusts; and of the advantages of
renunciation. When the Blessed One saw that the mind of Ro*g*a the Malla
was prepared, impressible, free from obstacles to understanding the
truth, elated, and believing, then he preached that which is the
principal doctrine of the Buddhas, namely, Suffering, the Cause of
suffering, the Cessation of suffering, and the Path. And just as a clean
cloth, free from black specks, properly takes the dye, thus did Ro*g*a
the Malla, even while sitting there, obtain the pure and spotless eye of
the truth (that is, the knowledge that), 'Whatsoever is subject to the
condition of beginning, that is subject also to the condition of
cessation.' And Ro*g*a the Malla, having seen the truth, having mastered
the truth, having understood the truth, having penetrated the truth,
having overcome uncertainty, having dispelled all doubts, having gained
full knowledge, dependent on no one else for knowledge of the doctrine
of the Teacher, thus spake to the Blessed One:

'May the venerable one be pleased, Lord, to

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

receive from me alone, and not from others, the requisites of the Order:
that is to say, robes, and food, and dwelling-places, and medicine for
the use of the sick.'

'Whosoever, Ro*g*a, with the knowledge of a disciple, and with the
insight of a disciple <span id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_248), has
perceived the Truth, even as thou hast, they also will think, "Oh! that
the venerable ones would be pleased to receive from me alone, and not
from others, the requisites of the order." Therefore, Ro*g*a, they shall
receive them from you, indeed, but also from others.'

6\. Now at that time a certain succession had been fixed, in which the
inhabitants of Kusinârâ should each in succession provide food for the
Sa*m*gha. And it occurred to Ro*g*a the Malla, who had not received a
place in the succession, thus: What if I were to inspect the Sa*m*gha's
storehouse, and provide whatever I found wanting in the storehouse?' And
on inspecting the storehouse, he found there no potherbs, and no
meal <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_249).

Then Ro*g*a the Malla went up to the place where the venerable Ânanda
was, and when he had come there, he spake to the venerable Ânanda thus:

'It occurred to me (&ç., as before, down to:) and no meal. If, Ânanda, I
were to provide potherbs and meal, would the Blessed One accept them at
my hands?'

7\. The venerable Ânanda told this thing to the Blessed One.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

'Very good, then, Ânanda. Let him provide them.'

'Very good, then, Ro*g*a. Provide them accordingly.'

Then Ro*g*a the Malla at the end of the night, after he had had a
quantity of potherbs and meal made ready, offered them to the Blessed
One, saying, 'May the Blessed One accept at my hands the potherbs and
the meal.'

'Very good, then, Ro*g*a. Present them to the Bhikkhus.'

The Bhikkhus, fearing to offend, did not accept them.

'Accept them, O Bhikkhus, and make use of them.'

8\. Then Ro*g*a the Malla, with his own hand, offered to the company of
the Bhikkhus with the Buddha at their head, and satisfied them with the
potherbs and the meal. And when the Blessed One had finished his meal,
and had cleansed his hands and the bowl, he (Ro*g*a) took his seat on
one side. And when he was so seated the Blessed One taught, and incited,
and conversed, and gladdened Ro*g*a the Malla with religious discourse.
And Ro*g*a the Malla, when he had been taught, &c., rose from his seat
and departed thence.

And the Blessed One, on that occasion, and in that connection, when he
had delivered a religious discourse, addressed the Bhikkhus, and said:

'I allow you, O Bhikkhus, all kinds of potherbs <span
id="fr_254"></span>[1](#fn_250), and all kinds of meal <span
id="fr_255"></span>[2](#fn_251).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[135:1](sbe17050.htm#fr_248) That is, the
square kahâpa*n*as of copper or bronze, figured in the Bârhut
has-reliefs, and mentioned in the Dhammapada. See Rh. D.'s 'Ancient
Coins and Measures,' p. 4, § 5.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[135:2](sbe17050.htm#fr_249) Bahukato; only
found in this passage. Buddhaghosa says, Nâha*m* bhante Ânanda bahukato
ti nâham Buddhâdi-gatapasâda-bahumânena idhâgato ti dassetî ti. Here
Buddhâdi means the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sa*m*gha.

<span id="fn_246"></span>[136:1](sbe17050.htm#fr_250) Mahiddhiyo, where,
as so often elsewhere, Iddhi has no supernatural connotation. Compare
the passages quoted above in our note on I, 15, 2.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[136:2](sbe17050.htm#fr_251) Compare Rh. D.,
'Buddhist Birth Stories,' p. 112.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[138:1](sbe17050.htm#fr_252) Sekhena, as
opposed to asekhena. That is, with the knowledge of one who is not
himself an Arahat. See our note on Mahâvagga I, 7, 13.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[138:2](sbe17050.htm#fr_253) See the note at
the end; of § 8.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[139:1](sbe17050.htm#fr_254) Sabba*ñ* *k*a
*t*âkan (sic) ti sappi-âdîhi pakka*m* vâ apakka*m* vâ yam ki*ñk*i
*t*âka*m* (B.)

<span id="fn_251"></span>[139:2](sbe17050.htm#fr_255)
Pi*tth*a-khâdaniyan ti pi*tth*amaya*m* khâdaniya*m* (B.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 37](sbe17051)
