[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gm09)  [Next](gm11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Golden Mountain*, by Meyer Levin, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

### TWO SOULS

##### THE MYSTERY OF TWO SOULS THAT WERE SEPARATED, AND HOW RABBI ISRAEL BROUGHT THEM TOGETHER WHEN THEY SUFFERED RE-BIRTH ON EARTH

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Baal Shem Tov said, From every human
being there rises a light that reaches straight to heaven. And when two
souls that are destined to be together find each other, their streams of
light flow together, and a single brighter light goes forth from their
united being.

 

At the beginning of every year, among the hundreds of pilgrims who made
their way to the cottage of the Baal Shem Tov in Medzibuz, there always
came a very small woman, poorer than the rest, and humble. She was the
wife of a wood-cutter in a distant village. Each year she came on foot
to Medzibuz, and bowed her small head before Rabbi Israel. And each year
she would say to him, "I pray to God to give me a child. Rabbi Israel,
if you too will say a little prayer for me, the Almighty One will surely
send me a child."

But Rabbi Israel knew that no soul was yet allotted to be born through
her, and each year he said to her, "Go home and wait."

Year by year he watched her growing older, he saw how she became bent
with toil, and how the lines on her small face deepened with the pain of
her unfufilled desire.

But one year he said to her, "Go home. This year, a child will be given
you."

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

And then, during five years, the little woman did not come to the Baal
Shem Tov. He knew that she had a child, and that it was difficult for
her to make the journey with the infant.

But on the fifth year he saw her coming. She led a child by the hand.
And she was become so bent and shrunken that she seemed smaller than the
young boy who walked beside her.

She said to the Rabbi, "God has blessed me with a child, but I cannot
keep this child."

Rabbi Israel put his hand on her hair, and said, "Is this not the son
for whom you prayed so many years?"

"He is flesh of my flesh," said the old woman. "But his soul is not kin
to my soul. I cannot look into his eyes, for they are the eyes of a
stranger. Rabbi, he is a gentle boy, and obedient, and good, but he is
not of my poor world. I tremble before his wisdom."

The Baal Shem Tov looked at the boy. The child was beautiful, with a
large head, and great black eyes that were filled with mysterious
wisdom.

"I am afraid of his eyes," said the mother. "Rabbi, when he was born,
and he opened his eyes for the first time and looked into my eyes, it
was as if I had been pierced by two hot beams. Rabbi, I was terribly
frightened. I knew at once that he was not my child. And ever since
then, I have been frightened."

"Leave the child with me," said Rabbi Israel.

 

Then he raised the boy in his house; and as the boy grew, he began to
study in the books of the Law, and he learned so quickly and so
perfectly that he was soon the best of all the scholars in the house of
the Baal Shem Tov.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

Many wealthy Jews, hearing of the intelligence and beauty of the
scholar, came to the Baal Shem Tov seeking to make a marriage contract
for their daughters with the boy Issaschar.

"It is not yet time for him to marry," Rabbi Israel would say to them.

But when Issaschar was fully grown, Rabbi Israel called his trusted
follower Rabbi Wolf and said to him, "I will give you the name of a
certain man in a village far from this place. Go there and find the man.
Ask him to give us his third daughter as a wife for our young
Issaschar."

Then Rabbi Israel told Rabbi Wolf of certain signs by which he would
know the girl. He also told him her name, and her age, and how she would
seem.

Rabbi Wolf journeyed to the distant village, and began to ask among the
richest houses there for the man whom he sought. But the man was not
known among the wealthy, nor was his name known in the synagogue. Then
Rabbi Wolf went to all the places where men gathered, old and young, and
enquired for the man he sought. But he did not find him.

At last Rabbi Wolf despaired of fulfilling the command of his Master. He
wandered alone on the road. Not far from the village he saw a poor man
who was coming to the town, carrying on his back a great basket filled
with vegetables. The man was bent under the weight of the basket.

"Tell me your name," said Rabbi Wolf to the gardener.

The man spoke his name, and the messenger knew that this was the man he
sought.

"Set down your basket," he said.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

The man set down his basket.

"I have been sent to seek you by Rabbi Israel, the Baal Shem Tov. He
asks if you will give your third daughter in marriage to our young
scholar Issaschar."

Then a smile came onto the face of the gardener, and he laughed with
joy.

"Why shouldn't I?" he said. "My house is filled with daughters! They run
around barefoot, they quarrel over each crust of bread. And where will I
ever get money to provide each of them with a dowry!"

"There is no need of a dowry," said Rabbi Wolf. "Besides, my Master will
provide the wedding, and give the bride wedding clothes, and furnish a
home for the bride and the groom."

The gardener was overjoyed. "For it just happens," he said, "that the
daughter for whom you ask is the quietest of all the girls. She does the
work about the house, and she comes out to help me in the garden. She is
good and gentle. And yet, sometimes, she is as a stranger among us."

Then Rabbi Wolf told him the name of his daughter, and gave him other
signs, to make sure that she was the one.

On the next day, the little old Jew and his daughter started with Rabbi
Wolf for Medzibuz.

When they arrived, they were received with great honour by Rabbi Israel.
The girl was given good clothes to wear, and shoes to put on her bare
feet.

For the wedding festival, the Baal Shem had sent to the little village
where the mother and father of Issaschar lived, and the aged couple had
come to see the wedding of their son.

And now a great feast was prepared, and the canopy

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

was made ready. The Baal Shem Tov himself read the service of the
marriage, and blessed the husband and wife.

When the wedding was concluded, Rabbi Israel sat at the head of his
great table. On his one side was the father of the girl, and on his
other side was the mother of the boy. And the girl and the boy were
there, and all of the chassidim sat around the table. Then Rabbi Israel
said, "I will tell you a story."

They knew by his voice that this was no idle story he would tell, and
all became quiet, and listened. The boy and the girl put their hands
together, and listened.

Then the Baal Shem spoke. "Long ago in a distant land there was a King
who passed his days in worry and his nights in torment because he had no
heir. Year after year went by. He called to him every wise man and every
sorcerer in his kingdom, but their [wizardry](errata.htm#0) was of no
avail. He sent to all the corners of the earth, and brought wise men and
sorcerers to his court, and they tried with all their might to force the
Supreme Will to send down a child to the King. But none of their efforts
availed.

"At last the most learned of the sorcerers said to the King, 'I have
thought of a way.'

"The King said, 'Tell me what it is, and I will do it, though I have to
destroy my kingdom in its accomplishment.'

"Then the sorcerer said, 'In your land there are many Jews. These Jews
have a powerful God. Send out a command forbidding the Jews to worship
their God, forbidding them on pain of death to indulge in any of the
practices of their religion until a son is

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

born to the King. Afterwards, if a son is born to you, you may allow
them to return to the practices of their religion. And say in your
command that if any Jew is found worshipping his God while a son is not
yet born to the King, he shall be put to death.'

"The King agreed, and sent out a declaration that the Jews were
forbidden to read in their holy books, or put on phylacteries, or wear
the prayer-shawl, or circumcise their male offspring, or to perform any
of the rites of their religion, on pain of death, until a son was born
to the King.

"Then darkness and bitterness came over all the Jews of that land. Many
fled the kingdom. Others pretended obedience by day, but at night crept
into houses of prayer that they had digged under the earth, they hid
themselves in secret places, in graveyards, in forests, and there they
worshipped their God with feverish intensity, begging that they be saved
from the commands of their King.

"When sons were born, they might not be circumcised, for when the
officers of the King found a child had been secretly circumcised, they
seized the child and cut him in two with their swords. Thus many of the
children of Israel were slaughtered, and the Jews of the land were
filled with grief.

"The angels on high saw the suffering of the Jews. Then the purest choir
of souls that entour the throne of the Almighty had pity on the Jews,
and begged God to send the King a son. But the Almighty would not yield,
or change the order of the going down of souls.

"At last one soul, purer than all the rest, the soul of a Tsadik who had
been freed forever from earthly

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

bonds, and who had won his place in the highest rings of heaven, came
before God and said, 'I offer to suffer *gilgul* and take earthly form
again. Let me go down and be born as a son to that King, so the Jews of
his land may be free once more to worship the unutterable Name.'

"God consented. Then the soul of the Tsadik went down to earth, to be
born as the son of the King.

"But when the child was born, the King, in the greatness of his joy,
forgot all about the Jews, and as no Jews were permitted to come into
the palace, there was no one to remind him of their suffering. The laws
against them were not withdrawn, and just as before they were forbidden
to worship their God.

"The prince grew. He became a beautiful boy, and he surprised everyone
with his quickness in learning.

"The King took care that the prince should have no desire unsatisfied.
The boy was surrounded by every luxury known to man, and provided with
every delicacy. A hundred slaves bowed to the slightest movement of his
fingers.

"But the prince seemed to take no joy in luxury. He desired only wisdom.
The most learned men in the kingdom were brought to the court to become
his teachers, but the boy was so quick to learn that before he was six
years old he had sucked dry of their knowledge all the wise men in the
land. Then the King sent abroad once more, and brought scholars and
magicians to his court. But none of them could quench the thirst that
was in the prince. Soon he knew all the languages of men, and all the
sciences of men, and yet he was sad, seeking some unknown thing.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

"All day long he wandered by himself in the garden.

"His father the King would come to him and say, 'Why are you unhappy?'

"The boy would answer, 'Bring me a sage who can teach me happiness.'

"The King was more grieved than he had been before the child was born.
He did not know where to find such a sage.

"At last the King heard his people talking of a learned man who had
appeared in the city, who spoke in the streets and in the market-place,
and whose words were filled with marvellous wisdom.

"The King sent out messengers to seek for that man, and after many days
he was found in one of the small streets of the city. 'Will you teach my
son wisdom?' the King said to him.

"The aged man was willing to become the teacher of the prince. But he
asked only one thing. 'Give me a chamber,' he said, 'that shall be for
me alone. Let no one be permitted to come into that chamber. And during
one hour of each day, let me retire into that chamber, and be alone. Let
no one disturb me, or spy upon me in that chamber.' This wish the King
granted, and the stranger became the teacher of the prince.

"The prince was happy with his new master. There seemed no depth of
wisdom which he had not plumbed. They were together all the day long,
and spoke of things on earth, and below, and above. Often the prince
woke at night, with a question on his lips, then he asked for his
teacher to come and sleep in the

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

same room with him, and so they slept in the same room.

"The prince did not know why it was, but he loved the aged stranger. He
loved to walk with him in the garden, to sit by his side at table, to
listen to his voice.

"But during one hour every day the prince was unhappy.

"He asked the aged man: 'Where do you go, when I cannot find you?'

"Then the teacher said to him, 'I have a closed chamber, and for one
hour each day I am alone there.'

"The boy could not bear to think that his beloved friend should have a
secret from him. He did not wish to spy upon his teacher, but at last,
like a child, he could withhold himself no longer. One day he hid behind
the curtains of his master's private chamber. He saw the master come
into the room, and stand before the altar, and put a fringed shawl over
his head, and wind phylacteries about his arms. Then the boy stepped
from his hiding place and said.

"'Here I am.'

"The old man was not angry with him, for he loved the boy. But he feared
what might come of this knowledge, and he said to the boy, 'No one must
know of what you have seen here.'

"The boy said, 'Why do you do these things?'

"The aged man said, 'I am a Jew.'

"The boy said, 'In all the times when you have been with me, I have felt
at peace because you were at peace. But in this chamber I have seen you
joyful, I have never seen you so joyful.'

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

"The aged man said, 'Here, I worship my God. And I worship my God with
joy.'

"The prince wanted in every way to be like his teacher, and he said,
'Teach me to worship your God.'

"'It is forbidden,' said the old man. Then he explained to the prince
how the King had forbidden the Jews to practice their religion until a
son should be born to him. 'With many others, I fled the kingdom,' he
said. 'But when I heard that there was a prince in the land, I returned.
Nevertheless, the Jews are still forbidden to worship their God;
therefore I put on my prayer-shawl and my phylacteries in secret in this
room, and no one must know what I do.'

"After that, in the same hour every day, they retired to the room of the
teacher, and the boy learned to read in the books of the Torah. He
learned quickly, and the Tsadik's soul that was in him became joyous. At
the end of that hour each day it become more difficult for him to tear
himself from his studies. 'Let us spend all of our time studying the
Torah,' he said.

"'Then we must go away from here,' said the sage. And he made a plan.
'We will escape at night, and go to a far city where we may freely
worship our God.'

"In the midst of the night they wrapped their holy books in bundles, and
went out of the palace and fled.

"The old man took the prince to a distant city where he was known and
honoured. There the boy grew; soon he became celebrated among the rabbis
for his wisdom. 'He will be a Tsadik,' they said of him.

"But when they spoke in that way of his perfection,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the boy became sad, and a vast yearning and loneliness came over his
face. For he had already knocked on the innermost door of heaven, and
the door had remained closed to him, while a hand had shown him the blot
that was upon his soul.

"One day the sage took the prince to visit the chiefest of the rabbis of
that city. As they came into the house of the great rabbi, his daughter
saw the young prince, and her soul quivered. The prince looked on the
girl, and he felt that she would be the end of his loneliness.

"Afterwards the girl went to her father and asked of him that he speak
to the teacher of the young scholar. The chiefest of the rabbis came to
the sage's house and said, 'Your young scholar is the worthiest of the
young men. Let him become the husband of my daughter.'

"So the two children were married. So true was the love of their souls,
that at the moment of their marriage a single light streamed upward to
heaven, and lighted the whole world.

"But on the night of their marriage the boy said to his wife, 'Dear one,
there will be times when my soul will leave my body, my body will lie as
dead, and you will be stricken with fear. At those times you must not
call anyone, nor be alarmed, but must remain sitting by my side, and
wait silently until my soul returns to this body.'

"She answered, 'Beloved, I shall do as you say.'

"So they lived together in that city, and they were happy in their love.

"But once, at night, the soul of the prince left his body, and was away
for a very long time. The bride

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

sat by his body, and held his hand, and waited. The hand became cold as
stone. The face became white as snow. The brow shone in the pallor of
death. From moment to moment she leaned her head to his heart, and she
heard how the heart beat ever more faintly.

"The bride was frightened, she wanted to run from the house and call
people to help her, but she remembered the words of her husband, and sat
by his side, and waited.

"At last, when dawn came creeping, a flush of colour returned with the
first flush of light to the cheeks of her husband. Soon she felt warmth
in his hand. Then she knew his soul had returned to his body. But his
body was very weak, and he did not rise from the bed.

"'Know,' he said, 'that this night I pierced to the highest of heavens,
and stood before the Unnameable Presence. And I asked what would become
of me. My soul was born in sin, all my youth I was raised in luxury in
the palace of a king, while my people suffered. And for the youth that I
passed in ignorance and in luxury, and for that I lived uncircumcised;
there is a stain upon my soul, and my soul will be forever prevented of
attaining perfection. Then, there is only one thing that I may do. I may
consent to immediate death. Afterwards, my soul must be reborn. of a
pure but humble woman, and the first years of my life must be passed in
poverty, for only in that next incarnation may I attain perfection.
Beloved, I must depart from this life. Beloved, let me go.'

"Then his wife said to him, 'Only on one condition will I consent that
you give yourself to death. Let me die with you. Let me be reborn when
you are

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span id="img_08300"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![WEDDING](tn/08300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08300.jpg)  
WEDDING  
</span>

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

reborn. Let me come back to earth, and as your wife be one with you
again."

"He said, 'May it be so.'

"They lay down to death together, and their souls went forth in the same
breath. For timeless ages their souls strayed in the darkness where
there is no boundary of space. And at last the soul of the boy returned
to earth to be born as the son of a little old woman who lived in
poverty in a wood-cutter's hut on the mountain. And the soul of the girl
returned to earth to be born as the daughter of a poor gardener, the
father of many daughters.

"Then, far from each other, the two children grew. And in each child
there was a sadness and a yearning for it knew not what, and each child,
though gentle and good at home among its people, was as a stranger in
its world.

"And so all the days of their childhood and youth were a seeking for
they knew not what, their eyes looked with hope toward each new soul,
and yet they saw into endless darkness, until they forgot what they
awaited. But know, my friends, that these two souls at last have found
each other, and are come together here as bride and bridegroom on this
day."

Then the Master was silent. And all those who sat in the house felt a
sweet joy arise within them, and they looked up with eyes that seemed to
greet the wanderers of eternity, and all of their faces seemed to be
lighted by a single mighty flame that rose heavenward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Standing Sheep](gm11)
