[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gm34)  [Next](gm36.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Golden Mountain*, by Meyer Levin, \[1932\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

### THE PRINCE

##### WHO WAS MADE ENTIRELY OF PRECIOUS STONES

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> was a king who had no children, and
he was greatly troubled with thought that after his death his kingdom
would pass into the hands of strangers. So he called to him all the
physicians and all the magicians of his realm, and commanded them to
make use of their learning and of their magic, that a prince might be
born to the royal family. But they were of no help to him.

At last in despair he turned upon the Jews who lived in his kingdom,
for, he said, "I have heard that among the Jews there are secret saints
whose prayers can bring whatever is in the heavens down on earth." So he
commanded the Jews to bring one of these saints to the palace.

In each generation there are thirty-six men whose virtue bears up the
world; they live unknown among other men, and they are called hidden
Tsadikim. When the king commanded that one of them be brought to the
palace, the Jews did not know where to turn, but one man went up to
another, asking, "Might you be one of the secret Tsadikim?"

There was a shoe-maker in a village; he lived quietly, earning bread for
himself and his family, working each day, but resting on Sabbath. Then
all the people in the village bethought themselves that they had never
known him to do any wrong, and they said to one another, "He must be a
secret Tsadik!" But when they came to him and asked him, he only said,
"I don't know anything about it. I am a shoe-maker." Still, the word
went from one village to another, and

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<span id="img_24100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE
PRINCE](tn/24100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/24100.jpg.md)  
THE PRINCE  
</span>

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

at last it came to the king that in a certain village there lived a
shoe-maker who was really a hidden Tsadik, but who said he knew nothing
about it.

The king commanded that the man be brought before him, and when the
Tsadik stood in the palace, the king spoke to him in a friendly way,
saying, "You know that all your people are in my power, and I can do
good or ill to them as I please. Therefore I ask you in a friendly way
to pray that my queen may have a child."

The Tsadik went into a little room and spoke to God. Then he returned to
the king. "Within a year," the Tsadik said, "a child will be born to the
queen." And he went home to his village, and made shoes.

Before the year had passed, the queen gave birth to a daughter. The
little girl was so beautiful that whoever looked once upon her never
ceased wondering at her loveliness; and she was so clever that when she
was four years old she could play music upon many instruments, and speak
all the languages of mankind. Emperors and sages came from distant lands
to look upon and speak with the child.

At first the king was happy with his daughter, but then he grew
discontented, for he wanted a son to rule after him, in order that his
kingdom might not fall into strange hands. So he commanded that the
secret Tsadik should again be brought before him.

But when the king's messenger went to seek out the Tsadik, he was told
that the man had died.

The king said, "Let the Jews find another Tsadik!" So the Jews asked of
one another, and sought amongst themselves, until they found another of
the thirty-six secret Tsadikim, and they told the king where he was,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

and the king sent for him and said to him in a friendly way, "If you do
not help me, remember that your people are in my power."

Then the Tsadik answered, "I will help you, if you will give me what I
ask."

"I will give half of my possessions for a son!" the king cried.

"Then," said the Tsadik, "you must bring me precious stones, for in
every jewel there is a quality of good, and the secret virtues of the
jewels are written in the angel's book. Bring me every kind of precious
stone, for I have need of them all."

The king commanded that jewels be brought. And from all parts of the
world there were brought to him the largest and purest of precious
stones: a diamond as radiant as a falling star, a pearl as white as an
infant's smile, a ruby deep as a friendly eye, and sapphire, agate,
carbuncle, and opal stones. These the king gave to the Tsadik who took
them and crushed them into a powder; the powder he poured into a goblet
of wine. Then he gave half of the wine to the king to drink, and the
queen drank the other half.

"You will have a son," said the Tsadik, "who will be made entirely of
precious stones, and who will have all the virtues of all the jewels in
the world." Then he went home.

A son was born to the queen.

Now the king was completely happy, for he had a son to reign after him.
And though the child appeared to be made like all other children, and
not made of precious stones as the Tsadik had predicted, the king was
satisfied, for the boy was even more beautiful than his sister, and he
too was able to speak all the languages

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

of mankind when he was four years old, and he knew besides all the
wisdom of the world, so that rulers came from far places to ask advice
of him.

But when the little girl saw the emperors and sages coming to court to
seek her younger brother, and no longer for her sake, and when she heard
the beauty and the wisdom of her brother constantly praised, while she
was forgotten, she became jealous of her brother. Only one thing pleased
her. "They said he would be made entirely of precious stones," she
remembered, "but he is made like all of us."

One day as he was carving wood with a sharp knife, the prince cut his
finger. His sister ran to bind up his finger, but as she looked into the
wound she saw a gleaming sapphire there.

Then her jealousy turned to hatred, and she thought only of how she
could be revenged upon her brother.

There was consternation in the palace because of the prince's injury,
and when the princess saw how the king was troubled, and the people
anxious, and the servants ran everywhere, she thought, "I too will be
ill, and then they will remember me!" So she pretended to be sick.

Physicians were sent to her, but they could not find out the cause of
her illness; at last the magicians were called, but none of the
magicians could help her. She lay in her bed, and thought with hatred of
her brother, and how he was indeed made of precious stones, and her
jealousy gave her no rest. Then the sorcerer who was the most cunning of
all the king's magicians came to the little girl, and as soon as he saw
her he said, "You are not ill, but are only pretending

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

illness!" She looked into his wicked eyes, and they were like two hard
stones pressing upon her. Then she told the sorcerer the truth.

"I am not ill," she said, "but I cannot bear my brother's beauty; he is
so beautiful that no one any longer remembers me." Then the princess
begged the wizard, "Tell me," she cried, "is there no way to bewitch a
person, so that all his body will become covered with itching sores?"

"There is a way," the wizard said. "I can make a charm against him."

But the clever little princess thought, "What if another magician should
come, and break your charm? Then my brother will be beautiful again."

"If the charm is buried in water," the sorcerer replied, "it can never
again be broken."

So they made an evil charm against the prince, and they bound their
sorcery in a silken cloth and threw it into a deep pool where it could
never again be found.

Then the prince's tender skin became red, and broke; sores appeared on
his face and hands, and there were itching and leprous sores all over
his body.

The king was terrified, the entire kingdom was in mourning because of
the loathsome disease that had come upon the beautiful prince. Every
physician and every sage hurried to the palace to try to heal the
suffering boy. They covered him with balm and with ointments, but the
sores remained upon him, and he tore at his loathsome skin.

The physicians said, "He cannot be cured."

Then the king cried, "It is the Jews who have brought this thing upon
me!" and he commanded

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

that the Jews cause the boy to be healed of his sores.

Once more the Jews sought amongst themselves for a secret Tsadik. And
they found that Tsadik who had brought about the birth of the prince,
and he was brought again to the palace.

"See what you have done!" the king cried. "You promised me a son who
would be made entirely of precious stones, and instead he is covered
with sores."

"Let me go into a little room where I may be alone," said the Tsadik.
Then he went into a tiny chamber, and closed the door, and stood alone
and spoke to God.

"It was not to bring glory upon myself that I did this thing," said the
Tsadik, "but it was for the glory of your Name that I said that a child
would be born, all made of precious stones. And now, see how my words
have been fulfilled; the boy is covered with sores."

Then the truth was revealed to the Tsadik, for he knew that nothing
happened without reason, and that the depths of loathsome sin must be
felt before the heights of purest beauty may be known. And he came out
and said to the king, "A sorcerer has made a charm against the prince,
to cover him with evil. The charm has been buried in water, so that it
may not be destroyed."

The king was terrified, for he thought that the prince would never be
well again. "Is there nothing that can be done?" he begged. "Is there no
magician more powerful than the evil one who has done this thing?"

"Since the charm has been buried in water," the Tsadik said, "there is
only one way in which it can

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

be broken. The magician who made the charm must be found, and he also
must be thrown into the water."

"Take all the magicians of my kingdom," cried the king, "and throw them
into the sea! If only my son will be well!"

Then he issued a decree that on the very next day every wizard,
sorcerer, and magician in his realm should be thrown into the water.

When the princess heard this decree, her guilt made her afraid, for she
thought, "Now the charm will be found out, and they will know that I
have done this thing to my brother." So she ran to the pond, to take the
charm out of the water before anyone else would find it there. But as
the Princess leaned far over the pond seeking for the evil charm, she
fell into the water herself, and she sank to the bottom of the deep
pool.

Then the servants hurried through the palace crying, "The princess has
fallen into the pool!" and there was crying and wailing everywhere.

But when the Tsadik heard them he only smiled and said, "Now the prince
will be well."

And so it was as he said. The sores upon the body of the prince began to
close, and to dry up, and to fall away. And as the wounds fell away, the
sickly skin became dry and hard, and it slipped from him as a cloud from
the face of the sun; then the prince stood healed and shining before
them, and their eyes were scarcely strong enough to look upon the
dazzling brilliance of the boy, for now anyone might see that the prince
was indeed made entirely of precious stones.

And he had all the virtues of all the jewels in the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Spider and the Fly](gm36.md)
