<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sglt03)  [Next](sglt05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f03"></span>

CHAPTER III: THE WARRIORS OF THE RAVEN SEARCH THE SEAS

Then the women bethought them, and they spake a word or two together,
and then they sundered and went one this way and one that, to gather
together the warriors of the Raven who were a-field, or on the way, nigh
unto the house, that they might follow Hallblithe down to the sea-shore
and help him; after a while they came back again by one and two and
three, bringing with them the wrathful young men; and when there was
upward of a score gathered in the garth armed and horsed, they rode
their ways to the sea, being minded to thrust a long-ship of the Ravens
out over the Rollers into the sea, and follow the strong-thieves of the
waters and bring a-back the Hostage, so that they might end the sorrow
at once, and establish joy once more in the House of the Raven and the
House of the Rose.  But they had with them three lads of fifteen winters
or thereabouts to lead their horses back home again, when they should
have gone up on to the Horse of the Brine.

Thus then they departed, and the maidens stood in the garth-gate till
they lost sight of them behind the sandhills, and then turned back
sorrowfully into the house, and sat there talking low of their sorrow. 
And many a time they had to tell their tale anew, as folk came into the
hall one after another from field and fell.  But the young men came down
to the sea, and found Hallblithe's black horse straying about amongst
the tamarisk-bushes above the beach; and they looked thence over the
sand, and saw neither Hallblithe nor any man: and they gazed out
seaward, and saw neither ship nor sail on the barren brine.  Then they
went down on to the sand, and sundered their fellowship, and went half
one way, half the other, betwixt the sandhills and the surf, where now
the tide was flowing, till the nesses of the east and the west, the
horns of the bay, stayed them. Then they met together again by the
Rollers, when the sun was within an hour of setting.  There and then
they laid hand to that ship which is called the Seamew, and they ran her
down over the Rollers into the waves, and leapt aboard and hoisted sail,
and ran out the oars and put to sea; and a little wind was blowing
seaward from the gates of the mountains behind them.

So they quartered the sea-plain, as the kestrel doth the water-meadows,
till the night fell on them, and was cloudy, though whiles the wading
moon shone out; and they had seen nothing, neither sail nor ship, nor
aught else on the barren brine, save the washing of waves and the
hovering of sea-fowl.  So they lay-to outside the horns of the bay and
awaited the dawning.  And when morning was come they made way again, and
searched the sea, and sailed to the out-skerries, and searched them with
care; then they sailed into the main and fared hither and thither and up
and down:  and this they did for eight days, and in all that time they
saw no ship nor sail, save three barks of the Fish-biters nigh to the
Skerry which is called Mew-stone.

So they fared home to the Raven Bay, and laid their keel on the Rollers,
and so went their ways sadly, home to the House of the Raven:  and they
deemed that for this time they could do no more in seeking their valiant
kinsman and his fair damsel.  And they were very sorry; for these two
were well-beloved of all men.  But since they might not amend it, they
abode in peace, awaiting what the change of days might bring them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV. Now Hallblithe Taketh the Sea](sglt05)

</div>
