<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [William Morris](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sglt01)  [Next](sglt03) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Story of the Glittering Plain*, by William Morris, \[1891\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="an_f01"></span>

CHAPTER I: OF THOSE THREE WHO CAME TO THE HOUSE OF THE RAVEN

It has been told that there was once a young man of free kindred and
whose name was Hallblithe:  he was fair, strong, and not untried in
battle; he was of the House of the Raven of old time.

This man loved an exceeding fair damsel called the Hostage, who was of
the House of the Rose, wherein it was right and due that the men of the
Raven should wed.

She loved him no less, and no man of the kindred gainsaid their love,
and they were to be wedded on Midsummer Night.

But one day of early spring, when the days were yet short and the nights
long, Hallblithe sat before the porch of the house smoothing an ash
stave for his spear, and he heard the sound of horse-hoofs drawing nigh,
and he looked up and saw folk riding toward the house, and so presently
they rode through the garth gate; and there was no man but he about the
house, so he rose up and went to meet them, and he saw that they were
but three in company:  they had weapons with them, and their horses were
of the best; but they were no fellowship for a man to be afraid of; for
two of them were old and feeble, and the third was dark and sad, and
drooping of aspect:  it seemed as if they had ridden far and fast, for
their spurs were bloody and their horses all a-sweat.

Hallblithe hailed them kindly and said:  "Ye are way-worn, and maybe ye
have to ride further; so light down and come into the house, and take
bite and sup, and hay and corn also for your horses; and then if ye
needs must ride on your way, depart when ye are rested; or else if ye
may, then abide here night-long, and go your ways to-morrow, and
meantime that which is ours shall be yours, and all shall be free to
you."

Then spake the oldest of the elders in a high piping voice and said:
"Young man, we thank thee; but though the days of the springtide are
waxing, the hours of our lives are waning; nor may we abide unless thou
canst truly tell us that this is the Land of the Glittering Plain:  and
if that be so, then delay not, lead us to thy lord, and perhaps he will
make us content."

Spake he who was somewhat less stricken in years than the first: "Thanks
have thou! but we need something more than meat and drink, to wit the
Land of Living Men.  And Oh! but the time presses."

Spake the sad and sorry carle:  "We seek the Land where the days are
many:  so many that he who hath forgotten how to laugh, may learn the
craft again, and forget the days of Sorrow."

Then they all three cried aloud and said:

"Is this the Land?  Is this the Land?"

But Hallblithe wondered, and he laughed and said:  "Wayfarers, look
under the sun down the plain which lieth betwixt the mountains and the
sea, and ye shall behold the meadows all gleaming with the spring
lilies; yet do we not call this the Glittering Plain, but Cleveland by
the Sea.  Here men die when their hour comes, nor know I if the days of
their life be long enough for the forgetting of sorrow; for I am young
and not yet a yokefellow of sorrow; but this I know, that they are long
enough for the doing of deeds that shall not die.  And as for Lord, I
know not this word, for here dwell we, the sons of the Raven, in good
fellowship, with our wives that we have wedded, and our mothers who have
borne us, and our sisters who serve us.  Again I bid you light down off
your horses, and eat and drink, and be merry; and depart when ye will,
to seek what land ye will."

They scarce looked on him, but cried out together mournfully:

"This is not the Land!  This is not the Land!"

No more than that they said, but turned about their horses and rode out
through the garth gate, and went clattering up the road that led to the
pass of the mountains.  But Hallblithe hearkened wondering, till the
sound of their horse-hoofs died away, and then turned back to his work: 
and it was then two hours after high-noon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Evil Tidings Come to Hand at Cleveland](sglt03)

</div>
