[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080069)  [Next](1080071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LIX.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p1"></span> *The Second Part.*

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p2"></span>1. For, behold, the Jews are enemies, whom
this Psalm seemeth to imply; the law of God they hold, and therefore of
them hath been said, “Slay not them, lest sometime they forget Thy law:”
in order that the nation of Jews might remain, and by it remaining the
number of Christians might increase. Throughout all nations they remain
certainly, and Jews they are, nor have they ceased to be what they were:
that is, this nation hath not so yielded to Roman institutions, as to
have lost the form of Jews; but hath been subjected to the Romans so as
that it still retaineth its own laws; which are the laws of God. But
what in their case hath been done? “Ye tithe mint and cummin, and have
<span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="ii.LIX.2-Page_242"></span>forsaken the weightier matters of the law,
mercy, and judgment, straining a gnat, but swallowing a camel.” <span
id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) This to them the Lord saith. And in
truth so they are; they hold the law, hold the Prophets; read all
things, sing all things: the light of the Prophets therein they see not,
which is Christ Jesus. Not only Him now they see not, when he is sitting
in Heaven: but not even at that time saw they Him, when among them
humble He was walking, and they were made guilty by shedding the blood
of the Same; but not all. This even to-day we commend to the notice of
your Love. Not all: because many of them were turned to Him whom they
slew, and by believing on Him, they obtained pardon even for the
shedding of His blood: and they have given an example for men; how they
ought not to despair that sin of whatsoever kind would be remitted to
them, since even the killing of Christ was remitted to them confessing.…

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p4"></span>2. What in them wilt Thou slay? The
Crucify, Crucify, <span id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262) which they
cried out, not them that cried out. For they willed to blot out, cut
off, destroy Christ: but Thou, by raising to life Christ, whom they
willed to destroy, dost slay the “transgressions of their mouth, the
discourse of their lips.” For in that He whom they cried out should be
destroyed, liveth, they are taken with dread: and that He whom on earth
they despised, in heaven is adored by all nations, they wonder: thus are
there slain the transgressions of them, and the discourse of their lips.
What is, “let them be taken in their pride”? Because to no purpose have
strong men rushed on, and it hath fallen out to them as it were to think
themselves to have done somewhat, and they have prevailed against the
Lord. They were able to crucify a man, weakness might prevail and
virtue <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263) be slain; and they
thought themselves somewhat, as it were strong men, as it were mighty
men, as it were prevailing, as it were a lion prepared for prey, as it
were fat bulls, as of them in another place he maketh mention: “Fat
bulls have beset me.” <span id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) But
what have they done in the case of Christ? Not life, but death they have
slain.…And what now hath come to pass in those men that have been
converted? For it was told to them that He whom they slew rose again.
They believed Him to have risen again, because they saw that He, being
in Heaven, thence sent the Holy Spirit, and filled those that on Him
believed; and they found themselves to have condemned nought, and to
have done nought. Their doing issued in emptiness, the sin remained.
Because therefore the doing was made void, but the sin remained upon the
doers; they were taken in their pride, they saw themselves under their
iniquity. <span id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) It remained
therefore for them to confess the sin, and for Him to pardon, that had
given Himself up to sinners, and to forgive His death, having been slain
by men dead, and making alive men dead. They were taken therefore in
their pride.

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p9"></span>3. “And out of cursing and lying shall be
declared consummations, in anger of consummation, and they shall not
be.” This too with difficulty is understood, to what is joined the “and
they shall not be.” What shall they not be? Let us therefore examine the
context above: when they shall have been taken in their pride, “there
shall be declared out of cursing and lying consummations.” What are
consummations? Perfections: for to be consummated, is to be perfected.
One thing it is to be consummated, another thing to be consumed. For a
thing is consummated which is so finished as that it is perfected: a
thing is consumed which is so finished that it is not. Pride would not
suffer a man to be perfected, nothing so much hindereth perfection. For
let your Love attend a little to what I am saying; and see an evil very
pernicious, very much to be guarded against. What sort of evil do ye
think it is? How long could I enlarge upon how much evil there is in
pride? The devil on that account alone is to be punished. Certes he is
the chief of all sinners: certes he is the tempter to sin: to him is not
ascribed adultery, not wine-bibbing, not fornication, not the robbing of
others’ goods: by pride alone he fell. And since pride’s companion is
envy, it must needs be that a proud man should envy.…In a word, all
vices in evil-doings are to be feared, pride in well-doings is more to
be feared. It is no wonder, then, that so humble is the Apostle, as to
say, “When I am made weak, then I am strong.” <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) For lest he should himself be
tempted by this sin, what sort of medicine doth he say was applied to
him against swelling by the Physician, who knew what He was healing?
“Lest by the greatness,” he saith, “of the revelations I should be
exalted, there was given to me a thorn of my flesh, the angel of Satan,
to buffet me: wherefore thrice the Lord I besought, that it should
depart from me: and He said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for
virtue in weakness is made perfect.” <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) See what the consummations are. An
Apostle, the teacher of Gentiles, father of the faithful through the
Gospel, received a thorn of the flesh whereby he might be buffeted.
Which of us would dare to say this, unless he had not been ashamed to
confess this? For if we shall have said that Paul had not suffered this;
while to him as it were honour we give, a liar we make him. But be<span
id="page_243">p. 243</span> <span id="ii.LIX.2-Page_243"></span>cause
truthful he is, and truth he hath spoken; it behoveth us to believe that
there was given to him an angel of Satan, lest by the greatness of the
revelations he should be exalted. Behold how much to be feared is the
serpent of pride.…

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p12"></span>4. What is, “in the anger of consummation
shall be declared consummations”? There is an anger of consummation, and
there is an anger of consuming. For every vengeance of God is called
anger: sometimes God avengeth, to the end that He may make perfect;
sometimes He avengeth, to the end that He may condemn. How doth He
avenge, to the end that He may make perfect? “He scourgeth every son
whom He receiveth.” <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) How doth
He avenge, to the end that He may condemn? When He shall have set
ungodly men on the left hand, and shall have said to them, “Go ye into
fire everlasting, that hath been prepared for the devil and his
angels.” <span id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) This is the anger of
consuming, not that of consummation. But “there shall be declared
consummations in the anger of consummation;” it shall be preached by the
Apostles, that “where sin hath abounded, grace shall much more
abound,” <span id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) and the weakness of
man hath belonged to the healing of humility. Those men thinking of
this, and finding out and confessing their iniquities, “shall not be.”
“Shall not be” what? In their pride.

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p16"></span>5. “And they shall know how God shall
have dominion of Jacob, and of the ends of the earth” ([Psa.
59.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LIX.2-p16.1"></span>). For before they thought themselves just
men, because the Jewish nation had received the Law, because it had kept
the commandments of God: it is proved to them that it hath not kept
them, since in the very commandments of God Christ it perceived not,
because “blindness in part has happened to Israel.”  <span
id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271) Even the Jews themselves see that
they ought not to despise the Gentiles, of whom they deemed as of dogs
and sinners. For just as alike they have been found in iniquity, so
alike they will attain unto salvation. “Not only to Jews,” saith the
Apostle, “but also even to Gentiles.” <span
id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) For to this end the Stone which the
builders set at nought, hath even been made for the Head of the
corner, <span id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273) in order that two in
itself It might join: for a corner doth unite two walls. The Jews
thought themselves exalted and great: of the Gentiles they thought as
weak, as sinners, as the servants of demons, as the worshippers of
idols, and yet in both was there iniquity. Even the Jews have been
proved sinners; because “there is none that doeth good, there is not
even so much as one:” <span id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) they
have laid down their pride, and have not envied the salvation of the
Gentiles, because they have known their own and their weakness to be
alike: and in the Corner Stone being united, they have together
worshipped the Lord.…

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p21"></span>6. “They shall be converted at evening”
([Psa. 59.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LIX.2-p21.1"></span>): that is, even if late, that is, after the
slaying of our Lord Jesus Christ: “They shall be converted at evening:
and hereafter they shall suffer hunger as dogs.” But “as dogs,” not as
sheep or calves: “as dogs,” as Gentiles, as sinners; because they too
have known their sin that thought themselves righteous.…It is a good
thing therefore for a sinner to be humbled; and no one is more incurable
than he that thinketh himself whole. “And they shall go around the
city.” Already we have explained “city;” <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) it is the “city of standing round;”
all nations.

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p23"></span>7. “They shall be scattered abroad in
order that they may eat” ([Psa.
59.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LIX.2-p23.1"></span>); that is, in order that they may gain
others, in order that into their Body they may change believers. “But if
they shall not be filled, they shall murmur.” Because above also he had
spoken of the murmur of them, saying, “For who hath heard?” “And Thou, O
Lord,” he saith, “shall deride them, saying, Who hath heard?” <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) Wherefore? Because, as nothing Thou
shall count all nations. Let the Psalm be concluded. See ye the
Corner <span id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) exulting, now with
both walls rejoicing. The Jews were proud, humbled they have been;
Gentiles were despairing, raised up they have been: let them come to the
Corner, there let them meet, there run together, there find the kiss of
peace; from different parts let them come, but with differing not come,
those of Circumcision, these of uncircumcision. Far apart were the
walls, but before that to the Corner they came: but in the Corner let
them hold themselves, and now let the whole Church from both walls, say
what? “But I will sing of Thy power, and I will exult in the morning of
Thy mercy” ([Psa. 59.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LIX.2-p25.2"></span>). In the morning when temptations have been
overcome, in the morning when the night of this world shall have passed
away; in the morning when no longer the lyings in wait of robbers and of
the devil and of his angels we dread, in the morning when no longer by
the lamp of prophecy we walk, but Himself the Word of God as it were a
Sun we contemplate. “And I will exult in the morning of Thy mercy.” With
reason in another Psalm is said, “In the morning I will stand by Thee,
and I will meditate.” <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) With
reason also of the Lord Himself the Resurrection was at dawn, that there
should be fulfilled that which hath been said in another Psalm, “In the
evening shall tarry weeping and in the morning exultation.” <span
id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) For at even the disciples mourned
our Lord Jesus <span id="page_244">p. 244</span> <span
id="ii.LIX.2-Page_244"></span>Christ as dead, at dawn at Him rising
again they exulted. “For Thou hast become my taker up, and my refuge in
the day of my tribulation.”

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p28"></span>8. “My Helper, to Thee I will play,
because Thou, O God, art my taker up” ([Psa.
59.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LIX.2-p28.1"></span>). What was I, unless Thou didst succour? How
much despaired of was I, unless Thou didst heal? Where was I lying,
unless Thou didst come to me? Certes with a huge wound I was endangered,
but that wound of mine did call for an Almighty Physician. To an
Almighty Physician nothing is incurable.…Lastly, thinking of all good
things whatsoever we may have, either in nature or in purpose, or in
conversion itself, in faith, in hope, in charity, in good morals, in
justice, in fear of God; all these to be only by His gifts, he hath thus
concluded: “My God is my mercy:” He being filled with the good things of
God hath not found what he might call his God, save “his mercy.” O name,
under which no one must despair! If thou say, my salvation, I perceive
that He giveth salvation; if thou say, my refuge, I perceive that thou
takest refuge in Him; if thou say, my strength, I perceive that He
giveth to thee strength: “my mercy,” is what? All that I am is of Thy
mercy.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[242:2262](1080070.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p3"></span> [Matt.
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[242:2263](1080070.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p5"></span> [Matt.
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023), [John
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[242:2264](1080070.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p6"></span> Or, “strength.”

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[242:2265](1080070.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p7"></span> [Ps. xxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[242:2266](1080070.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p8"></span> [Acts
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#009), [Acts
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#037)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[242:2267](1080070.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[242:2268](1080070.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p11"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[243:2269](1080070.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p13"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[243:2270](1080070.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p14"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[243:2271](1080070.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p15"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[243:2272](1080070.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p17"></span> [Rom. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[243:2273](1080070.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p18"></span> [Rom. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#010)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[243:2274](1080070.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p19"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[243:2275](1080070.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p20"></span> [Ps. xiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[243:2276](1080070.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p22"></span> See p. 240, note 2.

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[243:2277](1080070.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p24"></span> [Ps. lix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#007)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[243:2278](1080070.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p25"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[243:2279](1080070.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p25.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p26"></span> [Ps. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[243:2280](1080070.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="ii.LIX.2-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LIX.2-p27"></span> [Ps. xxx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005)<span id="ii.LIX.2-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LX](1080071)
