[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080056)  [Next](1080058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XLIX.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p1"></span> <span id="page_169">p. 169</span> <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_169"></span>[Psalm
XLIX](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#000)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p1.1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p1.2"></span>. <span id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605)
</span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p3"></span>The First Part.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p4"></span>1. …“Hear ye these things, all ye
nations” ([Psa. 49.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p4.1"></span>). Not then you only who are here. For of
what power is our voice so to cry out, as that all nations may hear? For
Our Lord Jesus Christ hath proclaimed it through the Apostles, hath
proclaimed it in so many tongues that He sent; and we see this Psalm,
which before was only repeated in one nation, in the Synagogue of the
Jews, now repeated throughout the whole world, throughout all Churches;
and that fulfilled which is here spoken of, “Hear ye these words, all ye
nations.”…Of whom ye are: “With ears ponder, all ye that dwell in the
world.” This He seemeth to have repeated a second time, lest to have
said “hear,” before, were too little. What I say, he saith, “hear, with
ears ponder,” that is, hear not cursorily. What is, “with ears ponder”?
It is what the Lord said, “he that hath ears to hear, let him hear:”
 <span id="fr_1606"></span>[1607](#fn_1606) for as all who were in His
presence must have had ears, what ears did He require save those of the
heart, when He said, “he that hath ears to hear, let him hear”? The same
ears also this Psalm doth smite. “With ears ponder, all ye that dwell in
the world.” Perhaps there is here some distinction. We ought not indeed
to narrow our view, but there is no harm in explaining even this view of
the sense. Perhaps there is some difference between the saying, “all
nations,” and the saying, “all ye that dwell in the world.” For
perchance he would have us understand the expression, “dwell in,” with a
further meaning, so as to take all nations for all the wicked, but the
dwellers of the world all the just. For he doth inhabit who is not held
fast: but he that is occupied is inhabited, and doth not inhabit. Just
as he doth possess whatever he hath, who is master of his property: but
a master is one who is not held in the meshes of covetousness: while he
that is held fast by covetousness is the possessed, and not the
possessor.…

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p6"></span>2. Therefore let even the ungodly hear:
“Hear ye this, all ye nations.” Let the just also hear, who have not
heard to no purpose, and who rather rule the world than are ruled by the
world: “with ears ponder, all ye that dwell in the world.”

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p7"></span>3. And again he saith, “both all ye
earthborn, and sons of men” ([Psa.
49.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p7.1"></span>). The expression “earthborn” he doth refer
to sinners; the expression “sons of men” to the faithful and righteous.
Ye see then that this distinction is observed. Who are the “earthborn”?
The children of the earth. Who are the children of the earth? They who
desire earthly inheritances. Who are the “sons of men”? They who
appertain to the Son of Man. We have already before explained this
distinction to your Sanctity,  <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[1608](#fn_1607) and have concluded that Adam was a
man, but not the son of man; that Christ was the Son of Man, but was God
also. For whosoever pertain to Adam, are “earthborn:” whosoever pertain
to Christ, are “sons of men.” Nevertheless, let all hear, I withhold my
discourse from no one. If one is “earthborn,” let him hear, because of
the judgment: another is a “son of man,” let him hear for the kingdom’s
sake. “The rich and poor together.” Again, the same words are repeated.
The expression “rich” refers to the “earthborn;” but the word “poor” to
the “sons of men.” By the “rich” understand the proud, by the “poor” the
humble.…He saith in another Psalm, “The poor shall eat and be
satisfied.” <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1609](#fn_1608) How hath he
commended the poor? “The poor shall eat and be satisfied.” What eat
they? That Food which the faithful know. How shall they be satisfied? By
imitating the Passion of their Lord, and not without cause receiving
their recompense. “The poor shall eat and be satisfied, and they shall
praise the Lord who seek Him.” What of the rich? Even they eat. But how
eat they? “All the rich upon the earth have eaten and worshipped.”
 <span id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609) He said not, “Have eaten and
are satisfied;” but, “have eaten and worshipped.” They worship God
indeed, but they will not display brotherly humaneness. These eat and
worship; those eat and are filled: yet both eat. Of the eater what he
eateth is required: let him not be forbidden by the distributor to eat,
but let him be admonished to fear him who doth require his account. Let
these words then be heard by sinners and righteous, nations, and those
who inhabit the world, “earthborn and sons of men, the rich and the poor
together:” not divided, not separated. That is for the time of the
harvest to do, the hand of the winnower will effect that. <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1611](#fn_1610) Now together let rich and poor
hear, let goats and sheep feed in the same pasture, until He come who
shall separate the one on His right hand, the other on His left. <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1612](#fn_1611) Let them all hear together the
teacher, lest separated from one another they hear the voice of the
Judge.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p13"></span>4. And what is it they are now to hear?
“My mouth shall speak of wisdom, and the meditation of my heart
understanding” ([Psa. 49.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p13.1"></span>). And this repetition is perhaps made, lest
perchance if he had said only “my mouth,” thou shouldest suppose that
one spake to thee who had understanding but in his lips. For many have
understanding in their lips, but have not in their heart, of whom the
Scripture saith, “This people honoureth me with their lips, but their
heart <span id="page_170">p. 170</span> <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_170"></span>is far from me.” <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[1613](#fn_1612) What saith he then who speaketh to
thee? when he hath said, “My mouth shall speak of wisdom,” in order that
thou mayest know that what is poured forth from the mouth floweth from
the bottom of the heart, he hath added, “And the meditation of my heart
of understanding.”

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p15"></span>5. “I will incline mine ear to the
parable, I will show my proposition upon the harp” ([Psa.
49.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p15.1"></span>).…And why “to a parable”? Because “now we
see through a glass darkly,” <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1614](#fn_1613)
as saith the Apostle; “whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord.” <span id="fr_1614"></span>[1615](#fn_1614) For our
vision is not yet that face to face, where there are no longer parables,
where there no longer are riddles and comparisons. Whatever now we
understand we behold through riddles. A riddle is a dark parable which
it is hard to understand. Howsoever a man may cultivate his heart and
apply himself to apprehend mysteries, so long as we see through the
corruption of this flesh, we see but in part.…But as He was seen by
those who believed, and by those who crucified Him, when He was judged;
so will He be seen, when He shall have begun to be judge, both by those
whom He shall condemn, and by those whom He shall crown. But that vision
of divinity, which He hath promised to them that love Him, when He
saith, “He that loveth Me shall be loved of My Father, and he that
loveth Me keepeth My commandments, and I will love him, and will
manifest Myself to him:” <span id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615) this
the ungodly shall not see. This manifestation is in a certain way
familiar: He keepeth it for His own, He will not show it to the ungodly.
Of what sort is the vision itself? Of what sort is Christ? Equal to the
Father. Of what sort is Christ? “In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616) For this vision we sigh now, and
groan so long as we sojourn here; to this vision we shall be brought
home at the last, this vision now we see but darkly. If then we see now
darkly, let us “incline our ear to the parable,” and then let us “show
our proposition upon the harp:” <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617) let us hear what we say, do what we
enjoin.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p21"></span>6. And what hath he said? “And wherefore
shall I fear in the evil day? The iniquity of my heel shall compass me”
([Psa. 49.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p21.1"></span>). He beginneth something obscurely.
Therefore he ought the rather to fear if the iniquity of his heel shall
compass him. Nay, for let not man fear, he saith, who hath not power to
escape. For example, he who feareth death, what shall he do to escape
death? Let him tell me how he is to escape what Adam oweth, he who is
born of Adam. But let him consider that he is born of Adam, and hath
followed Christ, and ought to pay what Adam oweth, and obtain what
Christ hath promised. Therefore, he who feareth death can no wise
escape: but he who feareth the damnation which the ungodly shall hear,
“Go ye into everlasting fire,” <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) hath an escape. Let him not fear
then. For why should he fear? Will the iniquity of his heel compass him?
If then he avoid “the iniquity of his heel,” and walk in the ways of
God, he shall not come to the evil day: the evil day, the last day,
shall not be evil to him.…Now while they live, let them take heed to
themselves, let them put away iniquity from their heel: let them walk in
that way, let them walk in the way of which He saith Himself, “I am the
way, the truth, and the life:” <span
id="fr_1619"></span>[1620](#fn_1619) and let them not fear in the evil
day, for He giveth them safety who became “The Way.” Therefore let them
avoid the iniquity of their heel. With the heel a man slippeth. Let your
Love observe. What was said by God to the Serpent? “She shall mark thy
head, and thou shalt mark her heel.” <span
id="fr_1620"></span>[1621](#fn_1620) The devil marketh thy heel, in
order that when thou slippest he may overthrow thee. He marketh thy
heel, do thou mark his head. What is his head? The beginning of an evil
suggestion. When he beginneth to suggest evil thoughts, then do thou
thrust him away before pleasure ariseth, and consent followeth; and so
shalt thou avoid his head, and he shall not grasp thy heel. But
wherefore said He this to Eve? Because through the flesh man doth slip.
Our flesh is an Eve within us. “He that loveth his wife,” he saith,
“loveth himself.” What meaneth “himself”? He continueth, and saith, “For
no man ever yet hath hated his own flesh.” <span
id="fr_1621"></span>[1622](#fn_1621) Because then the devil would make
us slip through the flesh, just as he made that man Adam to slip,
through Eve; Eve is bidden to mark the head of the devil, because the
devil marketh her heel. <span id="fr_1622"></span>[1623](#fn_1622) “If
then the iniquity of our heel shall compass us, why fear we in the evil
day,” since being converted to Christ we are able not to do iniquity;
and there will be nothing to compass us, and we shall joy and not sorrow
in the last day?

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p27"></span>7. But who are they whom the “iniquity
of their heel shall compass”? “They who trust in their virtue, <span
id="fr_1623"></span>[1624](#fn_1623) and in the abundance of their
riches do glory” ([Psa. 49.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p28.1"></span>). Therefore such sins <span
id="page_171">p. 171</span> <span id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_171"></span>will I
avoid, and the “iniquity of my heel” shall never compass me. What is
avoiding such sins? Let us not trust in our own virtue, let us not glory
in the abundance of our own riches, but let us glory in Him who hath
promised to us, being humble, exaltation, and hath threatened
condemnation to men exalted; and then iniquity of our heel shall never
compass us.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p29"></span>8. There are some who rely on their
friends, others rely on their virtue, others on their riches. This is
the presumption of mankind which relieth not on God. He hath spoken of
virtue, he hath spoken of riches, he speaketh of friends. “Brother
redeemeth not, <span id="fr_1624"></span>[1625](#fn_1624) shall man
redeem?” ([Psa. 49.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p30.2"></span>). Dost thou expect that man shall redeem
thee from the wrath to come? If brother redeem thee not, shall man
redeem thee? Who is the brother, who if He hath not redeemed thee, no
man will redeem? It is He who said after His resurrection, “Go, tell My
brethren.” <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625) Our Brother He
hath willed to be: and when we say to God, “Our Father,” this is
manifested in us. For he that saith to God, “Our Father;” saith to
Christ, “Brother.” <span id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626) Therefore
let him that hath God for his Father and Christ for his Brother, not
fear in the evil day. “For the iniquity of his heel shall not compass
him;” for he relieth not on his virtue, nor glorieth in the abundance of
his riches, nor vaunteth himself of his powerful friends. Let him rely
on Him who died for him, that he might not die eternally: who for his
sake was humbled, in order that he might be exalted; who sought him
ungodly, in order that He might be sought by him faithful. Therefore if
He redeem not, shall man redeem? Shall any man redeem, if the Son of man
redeem not? If Christ redeem not, shall Adam redeem? “Brother redeemeth
not, shall man redeem?” <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627)

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p34"></span>9. “He shall not give to God his
propitiation, and the price of the redemption of his soul” ([Psa.
49.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p34.1"></span>). He trusteth in his virtue, and in the
abundance of his riches doth glory, who “shall not give to God his
propitiation:” that is, satisfaction whereby he may prevail with God for
his sins: “nor the price of the redemption of his soul,” who relieth on
his virtue, and on his friends, and on his riches. But who are they that
give the price of the redemption of their souls? They to whom the Lord
saith, “Make to yourselves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness,
that they may receive you into everlasting habitations.” <span
id="fr_1628"></span>[1629](#fn_1628) They give the price of the
redemption of their soul who cease not to do almsdeeds. So those whom
the Apostle chargeth by Timothy he would not have to be proud, lest they
should glory in the abundance of their riches. Lastly, what they
possessed he would not have to grow old in their hands: but that
something should be made of it to be for the price of the redemption of
their souls. For he saith, “Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high-minded: nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, who giveth us richly all things to enjoy.” <span
id="fr_1629"></span>[1630](#fn_1629) And as if they had said, “What
shall we then make of our riches?” he continueth, “Let them be rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate,” <span
id="fr_1630"></span>[1631](#fn_1630) and they will not lose that. How
know we? Hear what followeth. “Let them lay up for themselves a good
foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on the true
life.” <span id="fr_1631"></span>[1632](#fn_1631) So shall they give the
price of the redemption of their soul. And our Lord counselleth this:
“Make for yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens
that faileth not, where thief approacheth not, neither moth
corrupteth.” <span id="fr_1632"></span>[1633](#fn_1632) God would not
have thee lose thy wealth, but He hath given thee counsel to change the
place thereof. Let your love understand. Suppose thy friend were just
now to enter thy house, and find thou hadst placed thy store of grain in
a damp place, and he knew the natural proneness of grain to decay, which
thou perchance knewest not, he would give thee counsel of this sort,
saying, “Brother, thou art losing what with great toil thou hast
gathered, thou hast placed it in a damp place, in a few days this grain
will decay.” “And what am I to do, brother? “Raise it into a higher
place.” Thou wouldest hearken to thy friend suggesting that thou
shouldest raise grain from a lower to a higher chamber, and dost thou
not hearken to Christ charging thee to lift thy treasure from earth to
heaven, where not what thou keepest in store may be paid to thee, but
that thou mayest keep in store earth, mayest receive heaven, mayest keep
in store things mortal, mayest receive things everlasting, that while
thou lendest Christ to receive at thy hands but a small loan upon earth,
He may repay thee a great recompense in Heaven? Nevertheless, they whom
“the iniquity of their heel shall compass,” because they trust in their
virtue, and in the abundance of their riches do glory, and rely on human
friends who are able to help them in nothing, “shall not give to God
their propitiation, and the price of the redemption of their souls.”

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p40"></span>10. And what hath he said of such a man?
“Yea, he hath laboured for ever, and shall live till the end” ([Psa.
49.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p40.1"></span>). His labour shall be without end, his life
shall have an end. Wherefore saith he, “He shall live till the end”?
Because <span id="page_172">p. 172</span> <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_172"></span>such men think life to be nought but
daily enjoyments. So when many poor and needy men of our times,
unstable, and not looking to what God doth promise them for their
labours, see rich men in daily feastings, in the splendour and glitter
of gold and of silver, they say what? “These are the only people; <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[1634](#fn_1633) they really live!” This is a
saying, be it said no longer: we both warn you, and it remains to warn
you, that it be said by fewer persons than it would be said, if we had
not warned you. For we do not presume to say that we so say these words,
as that it be not said, but that it be said by fewer persons: for it
will be said even unto the end of the world. It is too little that he
saith, “he liveth;” he addeth and saith, he thundereth, thinkest thou
that he alone liveth? Let him live! his life will be ended: because he
giveth not the price of the redemption of his soul, his life will end,
his labour will not end. “He laboured for ever, and shall live till the
end.” How shall he live till the end? As he lived that was “clothed with
purple and fine linen, and fared sumptuously every day,” <span
id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) who, being proud and puffed up,
spurned the man full of sores lying before his gate, whose sores the
dogs licked, and who longed for the crumbs which fell from his table.
What did those riches profit him? Both changed places: the one was borne
from the rich man’s gate into Abraham’s bosom, the other from his rich
feasts was cast into the fire; the one was in peace, the other burned;
the one was sated, the other thirsted; the one had laboured till the
end, but he lived for ever; the other had lived till the end, but he
laboured for ever. And what did it profit the rich man, who asked, while
lying in torments in hell, that a drop of water should be poured upon
his tongue from the finger of Lazarus, saying, “For I am burning here in
this flame,” <span id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635) and it was not
granted to him? One longed for the drop from the finger, as the other
had for the crumbs from the rich man’s table; but the labour of the one
is ended, and the life of the other is ended: the labour of this is for
ever, the life of that is for ever. We who labour perchance here on the
earth, have not our life here: and shall not be so placed hereafter, for
our life shall be Christ for ever: while they who “will” have their life
here, shall labour for ever and live till the end.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p44"></span>11. “For he shall not see death, though
he shall have seen wise men dying” ([Psa.
49.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p44.1"></span>). The man who laboured for ever and shall
live till the end, “shall not see death, though he shall have seen wise
men dying.” What is this? He shall not comprehend what death is,
whenever he shall have seen wise men dying. For he saith to himself,
“this fellow, for all he was wise and dwelled with wisdom and worshipped
God with piety, is he not dead? Therefore I will enjoy myself while I
live; for if they that are wise in other respects, could do anything,
they would not have died.” Just as the Jews saw Christ hanging on the
Cross and despised Him, saying, “If this Man were the Son of God, He
would come down from the Cross:” <span
id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636) not seeing what death is. If they
had seen what death is; if they had seen, I say. <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) He died for a time, that He might
live again for ever: they lived for a time, that they might die for
ever. But because they saw Him dying, they saw not death, that is to
say, they understood not what was very death. What say they even in
Wisdom? “Let us condemn Him with a most shameful death, for by His own
sayings He shall be respected;” <span
id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638) for if he is indeed the Son of God,
He will deliver Him from the hands of His adversaries: He will not
suffer His Son to die, if He is truly His Son. But when they saw
themselves insulting Him upon the Cross, and Him not descending from the
Cross, they said, He was indeed but a Man. Thus was it spoken: and
surely He could have come down from the Cross, He that could rise again
from the tomb: but He taught us to bear with those who insult us; He
taught us to be patient of the tongues of men, to drink now the cup of
bitterness, and afterwards to receive everlasting salvation.…

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p48"></span>12. “The imprudent and unwise shall
perish together.” Who is “the imprudent”? He that looketh not out for
himself for the future. Who is “the unwise”? He that perceiveth not in
what evil case he is. But do thou perceive in what evil case thou art
now, and look out that thou be in a good case for the future. By
perceiving in what evil case thou art, thou wilt not be unwise: by
looking out for thyself for the future, thou wilt not be imprudent. Who
is he that looketh out for himself? That servant to whom his master gave
what he should expend, and afterwards said to him, “Thou canst not be my
steward, give an account of thy stewardship;” and who answered, “What
shall I do? I cannot dig, to beg I am ashamed;” <span
id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639) had, nevertheless, by even his
master’s goods made to himself friends, who might receive him when he
was put out of his stewardship. Now he cheated his master in order that
he might get to himself friends to receive him: fear not thou lest thou
be cheating, the Lord Himself exhorteth thee to do so: He saith Himself
to thee, “Make to thyself friends of the mammon of
unrighteousness.” <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640) Perhaps
what thou hast got, thou hast gotten of <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> <span id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_173"></span>unrighteousness: or
perhaps this very thing is unrighteousness, that thou hast and another
hath not, thou aboundest and another needeth. Of this mammon of
unrighteousness, of these riches which the unrighteous call riches, make
to thyself friends, and thou shalt be prudent: thou art gaining for
thyself, and art not cheating. For now thou seemest to lose it. Wilt
thou lose it if thou place it in a treasury? For boys, my brethren, no
sooner find some money, wherewith to buy something, than they put it in
a money-box, <span id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641) which they open
not until afterwards: do they, because they see not what they have got,
on that account lose it? Fear not: boys put in a money-box, and are
secure: dost thou place it in the hand of Christ, and fear? Be prudent,
and provide for thyself against the future in Heaven. Be therefore
prudent, copy the ant, as saith the Scripture: <span
id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642) “Store in summer, lest thou hunger
in winter;” the winter is the last day, the day of tribulation; the
winter is the day of offences and of bitterness: gather what may be
there for thee for the future: but if thou doest not so, thou wilt
perish both imprudent and unwise.

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p53"></span>13. But that rich man <span
id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643) too died, and a like funeral was
made for him. See to what men have brought themselves: they regard not
what a wicked life he led while he lived, but what pomp followed him
when he died! O happy he, whom so many lament! But the other lived in
such sort, that few lament. For all ought to lament a man living so
sadly. But there is the funeral train; he is received in a costly tomb,
he is wound in costly robes, he is buried in perfumes and spices.
Secondly, what a monument he hath! How marbled! Doth he live in that
same monument? He is therein dead. Men deeming these to be good things,
have strayed from God, and have not sought the true good things, and
have been deceived with the false. To this end see what followeth. He
who gave not the price of the redemption of his soul, who understood not
death, because he saw wise men dying, he became imprudent and unwise, in
order that he might die with them. And how shall they perish, who “shall
leave their riches to aliens”?…

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p55"></span>14. But do those same aliens indeed
serve them who are called their own? Hear in what they serve them,
observe how they are ridiculed: why hath he said, “to strangers”?
Because they can do them no good. Nevertheless, wherein do they seem to
themselves to do good? “And their tombs shall be their house for ever”
([Psa. 49.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p55.1"></span>). Now because these tombs are erected, the
tombs are a house. For often thou hearest a rich man saying, I have a
house of marble which I must quit, and I think not for myself of an
eternal house, where I shall alway be. When he thinketh to make for
himself a monument of marble or of sculpture, he is deeming as it were
of an eternal house: as if therein this rich man would abide! If he
would abide there, he would not burn in hell. We must consider that the
place where the spirit of an evil doer abideth, is not where the mortal
body is laid: but “their tombs shall be their house for ever. Their
dwelling places are from generation to generation.” “Dwelling places”
are wherein they abode for a season: “house” is wherein they will abide
as it were for ever, that is to say, their tombs. Thus they leave their
dwelling places, where they abode while they lived, to their families,
and they pass as it were to everlasting houses, to their tombs. What
profit to them are “their dwelling places, from generation to
generation”? Now suppose a generation and generation are sons, grandsons
there will be, and great grandsons; what do their dwelling places, what
do they profit them? What? Hear: “they shall invoke their names in their
lands.” What is this? They shall take bread and wine to their tombs, and
there they shall invoke the names of the dead. Dost thou consider how
loudly was invoked the name of the rich man after his death, when men
drank them drunk at his monument, and there came down not one drop upon
his own burning tongue? Men minister to their own belly, not to the
ghosts of their friends. The souls of the dead nothing doth reach, but
what they have done of themselves while alive: but if they have done
nought of themselves while alive, nothing doth reach them dead. But what
do the survivors? They will but “invoke their names in their lands.”

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p56"></span>15. “And man though he was in honour
perceived not, he was compared to the beasts without sense, and was made
like to them” ([Psa. 49.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p56.1"></span>).…They ought, on the contrary, to have made
ready for themselves an eternal house in good works, to have made ready
for themselves everlasting life, to have sent before them expenditure,
to have followed their works, to have ministered to a needy companion,
to have given to him with whom they were walking, not to have despised
Christ covered with sores before their gate, who hath said, “Inasmuch as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye have done
it unto Me.” <span id="fr_1644"></span>[1645](#fn_1644) However, “man
being in honour hath not understood.” What is, “being in honour”? Being
made after the image and likeness of God, man is preferred to beasts.
For God hath not so made man as He made a beast: but God hath made man
for beasts to minister to: is it to his strength then, and not to his
<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-Page_174"></span>understanding? Nay. But he “understood
not;” and he who was made after the image of God, “is compared to the
beasts without sense, and is made like unto them.” Whence it is said
elsewhere, “Be ye not like to horse and mule, in which there is no
understanding.” <span id="fr_1645"></span>[1646](#fn_1645)

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p59"></span>16. “This their own way is an offence to
them” ([Psa. 49.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p59.1"></span>). Be it an offence to them, not to thee.
But when will it be so to thee too? If thou thinkest such men to be
blessed. If thou perceivest that they be not blessed, their own way will
be an offence to themselves; not to Christ, not to His Body, not to His
members. “And afterwards they shall bless with their mouth.” What
meaneth, “Afterwards they shall bless with their mouth”? Though they
have become such, that they seek nothing but temporal goods, yet they
become hypocrites: and when they bless God, with lips they bless, and
not with heart. Christians like these, when to them eternal life is
commended, and they are told, that in the name of Christ they ought to
be despisers <span id="fr_1646"></span>[1647](#fn_1646) of riches, do
make grimaces in their hearts: and if they dare not do it with open
face, lest they blush, or lest they should be rebuked by men, yet they
do it in heart, and scorn; and there remaineth in their mouth blessing,
and in their heart cursing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[169:1606](1080057.htm#fr_1605) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p2"></span> Lat. XLVIII. \[From a sermon preached
before a bishop.\]

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[169:1607](1080057.htm#fr_1606) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p5"></span> [Matt. xi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[169:1608](1080057.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p8"></span> On [Ps.
viii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#000)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[169:1609](1080057.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p9"></span> [Ps. xxii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[169:1610](1080057.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p10"></span> [Ps. xxii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[169:1611](1080057.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p11"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[169:1612](1080057.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p12"></span> [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[170:1613](1080057.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p14"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[170:1614](1080057.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[170:1615](1080057.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p17"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[170:1616](1080057.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p18"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[170:1617](1080057.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p19"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[170:1618](1080057.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p20"></span> \[He explains “the harp” elsewhere as
the body, used by the soul “as the harper useth the harp”; and see p.
139, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[170:1619](1080057.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p22"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1619"></span>[170:1620](1080057.htm#fr_1619) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p23"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1620"></span>[170:1621](1080057.htm#fr_1620) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p24"></span> [Gen. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p24.1"></span>.
\[“She shall mark,” etc. So the Vulgate, but not in the older editions.
The Septuagint is conclusive as to the ancient exposition of the Jews,
for the *neuter* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p24.2"></span>σπ™ρμα</span>) had a masculine pronoun
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.XLIX.1-p24.3"></span>αὐτός)</span> as
nominative to the verb. So Jerome, *Dominus noster conteret Satanam*. It
is noteworthy that our author attaches no such force to his reading as
Mariolatry demands.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1621"></span>[170:1622](1080057.htm#fr_1621) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p24.4"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p25"></span> [Eph.
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1622"></span>[170:1623](1080057.htm#fr_1622) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p26"></span> \[See Hippolytus, A.N.F. vol. v. p.
166.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1623"></span>[170:1624](1080057.htm#fr_1623) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p28"></span> Or, “might” (*virtute*).

<span id="fn_1624"></span>[171:1625](1080057.htm#fr_1624) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p30"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p30.1"></span>mss</span>. “hath not redeemed,” and so
through the paragraph.

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[171:1626](1080057.htm#fr_1625) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p31"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[171:1627](1080057.htm#fr_1626) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p32"></span> See on St. John, Hom. xxi. § 3.

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[171:1628](1080057.htm#fr_1627) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p33"></span> \[The Latin versions do not divide into
verses such as our author seems to have made.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1628"></span>[171:1629](1080057.htm#fr_1628) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p35"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1629"></span>[171:1630](1080057.htm#fr_1629) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p36"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1630"></span>[171:1631](1080057.htm#fr_1630) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p37"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#018)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1631"></span>[171:1632](1080057.htm#fr_1631) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p38"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#019)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[171:1633](1080057.htm#fr_1632) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p39"></span> [Luke xii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[172:1634](1080057.htm#fr_1633) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p41"></span> *Soli sunt isti*.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[172:1635](1080057.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p42"></span> [Luke xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[172:1636](1080057.htm#fr_1635) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p43"></span> [Luke xvi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[172:1637](1080057.htm#fr_1636) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p45"></span> [Matt.
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040),
[42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[172:1638](1080057.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p46"></span> *Al*. “if they had seen themselves.”

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[172:1639](1080057.htm#fr_1638) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p47"></span> [Wisd. ii.
20](../../../bib/apo/wis002.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p47.1"></span>.
\[The Jews, *even in their own book* of Wisdom, show what they did to
“the Just One.” The whole passage is so remarkable, that we need not
wonder at the esteem in which this book was held by the Fathers. St.
James ([Jas. 5.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p47.2"></span>) seems to refer to this passage.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[172:1640](1080057.htm#fr_1639) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p49"></span> [Luke
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#002)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p49.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[172:1641](1080057.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p50"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[173:1642](1080057.htm#fr_1641) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p51"></span> *Thesaurario*.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[173:1643](1080057.htm#fr_1642) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p52"></span> [Prov.
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#008), [Prov.
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025)<span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[173:1644](1080057.htm#fr_1643) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p54"></span> [Luke xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1644"></span>[173:1645](1080057.htm#fr_1644) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p57"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1645"></span>[174:1646](1080057.htm#fr_1645) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p58"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1646"></span>[174:1647](1080057.htm#fr_1646) <span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLIX.1-p60"></span> Most <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLIX.1-p60.1"></span>mss</span>. “there should be a despising.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part 2](1080058)
