[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080135)  [Next](1080137) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p1"></span> *<span class="c2"><span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p1.1"></span>Vav.</span>*

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p2"></span>42. “And let Thy loving mercy come also
unto us, O Lord” ([Psa. 119.41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p2.1"></span>). This sentence seems annexed to the
foregoing: for he doth not say, Let it come unto me, but, “*And* let it
come unto me.”…What then doth he here pray for, save that through His
loving mercy who commanded, he may perform the commandments which he
hath coveted? For he explaineth in some degree what he meant by adding,
“even Thy salvation, according to Thy word:” that is, according to Thy
promise. Whence the Apostle desireth us to be understood as the children
of promise: <span id="fr_5179"></span>[5180](#fn_5179) that we may not
imagine that what we are is our own work, but refer the whole to the
grace of God.…Christ Himself is the Salvation of God, so that the whole
body of Christ may say, “By the grace of God I am what I am.” <span
id="fr_5180"></span>[5181](#fn_5180)

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p5"></span>43. “And so shall I make answer,” he
saith, “to them that reproach me with the word” ([Psa.
119.42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p5.1"></span>). It is doubtful whether it be “reproach me
with a word;” or, “I will answer with a word;” but either signifieth
Christ. They to whom Christ crucified is a stumbling-block or
foolishness, <span id="fr_5181"></span>[5182](#fn_5181) reproach us with
Him; ignorant that “the Word was made flesh, and dwelt in us;” <span
id="fr_5182"></span>[5183](#fn_5182) the Word which “was in the
beginning,” and “was with God, and was God.” <span
id="fr_5183"></span>[5184](#fn_5183) But although they may not reproach
us with the Word which is unknown unto them, because His Divinity is not
known unto those by whom His weakness on the Cross is despised; let us
nevertheless make answer of the Word, and let us not be terrified or
confounded by their reproaches. For “if they had known” the Word, “they
<span id="page_567">p. 567</span> <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-Page_567"></span>would never have crucified the Lord of
glory.” <span id="fr_5184"></span>[5185](#fn_5184) …Therefore, when the
Psalmist had said, “I will make answer unto them that reproach me with
the word:” he at once addeth, “For my trust is in Thy words,” which
meaneth exactly, in Thy promises.

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p10"></span>44. “O take not the word of Thy truth
away out of my mouth even exceedingly” ([Psa.
119.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p10.1"></span>). He saith, out of my mouth, because the
unity of the body is speaking, among whose members those also are
counted who failed at the hour by denying, but by penitence afterwards
came again to life, or even, by renewing their confession, received the
palm of martyrdom, which they had lost. The word of truth, therefore,
was not “even exceedingly,” or, as some copies have it, even every way,
that is not altogether taken from the mouth of Peter, in whom was the
type of the Church; because although he denied for the hour, being
disturbed with fear, yet by weeping he was restored, <span
id="fr_5185"></span>[5186](#fn_5185) and by confessing was afterwards
crowned. The whole body of Christ therefore speaketh.…Next followeth,
“for I have hoped in Thy judgments.” Or, as some have more strictly
rendered it from the Greek, “I have hoped more;” <span
id="fr_5186"></span>[5187](#fn_5186) a word which, although compounded
in a somewhat unusual way, yet answers the necessary purpose of
conveying the truth in a translation.…Behold the saints and the humble
in heart when they have trusted in Thee, have not failed in
persecutions: behold also those who from trusting in themselves have
failed, and nevertheless have belonged to the Very Body, have wept when
they became known unto themselves, and have found Thy grace a more solid
support, because they have lost their own pride.

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p13"></span>45. “So shall I alway keep Thy law”
([Psa. 119.44](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#044)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p13.1"></span>): that is, if Thou wilt not take the word
of Thy truth out of my mouth. “Yea, unto age, and age of age:” he
showeth what he meant by “alway.” For sometimes by “alway” is meant, as
long as we live here; but this is not, “unto age, and age of age.” <span
id="fr_5187"></span>[5188](#fn_5187) For it is better thus translated
than as some copies have, “to eternity, and to age of age,” since they
could not say, and to eternity of eternity. That law therefore should be
understood, of which the Apostle saith, “Love is the fulfilling of the
law.” <span id="fr_5188"></span>[5189](#fn_5188) For this will be kept
by the saints, from whose mouth the word of truth is not taken, that is,
by the Church of Christ Herself, not only during this world, that is,
until this world is ended; but for another also which is styled, “world
without end.” <span id="fr_5189"></span>[5190](#fn_5189) …

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p17"></span>46. “And I walked at liberty: for I
sought Thy precepts” ([Psa.
119.45](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p17.1"></span>).…“And I walked at liberty.” Here the
copulative conjunction, “and,” is not used as a connecting particle; for
he doth not say, and I will walk, as he had said, “and I will keep Thy
commandments for ever and ever:” or if this latter verse be in the
optative mood, and may I keep Thy law; he doth not add, And may I walk
at liberty, as if he had desired and prayed for both of these things;
but he saith, “And I walked at liberty.” If this conjunction were not
used here, and if the sentence were introduced free from any such
connection with what preceded, “I walked at liberty,” the reader would
never be induced by anything unusual in the mode of speech to think he
should seek for some hidden sense. Doubtless, then, he wished what he
hath not said to be understood, that is, that his prayers had been
heard; and he then added what he had become: as if he were to say, When
I prayed for these things, Thou heardest me, “And I walked at liberty;”
and so with the remaining expressions which he hath added to the same
purpose.

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p18"></span>47. …Whence after he had said, “And I
walked at liberty,” he subjoined the reason, “For I sought out Thy
commandments.” Some copies have not “commandments” but “testimonies:”
but we find “commandments” in most, and especially in the Greek; and who
would hesitate rather to believe this tongue, as prior to our own, <span
id="fr_5190"></span>[5191](#fn_5190) and that from which these Psalms
have been rendered into Latin? If then we wish to know how he sought out
these commandments, or how they ought to be sought out, let us consider
what our good Master, who both taught and gave them, saith: “Ask, and it
shall be given you.” <span id="fr_5191"></span>[5192](#fn_5191) And a
little lower, “If ye then,” He saith, “being evil, know how to give good
gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in
Heaven give good things to them that ask Him.” <span
id="fr_5192"></span>[5193](#fn_5192) Where He evidently showeth, that
the words He had spoken, seek, ask, knock, belong only to earnestness in
asking, that is, in praying. Moreover, another Evangelist saith not, He
will give good things to them that ask Him; which may be understood in
many ways, either as earthly or spiritual blessings; but has excluded
other interpretations, and very carefully expressed what our Lord wished
us to pray earnestly and instantly for, in these words: “How much more
shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask
Him.” <span id="fr_5193"></span>[5194](#fn_5193) …

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p23"></span>48. “I spoke of Thy testimonies also,”
he saith, “before kings, and I was not ashamed” ([Psa.
119.46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p23.1"></span>): as one who had sought and had <span
id="page_568">p. 568</span> <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-Page_568"></span>received grace to answer those who
reproached him with the word, and the promise that the word of truth
should not be taken from his mouth. Struggling for this truth even unto
death, not even before kings was he ashamed to speak of it. For
testimonies, whereof he doth avow that he was speaking, are in Greek
styled <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p23.2"></span>μαρτύρια</span>, a word which we now employ
instead of the Latin. The name of “Martyrs,” unto whom Jesus foretold,
that they should confess Him even before kings, <span
id="fr_5194"></span>[5195](#fn_5194) is derived hence.

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p25"></span>49. “And I meditated,” he saith, “on
Thy commandments, which I have loved” ([Psa.
119.47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p25.1"></span>). “My hands also have I lifted up unto Thy
commandments, which I have loved” ([Psa.
119.48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p25.2"></span>); or, as some copies read, “which I have
loved exceedingly,” or “too much,” or “vehemently,” as they have chosen
to render the Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p25.3"></span>σφόδρα</span>. He then loved the
commandments of God because he walked at liberty; that is, through the
Holy Spirit, through whom love itself is shed abroad, <span
id="fr_5195"></span>[5196](#fn_5195) and enlargeth the hearts of the
faithful. But he loved, both in thought and in acts. With a view to
thought, he saith, “And I meditated:” as to action, “My hands also have
I lifted up.” But to both sentences, he hath annexed the words, “which I
have loved:” for “the end of the commandment is love out of a pure
heart.” <span id="fr_5196"></span>[5197](#fn_5196) …The following words,
“And my study was in Thy statutes,” relate to both. This expression most
of the translators have preferred to this, “I rejoiced in,” or “I talked
of,” a version which some have given from the Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p27.2"></span>ἠ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p27.3"></span>δολ™σχουν</span>. For
he who keepeth the commandments of God, which he loveth, both in thought
and in works taking delight in them, is exercised with joy, and with a
certain abundance of speech, in the judgments of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5179"></span>[566:5180](1080136.htm#fr_5179) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p3"></span> [Rom. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5180"></span>[566:5181](1080136.htm#fr_5180) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p4"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5181"></span>[566:5182](1080136.htm#fr_5181) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p6"></span> [1 Cor. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5182"></span>[566:5183](1080136.htm#fr_5182) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p7"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5183"></span>[566:5184](1080136.htm#fr_5183) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p8"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5184"></span>[567:5185](1080136.htm#fr_5184) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5185"></span>[567:5186](1080136.htm#fr_5185) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p11"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
70-75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#070)<span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5186"></span>[567:5187](1080136.htm#fr_5186) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p12"></span> *Supersperavi*. Gr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p12.1"></span>ἐπήλπισα</span>;
literally, as he takes it, “over-hoped.”

<span id="fn_5187"></span>[567:5188](1080136.htm#fr_5187) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p14"></span> The phrase *in sæculum sæculi* is that
which we usually render “world without end,” or, “for ever and ever.”

<span id="fn_5188"></span>[567:5189](1080136.htm#fr_5188) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p15"></span> [Rom. xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5189"></span>[567:5190](1080136.htm#fr_5189) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p16"></span> Lit. “age of age.”

<span id="fn_5190"></span>[567:5191](1080136.htm#fr_5190) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p19"></span> \[A noteworthy tribute to the
Septuagint as compared with the Vulgate.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5191"></span>[567:5192](1080136.htm#fr_5191) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p20"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5192"></span>[567:5193](1080136.htm#fr_5192) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p21"></span> [Matt. vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5193"></span>[567:5194](1080136.htm#fr_5193) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p22"></span> [Luke xi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p22.1"></span>.
\[The sevenfold gifts.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5194"></span>[568:5195](1080136.htm#fr_5194) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p24"></span> [Matt. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5195"></span>[568:5196](1080136.htm#fr_5195) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p26"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5196"></span>[568:5197](1080136.htm#fr_5196) <span
id="ii.CXIX.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p27"></span> [1 Tim. i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXIX.vi-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zain.](1080137)
