[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080112)  [Next](1080114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CII"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CII. <span
id="fr_4574"></span>[4575](#fn_4574) </span>

<span id="ii.CII-p3"></span>1. Behold, one poor man prayeth, and prayeth
not in silence. We may therefore hear him, and see who he is: whether it
be not perchance He, of whom the Apostle saith, “Though He was rich, yet
for your sakes He became poor, that ye through His poverty might be
rich.” <span id="fr_4575"></span>[4576](#fn_4575) If it is He, then, how
is He poor? For in what sense He is rich, who seeth not? What then is
richer than He, by whom riches were made, even those which are not true
riches? For through Him we have even these riches, ability, memory,
character, health of body, the senses, <span id="page_495">p. 495</span>
<span id="ii.CII-Page_495"></span>and the conformation of our limbs: for
when these are safe, even the poor are rich. Through Him also are those
greater riches, faith, piety, justice, charity, chastity, good conduct:
for no man hath these, except through Him who justifieth the
ungodly.…Behold, how rich! In one so rich, how are we to recognise these
words? “I have eaten ashes as it were bread: and mingled my drink with
weeping.” <span id="fr_4576"></span>[4577](#fn_4576) Have these so great
riches come to this? The former state is a very high one, this is a very
lowly one.…Yet still examine whether this poor man be He; since, “The
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” <span
id="fr_4577"></span>[4578](#fn_4577) Reflect also upon these words: “I
am Thy servant, and the Son of Thine handmaid.” <span
id="fr_4578"></span>[4579](#fn_4578) Observe, this handmaid, chaste, a
virgin, and a mother: for there He received our poverty, when He was
clothed in the form of a servant, emptying Himself; lest thou shouldest
dread His riches, and in thy beggarly state shouldest not dare approach
Him. There, I say, He put on the form of a servant, there He was clothed
with our poverty; there He made Himself poor, and us rich. We are now
drawing near to understand these things of Him: nevertheless we may not
as yet rashly pronounce.…

<span id="ii.CII-p8"></span>2. Let him add poverty then to poverty: let
Him transfigure unto Himself our humble body: let Him be our Head, we
His limbs, let there be two in one flesh. <span
id="fr_4579"></span>[4580](#fn_4579) …For He hath deigned to hold even
us as His limbs. The penitent also are among His limbs. For they are not
shut out, nor separated from His Church: nor would He make the Church
His spouse, unless by words like these: “Repent ye, for the kingdom of
heaven is at hand.” <span id="fr_4580"></span>[4581](#fn_4580) Let us
then hear what the head and the body prayeth, the bridegroom and bride,
Christ and the Church, <span id="fr_4581"></span>[4582](#fn_4581) both
one Person; but the Word and the flesh are not both one thing; the
Father and the Word are both one thing; Christ and the Church are both
one Person, one perfect man in the form of His own fulness.…Let us hear
therefore Christ, poor within us and with us, and for our sakes. For the
title itself indicates the poor one. Lastly, remember that I conjectured
who that poor one was: let us hear His prayer, and recognise His Person;
and mistake not, when thou shalt have heard anything that cannot apply
to His Head; it was for this reason that I have prefaced as I have, that
whatever thou shalt hear of this description, thou mayest understand as
sounding from the weakness of the body, and recognise the voice of the
members in the head. The title is, “A Prayer of the afflicted, when he
was tormented, and poured out his prayer before the Lord.” It is the
same poor one who elsewhere saith: “From the ends of the earth will I
call upon Thee, when my heart is in heaviness.” <span
id="fr_4582"></span>[4583](#fn_4582) He is afflicted because He is also
Christ; who in the Prophet’s words calleth Himself both Bridegroom and
Bride: “He hath bound on me the diadem as on a bridegroom, and as a
bride hath adorned me with an ornament.” <span
id="fr_4583"></span>[4584](#fn_4583) He called Himself Bridegroom, He
called Himself Bride; wherefore this, unless Bridegroom applieth to the
Head, Bride to the body? They are one voice then, because they are one
flesh. Let us hear, and recognise ourselves in these words; and if we
see that we are without, let us labour to be there.

<span id="ii.CII-p14"></span>3. “Hear my prayer, O Lord: and let my
crying come unto Thee” ([Psa.
102.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#001)<span id="ii.CII-p14.1"></span>).
“Hear my prayer, O Lord,” is the same as, “Let my crying come unto
Thee:” the feeling of the suppliant is shown by the repetition. “Turn
not Thy face away from me.” When did God turn away His Face from His
Son? when did the Father turn away His Face from Christ? But for the
sake of the poverty of my members, “Turn not away Thy face from me:
whatsoever day I am troubled, incline Thine ear unto me” ([Psa.
102.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CII-p14.2"></span>).…Thou art in trouble this day, I am in
trouble; another is in trouble to-morrow, I am in trouble; after this
generation other descendants, who succeed your descendants, are in
trouble, I am in trouble; down to the end of the world, whoever are in
trouble in My body, I am in trouble.…Peter prayed, Paul prayed, the rest
of the Apostles prayed; the faithful prayed in those times, the faithful
prayed in the following times, the faithful prayed in the times of the
Martyrs, the faithful pray in our times, the faithful will pray in the
times of our descendants. “Right soon:” for I now ask that which Thou
art willing to grant. I ask not earthly things, as an earthly man; but
redeemed at last from my former captivity, I long for the kingdom of
heaven; “Hear me right soon:” for it is only to such a longing that Thou
hast said, “Even while Thou art speaking, I will say, Here I am.” <span
id="fr_4584"></span>[4585](#fn_4584) Wherefore dost thou call? in what
tribulation? in what want? O poor one, before the gate of God all-rich,
in what longing dost thou beg? from what destitution dost thou ask
relief? from what want dost thou knock, that it may be opened unto thee?

<span id="ii.CII-p16"></span>4. “For my days are consumed away like
smoke” ([Psa. 102.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CII-p16.1"></span>). O days! if days: for where day is heard of,
light is understood. “My days,” my times; wherefore, “like smoke,”
unless from the puffing up of pride?…See smoke, like pride, ascending,
swelling, vanishing: deservedly therefore failing, and not stedfast.
“And my <span id="page_496">p. 496</span> <span
id="ii.CII-Page_496"></span>bones are scorched up as it were in an
oven.” Both my bones, and my strength, not without tribulation, not
without burning. The bones of the body of Christ, the strength of His
body, is it anywhere greater than in the Holy Apostles? And yet see that
the bones are scorched. “Who is offended, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_4585"></span>[4586](#fn_4585) They are brave, faithful, able
interpreters and preachers of the word, living as they speak, speaking
as they hear; they are clearly brave, yet all who suffer offences, are
an oven to them. For there is love there, and more so in the bones. The
bones are within all the flesh, and support all the flesh. But if any
man suffer any offence, and endanger his soul; the bone is scorched in
proportion as it loveth.…

<span id="ii.CII-p18"></span>5. Look back to Adam, whence the human race
sprung. For how but from him was misery propagated? whence but from him
is this hereditary poverty? Let him then, who in his own body was at one
time in despair, now that he is set in Christ’s body, say with hope, “My
heart is smitten down, and withered like grass” ([Psa.
102.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#004)<span id="ii.CII-p18.1"></span>).
Deservedly, since all flesh is grass. <span
id="fr_4586"></span>[4587](#fn_4586) But how did this happen unto thee?
“Since I have forgotten to eat my bread.” For God had given His
commandment for bread. For what is the bread of the soul? The serpent
suggesting, and the woman transgressing, he touched the forbidden
fruit, <span id="fr_4587"></span>[4588](#fn_4587) he forgot the
commandment: his heart was smitten as it deserved, and withered like
grass, since he forgot to eat his bread. Having forgotten to eat bread,
he drinketh poison: his heart is smitten, and withered like grass.…Now
eat that bread which thou hadst forgotten. But this very Bread hath
come, in whose body thou mayest remember the voice of thy forgetfulness,
and cry out in thy poverty, so that thou mayest receive riches. Now eat:
for thou art in His body, who saith, “I am the living bread which came
down from heaven.” <span id="fr_4588"></span>[4589](#fn_4588) Thou hadst
forgotten to eat thy bread; but after His crucifixion, “all the ends of
the earth shall be reminded, and be converted unto the Lord.” <span
id="fr_4589"></span>[4590](#fn_4589) After forgetfulness, let
remembrance come, let bread be eaten from heaven, that we may live; not
manna, as they did eat, and died; <span
id="fr_4590"></span>[4591](#fn_4590) that bread, of which it is said,
“Blessed are they who hunger and thirst after righteousness.” <span
id="fr_4591"></span>[4592](#fn_4591)

<span id="ii.CII-p25"></span>6. “For the voice of my groaning, the bones
cleave unto my flesh” ([Psa.
102.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#005)<span id="ii.CII-p25.1"></span>).
For many groan, and I also groan; even for this I groan, because they
groan for a wrong cause. That man hath lost a piece of money, he
groaneth: he hath lost faith, he groaneth not: I weigh the money and the
faith, and I find more cause for groaning for him who groaneth not as he
ought, or doth not groan at all. He committeth fraud, and rejoiceth.
With what gain, with what loss? He hath gained money, he hath lost
righteousness. For the latter reason, he who knoweth how to groan,
groaneth; he who is near the head, who righteously clingeth to Christ’s
body, groaneth for this reason. But the carnal do not groan for this
reason, and they cause themselves to be groaned for, because they do not
groan for this reason; nor can we despise them, whether they groan not
at all, or groan for the wrong cause. For we wish to correct them, we
wish to amend them, we wish to reform them, and when we cannot, we
groan; and when we groan, we are not separated from them.…

<span id="ii.CII-p26"></span>7. “I am become like a pelican in the
wilderness, and like an owl among ruined walls” ([Psa.
102.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p26.1"></span>).
Behold three birds and three places: the pelican, the owl, and the
sparrow; <span id="fr_4592"></span>[4593](#fn_4592) and the three places
are severally, the wilderness, the ruined walls, and the house-top. The
pelican in the wilderness, the owl in the ruined walls, and the sparrow
in the house-top. In the first place we must explain, what the pelican
signifieth: since it is born in a region which maketh it unknown to us.
It is born in lonely spots, especially those of the river Nile in Egypt.
Whatever kind of bird it is, let us consider what the Psalm intended to
say of it. “It dwelleth,” it saith, “in the wilderness.” Why enquire of
its form, its limbs, its voice, its habits? As far as the Psalm telleth
thee, it is a bird that dwelleth in solitude. The owl is a bird that
loveth night. *Parietinæ,* or ruins, as we call them, are walls standing
without roof, without inhabitants, these are the habitation of the owl.
And then as to the house-top and the sparrows, ye are familiar with
them. I find, therefore, some one of Christ’s body, a preacher of the
word, sympathizing with the weak, seeking the gains of Christ, mindful
of his Lord to come. <span id="fr_4593"></span>[4594](#fn_4593) Let us
see these three things from the office of His steward. Hath such a man
come among those who are not Christians? He is a pelican in the
wilderness. Hath he come among those who were Christians, and have
relapsed? He is an owl in the ruined walls; for he forsaketh not even
the darkness of those who dwell in night, he wisheth to gain even these.
Hath he come among such as are Christians dwelling in a house, not as if
they believed not, or as if they had let go what they had believed, but
walking lukewarmly in what they believe? The sparrow crieth unto them,
not in the wilderness, because they are Christians; nor in the ruined
walls, because they have not relapsed; but because they are within the
roof; under the roof rather, <span id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span
id="ii.CII-Page_497"></span>because they are under the flesh. The
sparrow above the flesh crieth out, husheth not up the commandments of
God, nor becometh carnal, so that he be subject to the roof. “What ye
hear in the ear, that preach ye on the housetops.” <span
id="fr_4594"></span>[4595](#fn_4594) There are three birds and three
places; and one man may represent the three birds, and three men may
represent severally the three birds; and the three sorts of places, are
three classes of men: yet the wilderness, the ruined walls, and the
house-top, are but three classes of men.

<span id="ii.CII-p30"></span>8. …Let us not pass over what is said, or
even read, of this bird, that is, the pelican; not rashly asserting
anything, but yet not passing over what has been left to be read and
uttered by those who have written it. Do ye so hear, that if it be true,
it may agree; if false, it may not hold. These birds are said to slay
their young with blows of their beaks, and for three days to mourn them
when slain by themselves in the nest: after which they say the mother
wounds herself deeply, and pours forth her blood over her young, bathed
in which they recover life. This may be true, it may be false: yet if it
be true, see how it agreeth with Him, who gave us life by His
blood. <span id="fr_4595"></span>[4596](#fn_4595) It agreeth with Him in
that the mother’s flesh recalleth to life her young with her blood; it
agreeth well. For He calleth Himself a hen brooding over her
young. <span id="fr_4596"></span>[4597](#fn_4596) …If, then, it be so
truly, this bird doth closely resemble the flesh of Christ, by whose
blood we have been called to life. But how may it agree with Christ,
that the bird herself slays her own young? Doth not this agree with it?
“I will slay, and I will make alive: I will wound, and I will
heal.” <span id="fr_4597"></span>[4598](#fn_4597) Would the persecutor
Saul <span id="fr_4598"></span>[4599](#fn_4598) have died, unless he
were wounded from heaven; or would the preacher be raised up, unless by
life given him from His blood? But let those who have written on the
subject see to this; we ought not to allow our understanding of it to
rest upon doubtful ground. <span id="fr_4599"></span>[4600](#fn_4599)
Let us rather recognise this bird in the wilderness; as the Psalm
expresseth it, “A pelican in the solitude.” I suppose that Christ born
of a Virgin is here meant. He was born in loneliness, because He alone
was thus born. After the nativity, we come to His Passion.…Born in the
wilderness, because alone so born; suffering in the darkness of the Jews
as it were in night, in their sin, as it were in ruins: what next? “I
have watched:” and “am become even as it were a sparrow, that sitteth
alone upon the house-top” ([Psa.
102.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007)<span id="ii.CII-p35.1"></span>).
Thou hadst then slept amid the ruins, and hadst said, “I laid me down,
and slept.” <span id="fr_4600"></span>[4601](#fn_4600) What meaneth, “I
slept”? Because I chose, I slept: I slept for love of night: but, “I
rose again,” followeth. Therefore “I watched,” is here said. But after
He watched, what did He? He ascended into heaven, He became as a sparrow
by flying; that is, by ascending; “alone on the house-top;” that is, in
heaven. He is therefore as the pelican by birth, as the owl by dying, as
the sparrow by ascending again: there in the wilderness, as one alone;
here in the ruined walls, as one slain by those who could not stand in
the building; and here again watching and flying for our sakes alone on
the house-top, He there intercedeth in our behalf. <span
id="fr_4601"></span>[4602](#fn_4601) For our Head is as the sparrow, His
body as the turtle-dove. “For the sparrow hath found her an house.” What
house? In heaven, where He doth mediate for us. “And the turtle-dove a
nest,” the Church of God hath found a nest from the wood of His Cross,
where “she may lay her young,” her children.

<span id="ii.CII-p38"></span>9. “Mine enemies revile me all day, and
they that praised me are sworn together against me” ([Psa.
102.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#008)<span id="ii.CII-p38.1"></span>).
With their mouth they praised, in their heart they were laying snares
for me. Hear their praise: “Master, we know that Thou art true, and
teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest Thou for any man. Is it
lawful to give tribute unto Cæsar, or not?” <span
id="fr_4602"></span>[4603](#fn_4602) And whence this evil repute, except
because I came to make sinners my members, that by repentance they may
be in my body? Thence is all the calumny, thence the persecution. “Why
eateth your Master with publicans and sinners? They that be whole need
not a physician, but they that be sick.” <span
id="fr_4603"></span>[4604](#fn_4603) Would that ye were aware of your
sickness, that ye might seek a physician; ye would not slay Him, and
through your infatuated pride perish in a false health.

<span id="ii.CII-p41"></span>10. “I have eaten ashes as it were bread:
and mingled my drink with weeping” ([Psa.
102.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p41.1"></span>).
Because He chose to have among His members these kinds of men, that they
should be healed and set free, thence is the evil repute. Now at this
day what is the character of Pagan calumny against us? what, brethren,
do ye conceive they tell us? Ye corrupt discipline, and pervert the
morality of the human race. Why dost thou attack us; say why? what have
we done? By giving, he replieth, to men room for repentance, by
promising impunity for all sins: for this reason men do evil deeds,
careless of consequences, because everything is pardoned them, when they
are converted.…And what is to become of thee, miserable man, if there
shall be no harbour of impunity? If there is only licence for sinning,
and no pardon for sins, <span id="page_498">p. 498</span> <span
id="ii.CII-Page_498"></span>where wilt thou be, whither wilt thou go?
Surely even for thee did it happen, that that afflicted one ate ashes as
it were bread, and mingled His drink with weeping. Doth not such a feast
now please thee? But nevertheless, he replieth, men add to their sins
under the hope of pardon. Nay, but they would add to them if they
despaired of pardon. Dost thou not observe in what licentious cruelty
gladiators live? whence this, except because, as destined for the sword
and sacrifice, they choose to sate their lust, before they pour forth
their blood?  <span id="fr_4604"></span>[4605](#fn_4604) Wouldest not
thou also thus address thyself? I am already a sinner, already an unjust
man, one already doomed to damnation, hope of pardon there is none: why
should I not do whatever pleaseth me, although it be not lawful? why not
fulfil, as far as I can, any longings I may have, if, after these,
nothing but torments only be in store? Wouldest thou not thus speak unto
thyself, and from this very despair become still worse? Rather than
this, then, He who promiseth forgiveness, doth correct thee, saying, “As
I live, saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked;
but that the wicked turn from his way and live.” <span
id="fr_4605"></span>[4606](#fn_4605) …For in order that men might not
live the worse from despair, He promised a harbour of forgiveness;
again, that they might not live the worse from hope of pardon, He made
the day of death uncertain: fixing both with the utmost providence, both
as a refuge for the returning, and a terror to the loitering. Eat ashes
as bread, and mingle thy drink with weeping; by means of this banquet
thou shalt reach the table of God. Despair not; pardon hath been
promised thee. Thanks be to God, he saith, because it is promised; I
hold fast the promise of God. Now therefore live well. To-morrow, he
replieth, I will live well. God hath promised the pardon; no one
promised thee to-morrow.…

<span id="ii.CII-p44"></span>11. “And that because of thine indignation
and wrath: because thou hast taken me up, thou hast cast me down” ([Psa.
102.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CII-p44.1"></span>). This is thy wrath, O Lord, in Adam: that
wrath in which we were all born, which cleaveth unto us by our birth;
the wrath froth the stock of iniquity, the wrath from the mass of sin:
according to what the Apostle saith, “We also were once the children of
wrath, even as others.” For He saith not, the wrath of God shall come
upon him: but, “abideth upon him:” because that wrath in which he was
born is not taken away.…Man set in honour, is made in the image of God:
raised up to this honour, lifted up from the dust, from the earth, he
hath received a reasonable soul; by the vivacity of that very reason, he
is placed before all beasts, cattle, birds that fly, and fishes. <span
id="fr_4606"></span>[4607](#fn_4606) For which of these hath reason to
understand? Because none of them is created in the image of
God.…Therefore, “Because Thou hast taken me up, Thou hast cast me down:”
punishment followeth me, because Thou hast given me a free choice. For
if Thou hadst not given me a free choice, and for this reason didst not
make me better than cattle, just condemnation would not follow me when I
sinned. Thus Thou hast taken me up in giving me freedom of choice, and
by Thy judgment Thou hast cast me down.

<span id="ii.CII-p46"></span>12. “My days have declined like a shadow”
([Psa. 102.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CII-p46.1"></span>).…He had said above, “My days are consumed
away like smoke;” and he now saith, “My days have declined like a
shadow.” In this shadow, day must be recognised; in this shadow, light
must be discerned; lest afterward it be said in late and fruitless
repentance, “What hath pride profited us? or what good hath riches with
our vaunting brought us? All those things are passed away like a
shadow.” <span id="fr_4607"></span>[4608](#fn_4607) Say at this season,
all things will pass away like a shadow, and thou mayest not pass away
like a shadow. “My days have declined like a shadow, and I am withered
like grass.” For he had said above, “my heart is smitten down, and I am
withered like grass.” But the grass bedewed with the Saviour’s blood
will flourish afresh. “I have withered like grass;” I, that is, man,
after that disobedience; this I have suffered from Thy just judgment:
but what art Thou?

<span id="ii.CII-p48"></span>13. For not because I have fallen, hast
Thou grown old: for Thou art strong to set me free, who hast been strong
to humble me. “But Thou, O Lord, endurest for ever: and Thy remembrance
throughout all generations” ([Psa.
102.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CII-p48.1"></span>). “Thy remembrance,” because Thou dost not
forget: “throughout all generations,” forasmuch as we know the promise
of life, both present and future. <span
id="fr_4608"></span>[4609](#fn_4608)

<span id="ii.CII-p50"></span>14. “Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon
Sion: for it is time that Thou have mercy upon her” ([Psa.
102.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CII-p50.1"></span>). What time? “But when the fulness of time was
come, God sent forth His Son, made of a woman, made under the Law.” And
where is Sion? “To redeem them that were under the Law.” <span
id="fr_4609"></span>[4610](#fn_4609) First then were the Jews: for
thence were the Apostles, thence those more than five hundred
brethren, <span id="fr_4610"></span>[4611](#fn_4610) thence that later
multitude, who had but one heart and one soul toward God. <span
id="fr_4611"></span>[4612](#fn_4611) Therefore, “the time is come.” What
time? “Behold, now is the accepted time: behold, now is the day of
salvation.” <span id="fr_4612"></span>[4613](#fn_4612) Who saith this?
That Servant of God, that Builder, who said, “Ye are God’s
building.” <span id="fr_4613"></span>[4614](#fn_4613)

<span id="ii.CII-p56"></span><span id="page_499">p. 499</span> <span
id="ii.CII-Page_499"></span>15. Here therefore what saith he? “For thy
servants take pleasure in her stones” ([Psa.
102.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014)<span
id="ii.CII-p56.1"></span>). In whose stones? In the stones of Sion? But
there are those there that are not stones. Not stones of what? What then
followeth? “and pity the dust thereof.” I understand by the stones of
Sion all the Prophets: there was the voice of preaching sent before,
thence the ministry of the Gospel assumed, through their preaching
Christ became known. Therefore thy servants have taken pleasure in the
stones of Sion. But those faithless apostates from God, who offended
their Creator by their evil deeds, have returned to the earth, whence
they were taken. They have become dust, they have become ungodly. <span
id="fr_4614"></span>[4615](#fn_4614) But wait, Lord; bear with us, Lord;
be long-suffering, O Lord: let not the wind rush in, and sweep away this
dust from the face of the earth. Let thy servants come, let them come,
let them acknowledge in the stones thy voice, let them pity the dust of
Sion, let them be formed in thy image: let the dust say, lest it perish,
“Remember that we are but dust.” <span
id="fr_4615"></span>[4616](#fn_4615) This of Sion: was not that which
crucified the Lord, dust? What is worse, it was dust from the ruined
walls; altogether dust it was, but nevertheless it was not in vain said
of this dust, “Father, forgive them.” From this very dust there came a
wall of so many thousands who believed, and who laid the price of their
possessions at the Apostles’ feet. From that dust then there arose a
human nature formed <span id="fr_4616"></span>[4617](#fn_4616) and
beautiful. Who among the heathen acted thus? How few are there whom we
admire for having done thus, compared with the many thousands of these
converts? At first suddenly three, afterwards five thousand; all living
in unity, all laying the price of their possessions, when they had sold
them, at the Apostles’ feet, that it might be distributed to each, as
each had need, who had one soul and one heart toward God. <span
id="fr_4617"></span>[4618](#fn_4617) Who made this even of that very
dust, but He who created Adam himself out of dust? This then is
concerning Sion, but not in Sion only.

<span id="ii.CII-p61"></span>16. “The heathen shall fear Thy Name, O
Lord; and all the kings of the earth Thy Majesty” ([Psa.
102.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CII-p61.1"></span>). Now that Thou hast pitied Sion, now that Thy
servants have taken pleasure in her stones, by acknowledging the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; now that they have pitied her
dust; so that man is formed, or rather re-formed, in life out of dust;
hence preaching hath increased among the heathen: let the heathen fear
Thy Name, let another wall approach also from the heathen, let the
Corner Stone <span id="fr_4618"></span>[4619](#fn_4618) be recognised,
let the two who come from different regions, but who no longer differ in
belief, meet in close union.

<span id="ii.CII-p63"></span>17. “For the Lord shall build up Sion”
([Psa. 102.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CII-p63.1"></span>). This work is going on now. O ye living
stones, run to the work of building, not to ruin. Sion is in building,
beware of the ruined walls: the tower is building, the ark is in
building; remember the deluge. This work is in progress now; but when
Sion is built, what will happen? “And He will appear in His glory.” That
He might build up Sion, that He might be a foundation in Sion, He was
seen by Sion, but not in His glory: “we have seen Him, and He had no
form nor comeliness.” <span id="fr_4619"></span>[4620](#fn_4619) But
truly when He shall have come with His angels to judge, <span
id="fr_4620"></span>[4621](#fn_4620) shall they not look then upon Him
whom they have pierced? <span id="fr_4621"></span>[4622](#fn_4621) and
they shall be put to confusion when too late, who refused confusion in
early and healthful repentance.

<span id="ii.CII-p67"></span>18. “He hath turned Him unto the prayer of
the poor destitute, and despised not their desire” ([Psa.
102.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CII-p67.1"></span>). This is going on now in the building of
Sion: the builders of Sion pray, they groan: He is the one poor, because
the poor are many; because the thousands among so many nations are one
in Him, because He is the unity of the peace of the Church, He is one,
He is many: one, through love: many, on account of His extension.
Therefore we now pray, we now run: now, if any man hath used to be
otherwise, and lived differently, let him eat ashes as it were bread,
and mingle his drink with weeping. Now is the time, when Sion is in
building: now the stones are entering into the structure: when the
building is finished, and the house dedicated, why dost thou run, to ask
when too late, to beg in vain, to knock to no purpose, doomed to abide
without with the five foolish virgins?  <span
id="fr_4622"></span>[4623](#fn_4622) Therefore now run.

<span id="ii.CII-p69"></span>19. “Let these things be written for those
that come after” ([Psa. 102.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CII-p69.1"></span>). When these words were written, they profited
not so much those among whom they were written for they were written to
prophesy the New Testament, among men who lived according to the Old
Testament. But God had both given that Old Testament, and had settled in
that land of promise His own people. But since “Thy remembrance is from
generation to generation,” belongeth not to the ungodly, but to the
righteous; “in our generation” belongeth to the Old Testament; while “in
the other generation” belongeth to the New Testament; and since the New
Testament announceth this that was prophesied, “Let these things be
written for those that come after: and the people which shall be
created, shall praise the Lord.” Not the people which is created, but
“the people which shall be created.” What is clearer, my brethren? Here
is prophesied that creation of which the Apostle saith: <span
id="page_500">p. 500</span> <span id="ii.CII-Page_500"></span>“Therefore
if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are passed
away; behold, all things are become new.” <span
id="fr_4623"></span>[4624](#fn_4623) “For he hath looked down from His
lofty sanctuary.” He hath looked down from on high, that He might come
unto the humble: from on high He hath become humble, that He might exalt
the humble.…

<span id="ii.CII-p71"></span>20. “Out of the heaven did the Lord look
down upon the earth” ([Psa.
102.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CII-p71.1"></span>): “that He might hear the mournings of such as
are in fetters, and deliver the children of such as are put to death”
([Psa. 102.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#020)<span
id="ii.CII-p71.2"></span>). We have found it said in another Psalm, “O
let the sorrowful sighs of the fettered come before Thee;” <span
id="fr_4624"></span>[4625](#fn_4624) and in a passage where the voice of
the martyrs was meant. Whence are the martyrs in fetters?…But God had
bound them with these fetters, hard indeed and painful for a season, but
endurable on account of His promises, unto whom it is said, “On account
of the words of Thy lips, I have kept hard ways.” We must indeed groan
in these fetters in order to gain the mercy of God. These fetters must
not be shunned, in order to gain a destructive freedom and the temporal
and brief pleasure of this life, to be followed by perpetual bitterness.
Accordingly Scripture, <span id="fr_4625"></span>[4626](#fn_4625) that
we may not refuse the fetters of wisdom, thus addresseth us: “…Then
shall her fetters be a strong defence for thee, and her chains a robe of
glory.” Let the fettered therefore cry out, as long as they are in the
chains of the discipline of God, in which the martyrs have been tried:
the fetters shall be loosed, and they shall fly away, and these very
fetters shall afterwards be turned into an ornament. This hath happened
with the martyrs. For what have the persecutors effected by killing
them, except that their fetters were thereby loosed, and turned into
crowns?…The remission of sins, is the loosing. For what would it have
profited Lazarus, that he came forth from the tomb, unless it were said
to him, “loose him, and let him go”? <span
id="fr_4626"></span>[4627](#fn_4626) Himself indeed with His voice
aroused him from the tomb, Himself restored his life by crying unto him,
Himself overcame the mass of earth that was heaped upon the tomb, and he
came forth bound hand and foot: not therefore with his own feet, but by
the power of Him who drew him forth. This taketh place in the heart of
the penitent: when thou hearest a man is sorry for his sins, he hath
already come again to life; when thou hearest him by confessing  <span
id="fr_4627"></span>[4628](#fn_4627) lay bare his conscience, he is
already drawn forth from the tomb, but he is not as yet loosed. When is
he loosed, and by whom is he loosed? “Whatsoever thou shalt loose on
earth,” He saith, “shall be loosed in Heaven.” <span
id="fr_4628"></span>[4629](#fn_4628) Forgiveness of sins may justly be
granted by the Church: but the dead man himself cannot be aroused except
by the Lord crying within him; for God doth this within him. We speak to
your ears: how do we know what may be going on in your hearts? But what
is going on within, is not our doing, but His. <span
id="fr_4629"></span>[4630](#fn_4629)

<span id="ii.CII-p78"></span>21. “That the name of the Lord may be
declared in Sion” ([Psa. 102.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CII-p78.1"></span>). For at first, when the fettered were
appointed unto death, the Church was oppressed: since these tribulations
the Name of the Lord has been declared in Sion, with great freedom, in
the Church herself. For she is Sion: not that one spot, at first proud,
afterwards taken captive; but the Sion whose shadow was that Sion, which
signifieth a watch-tower; because when placed in the flesh, we see into
the things before us, extending ourselves not to the present which is
now, but to the future. Thus it is a watch-tower: for every watcher
gazes far. Places where guards are set, are termed watch-towers: these
are set on rocks, on mountains, in trees, that a wider prospect may be
commanded from a higher eminence. Sion therefore is a watch-tower, the
Church is a watch-tower.…If therefore the Church be a watch-tower, the
Name of the Lord is already declared there. Not the Lord’s Name only is
declared in that Sion, but “His praise,” He saith, “in Jerusalem.”

<span id="ii.CII-p79"></span>22. And how is it declared? “In the nations
gathering together in one, and the kingdoms, that they may serve the
Lord” ([Psa. 102.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CII-p79.1"></span>). How is this accomplished, unless by the
blood of the slain? How accomplished, but by the groans of the fettered?
Those therefore who were in tribulation and humility have been heard;
that in our times the Church might be in the great glory which we see
her in, so that the very kingdoms which then persecuted her, now serve
the Lord.

<span id="ii.CII-p80"></span>23. “She answered Him in the way of His
strength” ([Psa. 102.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CII-p80.1"></span>).…The preceding words show, that either “His
praise,” or “Jerusalem,” answered: for it was said, “And His praise in
Jerusalem; in the nations gathering together in one, and the kingdoms,
that they may serve the Lord. *Respondit ei.*” We cannot say, “the
kingdoms answered,” for he would have said *responderunt. Respondit ei.*
We cannot say, “the nations answered,” for he would have said,
*responderunt* (in the plural). Since then it is *Respondit ei,* in the
singular, we look for the singular number above, and find that the
words, “His praise,” and “Jerusalem,” are the <span id="page_501">p.
501</span> <span id="ii.CII-Page_501"></span>only words in which we find
it. But since it is doubtful, whether it be “His praise,” or
“Jerusalem,” let us expound it each way. How did “His praise” answer
Him? When they who are called by Him thank Him. For He calleth, we
answer; not by our voice, but by our faith; not by our tongue, but by
our life.…From His elect and holy men, Jerusalem also answereth Him. For
Jerusalem also was called: and the first Jerusalem refused to hear, and
it was said unto her, “Behold, thy house shall be left unto the
desolate.” <span id="fr_4630"></span>[4631](#fn_4630) …But that
Jerusalem, of whom it was written, “Sing, O barren, thou that didst not
bear,” <span id="fr_4631"></span>[4632](#fn_4631) “She hath answered
Him.” What meaneth, “She hath answered Him”? She despiseth Him not when
He called. He sent rain, She gave fruit.

<span id="ii.CII-p83"></span>24. “She answered Him:” but where? “in the
path of His strength.”…The Church therefore answered Him not in the way
of weakness; because after His resurrection He called the Church from
the whole world, no longer weak upon the cross, but strong in heaven.
For it is not the praise of the Christian faith that they believe that
Christ died, but that they believe that He arose from the dead. Even the
Pagan believeth that He died; and maketh this a charge against thee,
that thou hast believed in one dead. What then is thy praise? It is that
thou believest that Christ arose from the dead, and that thou dost hope
that thou shalt rise from the dead through Christ: this is the praise of
faith. “For if thou shalt confess with thy mouth that Jesus is the Lord,
and shalt believe in thy heart that God hath raised Him from the dead,
thou shalt be saved.” <span id="fr_4632"></span>[4633](#fn_4632) …This
is the faith of Christians. In this faith then, in which the Church is
gathered, “She hath answered Him,” She gave Him worship according to His
commandments: “in the path of His strength,” not in the path of His
weakness.

<span id="ii.CII-p85"></span>25. How she answered Him, ye have already
heard above. “In the gathering of the nations into one.” Herein she
answered Him, in unity: he who is not in unity, answereth Him not. For
He is One, the Church is unity: none but unity answereth to Him who is
One.…Since some <span id="fr_4633"></span>[4634](#fn_4633) were destined
to say against her, She hath existed, and no longer doth exist; “Show
me,” He saith, “the shortness of my days,” what is it, that I know not
what apostates from me murmur against me? why is it that lost men
contend that I have perished? For they surely say this, that I have
been, and no longer am: “Show me the shortness of my days.” I do not ask
from Thee about those everlasting days: they are without end, where I
shall be; it is not those I ask of: I ask of temporal days; show unto me
my temporal days; “show me the shortness,” not the eternity, “of my
days.” Declare unto me, how long I shall be in this world: on account of
those who say, “She hath been,” and is no more: on account of those who
say, The Scriptures are fulfilled, all nations have believed, but the
Church hath become apostate, and hath perished from among all nations.…

<span id="ii.CII-p87"></span>26. Seest thou not that there are still
nations among whom the Gospel hath not been preached? Since then it is
needful that what the Lord spoke shall be fulfilled, declaring unto the
Church the shortness of my days, that this Gospel be preached in all
nations, and then that the end may come, why is it that thou sayest that
the Church hath already perished from among all nations, when the Gospel
is being preached for this purpose, that it may be in all nations?
Therefore the Church remaineth even unto the end of the world, in all
nations; and this is the shortness of Her days, because all that is
limited is short; so that She may pass into eternity from this brief
existence. May heretics be lost, <span
id="fr_4634"></span>[4635](#fn_4634) may that which they are be lost,
and may they be found, that they may be what they are not. Shortness of
days will be unto the end of the world: shortness for this reason,
because the whole of this season, I say not from this day unto the end
of the world, but from Adam down to the end of the world, is a mere drop
compared with eternity.

<span id="ii.CII-p89"></span>27. Let not therefore heretics flatter
themselves against me, because I said, “the shortness of my days,” as if
they would not last down to the end of the world. For what hath he
added? “O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days” ([Psa.
102.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CII-p89.1"></span>). Deal Thou not with me according as heretics
speak. Lead me on unto the end of the world, not only to the middle of
my days; and finish my short days, that Thou mayest afterwards grant
unto me eternal days. Wherefore then hast thou asked concerning the
shortness of thy days? Wherefore? Dost thou wish to hear? “Thy years are
in the generation of generations.” This is why I asked concerning those
short days, because although my days should endure unto the end of the
world, yet they are short in comparison of Thy days. For “Thy years are
in the generation of generations.” Wherefore doth he not say, Thy years
are unto worlds of worlds; for thus rather is eternity usually signified
in the holy Scriptures; but he saith, “Thy years are in the generation
of generations”? But what are thy years? what, but those which do not
come, and then pass away? what, but they which come not, so as to cease
again? For every day in this season so cometh <span id="page_502">p.
502</span> <span id="ii.CII-Page_502"></span>as to cease again; every
hour, every month, every year; nothing of these is stationary; before it
hath come, it is to be; after it hath come, it will not be. Those
everlasting years of thine, therefore, those years that are not changed,
“are in the generation of generations.” There is a “generation of
generations;” in that shall thy years be. There is one such, and if we
acknowledge it aright, we shall be in it, and the years of God shall be
in us. How shall they be in us? Just as God Himself shall be in us:
whence it is said, “That God may be all in all.” <span
id="fr_4635"></span>[4636](#fn_4635) For the years of God, and God
Himself, are not different: but the years of God are the eternity of
God: eternity is the very substance of God, which hath nothing
changeable; there nothing is past, as if it were no longer: nothing is
future, as if it existed not as yet. There is nothing there but, Is:
there is not there, Was, and Will be; because what was, is now no
longer: and what will be, is not as yet: but whatever is there, simply
Is.…Behold this great I <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CII-p90.2"></span>Am</span>! What is man’s being to this? To this
great I <span class="c21"><span id="ii.CII-p90.3"></span>Am</span>, what
is man, whatever he be? Who can understand that <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CII-p90.4"></span>To Be</span>? who can share it? who can pant,
aspire, presume that he may be there? Despair not, human frailty! “I
am,” He saith, “the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob.” Thou hast heard what I am in Myself: now hear what I am on thy
account. This eternity then hath called us, and the Word burst forth
from eternity. It is now eternity, it is now the Word, and no longer
time.

<span id="ii.CII-p91"></span>28. …From so many generations thou wilt
gather together all the holy offspring of all generations, and wilt form
one generation thence: “In” this “generation of generations are Thy
years,” that is, that eternity will be in that generation, which is
collected from all generations, and reduced into one; this shall share
in Thy eternity. Other generations are born for fulfilling their times,
out of which this one is regenerated for ever; though changed it shall
be endued with life, it shall be fitted to bear Thee, receiving strength
from Thee.

<span id="ii.CII-p92"></span>29. “Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid
the foundation of the earth: and the Heavens are the work of Thy hands”
([Psa. 102.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CII-p92.1"></span>).…God laid the foundation of the earth, we
know: the heavens are the works of His hands. For do not imagine that
God doth one thing with His hand, another by His word. What He doth by
His word, He doth by His hand: for He hath not distinct bodily members,
who said, “I Am That I Am.” And perhaps His Word is His hand, assuredly
His hand is His power. For inasmuch as it is said, “Let there be a
firmament,” <span id="fr_4636"></span>[4637](#fn_4636) and there was a
firmament; He is understood to have created it by His Word; but when He
said, “Let Us make man in Our image, after Our likeness;” <span
id="fr_4637"></span>[4638](#fn_4637) He seemeth to have created him by
His hand. Hear therefore: “The heavens are the work of Thy hands.” Lo,
what He created by His word, He created also by His hands; because He
created them through His excellence, through His power. Observe rather
what He created, and seek not to know in what manner He created them. It
is much to thee to understand how He created them, since He created
thyself so, that thou mayest first be a servant obeying, and afterwards
perhaps a friend understanding. <span
id="fr_4638"></span>[4639](#fn_4638)

<span id="ii.CII-p96"></span>30. “They shall perish, but Thou shalt
endure” ([Psa. 102.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026)<span
id="ii.CII-p96.1"></span>). The Apostle Peter saith this openly: “By the
word of God the heavens were of old,” etc. <span
id="fr_4639"></span>[4640](#fn_4639) He hath said then that the heavens
have already perished by the flood: and we know that the heavens
perished as far as the extent of this atmosphere of ours. For the water
increased, and filled the whole of that space in which birds fly; thus
perished the heavens that are near the earth; those heavens which are
meant when we speak of the birds of heaven. But there are heavens of
heavens higher than these in the firmament: but whether these also shall
perish by fire, or those only which perished also by the flood, is a
much harder question among the learned, nor can it easily, especially in
a limited space of time, be explained. Let us therefore dismiss or put
it off; nevertheless, let us know that these things perish, and that God
endureth.…

<span id="ii.CII-p98"></span>31. Perhaps by the heavens we here may
understand, without being far-fetched, the righteous themselves, the
saints of God, abiding in whom God hath thundered in His commandments,
lightened in His miracles, watered the earth with the wisdom of truth,
for “The heavens have declared the glory of God.” <span
id="fr_4640"></span>[4641](#fn_4640) But shall they perish? Shall they
in any sense perish? In what sense? As a garment. <span
id="fr_4641"></span>[4642](#fn_4641) What is, as a garment? As to the
body. For the body is the garment of the soul; since our Lord called it
a garment, when He said, “Is not the life more than meat, and the body
than raiment?” <span id="fr_4642"></span>[4643](#fn_4642) How then doth
the garment perish? “Though our outward man perish, yet the inward man
is renewed day by day.” <span id="fr_4643"></span>[4644](#fn_4643) They
then shall perish: but as to the body: “But Thou shalt endure.”…Such
heavens therefore shall perish; not, however, for ever; they shall
perish, that they may be changed. Doth not the Psalm say this? Read the
following: “They shall all wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture
shalt Thou <span id="page_503">p. 503</span> <span
id="ii.CII-Page_503"></span>change them, and they shall be changed.”
Thou hearest of the garment, of the vesture, and dost thou understand
anything but the body? We may therefore hope for the change of our
bodies also, but from Him who was before us, and abideth after us.…“But
Thou art the same, and Thy years shall not fail” ([Psa.
102.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CII-p102.2"></span>). But what are we to those years with these
beggarly years? and what are they? Yet we ought not to despair. He had
already said in His great and exceeding Wisdom, “I Am That I Am;” and
yet He saith to console us, “I am the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob:” <span id="fr_4644"></span>[4645](#fn_4644)
and we are Abraham’s seed: <span id="fr_4645"></span>[4646](#fn_4645)
even we, although abject, although dust and ashes, trust in Him. We are
servants: but for our sakes our Lord took the garb of a servant: <span
id="fr_4646"></span>[4647](#fn_4646) for us who are mortal the Immortal
One deigned to die, for our sakes He showed His example of resurrection.
Let us therefore hope that we may reach these lasting years, in which
days are not spent in a revolution of the Sun, but what is abideth even
as it is, because it alone truly Is.

<span id="ii.CII-p106"></span>32. “The children of Thy servants shall
dwell there: and their seed shall stand fast for ages” ([Psa.
102.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CII-p106.1"></span>): for the age of ages, the age of eternity,
the age that abideth. But, “the children,” he saith, “of Thy servants:”
is it to be feared lest we be the servants of God, and our children, and
not ourselves, dwell there? Or if we are the children of the servants,
inasmuch as we are the Apostles’ children, what are we to say? Can those
children rising after have so unhappy a presumption, as to boast in
their late succession, and so to venture to say, We shall be there; the
Apostles will not be there? May this be far from their piety as
children, from their faith as little ones, from their understanding when
of age! The Apostles also will be there: rams go before, lambs follow.
Wherefore then, “the children of Thy servants;” and not in brief, “Thy
servants”? Both they are Thy servants, and their children are Thy
servants; and the children of these, their grandsons, what are they but
Thy servants? Thou wouldest include them all briefly, if Thou shouldest
say, Thy servants shall dwell therein.…“The children of Thy servants,”
are the works of Thy servants; no one shall dwell there, but through his
own works. What therefore meaneth, Their children shall dwell? Let no
man boast that he shall dwell there, if he calleth himself God’s
servant, and hath not works; for none but children shall dwell there.
What meaneth therefore, “The children of Thy servants shall dwell
there”? Thy servants shall dwell there by their own works, Thy servants
shall dwell there through their own children. Be not therefore barren,
if thou dost wish to dwell there; send before the children whom thou
mayest follow, by sending them before thee, not by burying them. Let thy
children lead thee to the land of promise, the land of the living, not
of the dying: whilst thou art living here in this pilgrimage, let them
go before thee, let them receive thee.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4574"></span>[494:4575](1080113.htm#fr_4574) <span
id="ii.CII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p2"></span> Lat. CI.

<span id="fn_4575"></span>[494:4576](1080113.htm#fr_4575) <span
id="ii.CII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p4"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4576"></span>[495:4577](1080113.htm#fr_4576) <span
id="ii.CII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p5"></span> [Ps. cii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4577"></span>[495:4578](1080113.htm#fr_4577) <span
id="ii.CII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p6"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4578"></span>[495:4579](1080113.htm#fr_4578) <span
id="ii.CII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p7"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span id="ii.CII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4579"></span>[495:4580](1080113.htm#fr_4579) <span
id="ii.CII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p9"></span> [Philip. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021)<span id="ii.CII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4580"></span>[495:4581](1080113.htm#fr_4580) <span
id="ii.CII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p10"></span> [Matt. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)<span id="ii.CII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4581"></span>[495:4582](1080113.htm#fr_4581) <span
id="ii.CII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p11"></span> [Eph.
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#015), [John
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="ii.CII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4582"></span>[495:4583](1080113.htm#fr_4582) <span
id="ii.CII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p12"></span> [Ps. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span id="ii.CII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4583"></span>[495:4584](1080113.htm#fr_4583) <span
id="ii.CII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p13"></span> [Isa. lxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span id="ii.CII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4584"></span>[495:4585](1080113.htm#fr_4584) <span
id="ii.CII-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p15"></span> [Isa. lviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4585"></span>[496:4586](1080113.htm#fr_4585) <span
id="ii.CII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p17"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="ii.CII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4586"></span>[496:4587](1080113.htm#fr_4586) <span
id="ii.CII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p19"></span> [Isa. xl.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4587"></span>[496:4588](1080113.htm#fr_4587) <span
id="ii.CII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p20"></span> [Gen. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4588"></span>[496:4589](1080113.htm#fr_4588) <span
id="ii.CII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p21"></span> [John vi.
41](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#041)<span id="ii.CII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4589"></span>[496:4590](1080113.htm#fr_4589) <span
id="ii.CII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p22"></span> [Ps. xxii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027)<span id="ii.CII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4590"></span>[496:4591](1080113.htm#fr_4590) <span
id="ii.CII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p23"></span> [John vi.
49](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#049)<span id="ii.CII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4591"></span>[496:4592](1080113.htm#fr_4591) <span
id="ii.CII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p24"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4592"></span>[496:4593](1080113.htm#fr_4592) <span
id="ii.CII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p27"></span> \[In the next verse.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4593"></span>[496:4594](1080113.htm#fr_4593) <span
id="ii.CII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p28"></span> [Matt. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#026)<span id="ii.CII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4594"></span>[497:4595](1080113.htm#fr_4594) <span
id="ii.CII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p29"></span> [Matt. x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)<span id="ii.CII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4595"></span>[497:4596](1080113.htm#fr_4595) <span
id="ii.CII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p31"></span> \[See p. 285, note 8, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4596"></span>[497:4597](1080113.htm#fr_4596) <span
id="ii.CII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p32"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="ii.CII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4597"></span>[497:4598](1080113.htm#fr_4597) <span
id="ii.CII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p33"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="ii.CII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4598"></span>[497:4599](1080113.htm#fr_4598) <span
id="ii.CII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p34"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.CII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4599"></span>[497:4600](1080113.htm#fr_4599) <span
id="ii.CII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p35"></span> \[Compare the pardonable credulity of
Clement, A.N.F. vol. i. p. 12, note 2; also p. 285, note 8,
*supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4600"></span>[497:4601](1080113.htm#fr_4600) <span
id="ii.CII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p36"></span> [Ps. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)<span id="ii.CII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4601"></span>[497:4602](1080113.htm#fr_4601) <span
id="ii.CII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p37"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.CII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4602"></span>[497:4603](1080113.htm#fr_4602) <span
id="ii.CII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p39"></span> [Matt.
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#017)<span id="ii.CII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4603"></span>[497:4604](1080113.htm#fr_4603) <span
id="ii.CII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p40"></span> [Matt.
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span id="ii.CII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4604"></span>[498:4605](1080113.htm#fr_4604) <span
id="ii.CII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p42"></span> \[See p. 315, note 10, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4605"></span>[498:4606](1080113.htm#fr_4605) <span
id="ii.CII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p43"></span> [Ezek. xiii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011)<span id="ii.CII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4606"></span>[498:4607](1080113.htm#fr_4606) <span
id="ii.CII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p45"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.CII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4607"></span>[498:4608](1080113.htm#fr_4607) <span
id="ii.CII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p47"></span> [Wis.
5:8](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4608"></span>[498:4609](1080113.htm#fr_4608) <span
id="ii.CII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p49"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="ii.CII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4609"></span>[498:4610](1080113.htm#fr_4609) <span
id="ii.CII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p51"></span> [Gal.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#005)<span id="ii.CII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4610"></span>[498:4611](1080113.htm#fr_4610) <span
id="ii.CII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p52"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4611"></span>[498:4612](1080113.htm#fr_4611) <span
id="ii.CII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p53"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.CII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4612"></span>[498:4613](1080113.htm#fr_4612) <span
id="ii.CII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p54"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.CII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4613"></span>[498:4614](1080113.htm#fr_4613) <span
id="ii.CII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p55"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009)<span id="ii.CII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4614"></span>[499:4615](1080113.htm#fr_4614) <span
id="ii.CII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p57"></span> [Ps. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)<span id="ii.CII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4615"></span>[499:4616](1080113.htm#fr_4615) <span
id="ii.CII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p58"></span> [Ps. ciii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#014)<span id="ii.CII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4616"></span>[499:4617](1080113.htm#fr_4616) <span
id="ii.CII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p59"></span> *Formata et formosa*.

<span id="fn_4617"></span>[499:4618](1080113.htm#fr_4617) <span
id="ii.CII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p60"></span> [Acts
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041), [Acts
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.CII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4618"></span>[499:4619](1080113.htm#fr_4618) <span
id="ii.CII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p62"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.CII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4619"></span>[499:4620](1080113.htm#fr_4619) <span
id="ii.CII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p64"></span> [Isa. liii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002)<span id="ii.CII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4620"></span>[499:4621](1080113.htm#fr_4620) <span
id="ii.CII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p65"></span> [Matt. xxv.
31](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#031)<span id="ii.CII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4621"></span>[499:4622](1080113.htm#fr_4621) <span
id="ii.CII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p66"></span> [Zech. xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010)<span id="ii.CII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4622"></span>[499:4623](1080113.htm#fr_4622) <span
id="ii.CII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p68"></span> [Matt. xxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#012)<span id="ii.CII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4623"></span>[500:4624](1080113.htm#fr_4623) <span
id="ii.CII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p70"></span> [2 Cor. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span id="ii.CII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4624"></span>[500:4625](1080113.htm#fr_4624) <span
id="ii.CII-p71.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p72"></span> [Ps. lxxix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#011)<span id="ii.CII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4625"></span>[500:4626](1080113.htm#fr_4625) <span
id="ii.CII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p73"></span> [Eccles. vi.
24-32](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#024)<span id="ii.CII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4626"></span>[500:4627](1080113.htm#fr_4626) <span
id="ii.CII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p74"></span> [John xi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044)<span id="ii.CII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4627"></span>[500:4628](1080113.htm#fr_4627) <span
id="ii.CII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p75"></span> \[Public confession, the ancient
discipline. A.N.F. vol. iii. pp. 666, 667.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4628"></span>[500:4629](1080113.htm#fr_4628) <span
id="ii.CII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p76"></span> [Matt. xv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)<span id="ii.CII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4629"></span>[500:4630](1080113.htm#fr_4629) <span
id="ii.CII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p77"></span> \[Note this distinction between what the
Church may do in restoring to communion, and what Christ only can do in
cleansing the conscience.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4630"></span>[501:4631](1080113.htm#fr_4630) <span
id="ii.CII-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p81"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038)<span id="ii.CII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4631"></span>[501:4632](1080113.htm#fr_4631) <span
id="ii.CII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p82"></span> [Isa.
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001), [Gal.
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027)<span id="ii.CII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4632"></span>[501:4633](1080113.htm#fr_4632) <span
id="ii.CII-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p84"></span> [Rom.
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="ii.CII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4633"></span>[501:4634](1080113.htm#fr_4633) <span
id="ii.CII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p86"></span> \[*i.e*. the party of Donatus.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4634"></span>[501:4635](1080113.htm#fr_4634) <span
id="ii.CII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p88"></span> *Pereant*.

<span id="fn_4635"></span>[502:4636](1080113.htm#fr_4635) <span
id="ii.CII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p90"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span id="ii.CII-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4636"></span>[502:4637](1080113.htm#fr_4636) <span
id="ii.CII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p93"></span> [Gen. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4637"></span>[502:4638](1080113.htm#fr_4637) <span
id="ii.CII-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p94"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.CII-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4638"></span>[502:4639](1080113.htm#fr_4638) <span
id="ii.CII-p94.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p95"></span> [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span id="ii.CII-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4639"></span>[502:4640](1080113.htm#fr_4639) <span
id="ii.CII-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p97"></span> [2 Pet.
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4640"></span>[502:4641](1080113.htm#fr_4640) <span
id="ii.CII-p98.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p99"></span> [Ps. xix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span id="ii.CII-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4641"></span>[502:4642](1080113.htm#fr_4641) <span
id="ii.CII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p100"></span> Or, “as to the garment,” *secundum
vestimentum*.

<span id="fn_4642"></span>[502:4643](1080113.htm#fr_4642) <span
id="ii.CII-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p101"></span> [Matt. vi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="ii.CII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4643"></span>[502:4644](1080113.htm#fr_4643) <span
id="ii.CII-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p102"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016)<span id="ii.CII-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4644"></span>[503:4645](1080113.htm#fr_4644) <span
id="ii.CII-p102.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p103"></span> [Exod. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4645"></span>[503:4646](1080113.htm#fr_4645) <span
id="ii.CII-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p104"></span> [Gal. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)<span id="ii.CII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4646"></span>[503:4647](1080113.htm#fr_4646) <span
id="ii.CII-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CII-p105"></span> [Philip. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span id="ii.CII-p105.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CIII](1080114)
