[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080002)  [Next](1080004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="ii.ii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Editor’s Preface.</span>

<span id="ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.ii-p2.1"></span>The</span> delightful task of editing these
*Enarrations,* which was what I undertook, became, indeed, a very
painful one when the general editor informed me that the whole work must
be comprised in a single volume of the series. This allowed but one
hundred pages to each one of the six volumes of the Oxford translation.
But I felt that my learned friend was right (1) in deciding that St.
Augustin’s treatment of the Psalms must not be wanting to the series,
and (2) that the exposition is so diffuse and digressive, that it
readily admits of abridgement, if these exceptional features supply the
material for retrenchments. In working out the result, I have “done what
I could.” I have preserved the African Psalter entire, with as much of
the comment as was possible; even so overrunning, at the publishers’
cost, the six hundred pages which were all subscribers might expect. The
only means of avoiding this was to omit entirely the <span
class="c21"><span id="ii.ii-p2.2"></span>CXIX</span>th Psalm, an
expedient to which I could not consent.

<span id="ii.ii-p3"></span>To the primitive believers came the Psalter,
like an aftermath, wet with the dews of a new birth as from the womb of
the morning. The Spirit had descended upon it anew, as showers upon the
mown grass; and it had sprung up afresh, sweeter than before, for the
pasture of flocks. The Church received it as full of Christ, as the
inheritance of a nobler and truer Israel, for which His coming had
illuminated it with a genuine interpretation, painting even its darker
and clouded surfaces with the bow of promise, now made the symbol of an
everlasting covenant and of all promises fulfilled in Him. Hence the
local and temporary meanings of the Psalms were regarded as
insignificant. Their Sinaitic comminations and their conformities to the
Law were but prophecies which the Jews had voluntarily appropriated by
rejecting the Son of David. They were types of what had been fulfilled
in their rejected Messiah. The Church received the Psalter from the
temple and the synagogue, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) and adopted
it into liturgic use, “with hymns and spiritual songs,” all magnifying
the crucified and glorified Christ. With the fulfillment of prophecy by
the destruction of the Temple and the dispersion of the Jews, everything
pertaining to the law was sloughed from its ripened stalk; and the
Psalter blossomed with the consummate flowers and fruitage which were
its deeper intent, and which had waited so long to be disclosed. The
true David had come, and little thought of the typical David was to be
entertained: the true Israel was to be seen everywhere, and the dead
images of legal rites and symbols were to be interpreted only by the
Gospel. To bring out its hidden meanings, the reading and chanting of
the Psalter received the accentuation of antiphons and doxologies, and
constantly elevated the worshippers into the newness of the spirit out
of the oldness of the letter. Thus the whole book breathed a sweetness
unknown to the Hebrews, but for which kings and prophets had patiently
waited. The name of Jesus disclosed itself in every reference to
salvation, and perfumed these sacred odes with a flavour that could come
only from “the Root and the Offspring of David.” Such <span
id="page_vi">p. vi</span> <span id="ii.ii-Page_vi"></span>was the
Psalter to the primitive faithful: the walk of Emmaus had opened their
eyes to behold the Lord. To the true interpretation of the Psalms St.
Paul had supplied the key, and from the beginning of the Church’s
institutions we find evidences of the enthusiasm with which the Psalter
was appropriated in all of the richness of its evangelic import. The
earliest Fathers are full of what the genius of Augustin has embodied in
his *Enarrations,* which nobody must confound with works of scientific
exegesis. The author’s one idea was widely different from that of modern
critics. His “accommodations” of Scripture, as they would now be called,
are part of the system which the Church had received, of which Christ
was the Alpha and the Omega, and in which the foreshadowing David was
nowhere. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) He who comes to this volume
with any other conception of its uses will be sadly disappointed. In the
critical study of the Psalms, with all of the modern helps, such as
Delitzsch and others have so richly supplied, let us not fail to
exercise ourselves day and night; but if, as Christians, we wish to
catch the living Spirit that animates the “wheels” or mechanical
structure of the Psalms, let us learn from Augustin that indeed in every
sense a greater than David, a “greater than Solomon, is here.” The
fanciful ingenuity with which our author interweaves the New Testament
with the Psalms will at first provoke a smile. His ideas seem often
overstrained and unnatural. But let us reflect that he is animating the
Church of Christ with the true “spirit of prophecy,” which is the
“testimony of Jesus;” that his object is to hang Gospel associations
upon every stem and twig that come from the root of Jesse, and to wean
even the Hebrew Christians from their instinctive references to the Law.
Let us adopt these joint conceptions of the work, and we shall find in
it a glorious illustration of the Apostle’s assurance, “Ye are not come
unto the mount that burned with fire, …but unto Mount Sion, and unto the
city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, …and to Jesus the
mediator of the new covenant.”

<span id="ii.ii-p6"></span>In every way the divine and the student will
find this work, even as here presented, a noble introduction to
patristic studies. Let us observe also what it proves. It gives us the
old African psalter in all its rude and uncouth conceptions of the
Septuagint, and teaches us how much we owe to the erudition and labours
of St. Jerome. First of all, the dignity of the Holy Scriptures, and
their importance to all Christians, are assumed. Its historical values
are very great: it shows the absolute freedom of the early Church from
the corruptions of mediævalism. The Pentecostal unity of Christendom,
the Catholic and Apostolic system as defined in the constitutions of
Nicæa and Constantinople, the autonomy of national Churches, the
independence of the African Church (illustrated by the personal history
of Augustin, who rejected communion with the Bishop of Rome when he
stretched his claims beyond seas), and the dogmatic primacy of the
patriarchate of Carthage in Latin Christendom as the mother of its
theology, are assumed in every reflection upon the Donatists, and in the
tone and voice of the great preacher himself, to whom the Western
Churches owe all that survives their schism and corruptions, even to our
own day. But the ethical and doctrinal teacher will find the charm of
these pages, (1) in their correspondence with the evangelical precepts
of the Sermon on the Mount, and their freedom from the tainted
distinctions and dilutions of modern casuists; (2) in their perpetual
enforcement of the Pauline ideas of justification, harmonized
successfully with those of St. James; (3) in the faithful exhibition of
the doctrines of grace; (4) and in the loyalty to Jesus Christ of every
word; abasing human merit, and presenting Him as “the end of the law for
righteousness,” with an uncompromising tenacity, and a persevering
reiteration of this fundamental verity which seems to foresee the gross
departure of Western Churches from their original purity, and to “lay an
anchor to windward” for their restoration to orthodoxy.

<span id="ii.ii-p7"></span>The readers of this volume will need little
reference to the innumerable commentaries which have been devoted to the
Psalter; but I must mention the exceptional work of the late erudite
<span class="c21"><span id="ii.ii-p7.1"></span>J. Mason Neale,
D.D.,</span> because it throws light on the liturgical history of the
Psalter in the Western <span id="page_vii">p. vii</span> <span
id="ii.ii-Page_vii"></span>Churches. The learned commentary of the late
Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Wordsworth, will be found to combine in a
remarkable degree, with critical exposition, the Augustinian spirit of
devout evangelical associations and elevations.

<span id="ii.ii-p8"></span>The editor of this volume blesses God for
much spiritual help and comfort afforded by the review of these “songs
of our pilgrimage,” with which his task has enriched the latest years of
that period of our mortality beyond which all is but labour and sorrow.

<span id="ii.ii-p9"></span>A. C. C.

<span id="ii.ii-p10"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.ii-p10.1"></span>May 10, 1888.</span>

<span id="ii.ii-p11"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ii-p11.1"></span>Note.</span>

<span id="ii.ii-p12"></span><span class="c21"><span
id="ii.ii-p12.1"></span>It</span> remains to note that I have had the
Benedictine edition in the types of Louvain and of Migne constantly at
hand, and have referred to them not only in all cases of doubt, but for
general refreshment of mind; the epigrammatic beauty and consonance of
Augustin’s Latin being untranslatable. From the Oxford translations I
have rarely departed, and in all important instances have noted the
*wherefore* in the margin. It was not the design of this series to give
the reader any other than the masterly work of the scholars to whom we
owe its appearance. Other instances have been such inconsiderable
adaptations as are demanded in the suture of parts dislocated by
abridgment. My brief annotations are always bracketed and marked by an
initial of my name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](1080003.htm#fr_0) <span
id="ii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p4"></span> See Ante-Nicene Fathers, vol. vii. p. 530
*et seq*.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[vi:2](1080003.htm#fr_1) <span
id="ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ii-p5"></span> Compare [2 Chr.
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042), [Isa.
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003), [Acts
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034)<span id="ii.ii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisement.](1080004)
