[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080080)  [Next](1080082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXX"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXX-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXX. <span
id="fr_3026"></span>[3027](#fn_3026) </span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p3"></span>1. Thanks to the “Corn of wheat,” <span
id="fr_3027"></span>[3028](#fn_3027) because He willed to die and to be
multiplied: thanks to the only Son of God, our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ, who disdained not to undergo our death, in order that He might
make us worthy of His life. Behold Him that was single until He went
hence; as He said in another Psalm, “Single I am until I go
hence;” <span id="fr_3028"></span>[3029](#fn_3028) for He was a single
corn of wheat in such sort as that He had in Himself a great
fruitfulness of increase; in how many corns imitating the Passion of Him
we exult, when we celebrate the nativities of the Martyrs! Many
therefore members of Him, under one Head our Saviour Himself, being
bound together in the bond of love and peace (as ye judge it fit that ye
know, for ye have often heard), are one man: and of the same, as of one
man, the voice is ofttimes heard, in the Psalms, and thus one crieth as
though it were all, because all in one are one.…

<span id="ii.LXX-p6"></span>2. There is then in this Psalm the voice of
men troubled, and so indeed of Martyrs amid sufferings in peril, but
relying on their own Head. Let us hear them, and speak with them out of
sympathy of heart, though it be not with similarity of suffering. For
they are already crowned, we are still in peril: not that such sort of
persecutions do vex us as have vexed them, but worse perchance in the
midsts of all kinds of so great scandals. For our own times do more
abound in that woe, which the Lord cried: “Woe to the world because of
scandals.” <span id="fr_3029"></span>[3030](#fn_3029) And, “Because
iniquity hath abounded, the love of man shall wax cold.” <span
id="fr_3030"></span>[3031](#fn_3030) For not even that holy Lot at Sodom
suffered corporal persecution from any one, or had it been told him that
he should not dwell there: <span id="fr_3031"></span>[3032](#fn_3031)
the persecution of him were the evil doings of the Sodomites. Now then
that Christ sitteth in Heaven, now that He is glorified, now that necks
of kings are made subject to His yoke, and their brows placed beneath
His sign, now that not any one remaineth to dare openly to trample upon
Christians, still, however, we groan amid instruments and singers, still
those enemies of the Martyrs, because with words and <span
id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span id="ii.LXX-Page_312"></span>steel they
have no power, with their own wantonness do persecute them. And O that
we were sorrowing for Heathens alone: it would be some sort of comfort,
to wait for those that not yet have been signed with the Cross of
Christ; when they should be signed, and when, by His authority attached,
they should cease to be mad. We see besides men wearing on their brow
the sign of Him, at the same time on that same brow wearing the
shamelessness of wantonness, and on the days and celebrations of the
Martyrs not exulting but insulting. And amid these things we groan, and
this is our persecution, if there is in us the love which saith, “Who is
weak, and I am not weak? Who is scandalized, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_3032"></span>[3033](#fn_3032) Not any servant of God, then, is
without persecution: and that is a true saying which the Apostle saith,
“But even all men that will to live godly in Christ, shall suffer
persecution.” <span id="fr_3033"></span>[3034](#fn_3033) …

<span id="ii.LXX-p12"></span>3. “O God, to my aid make speed” ([Psa.
70.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXX-p12.1"></span>).
For need we have for an everlasting aid in this world. But when have we
not? Now however being in tribulation, let us especially say, “O God, to
my aid make speed.” “Let them be confounded and fear that seek my soul.”
Christ is speaking: whether Head speak or whether Body speak; He is
speaking that hath said, “Why persecutest thou Me?”  <span
id="fr_3034"></span>[3035](#fn_3034) He is speaking that hath said,
“Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of Mine, to Me ye have
done it.” <span id="fr_3035"></span>[3036](#fn_3035) The voice then of
this Man is known to be of the whole man, of Head and of Body: that need
not often be mentioned, because it is known. “Be they confounded,” he
saith, “and fear that seek my soul.” In another Psalm He saith, “I was
looking unto the right and saw, and there was not one that would know
Me: flight hath perished from Me, and there is not one to seek out My
soul.” <span id="fr_3036"></span>[3037](#fn_3036) There of persecutors
He saith, that there was not one to seek out His soul: but here, “Let
them be confounded and fear that seek My soul.”…And where is that which
thou hast heard from thy Lord, “Love ye your enemies, do good to them
that hate you, and pray for them that persecute you”? <span
id="fr_3037"></span>[3038](#fn_3037) Behold thou sufferest persecution,
and cursest them from whom thou sufferest: how dost thou imitate the
Passions of thy Lord that have gone before, hanging on the cross and
saying, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_3038"></span>[3039](#fn_3038) To persons saying such things the
Martyr replieth and saith, thou hast set before me the Lord, saying,
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do:” understand thou
my voice also, in order that it may be thine too: for what have I said
concerning mine enemies? “Let them be confounded and fear.” Already such
vengeance hath been taken on the enemies of the Martyrs. That Saul that
persecuted Stephen, he was confounded and feared. He was breathing out
slaughters,  <span id="fr_3039"></span>[3040](#fn_3039) he was seeking
some to drag and slay: a voice having been heard from above, “Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou Me,” <span
id="fr_3040"></span>[3041](#fn_3040) he was confounded and laid low, and
he was raised up to obedience, that had been inflamed unto persecuting.
This then the Martyrs desire for their enemies, “Let them be confounded
and fear.” For so long as they are not confounded and fear, they must
needs defend their actions: glorious they think themselves, because they
hold, because they bind, because they scourge, because they kill,
because they dance, because they insult, and because of all these doings
they be some time confounded and fear. <span
id="fr_3041"></span>[3042](#fn_3041) For if they be confounded, they
will also be converted: because converted they cannot be, unless they
shall have been confounded and shall have feared. Let us then wish these
things to our enemies, let us wish them without fear. Behold I have
said, and let me have said it with you, may all that still dance and
sing and insult the Martyrs “be confounded and fear:” at last within
these walls confounded may they beat their breasts!

<span id="ii.LXX-p21"></span>4. “Let them be turned away backward and
blush that think evil things to me” ([Psa.
70.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXX-p21.1"></span>).
At first there was the assault of them persecuting, now there hath
remained the malice of them thinking. In fact, there are in the Church
distinct seasons of persecutions following one another. <span
id="fr_3042"></span>[3043](#fn_3042) There was made an assault on the
Church when kings were persecuting: and because kings had been foretold
as to persecute and as to believe, when one had been fulfilled the other
was to follow. There came to pass also that which was consequent; kings
believed, peace was given to the Church, the Church began to be set in
the highest place of dignity, even on this earth, even in this life: but
there is not wanting the roar of persecutors, they have turned their
assaults into thoughts. In these thoughts, as in a bottomless pit, the
devil hath been bound, <span id="fr_3043"></span>[3044](#fn_3043) he
roareth and breaketh not forth. For it hath been said concerning these
times of the Church, “The sinner shall see, and shall be angry.” <span
id="fr_3044"></span>[3045](#fn_3044) And shall do what? That which he
did at first? Drag, bind, smite? He doeth not this. What then? “With his
teeth he shall gnash, and shall pine away.” And with these men the
Martyr is, as it were, angry, and yet for these men the Martyr prayeth.
For in like manner as he hath wished well to those men <span
id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span id="ii.LXX-Page_313"></span>concerning
whom he hath said, “Let them be confounded and fear that seek my
soul:” <span id="fr_3045"></span>[3046](#fn_3045) so also now, “Let them
be turned backward, and blush, that think evil things to me.” Wherefore?
In order that they may not go before, but follow. For he that censureth
the Christian religion, and on his own system willeth to live, willeth
as it were to go before Christ, as though He indeed had erred and had
been weak and infirm, because He either willed to suffer or could suffer
in the hands of the Jews; but that he is a clever man for guarding
against all these things; in shunning death, even in basely lying to
escape death, and slaying his soul that he may live in body, he thinketh
himself a man of singular and prudent measures. He goeth before in
censuring Christ, in a manner he outstrippeth Christ: let him believe in
Christ, and follow Christ. For that which had been desired but now for
persecutors thinking evil things, the same the Lord Himself said to
Peter. Now in a certain place Peter willed to go before the Lord.…A
little before, “Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood
hath not revealed it to thee, but My Father which is in Heaven:” now in
a moment, “Go back behind Me, Satan.” <span
id="fr_3046"></span>[3047](#fn_3046) What is, “Go back behind Me”?
Follow Me. Thou willest to go before Me, thou willest to give Me
counsel, it is better that thou follow My counsel: this is, “go back,”
go back behind Me. He is silencing one outstripping, in order that he
may go backward; and He is calling him Satan, because he willeth to go
before the Lord. A little before, “blessed;” now, “Satan.” Whence a
little before, “blessed”? Because, “to thee,” He saith, “flesh and blood
hath not revealed it, but My Father which is in Heaven.” Whence now,
“Satan”? Because “thou savourest not,” He saith, “the things which are
of God, but the things which are of men.” Let us then that would duly
celebrate the nativities of the Martyrs, long for the imitation of the
Martyrs; let us not wish to go before the Martyrs, and think ourselves
to be of better understanding than they, because we shun sufferings in
behalf of righteousness and faith which they shunned not. Therefore be
they that think evil things, and in wantonness feed their hearts,
“turned backward and blush.” Let them hear from the Apostle afterwards
saying, “But what fruit had ye some time in those things at which ye now
blush?”

<span id="ii.LXX-p27"></span>5. What followeth? “Let them be turned away
forthwith blushing, that say to me, Well, well” ([Psa.
70.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXX-p27.1"></span>).
Two are the kinds of persecutors, revilers and flatterers. The tongue of
the flatterer doth more persecute than the hand of the slayer: for this
also the Scripture hath called a furnace. Truly when the Scripture was
speaking of persecution, it said, “Like gold in a furnace it hath proved
them” (speaking of Martyrs being slain), “and as the holocaust’s victim
it hath received them.” <span id="fr_3047"></span>[3048](#fn_3047) Hear
how even the tongue of flatterers is of such sort: “The proving,” he
saith, “of silver and of gold is fire; but a man is proved by the tongue
of men praising him.” <span id="fr_3048"></span>[3049](#fn_3048) That is
fire, this also is fire: out of both thou oughtest to go forth safe. The
censurer hath broken thee, thou hast been broken in the furnace like an
earthen vessel. The Word hath moulded thee, and there hath come the
trial of tribulation: that which hath been formed, must needs be
seasoned; if it hath been well moulded, there hath come the fire to
strengthen. Whence He said in the Passion, “Dried up like a potsherd
hath been My virtue.”  <span id="fr_3049"></span>[3050](#fn_3049) For
Passion and the furnace of tribulation had made Him stronger.…

<span id="ii.LXX-p31"></span>6. And what cometh to pass when they are
all turned back and blush, whether it be they that seek my soul, or they
that think evil things to me, or they that with perverse and feigned
benevolence with tongue would soften the stroke which they inflict, when
they shall have been themselves turned away and confounded; there shall
come to pass what? “Let them exult and be joyous in Thee:” not in me,
not in this man or in that man; but in whom they have been made light
that were darkness. “Let them exult and be joyous in Thee, all that seek
Thee” ([Psa. 70.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXX-p31.1"></span>). One thing it is to seek God, another thing
to seek man. “Let them be joyous that seek Thee.” They shall not be
joyous then that seek themselves, <span
id="fr_3050"></span>[3051](#fn_3050) whom Thou hast first sought before
they sought Thee. Not yet did that sheep seek the Shepherd, it had
strayed from the flock, and He went down to it; <span
id="fr_3051"></span>[3052](#fn_3051) He sought it, and carried it back
upon His shoulders. Will He despise thee, O sheep, seeking Him, who hath
first sought thee despising Him and not seeking Him? Now then begin thou
to seek Him that first hath sought thee, and hath carried thee back on
His shoulders. Do thou that which He speaketh of, “They that are My
sheep hear My voice, and follow Me.” <span
id="fr_3052"></span>[3053](#fn_3052) If then thou seekest Him that first
hath sought thee, and hast become a sheep of His, and thou hearest the
voice of thy Shepherd, and followest Him; see what He showeth to thee of
Himself, what of His Body, in order that as to Himself thou mayest not
err, as to the Church thou mayest not err, that no one may say to thee,
that is Christ which is not Christ, or that is the Church which is not
the Church. For many men have said that Christ had no flesh, and that
Christ hath <span id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="ii.LXX-Page_314"></span>not risen in His Body: do not thou follow
the voices of them. Hear thou the voice of Himself the Shepherd, that
was clothed with flesh, in order that He might seek lost flesh. He hath
risen again, and He saith, “Handle ye and see; for a spirit hath not
flesh and bones as ye see Me have.” <span
id="fr_3053"></span>[3054](#fn_3053) He showeth Himself to thee, the
voice of Him follow thou. He showeth also the Church, that no one may
deceive thee by the name of Church. “It behoved,” He saith, “Christ to
suffer, and to rise again from the dead the third day, and that there
should be preached repentance and remission of sins through all nations,
beginning with Jerusalem.” <span id="fr_3054"></span>[3055](#fn_3054)
Thou hast the voice of Thy Shepherd, do not thou follow the voice of
strangers: <span id="fr_3055"></span>[3056](#fn_3055) and a thief thou
shalt not fear, if thou shalt have followed the voice of the Shepherd.
But how shalt thou follow? If thou shalt neither have said to any man,
as if it were by his own merit, Well, well: nor shalt have heard the
same with joy, so that thy head be not made fat with the oil of a
sinner. <span id="fr_3056"></span>[3057](#fn_3056) “Let all them exult
and be joyous in Thee, that seek Thee; and let them say”—let them say
what, that exult? “Be the Lord alway magnified!” Let all them say this,
that exult and seek Thee. What? “Be the Lord alway magnified; yea, they
that love Thy salvation.” Not only, “Be the Lord magnified;” but also,
“alway.”…A sinner thou art, be He magnified in order that He may call;
thou confessest, be He magnified in order that He may forgive: now thou
livest justly, be He magnified in order that He may direct: thou
perseverest even unto the end, be He magnified in order that He may
glorify. “Be the Lord,” then, “alway magnified; yea, they love His
saving health.” For from Him they have salvation, not from themselves.
The saving health of the Lord our God, is the Saviour our Lord Jesus
Christ: whosoever loveth the Saviour, confesseth himself to have been
made whole; whosoever confesseth himself to have been made whole,
confesseth himself to have been sick.  <span
id="fr_3057"></span>[3058](#fn_3057) Not their own saving health, as if
they could save themselves of themselves: not as it were the saving
health of a man, as though by him they could be saved. “Do not,” he
saith, “confide in princes, and in the sons of men, in whom there is no
safety.” <span id="fr_3058"></span>[3059](#fn_3058) Why so? “Of the Lord
is safety, and upon Thy people is Thy blessing.” <span
id="fr_3059"></span>[3060](#fn_3059)

<span id="ii.LXX-p42"></span>7. Behold, “Be the Lord magnified:” wilt
thou never, wilt thou nowhere? In Him was something, in me nothing: but
if in Him is whatsoever I am, be He, not I. But thou then what? “But I
am needy and poor” ([Psa. 70.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXX-p42.1"></span>). He is rich, He abounding, He needing
nothing. Behold my light, behold whence I am illumined; for I cry, “Thou
shalt illumine my candle, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_3060"></span>[3061](#fn_3060) What then of thee? “But I am needy
and poor.” I am like an orphan, my soul is like a widow destitute and
desolate: help I seek, alway mine infirmity I confess. There have been
forgiven me my sins, now I have begun to follow the commandments of God:
still, however, I am needy and poor. Why still needy and poor? Because
“I see another law in my members fighting against the law of my
mind.” <span id="fr_3061"></span>[3062](#fn_3061) Why needy and poor?
Because, “blessed are they that hunger and thirst after
righteousness.” <span id="fr_3062"></span>[3063](#fn_3062) Still I
hunger, still I thirst: my fulness hath been put off, not taken away. “O
God, aid Thou me.” Most suitably also Lazarus is said to be interpreted,
“one aided:” that needy and poor man, that was transported into the
bosom of Abraham; <span id="fr_3063"></span>[3064](#fn_3063) and beareth
the type of the Church, which ought alway to confess that she hath need
of aid. This is true, this is godly. “I have said to the Lord, My God
Thou art.” Why? “For my goods Thou needest not.” <span
id="fr_3064"></span>[3065](#fn_3064) He needeth not us, we need Him:
therefore He is truly Lord. For thou art not the very true Lord of thy
servant: both are men, both needing God. But if thou supposest thy
servant to need thee, in order that thou mayest give him bread; thou
also needest thy servant, in order that he may aid thy labours. Each one
of you doth need the other. Therefore neither of you is truly lord, and
neither of you truly servant. Hear thou the true Lord, of whom thou art
the true servant: “I have said to the Lord, My God Thou art.” Why art
Thou Lord? “Because my goods Thou needest not”? But what of thee? “But I
am needy and poor.” Behold the needy and poor: may God feed, may God
alleviate, may God aid: “O God,” he saith, “aid Thou me.”

<span id="ii.LXX-p48"></span>8. “My helper and deliverer art Thou; O
Lord, delay not.” Thou art the helper and deliverer: I need succour,
help Thou; entangled I am, deliver Thou. For no one will deliver from
entanglings except Thee. There stand round about us the nooses of divers
cares, on this side and on that we are torn as it were with thorns and
brambles, we walk a narrow way, perchance we have stuck fast in the
brambles: let us say to God, “Thou art my deliverer.” He that showed us
the narrow way, <span id="fr_3065"></span>[3066](#fn_3065) hath taught
us to follow it.…

<span id="ii.LXX-p50"></span>9. What is, “delay not”? Because many men
say, it is a long time till Christ comes. What then: because we say,
“delay not,” will He come before He hath determined to come? <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span id="ii.LXX-Page_315"></span>What
meaneth this prayer, “delay not”? May not Thy coming seem to me to be
too long delayed. For to thee it seemeth a long time, to God it seemeth
not long, to whom a thousand years are one day, or the three hours of a
watch. <span id="fr_3066"></span>[3067](#fn_3066) But if thou shalt not
have had endurance, late for thee it will be: and when to thee it shall
be late, thou wilt be diverted from Him, and wilt be like unto those
that were wearied in the desert, and hastened to ask of God the pleasant
things which He was reserving for them in the Land; and when there were
not given on their journey the pleasant things, whereby perchance they
would have been corrupted, they murmured against God, and went back in
heart unto Egypt:  <span id="fr_3067"></span>[3068](#fn_3067) to that
place whence in body they had been severed, in heart they went back. Do
not thou, then, so, do not so: fear the word of the Lord, saying,
“Remember Lot’s wife.” <span id="fr_3068"></span>[3069](#fn_3068) She
too being on the way, but now delivered from the Sodomites, looked back;
in the place where she looked back, there she remained: she became a
statue of salt, in order to season thee. For to thee she hath been given
for an example, in order that thou mayest have sense, mayest not stop
infatuated on the way. Observe her stopping and pass on: observe her
looking back, and do thou be reaching forth unto the things before, as
Paul was. <span id="fr_3069"></span>[3070](#fn_3069) What is it, not to
look back. “Of the things behind forgetful,” he saith. Therefore thou
followest, being called to the heavenly reward, whereof hereafter thou
wilt glory. For the same Apostle saith, “There remaineth for me a crown
of righteousness, which in that day the Lord, the just Judge, shall
render to me.” <span id="fr_3070"></span>[3071](#fn_3070)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3026"></span>[311:3027](1080081.htm#fr_3026) <span
id="ii.LXX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p2"></span> Lat. LXIX. Sermon preached at the
celebration of the Martyrs.

<span id="fn_3027"></span>[311:3028](1080081.htm#fr_3027) <span
id="ii.LXX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p4"></span> Preface. [John xii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3028"></span>[311:3029](1080081.htm#fr_3028) <span
id="ii.LXX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p5"></span> [Ps. cxli.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXX-p5.1"></span>,
LXX.; and Vulgate nearly.

<span id="fn_3029"></span>[311:3030](1080081.htm#fr_3029) <span
id="ii.LXX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p7"></span> [Matt. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3030"></span>[311:3031](1080081.htm#fr_3030) <span
id="ii.LXX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p8"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3031"></span>[311:3032](1080081.htm#fr_3031) <span
id="ii.LXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p9"></span> [Gen. xix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3032"></span>[312:3033](1080081.htm#fr_3032) <span
id="ii.LXX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p10"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span id="ii.LXX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3033"></span>[312:3034](1080081.htm#fr_3033) <span
id="ii.LXX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p11"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3034"></span>[312:3035](1080081.htm#fr_3034) <span
id="ii.LXX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p13"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3035"></span>[312:3036](1080081.htm#fr_3035) <span
id="ii.LXX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p14"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="ii.LXX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3036"></span>[312:3037](1080081.htm#fr_3036) <span
id="ii.LXX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p15"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXX-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3037"></span>[312:3038](1080081.htm#fr_3037) <span
id="ii.LXX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p16"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="ii.LXX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3038"></span>[312:3039](1080081.htm#fr_3038) <span
id="ii.LXX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p17"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.LXX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3039"></span>[312:3040](1080081.htm#fr_3039) <span
id="ii.LXX-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p18"></span> [Acts
7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058), [Acts
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXX-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3040"></span>[312:3041](1080081.htm#fr_3040) <span
id="ii.LXX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p19"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3041"></span>[312:3042](1080081.htm#fr_3041) <span
id="ii.LXX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p20"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXX-p20.1"></span>mss</span>. “and no more defend their doings.”

<span id="fn_3042"></span>[312:3043](1080081.htm#fr_3042) <span
id="ii.LXX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p22"></span> The reading *sequere* mentioned in Ben. is
probably a mistake for *seque*, which is found at Oxford. Or it is,
“follow them in their succession.”

<span id="fn_3043"></span>[312:3044](1080081.htm#fr_3043) <span
id="ii.LXX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p23"></span> *Vide* [Rev. xx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3044"></span>[312:3045](1080081.htm#fr_3044) <span
id="ii.LXX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p24"></span> [Ps. cxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3045"></span>[313:3046](1080081.htm#fr_3045) <span
id="ii.LXX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p25"></span> [Ps. lxx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3046"></span>[313:3047](1080081.htm#fr_3046) <span
id="ii.LXX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p26"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3047"></span>[313:3048](1080081.htm#fr_3047) <span
id="ii.LXX-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p28"></span> [Wisd. iii.
6](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3048"></span>[313:3049](1080081.htm#fr_3048) <span
id="ii.LXX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p29"></span> [Prov. xxvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3049"></span>[313:3050](1080081.htm#fr_3049) <span
id="ii.LXX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p30"></span> [Ps. xxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXX-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3050"></span>[313:3051](1080081.htm#fr_3050) <span
id="ii.LXX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p32"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXX-p32.1"></span>mss</span>. Reg. *non te*, “aught but Thee.”

<span id="fn_3051"></span>[313:3052](1080081.htm#fr_3051) <span
id="ii.LXX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p33"></span> [Luke xv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXX-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3052"></span>[313:3053](1080081.htm#fr_3052) <span
id="ii.LXX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p34"></span> [John x.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3053"></span>[314:3054](1080081.htm#fr_3053) <span
id="ii.LXX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p35"></span> [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="ii.LXX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3054"></span>[314:3055](1080081.htm#fr_3054) <span
id="ii.LXX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p36"></span> [Luke
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046),
[47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span id="ii.LXX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3055"></span>[314:3056](1080081.htm#fr_3055) <span
id="ii.LXX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p37"></span> [John x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3056"></span>[314:3057](1080081.htm#fr_3056) <span
id="ii.LXX-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p38"></span> [Ps. cxli.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXX-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3057"></span>[314:3058](1080081.htm#fr_3057) <span
id="ii.LXX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p39"></span> Here Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXX-p39.1"></span>mss</span>. repeat, “They that love Thy saving
health.”

<span id="fn_3058"></span>[314:3059](1080081.htm#fr_3058) <span
id="ii.LXX-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p40"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3059"></span>[314:3060](1080081.htm#fr_3059) <span
id="ii.LXX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p41"></span> [Ps. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXX-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3060"></span>[314:3061](1080081.htm#fr_3060) <span
id="ii.LXX-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p43"></span> [Ps. xviii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXX-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3061"></span>[314:3062](1080081.htm#fr_3061) <span
id="ii.LXX-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p44"></span> [Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXX-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3062"></span>[314:3063](1080081.htm#fr_3062) <span
id="ii.LXX-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p45"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3063"></span>[314:3064](1080081.htm#fr_3063) <span
id="ii.LXX-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p46"></span> [Luke xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXX-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3064"></span>[314:3065](1080081.htm#fr_3064) <span
id="ii.LXX-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p47"></span> [Ps. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXX-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3065"></span>[314:3066](1080081.htm#fr_3065) <span
id="ii.LXX-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p49"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3066"></span>[315:3067](1080081.htm#fr_3066) <span
id="ii.LXX-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p51"></span> [Ps. xc.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXX-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3067"></span>[315:3068](1080081.htm#fr_3067) <span
id="ii.LXX-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p52"></span> [Exod.
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002), [Acts
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039)<span id="ii.LXX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3068"></span>[315:3069](1080081.htm#fr_3068) <span
id="ii.LXX-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p53"></span> [Luke xvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3069"></span>[315:3070](1080081.htm#fr_3069) <span
id="ii.LXX-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p54"></span> [Philip. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3070"></span>[315:3071](1080081.htm#fr_3070) <span
id="ii.LXX-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXX-p55"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXX-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXI](1080082)
