[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080157)  [Next](1080159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXV"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXV-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXV. <span
id="fr_5471"></span>[5472](#fn_5471) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p3"></span>1. This Psalm, belonging to the number of
the Songs of Degrees, teacheth us, while we as<span id="page_601">p.
601</span> <span id="ii.CXXV-Page_601"></span>cend and raise our minds
unto the Lord our God in loving charity and piety, not to fix our gaze
upon men who are prosperous in this world, with a happiness that is
false and unstable, and altogether seductive; where they cherish nothing
save pride, and their heart freezeth up against God, and is made hard
against the shower of His grace, so that it beareth not fruit.…

<span id="ii.CXXV-p4"></span>2. “They that put their trust in the Lord
shall be even as the mount Sion: they shall not be removed for ever”
([Psa. 125.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXV-p4.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.CXXV-p5"></span>3. Who are these? “They shall stand fast
for ever, who dwell in Jerusalem” ([Psa.
125.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXV-p5.1"></span>).
If we understand this earthly Jerusalem, all who dwelt therein have been
excluded by wars and by the destruction of the city: thou now seekest a
Jew in the city of Jerusalem, and findest him not. Why then will “they
that dwell in Jerusalem not be moved for ever,” save because there is
another Jerusalem, of which ye are wont to hear much? She is our mother,
for whom we sigh and groan in this pilgrimage, that we may return unto
her.…They then who dwell therein “shall never be moved.” But they who
dwelt in that earthly Jerusalem, have been moved; first in heart,
afterwards by exile. When they were moved in heart and fell, then they
crucified the King of the heavenly Jerusalem herself; they were already
spiritually without, and shut out of doors their very King. For they
cast Him out without their city, and crucified Him without. <span
id="fr_5472"></span>[5473](#fn_5472) He too cast them out of His city,
that is, of the everlasting Jerusalem, the Mother of us all, who is in
Heaven.

<span id="ii.CXXV-p7"></span>4. What is this Jerusalem? He briefly
describes it. “The mountains stand around Jerusalem” ([Psa.
125.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXV-p7.1"></span>).
Is it anything great, that we are in a city surrounded by mountains? Is
this the whole of our happiness, that we shall have a city which
mountains surround? Do we not know what mountains are? or what are
mountains save swellings of the earth? Different then from these are
those mountains that we love, lofty mountains, preachers of truth,
whether Angels, or Apostles, or Prophets. They stand around Jerusalem;
they surround her, and, as it were, form a wall for her. Of these lovely
and delightful mountains Scripture constantly speaketh.…They are the
mountains of whom we sing: “I lifted up mine eyes unto the mountains,
from whence my help shall come:” <span
id="fr_5473"></span>[5474](#fn_5473) because in this life we have help
from the holy Scriptures. <span id="fr_5474"></span>[5475](#fn_5474) And
through the mountains that receive peace, the little hills received
righteousness: for what saith he of the mountains themselves? He said
not, they have peace from themselves, or they make peace, or generate
peace; but, they receive peace. The Lord is the source, whence they
receive peace. So therefore lift up thine eyes to the mountains for the
sake of peace, that thy help may come from the Lord, who hath made
heaven and earth. Again, the Holy Spirit mentioning these mountains
saith this: “Thou dost light them wonderfully from Thy everlasting
mountains.” <span id="fr_5475"></span>[5476](#fn_5475) He said not, the
mountains light them: but, Thou lightest them from Thy everlasting
mountains: through those mountains whom Thou hast willed to be
everlasting, preaching the Gospel, Thou lighting them, not the
mountains. Such then are the “mountains that stand around Jerusalem.”

<span id="ii.CXXV-p11"></span>5. And that ye may know what sort of
mountains these be that stand around Jerusalem; where Scripture hath
mentioned good mountains, very rarely, and hardly, and perhaps never,
doth it fail instantly to mention the Lord also, or allude to Him at the
same moment, that our hopes rest not in the mountains.…Lest thou again
shouldest tarry in the mountains, he at once addeth, “Even so the Lord
standeth round about His people:” that thy hope might not lie in the
mountains, but in Him who lighteth the mountains. <span
id="fr_5476"></span>[5477](#fn_5476) For when He dwelleth in the
mountains, that is, in the Saints, He Himself is round about His people;
and He hath Himself walled His people with a spiritual fortification,
that it may not be moved for evermore. But when Scripture speaketh of
evil mountains, it addeth not the Lord unto them. Such mountains, we
have already told you often, signify certain mighty, but evil, souls.
For ye are not to suppose, brethren, that heresies could be produced
through any little souls. None save great men have been the authors of
heresies; but in proportion as they were mighty, so were they evil,
mountains. For they were not such mountains as would receive peace, that
the hills might receive righteousness; but they received dissension from
their father the devil. There were therefore mountains: beware thou fly
not to such mountains. For men will come, and say unto thee, There is a
great hero, there is a great man! How great was that Donatus! How great
is Maximian! and a certain Photinus, what a great man he was! And Arius
too, how illustrious he was! All these I have mentioned are mountains,
but mountains that cause shipwreck. <span
id="fr_5477"></span>[5478](#fn_5477) …

<span id="ii.CXXV-p14"></span>6. But love such mountains, in whom the
Lord is. Then do those very mountains love thee, if thou hast not placed
hope in them. <span id="fr_5478"></span>[5479](#fn_5478) See, brethren,
what the mountains of God are. Thence they are so called in another
passage: “Thy righteousness is like the mountains of <span
id="page_602">p. 602</span> <span
id="ii.CXXV-Page_602"></span>God.” <span
id="fr_5479"></span>[5480](#fn_5479) Not their righteousness, but “Thy
righteousness.” Hear that great mountain the Apostle. “That I may be
found in Him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law,
but that which is through the faith of Christ.” <span
id="fr_5480"></span>[5481](#fn_5480) But they who have chosen to be
mountains through their own righteousness, as certain Jews or Pharisees
their rulers, are thus blamed: “Being ignorant of God’s righteousness,
and going about to establish their own righteousness, they have not
submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God.” <span
id="fr_5481"></span>[5482](#fn_5481) But they who have submitted
themselves are exalted in such a manner as to be humble. In that they
are great, they are mountains; in that they submit themselves unto God,
they are valleys: and in that they have the capacity of piety, they
receive the plenteousness of peace, and transmit the copious irrigation
to the hills, only beware, at present, what mountains thou lovest. If
thou wish to be loved by good mountains, place not thy trust even in
good mountains. For how great a mountain was Paul? where is one like him
found? We speak of the greatness of men. Can any one readily be found of
so great grace? Nevertheless, he feared lest that bird should place
trust in him: and what doth he say: “Was Paul crucified for you?” <span
id="fr_5482"></span>[5483](#fn_5482) But lift up your eyes unto the
mountains, whence help may come unto you: for, “I have planted, Apollos
hath watered:” but, your help cometh from the Lord, who hath made Heaven
and earth; for, “God gave the increase.” <span
id="fr_5483"></span>[5484](#fn_5483) “The mountains,” therefore, “stand
around Jerusalem.” But as “the mountains stand around Jerusalem, even so
standeth the Lord round about His people, from this time forth for
evermore.” If therefore the mountains stand around Jerusalem, and the
Lord standeth round about His people, the Lord bindeth His people into
one bond of love and peace, so that they who trust in the Lord, like the
mount Sion, may not be moved for evermore: and this is, “from this time
forth for evermore.”

<span id="ii.CXXV-p21"></span>7. “For the Lord will not leave the rod of
the ungodly upon the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put forth
their hands unto wickedness” ([Psa.
125.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXV-p21.1"></span>). At present indeed the righteous suffer in
some measure, and at present the unrighteous sometimes tyrannize over
the righteous. In what ways? Sometimes the unrighteous arrive at worldly
honours: when they have arrived at them, and have been made either
judges or kings; for God doth this for the discipline of His folk, for
the discipline of His people; the honour due to their power must needs
be shown them. For thus hath God ordained His Church, that every power
ordained in the world may have honour, and sometimes from those who are
better than those in power. For the sake of illustration I take one
instance; hence calculate the grades of all powers. The primary and
every day relation of authority between man and man is that between
master and slave. Almost all houses have a power of this sort. There are
masters, there are also slaves; these are different names, but men and
men are equal names. <span id="fr_5484"></span>[5485](#fn_5484) And what
saith the Apostle, teaching that slaves are subject to their masters?
“Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters according to the
flesh:” for there is a Master according to the Spirit. He is the true
and everlasting Master; but those temporal masters are for a time only.
When thou walkest in the way, when thou livest in this life, Christ doth
not wish to make thee proud. It hath been thy lot to become a Christian,
and to have a man for thy master: thou wast not made a Christian, that
thou mightest disdain to be a servant. For when by Christ’s command thou
servest a man, thou servest not the man, but Him who commanded thee. He
saith this also: “Servants, be obedient to them that are your masters
according to the flesh.” <span id="fr_5485"></span>[5486](#fn_5485)
Behold, he hath not made men free from being servants, but good servants
from bad servants. How much do the rich owe to Christ, who orders their
house for them! so that if thou hast had an unbelieving servant, suppose
Christ convert him, and say not to him, Leave thy master, thou hast now
known Him who is thy true Master: he perhaps is ungodly and unjust, thou
art now faithful and righteous: it is unworthy that a righteous and
faithful man should serve an unjust and unbelieving master. He spoke not
thus unto him, but rather, Serve him: and to confirm the servant, added,
Serve as I served; I before thee served the unjust.…If the Lord of
heaven and earth, through whom all things were created, served the
unworthy, asked mercy for His furious persecutors, and, as it were,
showed Himself as their Physician at His Advent (for physicians also,
better both in art and health, serve the sick): how much more ought not
a man to disdain, with his whole mind, and his whole good will, with his
whole love to serve even a bad master! Behold, a better serveth an
inferior, but for a season. Understand what I have said of the master
and slave, to be true also of powers and kings, of all the exalted
stations of this world. For sometimes they are good powers, and fear
God; sometimes they fear not God. Julian was an infidel Emperor, an
apostate, a wicked man, an idolater; Christian soldiers served an
infidel Emperor; when they came to the cause of Christ, they
acknowledged Him only who was in <span id="page_603">p. 603</span> <span
id="ii.CXXV-Page_603"></span>heaven. If he called upon them at any time
to worship idols, to offer incense; they preferred God to him: but
whenever he commanded them to deploy into line, to march against this or
that nation, they at once obeyed. They distinguished their everlasting
from their temporal master; and yet they were, for the sake of their
everlasting Master, submissive to their temporal master.

<span id="ii.CXXV-p24"></span>8. But will it be thus always, that the
ungodly have power over the righteous? It will not be so. The rod of the
ungodly is felt for a season upon the lot of the righteous; but it is
not left there, it will not be there for ever. A time will come, when
Christ, appearing in his glory, shall gather all nations before
Him. <span id="fr_5486"></span>[5487](#fn_5486) And thou wilt see there
many slaves among the sheep, and many masters among the goats; and again
many masters among the sheep, many slaves among the goats. For all
slaves are not good—do not infer this from the consolation we have given
to servants—nor are all masters evil, because we have thus repressed the
pride of masters. There are good masters who believe, and there are
evil: there are good servants who believe, and there are evil. But as
long as good servants serve evil masters, let them endure for a season.
“For God will not leave the rod of the ungodly upon the lot of the
righteous.” Why will He not? “Lest the righteous put forth their hand
unto wickedness:” that the righteous may endure for a season the
domination of the ungodly, and may understand that this is not for ever,
but may prepare themselves to possess their everlasting heritage.…

<span id="ii.CXXV-p26"></span>9. And he therefore addeth, “Do well, O
Lord, unto those that are good and true of heart” ([Psa.
125.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXV-p26.1"></span>). They who are right in heart, of whom I was
speaking a little before,—they who follow the will of God, not their own
will,—reflect upon this. But they who wish to follow God, allow Him to
go before, and themselves to follow; not themselves to go before, and
Him to follow; and in all things they find Him good, whether chastening,
or consoling, or exercising, or crowning, or cleansing, or enlightening;
as the Apostle saith, “We know that all things work together for good to
them that love God.” <span id="fr_5487"></span>[5488](#fn_5487)

<span id="ii.CXXV-p28"></span>10. Whence the Psalmist at once addeth:
“As for such as turn aside, the Lord shall lead them forth unto
strangling with the workers of unrighteousness” ([Psa.
125.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXV-p28.1"></span>): that is, those whose deeds they have
imitated; because they took delight in their present pleasures, and did
not believe in their punishments to come. What then shall they have, who
are righteous in heart, and who turn not back? Let us now come to the
heritage itself, brethren, for we are sons. What shall we possess? What
is our heritage? what is our country: what is it called? Peace. In this
we salute you, this we announce to you, this the mountains receive, and
the little hills receive as righteousness. <span
id="fr_5488"></span>[5489](#fn_5488) Peace is Christ: “for He is our
peace, who hath made both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of
partition between us.” <span id="fr_5489"></span>[5490](#fn_5489) Since
we are sons, we shall have an inheritance. And what shall this
inheritance be called, but peace? And consider that they who love not
peace are disinherited. Now they who divide unity, love not peace. Peace
is the possession of the pious, the possession of heirs. And who are
heirs? Sons.…Since then Christ the Son of God is peace, He therefore
came to gather together His own, and to separate them from the wicked.
From what wicked men? From those who hate Jerusalem, who hate peace, who
wish to tear unity asunder, who believe not peace, who preach a false
peace to the people, and have it not. To whom answer is made, when they
say, <span id="fr_5490"></span>[5491](#fn_5490) “Peace be with you,”
“And with thy spirit:” but they speak falsely, and they hear falsely.
Unto whom do they say, Peace be with you? To those whom they separate
from the peace of the whole earth. And unto whom is it said, “And with
thy spirit”? To those who embrace dissensions, and who hate peace. For
if peace were in their spirit, would they not love unity, and leave
dissensions? Speaking then false words, they hear false words. Let us
speak true words, and hear true words. Let us be Israel, and let us
embrace peace; for Jerusalem is a vision of peace, and we are Israel,
“and peace is upon Israel.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5471"></span>[600:5472](1080158.htm#fr_5471) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p2"></span> Lat. CXXIV. A discourse to the people.

<span id="fn_5472"></span>[601:5473](1080158.htm#fr_5472) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p6"></span> [John
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#018)<span id="ii.CXXV-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5473"></span>[601:5474](1080158.htm#fr_5473) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p8"></span> [Ps.
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5474"></span>[601:5475](1080158.htm#fr_5474) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p9"></span> \[Observe in our author *passim* this
implication that the laity as well as the clergy were filled with the
knowledge and comfort of the Scriptures.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5475"></span>[601:5476](1080158.htm#fr_5475) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p10"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5476"></span>[601:5477](1080158.htm#fr_5476) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p12"></span> \[Evidence against saint-worship.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5477"></span>[601:5478](1080158.htm#fr_5477) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p13"></span> \[So [Jude
16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CXXV-p13.1"></span>.—C.\] Vinc. Lir. *Common*. §§ 17–20.

<span id="fn_5478"></span>[601:5479](1080158.htm#fr_5478) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p15"></span> \[Evidence against saint-worship.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5479"></span>[602:5480](1080158.htm#fr_5479) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p16"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5480"></span>[602:5481](1080158.htm#fr_5480) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p17"></span> [Philip. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXXV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5481"></span>[602:5482](1080158.htm#fr_5481) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p18"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5482"></span>[602:5483](1080158.htm#fr_5482) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p19"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXXV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5483"></span>[602:5484](1080158.htm#fr_5483) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p20"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5484"></span>[602:5485](1080158.htm#fr_5484) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p22"></span> \[The Epistle to Philemon is here
reflected. See A.N.F. vol. viii. p. 782, note 1, and p. 784; also vol.
vii. p. 425.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5485"></span>[602:5486](1080158.htm#fr_5485) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p23"></span> [Eph. vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXXV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5486"></span>[603:5487](1080158.htm#fr_5486) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p25"></span> [Matt.
25:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="ii.CXXV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5487"></span>[603:5488](1080158.htm#fr_5487) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p27"></span> [Rom. viii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXXV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5488"></span>[603:5489](1080158.htm#fr_5488) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p29"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5489"></span>[603:5490](1080158.htm#fr_5489) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p30"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5490"></span>[603:5491](1080158.htm#fr_5490) <span
id="ii.CXXV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXV-p31"></span> \[In the Liturgy.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXVI](1080159)
