[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080123)  [Next](1080125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXIII. <span
id="fr_5029"></span>[5030](#fn_5029) </span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p3"></span>1. …When ye hear sung in the Psalms,
“Praise the Lord, ye children” ([Psa.
113.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p3.1"></span>); imagine not that that exhortation
pertaineth not unto you, because having already passed the youth of the
body, ye are either blooming in the prime of manhood, or growing gray
with the honours of old age: for unto all of you the Apostle saith,
“Brethren, be not children in understanding; howbeit, in malice be ye
children, but in understanding be men.” <span
id="fr_5030"></span>[5031](#fn_5030) What malice in particular, save
pride? For it is pride that, presuming in false greatness, suffereth not
man to walk along the narrow path, and to enter by the narrow gate; but
the child easily entereth through the narrow entrance; and thus no man,
save as a child, entereth into the kingdom of heaven. “Praise the Name
of the Lord.”…Let Him therefore be alway proclaimed: “Blessed be the
Name of the Lord, from this time forth for evermore” ([Psa.
113.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p4.2"></span>). Let Him be proclaimed everywhere: “From the
rising up of the sun unto the going down of the same, praise ye the Name
of the Lord” ([Psa. 113.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p4.3"></span>).

<span id="ii.CXIII-p5"></span>2. If any of the holy children who praise
the Name of the Lord were to ask of me and say to me, “for evermore” I
understand to mean unto all eternity: but why “from this,” and why is
not the Name of the Lord blessed before this, and before all ages? I
will answer the infant, who asketh not in contumacy. Unto you it is
said, masters and children, unto you it is said, “Praise the Name of the
Lord; blessed be the Name of the Lord:” let the Name of the Lord be
blessed, “from this,” that is, from the moment ye speak these words. For
ye begin to praise, but praise ye without end.…Or, since in this passage
he seemeth to signify rather humility than childhood, the contrary of
which is the vain and false greatness of pride; and for this reason none
but children praise the Lord, since the proud know not how to praise
Him; let old age be childlike, and your childhood like old age; that is,
that neither may your wisdom be with pride, nor your humility without
wisdom, that ye may “praise the Lord from this for evermore.” Wherever
the Church of Christ is diffused in her childlike saints, “Praise ye the
Name of the Lord;” that is, “from the rising up of the sun unto the
going down of the same.”

<span id="ii.CXIII-p6"></span>3. “The Lord is high above all heathen”
([Psa. 113.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p6.1"></span>). The heathen are men: what wonder if the
Lord be above all men? They see with their eyes those whom they worship
high above themselves to shine in heaven, the sun and moon and stars,
creatures which they serve while they <span id="page_549">p. 549</span>
<span id="ii.CXIII-Page_549"></span>neglect the Creator. But not only
“is the Lord high above all heathen;” but “His glory” also “is above the
heavens.” The heavens look up unto Him above themselves; and the humble
have Him together with them, who do not worship the heavens instead of
Him, though placed in the flesh beneath the heavens.

<span id="ii.CXIII-p7"></span>4. “Who is like unto the Lord our God,
that hath His dwelling so high; and yet beholdeth the humble?” ([Psa.
113.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p7.1"></span>). Any one would think that He dwelleth in the
lofty heavens, whence He may behold the humble things on earth; but “He
beholdeth the humble things that are in heaven and earth” ([Psa.
113.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p7.2"></span>): what then is His high dwelling, whence He
beholdeth the humble things that are in heaven and earth? Are the humble
things He beholdeth His own high dwelling itself? For He thus exalteth
the humble, so as not to make them proud. He therefore both dwelleth in
those whom He raiseth high, and maketh them heaven for Himself, that is,
His own abode; and by seeing them not proud, but constantly subject to
Himself, He beholdeth even in heaven itself these very humble things, in
whom raised on high He dwelleth. For the Spirit thus speaketh through
Isaiah: “Thus saith the Highest that dwelleth on high, that inhabiteth
eternity; the Lord Most High, dwelling in the holy.” He hath expounded
what He meant by dwelling on high, by the more full expression,
“dwelling in the holy.”…

<span id="ii.CXIII-p8"></span>5. And he hath moved us also to enquire
whether the Lord our God beholdeth the same humble things in heaven and
in earth: or different humble things in heaven to what He beholdeth on
earth.…But if the Lord our God beholdeth other humble things in heaven
to what He doth on earth; I suppose that He already beholdeth in heaven
those whom He hath called, and in whom He dwelleth; while on earth He
beholdeth those whom He is now calling, that He may dwell in them. For
He hath the one with Him musing on heavenly things, the others He is
waking, while they yet dream things earthly. But since it is difficult
to call even those humble, who have not as yet submitted their necks in
piety to the gracious yoke of Christ, since the divine writings
throughout the whole Psalm warn us to understand holy by the word
humble; there is also another interpretation, which, Beloved, ye may
consider with me. I believe that those are now meant by heavens who
shall sit upon twelve thrones, and shall judge with the Lord; <span
id="fr_5031"></span>[5032](#fn_5031) and under the name of the earth,
the rest of the multitude of the blessed, who shall be set on the right
hand, that through works of mercy they may be praised and received into
everlasting habitations by those whom they have made friends to
themselves from the mammon of unrighteousness in this mortal life. <span
id="fr_5032"></span>[5033](#fn_5032) …

<span id="ii.CXIII-p11"></span>6. “He taketh up the destitute out of the
dust, and lifteth the poor out of the mire” ([Psa.
113.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p11.1"></span>); “that He may set Him with the princes,
even with the princes of His people” ([Psa.
113.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p11.2"></span>). Let not then the heads of the exalted
disdain to be humble, beneath the Lord’s right hand. For though the
faithful steward of the Lord’s money be placed together with the princes
of the people of God, although he be destined to sit on the twelve
seats, and even to judge angels; <span
id="fr_5033"></span>[5034](#fn_5033) yet he is taken up destitute from
the dust, and lifted from out of the mire. Was not he possibly lifted up
from the mire, who “served divers lusts and pleasures”?…

<span id="ii.CXIII-p13"></span>7. What then, brethren, if we have
already heard of those humble things which are in heaven, lifted up from
the mire, that they might be set with the princes of the people; have we
by consequence heard nothing of the humble things which the Lord
beholdeth on the earth? For those friends who will judge with their Lord
are fewer, while those whom they receive into everlasting habitations
are more in number. For although the whole of a heap of corn compared
with the separate chaff may seem to contain few in number; yet
considered by itself, it is abundant.…The Church then speaketh thus in
that sense, wherein she seemeth to bear no offspring among those crowds
who have not given up all things, that they might follow the Lord, and
might sit upon the twelve thrones. <span
id="fr_5034"></span>[5035](#fn_5034) But how many in the same crowd, who
make unto themselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, <span
id="fr_5035"></span>[5036](#fn_5035) shall stand on the right hand
through works of mercy? He not only then lifteth up from the mire him
whom He is to place with the princes of His people; but also, “Maketh
the barren woman to keep house, and to be a joyful mother of children”
([Psa. 113.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXIII-p15.2"></span>): He who dwelleth on high, and beholdeth the
humble things that are in heaven and earth, the seed of Abraham like the
stars of heaven, holiness set on high in heavenly habitations; and like
the sand on the sea shore, a merciful and countless multitude gathered
together from the harmful waves, and the bitterness of impiety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5029"></span>[548:5030](1080124.htm#fr_5029) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXII. A discourse to the people.

<span id="fn_5030"></span>[548:5031](1080124.htm#fr_5030) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p4"></span> [1 Cor.
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020), [Matt.
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5031"></span>[549:5032](1080124.htm#fr_5031) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p9"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5032"></span>[549:5033](1080124.htm#fr_5032) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p10"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5033"></span>[549:5034](1080124.htm#fr_5033) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p12"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5034"></span>[549:5035](1080124.htm#fr_5034) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p14"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5035"></span>[549:5036](1080124.htm#fr_5035) <span
id="ii.CXIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIII-p15"></span> [Luke xvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXIII-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXIV](1080125)
