[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080096)  [Next](1080098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXXVI"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXXXVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXXXVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXXVI. <span
id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p3"></span>1. No greater gift could God have given
to men than in making His Word, by which He created all things, their
Head, and joining them to Him as His members: that the Son of God might
<span id="page_410">p. 410</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_410"></span>become also the Son of man, one God with
the Father, one Man with men; so that when we speak to God in prayer for
mercy, we do not separate the Son from Him; and when the Body of the Son
prays, it separates not its Head from itself: and it is one Saviour of
His Body, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who both prays for us,
and prays in us, and is prayed to by us. He prays for us, as our Priest;
He prays in us, as our Head; He is prayed to by us, as our God. Let us
therefore recognise in Him our words, and His words in us. Nor when
anything is said of our Lord Jesus Christ, especially in prophecy,
implying a degree of humility below the dignity of God, let us hesitate
to ascribe it to Him who did not hesitate to join Himself unto us.…He is
prayed to in the form of God, in the form of a servant He prayeth; there
the Creator, here created; assuming unchanged the creature, that it
might be changed, and making us with Himself one Man, Head and Body.
Therefore we pray to Him, through Him, in Him; and we speak with Him,
and He speaks with us; we speak in Him, He speaks in us the prayer of
this Psalm, which is entitled, “A Prayer of David.” For our Lord was,
according to the flesh, the son of David; but according to His divine
nature, the Lord of David, and his Maker.…Let no one then, when he hears
these words, say, Christ speaketh not; nor again say, I speak not; nay
rather, if he own himself to be in the Body of Christ, let him say both,
Christ speaks, and I speak. Be thou unwilling to say anything without
Him, and He saith nothing without thee.…

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p4"></span>2. “Bow down Thine ear, O Lord, and hear
me” ([Psa. 86.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p4.1"></span>). He speaks in the form of a servant: speak
thou, O servant, in the form of thy Lord: “Bow down Thine ear, O Lord.”
He bows down His ear, if thou dost not lift up thy neck: for unto the
humble He draweth near: from him that is exalted He removes afar off,
except whom He Himself hath exalted from being humble. God then bows
down His ear unto us. For He is above, we below: He in a high place, we
in a lowly one, yet not deserted. “For while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. For scarcely for a just man will one die: yet for a good
man peradventure one would even dare to die:” <span
id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940) but our Lord died for the wicked.
For no merits of ours had gone before, for which the Son of God should
die: but the more, because there were no merits, was His mercy great.
How sure then, how firm is the promise, by which for the righteous He
keepeth His life, who for the wicked gave His own death! “For I am poor
and in misery.” To the rich then He boweth not down His ear: unto the
poor and him that is in misery He boweth down His ear, that is, unto the
humble, and him that confesseth, unto him that is in need of mercy: not
unto him that is full, who lifteth up himself and boasteth, as if he
wanted nothing, and saith, “I thank Thee that I am not as this
Publican.” For the rich Pharisee boasted of his merits: the poor
Publican confessed his sins. <span id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941)

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p7"></span>3. Yet do not take what I have said, my
brethren, in such a way, as if God does not hear those who have gold and
silver, and a household, and farms, if they happen to be born to this
estate, or hold such a rank in the world: only let them remember the
Apostle’s words: “Charge those who are rich in this world, that they be
not highminded.” <span id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942) For those
that are not highminded are poor in God, and to the poor and needy and
those in want He inclines His ear. For they know that their hope is not
in gold and silver, nor in those things in which for a time they seem to
abound. It is enough that riches ruin them not; it is enough that they
do them no harm: for good they can do them none. What certainly
profiteth is a work of mercy, done by a rich or by a poor man: by a rich
man, with will and deed; by a poor man, with will alone. When therefore
he is such an one as despiseth in himself everything which is wont to
swell men with pride, he is one of God’s poor: He inclines unto him His
ear, for He knows that his heart is contrite.…Was it really for the
merit of his poverty that the poor man was carried away by Angels, <span
id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) or was it for the sin of his riches
that the rich man was sent away to be tormented? In that poor man is
signified the honour which is paid to humility, in that rich man the
condemnation which awaits pride. I will prove shortly that it was not
riches but pride which was tormented in that rich man. It is certain
that the poor man was carried into the bosom of Abraham: of Abraham
himself Scripture saith that he had here very much gold and silver, and
was rich on the earth.  <span id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944) If
every one that is rich is hurried away to be tormented, how could
Abraham have gone before that poor man, so as to be ready to receive him
when carried to his bosom? But Abraham in his riches was poor, humble,
reverencing all commands, and obeying them. So true was it that he
counted all those riches for nothing, that on God’s command he was ready
to sacrifice his son, <span id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945) for
whom he was keeping his riches. Learn therefore ye to be poor and needy,
whether ye have anything in this world, or whether ye have not.…

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p12"></span>4. “Preserve Thou My Soul, for I am
holy” ([Psa. 86.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p12.1"></span>). I know not whether any one could say
this, “I am holy,” but He who was in the world without sin: He by whom
all sins were not <span id="page_411">p. 411</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_411"></span>committed but remitted. <span
id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946) We own it to be His voice saying,
“Preserve Thou My Soul, for I am holy;” of course in that form of a
servant which He had assumed. For in that was flesh, in that, was also a
Soul. For He was not, as some <span id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947)
have said, only Flesh and the Word: but Flesh and Soul also, and the
Word, and all this, One Son of God, One Christ, One Saviour; in the form
of God equal to the Father, in the form of a servant the Head of the
Church. When therefore I hear, “for I am holy,” I recognise His voice:
yet do I exclude my own? Surely He speaks inseparably from His body when
He speaks thus. Shall I then dare to say, “For I am holy”? If holy as
making holy, and as needing none to sanctify, I should be proud and
false: but if holy as made holy, as it is written, “Be ye holy, for I am
holy,” <span id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) then the body of
Christ may venture, and that one Man “crying from the end of the
earth,” <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949) may venture with his
Head, and under his Head, to say, “For I am holy.” For he hath received
the grace of holiness, the grace of Baptism, and of remission of
sins. <span id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950) …Say unto thy God, I am
holy, for Thou hast sanctified me: because I received, not because I
had: because Thou gavest, not because I deserved. For on another side
thou art beginning to do an injury to our Lord Jesus Christ Himself. For
if all Christians who are faithful and have been baptized in Him have
put Him on, as the Apostle saith, “As many as are baptized in Christ
have put on Christ:” <span id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951) if they
have been made members of His body, and say that they are not holy, they
do injury to their Head, of whom they are members, and yet not holy.
Look thou where thou art and from thy Head assume dignity. For thou wert
in darkness, “but now light in the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) “Ye were sometime darkness,” he
saith: but did ye remain darkness? Was it for this the Enlightener came,
that ye might still remain darkness, or that in Him ye might become
light? Therefore, every Christian by himself, therefore also the whole
body of Christ, may say, it may cry everywhere, while it suffers
tribulations, various temptations and offences, it may say, “Preserve
Thou my soul, for I am holy: my God, save Thy servant, that putteth his
trust in Thee.” See thou, that holy man is not proud, since he putteth
his trust in God.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p20"></span>5. “Be merciful unto me, O Lord, for I
have cried unto Thee all day” ([Psa.
86.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p20.1"></span>). Not “one day:” understand “all day” to
mean continually: from the time that the body of Christ groans being in
afflictions, until the end of the world, when afflictions pass away,
that man groaneth and calleth upon God: and each one of us after his
measure hath his part in that cry in the whole body. Thou hast cried in
thy days, and thy days have passed away: another hath come after thee,
and cried in his days: and thou here, he there, another elsewhere: the
body of Christ crieth all the day, its members departing and succeeding
one another. One Man it is that reaches to the end of the world: the
same members of Christ cry, and some members already rest in Him, some
still cry, some when we shall be at rest will cry, and after them others
will cry. It is the whole body of Christ whose voice He hears, saying,
“Unto Thee have I cried all the day.” Our Head on the right hand of the
Father intercedes for us: some members He recovereth, others He
scourgeth, others He cleanseth, others He comforteth, others He is
creating, others calling, others recalling, others correcting, others
restoring.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p21"></span>6. “Make glad the soul of Thy servant:
for unto Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul” ([Psa.
86.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p21.1"></span>). Make it glad, for unto Thee have I lifted
it up. For it was on earth, and from the earth it felt bitterness: lest
it should wither away in bitterness, lest it should lose all the
sweetness of Thy grace, I lifted it up unto Thee: make Thou it glad with
Thyself. For Thou alone art gladness: the whole world is full of
bitterness. Surely with reason He admonishes His members to lift up
their hearts. May they hear and do it: may they lift up unto Him what on
earth is ill. There the heart decayeth not, if it be lifted up to God.
If thou hadst corn in thy rooms below, thou wouldest take it up higher,
lest it should grow rotten. Wouldest thou remove thy corn, and dost thou
suffer thy heart to rot on the earth? Thou wouldest take thy corn up
higher: lift up thy heart to heaven. And how can I, dost thou say? What
ropes are needed? what machines? what ladders? Thy affections are the
steps: thy will the way. By loving thou mountest, by neglect thou
descendest. Standing on the earth thou art in heaven, if thou lovest
God. For the heart is not so raised as the body is raised: the body to
be lifted up changes its place: the heart to be lifted up changes its
will.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p22"></span>7. “For Thou, Lord, art good and
gracious” ([Psa. 86.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p22.1"></span>).…Even prayers are often hindered by vain
thoughts, so that the heart scarcely remains fixed on God: and it would
hold itself so as to be fixed, and somehow flees from itself, and finds
no frames in which it can enclose itself, no bars by which it may keep
in its flights and wandering movements, and stand still to be made glad
by its God. Scarcely does one such prayer occur amongst many. Each one
might say that this happened to him, but that it happened not to others,
if we did not find in the holy Scripture David praying in a certain
place, <span id="page_412">p. 412</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_412"></span>and saying, “Since I have found my heart,
O Lord, so that I might pray unto Thee.” <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953) He said that he had found his
heart, as if it were wont to flee from him, and he to follow it like a
fugitive, and not be able to catch it, and to cry to God, “For my heart
hath deserted me.” <span id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) Therefore,
my brethren, thinking over what he saith here, I think I see what he
meaneth by “gracious.” I seem to feel that for this reason he calls God
gracious, because He bears with those failings of ours, and yet expects
prayer from us, in order to make us perfect: and when we have given it
to Him, He receives it gratefully, and listens to it, and remembers not
those many prayers which we pour out unthinkingly, and accepts the one
which we can scarcely find. For what man is there, my brethren, who, on
being addressed by his friend, when he wishes to answer his address,
sees his friend turn away from him and speak to another, who is there
who would bear this? Or if you appeal to a judge, and set him up to hear
you, and all at once, while you are speaking to him, pass from him, and
begin to converse with your friend, who would endure this? Yet God
endures the hearts of so many persons who pray and think of different
things.…What then? Must we despair of mankind, and say that every man is
already condemned into whose prayers any wandering thoughts have crept
and interrupted them? If we say this, my brethren, I know not what hope
remains. Therefore because there is some hope before God, because His
mercy is great, let us say unto Him, “For unto Thee, O Lord, have I
lifted up my soul.” And how have I lifted it up? As I could, as Thou
gavest me strength, as I could catch it when it fled away.…From
infirmity I sink: heal Thou me, and I shall stand: strengthen Thou me,
and I shall be strong. But until Thou do this, Thou bearest with me:
“For Thou, Lord, art good and gracious, and of great mercy.” That is,
not only “of mercy,” but “of great mercy:” for as our iniquity abounds,
so also aboundeth Thy mercy. “Unto all that call upon Thee.” What is it
then which Scripture saith in many places: “They shall call, and I will
not hear them”? <span id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955) Yet surely
Thou art merciful to all that call upon Thee; but that some call, yet
call not upon Him, of whom it is said, “They have not called upon
God.” <span id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956) They call, but not on
God. Thou callest upon whatever thou lovest: thou callest upon whatever
thou callest unto thyself, whatever thou wishest to come unto thee.
Therefore if thou callest upon God for this reason, in order that money
may come unto thee, that an inheritance may come unto thee, that worldly
rank may come unto thee, thou callest upon those things which thou
desirest may come unto thee: but thou makest God the helper of thy
desires, not the listener to thy needs. God is good, if He gives what
thou wishest. What if thou wishest ill, will He not then be more
merciful by not giving? Then, if He gives not, then is God nothing to
thee; and thou sayest, How much I have prayed, how often I have prayed,
and have not been heard! Why, what didst thou ask? Perhaps that thy
enemy might die. What if he at the same time were praying for thy death?
He who created thee, created him also: thou art a man, he too is a man;
but God is the Judge: He hears both, and He grants their prayer to
neither. Thou art sad, because thou wast not heard when praying against
him; be glad, because his prayer was not heard against thee. But thou
sayest, I did not ask for this; I asked not for the death of my enemy,
but for the life of my child; what ill did I ask? Thou askedst no ill,
as thou didst think. What if “he was taken away, lest wickedness should
alter his understanding.” <span id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957) But
he was a sinner, thou sayest, and therefore I wished him to live, that
he might be corrected. Thou wishedst him to live, that he might become
better; what if God knew, that if he lived he would become worse?…If,
therefore, thou callest on God as God, be confident thou shalt be heard:
thou hast part in that verse: “And of great mercy unto all that call
upon Thee.”…

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p28"></span>8. Think, brethren, and reflect what
good things God giveth unto sinners: and learn hence what He keepeth for
His own servants. To sinners who blaspheme Him every day He giveth the
sky and the earth, He giveth springs, fruits, health, children, wealth,
abundance: all these good things none giveth but God. He who giveth such
things to sinners, what thinkest thou He keeps for His faithful ones? Is
this to be believed of Him, that He who giveth such things to the bad,
keepeth nothing for the good? Nay verily He doth keep, not earth, but
heaven for them. Too common a thing perhaps I say when I say heaven;
Himself rather, who made the heaven. Fair is heaven, but fairer is the
Maker of heaven. But I see the heavens, Him I see not. Because thou hast
eyes to see the heavens: a heart thou hast not yet to see the Maker of
heaven: therefore came He from heaven to earth, to cleanse the heart,
that He may be seen who made heaven and earth. But wait thou with full
patience for salvation. By what treatment to cure thee, He knoweth: by
what cutting, what burning, He knoweth. Thou hast brought sickness on
thyself by sinning: He comes not only to nurse, but also to cut and to
burn. Seest <span id="page_413">p. 413</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_413"></span>thou not how much men suffer under the
hands of physicians, when a man promises them an uncertain hope? Thou
wilt be cured, says the physician: thou wilt be cured, if I cut. It is a
man who speaks, and to a man that he speaks: neither is he sure who
speaks, nor he who hears, for he who is speaking to the man hath not
made man, and knows not perfectly what is passing in man: yet at the
words of a man who knows not what is passing in man, man sooner
believeth, submits his limbs, suffers himself to be bound, often without
being bound is cut or burned; and receives perhaps health for a few
days, even when just healed not knowing when he may die: perhaps, while
being healed, dies; perhaps cannot be healed. But to whom hath God
promised anything, and deceived him?

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p29"></span>9. “Fix my prayer in Thy ears, O Lord”
([Psa. 86.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p29.1"></span>). Great earnestness of him who prays! That
is, let not my prayer go out of Thine ears, fix it then in Thine ears.
How did he travail that he might fix his prayer in the ears of God? Let
God answer and say to us; Wouldest thou that I fix thy prayer in My
ears? Fix My law in thy heart; “and attend to the voice of my prayer.”

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p30"></span>10. “In the day of my trouble I have
cried unto Thee, for Thou hast heard me” ([Psa.
86.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p30.1"></span>). A little before he had said, All the day
have I cried, all the day have I been troubled. Let no Christian then
say that there is any day in which he is not troubled. By “all the day”
we have understood the whole of time. What then, is there trouble even
when it is well with us? Even so, trouble. How is there trouble? Because
“as long as we are in the body we are absent from the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) Let what will abound here, we are
not yet in that country whither we are hastening to return. He to whom
foreign travel is sweet, loveth not his country: if his country is
sweet, travel is bitter; if travel is bitter, all the day there is
trouble. When is there not trouble? When there is joy in one’s country.
“At Thy right hand are delights for evermore.” <span
id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959) “Thou shalt fill me with joy,” he
saith, “with Thy countenance: that I may see the delight of the
Lord.” <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960) There toil and
groaning shall pass away: there shall be not prayer but praise; there
Alleluia, there Amen, the voice in concord with Angels; there vision
without failing and love without weariness. So long therefore as we are
not there, ye see that we are not in that which is good. But do all
things abound? If all things abound, see if thou art assured that all
things perish not. But I have what I had not: more money is come to me
which I had not before. Perhaps more fear too is come, which thou hadst
not before: perhaps thou wast so much the more secure as thou wast the
poorer. In fine, be it that thou hast wealth, that thou hast redundance
of this world’s affluence, that thou hast assurance given thee that all
this shall not perish; besides this, that God say unto thee, Thou shalt
remain for ever in these things, they shall be for ever with thee, but
My face thou shalt not see. Let none ask counsel of the flesh: ask ye
counsel of the Spirit: let your heart answer you; let hope, faith,
charity, which has begun to be in you, answer. If then we were to
receive assurance that we should always be in affluence of worldly
goods, and if God were to say to us, My face ye shall not see, would ye
rejoice in these goods? Some one might perhaps choose to rejoice, and
say, These things abound unto me, it is well with me, I ask no more. He
hath not yet begun to be a lover of God: he hath not yet begun to sigh
like one far from home. Far be it, far be it from us: let them retire,
all those seductions: let them retire, those false blandishments: let
them be gone, those words which they say daily unto us, “Where is thy
God?” Let us pour out our soul <span
id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961) over us, <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) let us confess in tears, let us
groan in confession, let us sigh in misery. Whatever is present with us
besides our God, is not sweet: we would not have all things that He hath
given, if He gives not Himself who gave all things.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p36"></span>11. “Among the gods there is none like
unto Thee, O Lord” ([Psa. 86.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p36.1"></span>). What did he say? “Among the gods,” etc.
Let the Pagans make for themselves what gods they will; let them bring
workmen in silver and in gold, furbishers, sculptors; let them make
gods. What kind of gods? Having eyes, and seeing not; <span
id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) and the other things which the
Psalm mentions in what follows. But we do not worship these, he says; we
do not worship them, these are symbols. What then do ye worship?
Something else that is worse: for the gods of the gentiles are devils.
What then? Neither, say they, do we worship devils. Ye have certainly
nothing else in your temples, nothing else inspires your prophets than a
devil. <span id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964) But what do ye say? We
worship Angels, we have Angels as gods. Ye know not altogether what
Angels are. Angels worship the one God, and favour not men who wish to
worship Angels and not God. For we find Angels of high rank <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) forbidding men to adore them, and
commanding them to adore the true God. <span
id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) But when they say Angels, suppose
they mean men, since it is said, “I have said, Ye are Gods, and all the
children of the Most Highest.” <span
id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) Whatever <span
id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) man thinks to the contrary, that
which was made is not like Him who made it. Except God, whatever else
there is in the <span id="page_414">p. 414</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_414"></span>universe was made by God. What a
difference there is between Him who made, and that which was made, who
can worthily imagine? Therefore this man said, “there is none like unto
Thee, O Lord: there is not one that can do as thou doest.” But how much
God is unlike them he said not, because it cannot be said. Let your
Charity attend: God is ineffable: we more easily say what He is not than
what He is. Thou thinkest of the earth; this is not God: thou thinkest
of the sea; this is not God: of all things which are in the earth, men
and animals; this is not God: of all things which are in the sea, which
fly through the air; this is not God: whatever shines in the sky, the
stars, sun and moon; this is not God: the heaven itself; this is not
God: think of the Angels, Virtues, Powers, Archangels, Thrones, Seats,
Principalities; this is not God. What is He then? I could only tell
thee, what He is not. Askest thou what He is? What “the eye hath not
seen, nor the ear heard, nor hath risen up into the heart of man.” <span
id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) …

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p44"></span>12. “All nations that Thou hast made
shall come and worship before Thee, O Lord” ([Psa.
86.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p44.1"></span>). He has announced the Church: “All
nations.” If there is any nation which God hath not made, it will not
worship Him: but there is no nation which God hath not made; because God
made Adam and Eve, the source of all nations, thence all nations sprang.
All nations therefore hath God made. When was this said? When before Him
there worshipped none but a few holy men in one people of the Hebrews,
then this was said: and see now what it is which was said: “All nations
that Thou hast made,” etc. When these things were spoken, they were not
seen, and they were believed: now that they are seen, why are they
denied? “All nations that Thou hast made shall come and worship before
Thee, O Lord, and shall glorify Thy Name.”

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p45"></span>13. “For Thou art great, and doing
wondrous things: Thou alone art the great God” ([Psa.
86.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p45.1"></span>). Let no man call himself great. Some were
to be who would call themselves great: against these it is said, “Thou
alone art the great God.” For what great thing is ascribed to God, when
it is said that He alone is the great God? Who knows not that He is the
great God? But because there were to be some who would call themselves
great and make God little, against these it is said, “Thou alone art the
great God.” For what Thou sayest is fulfilled, not what those say who
call themselves great. What hath God said by His Spirit? “All nations.”
What saith he, whoever he is, who calleth himself great? “Far from it:
God is not worshipped in all nations: all nations have perished, Africa
alone remains.” This thou sayest, who callest thyself great: <span
id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970) another thing He saith who alone is
the great God. What saith He, who alone is the great God? “All nations.”
I see what the only great God hath said: let man be silent, who is
falsely great; great only in appearance, because he disdains to be
small. Who disdains to be small? He who saith this. Whoever will be
great among you, said the Lord, shall be your servant. <span
id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971) If that man had wished to be the
servant of his brethren, he would not have separated them from their
mother: but when he wishes to be great, and wishes not to be small, as
would be for his welfare, God, who resisteth the proud, and giveth grace
to the humble, <span id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972) because He
alone is great, fulfilleth all things which He predicted, and
contradicteth those who blaspheme. For such persons blaspheme against
Christ, who say that the Church has perished from the whole world, and
is left only in Africa. If thou wert to say to him, Thou wilt lose thy
villa, he would perhaps scarcely keep from laying his hand upon thee:
and yet he says, that Christ has lost His inheritance, redeemed by His
own Blood! See now what a wrong he does, my brethren. The Scripture
says, “In a wide nation is the king’s honour; but in the domination of
the people is the affliction <span id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973)
of a prince.” <span id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974) This wrong then
thou dost unto Christ, to say that His people is diminished to that
small number. Was it for this thou wast born, for this thou callest
thyself a Christian, that thou mayest grudge Christ His glory, whose
sign thou sayest that thou bearest on thy forehead, and hast lost out of
thy heart? In a wide nation is the king’s honour: acknowledge thy King:
give Him glory, give Him a wide nation. What wide nation shall I give
Him, dost thou say? Choose not to give Him from thy own heart, and thou
wilt give aright. Whence am I to give? thou wilt say. Lo, give from
hence: “All nations that Thou hast made shall come and worship before
Thee, O Lord.” Say this, confess this, and thou hast given a wide
nation: for all nations in One are one: this is very oneness. For as
there is a Church and Churches, and those are Churches which also are a
Church, so that is a nation which was nations: formerly nations, many
nations, now one nation. Why one nation? Because one faith, one hope,
one charity, one expectation. Lastly, why not one nation, if one
country? Our country is heavenly, our country is Jerusalem: whoever is
not a citizen of it, belongs not to that nation: but whoever is a
citizen of it is in that one nation of God. And this nation, from the
east to the west, from the north and the sea, is extended through the
four quarters of the whole world. This God saith: From the east and
west, from <span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_415"></span>the north and the sea, give glory to God.
This He foretold, this He fulfilled, who alone is great. Let him
therefore who would not be little cease from saying this against Him who
alone is great: for there cannot be two great, God and Donatus. <span
id="fr_3975"></span>[3976](#fn_3975)

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p52"></span>14. “Lead me, O Lord, in Thy way, and I
will walk in Thy truth” ([Psa.
86.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p52.1"></span>). Thy way, Thy truth, Thy life, is Christ.
Therefore belongeth the Body to Him, and the Body is of Him. I am the
Way, and the Truth, and the Life. <span
id="fr_3976"></span>[3977](#fn_3976) “Lead me, O Lord, in Thy way.” In
what way? “And I will walk in Thy truth.” It is one thing to lead to the
way, another to guide in the way. Behold man everywhere poor, everywhere
in need of help. Those who are beside the way are not Christians, or not
yet Catholics: let them be guided to the way: but when they have been
brought to the way and made Catholics in Christ, they must be guided by
Him in the way itself, lest they fall.  <span
id="fr_3977"></span>[3978](#fn_3977) Now assuredly they walk in the way.
“Lead me, O Lord, in Thy way:” surely I am now in Thy way, lead me
there. “And I will walk in Thy truth:” while Thou leadest I shall not
err: if Thou let me go, I shall err. Pray then that He let thee not go,
but lead thee even to the end. How doth He lead thee? By always
admonishing, always giving thee His hand. And the arm of the Lord, to
whom is it revealed? <span id="fr_3978"></span>[3979](#fn_3978) For in
giving His Christ He giveth His hand: in giving His hand, He giveth His
Christ. He leadeth to the way, in leading to His Christ: He leadeth in
the way, by leading in His Christ, and Christ is truth. “Lead me,”
therefore, “O Lord, in Thy way, and I will walk in Thy truth:” in Him
verily who said, “I am the Way, and the Truth, and the Life.” <span
id="fr_3979"></span>[3980](#fn_3979) For Thou who leadest in the way and
the truth, whither leadest Thou, but unto life? In Him then, unto Him
Thou leadest.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p57"></span>15. “Let my heart be made glad, so that
it may fear Thy name.” There is then fear in gladness. How can there be
gladness, if fear? Is not fear wont to be painful? There will hereafter
be gladness without fear, now gladness with fear; for not yet is there
perfect security, nor perfect gladness. If there is no gladness, we
faint: if full security, we rejoice wrongly. Therefore may He both
sprinkle on us gladness, and strike fear into us, that by the sweetness
of gladness He may lead us to the abode of security; by giving us fear,
may cause us not to rejoice wrongly, and to withdraw from the way.
Therefore saith the Psalm: “Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto Him
with trembling:” <span id="fr_3980"></span>[3981](#fn_3980) so also
saith the Apostle Paul; “Work out your own salvation with fear and
trembling; for it is God that worketh in you.” <span
id="fr_3981"></span>[3982](#fn_3981) Whatever prosperity comes then, my
brethren, is rather to be feared: those things which ye think to be
prosperous, are rather temptations. An inheritance cometh, there cometh
wealth, there is an abundant overflow of some happiness: these are
temptations: take care that they corrupt you not. Whatever prosperity
also there is according to Christ, and the true love of Christ: if
perhaps thou hast gained thy wife, who was of the party of Donatus: if
thy sons have been made believers who were Pagans: if perhaps thou hast
gained thy friend who wished to draw thee away to the theatres, and thou
hast drawn him to the church: if some hostile opponent of thine who was
furiously mad against thee, laying aside his fury, has become gentle,
and owned God, and now barks at thee no more, but cries with thee
against wickedness: these things are pleasant. For what do we rejoice
for, if we do not rejoice for these things? Or what other are our joys,
but these? But because tribulations also abound, and temptations, and
dissensions, and schisms, and other evils, <span
id="fr_3982"></span>[3983](#fn_3982) without which this world cannot be,
until iniquity pass away: let not that rejoicing make us secure, but let
our heart be so made glad, as to fear the name of the Lord, lest it be
made glad on one side, be stricken on another. Expect not security in
journeying: if ever we wish for it here, it will be the birdlime of the
body, <span id="fr_3983"></span>[3984](#fn_3983) not the safety of the
man. “Let my heart be made glad, so that it may fear Thy name.”

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p62"></span>16. “I will confess unto Thee, O Lord my
God, in my whole heart, and I will glorify Thy name for ever” ([Psa.
86.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p62.1"></span>): “for great is Thy mercy toward me, and
Thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost hell” ([Psa.
86.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p62.2"></span>). Do not be angry, brethren, if I do not
explain what I have said as though I were certain. For I am a man, and
as much as is granted to me concerning the sacred Scriptures, so much I
venture to speak: nothing of myself. Hades <span
id="fr_3984"></span>[3985](#fn_3984) I have not yet seen, nor have you:
and there will be perhaps another way for us, and not through Hades.
These things are uncertain. But because Scripture, which cannot be
gainsaid, says, “Thou hast delivered my soul from the nether-most hell,”
we understand that there are as it were two hells, an upper one and a
lower one: for how can there be a lower hell, unless because there is
also an upper? The one would not be called lower, except by comparison
with that upper part. It appears then, my brethren, that there is some
heavenly abode of Angels: there is there a life of ineffable joys, there
immortality and incorruption, there all things abiding accord<span
id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_416"></span>ing to
the gift and grace of God. That part of the creation is above. If then
that is above, but this earthly part, where is flesh and blood, where is
corruptibleness, where is nativity and mortality, departure and
succession, changeableness and inconstancy, where are fears, desires,
horrors, uncertain joys, frail hope, perishable existence; I suppose
that all this part cannot be compared with that heaven of which I was
just now speaking; if then this part cannot be compared with that, the
one is above, the other below. And whither do we go after death, unless
there is a depth deeper than this depth <span
id="fr_3985"></span>[3986](#fn_3985) in which we are in the flesh and in
this mortal state? For “the body is dead,” saith the Apostle, “because
of sin.” <span id="fr_3986"></span>[3987](#fn_3986) Therefore even here
are the dead; that thou mayest not wonder because it is called
*infernum*, if it abounds with the dead. For he saith not, the body is
about to die: but, “the body is dead.” Even now surely our body hath
life: and yet compared with that body which is to be like the bodies of
Angels, the body of man is found to be dead, although still having life.
But again, from this *infernum*, that is from this part of Hades, there
is another lower, whither the dead go: from whence God would rescue our
souls, even sending thither His own Son. For it was on account of these
two hells, my brethren, that the Son of God was sent, on all sides
setting free. To this hell he was sent by being born, to that by dying.
Therefore it is His voice in that Psalm, not according to any man’s
conjecture, but an Apostle explaining, when he saith, “For Thou wilt not
leave my soul in hell.” <span id="fr_3987"></span>[3988](#fn_3987)
Therefore it is here also either His voice, “Thou hast delivered my soul
from the nethermost hell:” or our voice by the Lord Jesus Christ
Himself: for on this account He came even unto hell, that we might not
remain in hell.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p67"></span>17. I will mention another opinion also.
For perhaps even in hell itself there is some lower part where are
thrust the ungodly who have sinned most. <span
id="fr_3988"></span>[3989](#fn_3988) For whether in hell there were not
some places where Abraham was, we cannot define sufficiently. For not
yet had the Lord come to hell that He might rescue from thence the souls
of all the saints who had gone before, <span
id="fr_3989"></span>[3990](#fn_3989) and yet Abraham was there in
repose. <span id="fr_3990"></span>[3991](#fn_3990) And a certain rich
man when he was in torments in hell, when he saw Abraham, lifted up his
eyes. He could not have seen him by lifting up his eyes, unless the one
was above, the other below. And what did Abraham answer unto him, when
he said, “send Lazarus.” “My son,” he said, “remember that thou in thy
lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things:
but now he is at rest, but thou art tormented. And besides this,” he
said, “between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so that neither
can we go to you, nor can any one come from thence to us.” <span
id="fr_3991"></span>[3992](#fn_3991) Therefore between these two hells,
perhaps, in one of which the souls of the just have gotten rest, in the
other the souls of the ungodly are tormented, one waiting and praying
here, placed here in the body of Christ, and praying in the voice of
Christ, said that God had delivered his soul from the nethermost hell,
because He delivered him from such sins as might have been the means of
drawing him down to the torments of the nethermost hell.…Some one having
a troublesome cause was to be sent to prison: another comes and defends
him; what does he say when he thanks him? Thou hast delivered my soul
out of prison. A debtor was to be hanged up: <span
id="fr_3992"></span>[3993](#fn_3992) his debt is paid; he is said to be
delivered from being hanged up. They were not in all these evils: but
because they were in such due course towards them, <span
id="fr_3993"></span>[3994](#fn_3993) that unless aid had been brought,
they would have been in them, they rightly say that they are delivered
from thence, whither they were not suffered by their deliverers to be
taken. Therefore, brethren, whether it be this or that, consider me to
be herein an inquirer into the word of God, not a rash assertor. <span
id="fr_3994"></span>[3995](#fn_3994)

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p75"></span>18. “O God, the transgressors of the law
have arisen up against me” ([Psa.
86.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p75.1"></span>). Whom calleth he transgressors of the law?
Not the Pagans, who have not received the law: for no one transgresseth
that which he hath not received; the Apostle saith clearly, “For where
there is no law, there is no prevarication.” <span
id="fr_3995"></span>[3996](#fn_3995) Transgressors of the law he calls
“prevaricators.” Whom then do we understand, brethren? If we take this
word from our Lord Himself, the transgressors of the law were the
Jews.…They did not keep the law, and accused Christ as if He
transgressed the law. And we know what the Lord suffered. Thinkest thou
His Body suffers no such thing now? How can this be? “If they called the
Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more those of his household? The
disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his lord.” <span
id="fr_3996"></span>[3997](#fn_3996) The body also suffereth
transgressors of the law, and they rise up against the Body of Christ.
Who are the transgressors of the law? Do the Jews perchance dare to rise
up against Christ? No: for it is not they that cause us much trouble.
For they have not <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_417"></span>yet believed: they have not yet owned
their salvation. Against the Body of Christ bad Christians rise up, from
whom the Body of Christ daily suffereth trouble. All schisms, all
heresies, all within who live wickedly and engraft their own character
on those who live well, and draw them over to their own side, and with
evil communications corrupt good manners; these persons “transgressing
the law rose up against Me.” <span id="fr_3997"></span>[3998](#fn_3997)
Let every pious soul speak, let every Christian soul speak. That one
which suffers not this, let it not speak. But if it is a Christian soul,
it knows that it suffers evils: if it owns in itself its own sufferings,
let it own herein its own voice; but if it is without suffering, let
it <span id="fr_3998"></span>[3999](#fn_3998) also be without the voice;
but that it may not be without suffering, let it walk along the narrow
way, <span id="fr_3999"></span>[4000](#fn_3999) and begin to live godly
in Christ: it must of necessity suffer this persecution. For “all,”
saith the Apostle, “who will live godly in Christ, suffer
persecution.” <span id="fr_4000"></span>[4001](#fn_4000)

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p82"></span>“And the synagogue of the powerful have
sought after My soul.” The synagogue of the powerful is the congregation
of the proud. The synagogue of the powerful rose up against the Head,
that is, our Lord Jesus Christ, crying and saying with one mouth,
Crucify Him, crucify Him: <span id="fr_4001"></span>[4002](#fn_4001) of
whom it is said, “The sons of men, their teeth are spears and arrows,
and their tongue a sharp sword.” <span
id="fr_4002"></span>[4003](#fn_4002) They did not strike, but cried: by
crying they struck, by crying they crucified Him. The will of those who
cried was fulfilled, when the Lord was crucified: “And they did not
place Thee before their eyes.” How did they not place Him before them?
They did not know Him God. They should have spared him as Man: what they
saw, according to this they should have walked. Suppose that He was not
God, He was man: was He therefore to be slain? Spare Him a man, and own
Him God.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p85"></span>19. “And Thou, Lord God, art One who
hast compassion and merciful, longsuffering, and very pitiful, and true”
([Psa. 86.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p85.1"></span>). Wherefore longsuffering and very pitiful,
and One who hast compassion? Because hanging on the Cross He said:
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_4003"></span>[4004](#fn_4003) Whom prayeth He to? for whom doth
He pray? Who prayeth? Where prayeth He? The Son prays to the Father,
crucified for the ungodly, in the midst of very insults, not of words
but of death inflicted, hanging on the Cross; as if for this He had His
hands stretched out, that thus He might pray for them, that His “prayer
might be directed like incense in the sight of the Father, and the
lifting up of His hands like an evening sacrifice.” <span
id="fr_4004"></span>[4005](#fn_4004)

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p88"></span>20. If therefore Thou art “true,” “Look
upon me, and have mercy upon me: give power unto Thy servant.” Because
Thou art “true,” “give power unto Thy servant” ([Psa.
86.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p88.1"></span>). Let the time of patience pass away, the
time of judgment come. How, “give power”? The Father judgeth no man, but
hath committed all judgment unto the Son. <span
id="fr_4005"></span>[4006](#fn_4005) He rising again will come even to
earth Himself to judge: He will appear terrible who appeared despicable.
He will show His power, who showed His patience; on the Cross was
patience; in the judgment will be power. For He will appear as Man
judging, but in glory: because “as ye saw Him go,” said the Angels, “so
He will come.” <span id="fr_4006"></span>[4007](#fn_4006) His very form
shall come to judgment; therefore the ungodly also shall see Him: for
they shall not see the form of God. For blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God. <span id="fr_4007"></span>[4008](#fn_4007) …In
the vision of the Father there is also the vision of the Son: and in the
vision of the Son there is also the vision of the Father. Therefore He
adds a consequence, and says: “Know ye not that I am in the Father, and
the Father in Me?” <span id="fr_4008"></span>[4009](#fn_4008) that is,
both in Me seen the Father is seen, and in the Father seen the Son too
is seen. The vision of the Father and the Son cannot be separated: where
nature and substance is not separated, there vision cannot be separated.
For that ye may know that the heart ought to be made ready for that
place, to see the Divinity of the Father and Son and Holy Spirit, in
which though not seen we believe, and by believing cleanse the heart
that there may be able to be sight: the Lord Himself saith in another
place, “He that hath My commands and keepeth them, he it is that loveth
Me: and he that loveth Me shall be loved by My Father: and I will love
him, and will manifest Myself unto him.” <span
id="fr_4009"></span>[4010](#fn_4009) Did they not see Him, with whom He
was talking? They both saw Him, and did not see Him? they saw something,
they believed something: they saw Man, they believed in God. But in the
Judgment they shall see the same Lord Jesus Christ as Man, together with
the wicked: after the Judgment, they shall see God, apart from the
wicked.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p94"></span>21. “And save the Son of Thine
handmaid.” The Lord is the Son of the handmaid. Of what handmaid? Her
who when He was announced as about to be born of her, answered and said,
“Behold the handmaid of the Lord: be it unto me according to Thy
word.” <span id="fr_4010"></span>[4011](#fn_4010) He saved the Son of
His handmaid, and His own Son: His own Son, in the Form of God; <span
id="fr_4011"></span>[4012](#fn_4011) the Son of <span id="page_418">p.
418</span> <span id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_418"></span>His handmaid in the form
of a servant. Of the handmaid of God, therefore, the Lord was born in
the form of a servant; and He said, “Save the Son of Thine handmaid.”
And He was saved from death, as ye know, His flesh, which was dead,
being raised again.…And each several Christian placed in the Body of
Christ may say, “Save the Son of Thine handmaid.” Perhaps he cannot say,
“Give power unto Thy servant:” because it was He, the Son, who received
power. Yet wherefore saith He not this also? Was it not said to
servants, “Ye shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes
of Israel”? <span id="fr_4012"></span>[4013](#fn_4012) and the servants
say, “Know ye not that we shall judge Angels?” <span
id="fr_4013"></span>[4014](#fn_4013) Each one therefore of the saints
receiveth also power, and each several saint is the son of His handmaid.
What if he is born of a pagan mother, and has become a Christian? How
can the son of a pagan be the son of His handmaid: He is indeed the son
of a pagan mother after the flesh, but the son of the Church after the
Spirit.

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p99"></span>22. “Show me a sign for good” ([Psa.
86.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p99.1"></span>). What sign, but that of the Resurrection?
The Lord says: “This wicked and provoking generation seeketh after a
sign; and there shall no sign be given it, but the sign of the Prophet
Jonah.” <span id="fr_4014"></span>[4015](#fn_4014) Therefore in our Head
a sign has been shown already for good; each one of us also may say,
“Show me a sign for good:” because at the last trumpet, at the coming of
the Lord, both “the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be
changed.” <span id="fr_4015"></span>[4016](#fn_4015) This will be a sign
for good. “That they who hate me may see it, and be ashamed.” In the
judgment they shall be ashamed unto their destruction, who will not now
be ashamed unto their healing. Now therefore let them be ashamed: let
them accuse their own ways, let them keep the good way: because none of
us liveth without being ashamed, unless he first be ashamed and live
anew. Now God grants them the approach of a healthy shame, if they
despise not the medicine of confession: but if they will not now be
ashamed, then they shall be ashamed, when “their iniquities shall
convince them to their face.” <span id="fr_4016"></span>[4017](#fn_4016)
How shall they be ashamed? When they shall say, “These are they whom we
had sometimes in derision, and a parable of reproach. We fools counted
their life madness: how are they numbered among the children of God!
What hath pride profited us?” <span id="fr_4017"></span>[4018](#fn_4017)
Then shall they say this: let them say it now, and they say it to their
health. For let each one turn humbly to God, and now say, What hath my
pride profited me? and hear from the Apostle, “For what glory had ye in
those things of which ye are now ashamed?” <span
id="fr_4018"></span>[4019](#fn_4018) Ye see that there is even now a
wholesome shame while there is a place of penitence: but then one which
will be late, useless, fruitless.…

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p105"></span>23. “For Thou, Lord, hast holpen me,
and comforted me.” “Hast holpen me,” in struggle; “and comforted me,” in
sorrow. For no one seeketh comfort, but he who is in misery. Would ye
not be consoled? Say that ye are happy, and ye hear, “My people” (now ye
answer, and I hear a murmur, as of persons who remember the
Scriptures. <span id="fr_4019"></span>[4020](#fn_4019) May God, who hath
written this in your hearts, confirm it in your deeds. Ye see, brethren,
that those who say unto you, Ye are happy, seduce you), “O My people,
they that call you happy cause you to err, and disturb the way of your
feet.” <span id="fr_4020"></span>[4021](#fn_4020) So also from the
Epistle of the Apostle James: “Be afflicted, and mourn: let your
laughter be turned to mourning.” <span
id="fr_4021"></span>[4022](#fn_4021) Ye see what ye have heard read:
when would such things be said unto us in the land of security? This
surely is the land of offences, and temptations, and of all evils, that
we may groan here, and deserve to rejoice there; here to be troubled,
and there to be comforted, and to say, “For Thou hast delivered mine
eyes from tears, my feet from falling: I will please the Lord in the
land of the living.” <span id="fr_4022"></span>[4023](#fn_4022) This is
the land of the dead. The land of the dead passeth, the land of the
living cometh. In the land of the dead is labour, grief, fear,
tribulation, temptation, groaning, sighing: here are false happy ones,
true unhappy, because happiness is false, misery is true. But he that
owneth himself to be in true misery, will also be in true happiness: and
yet now because thou art miserable, hear the Lord saying, “Blessed are
they that mourn.”  <span id="fr_4023"></span>[4024](#fn_4023) O blessed
they that mourn! Nothing is so akin to misery as mourning: nothing so
remote and contrary to misery as blessedness: Thou speakest of those who
mourn, and Thou callest them blessed! Understand, He saith, what I say:
I call those who mourn blessed. Wherefore blessed? In hope. Wherefore
mourning? In act. For they mourn in this death, in these tribulations,
in their wandering: and because they own themselves to be in this
misery, and mourn, they are blessed. Wherefore do they mourn? The
blessed Cyprian was put to sorrow in his passion: now he is comforted
with his crown; now though comforted, he was sad. For our Lord Jesus
Christ still intercedeth for us: all the Martyrs who are with Him
intercede for us. Their intercessions pass not away, except when our
mourning is passed away: but when our mourning shall have passed away,
we all with <span id="page_419">p. 419</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-Page_419"></span>one voice, in one people, in one country,
shall receive comfort, thousands of thousands joined with Angels playing
upon harps, with choirs of heavenly powers living in one city. Who
mourneth there? Who there sigheth? Who there toileth? Who there needeth?
Who dieth there? Who there showeth mercy? Who breaketh bread to the
hungry there, where all are satisfied with the bread of righteousness?
No one saith unto thee, Receive a stranger; there no one will be a
stranger to thee: all live in their own country. No one saith unto thee,
Set at one thy friends disputing; in everlasting peace they enjoy the
Face of God. No one saith unto thee, Visit the sick; health and
immortality abide for ever. No one saith unto thee, Bury the dead; all
shall be in everlasting life. Works of mercy stop, because misery is
found not. And what shall we do there? Shall we perhaps sleep? If now we
fight against ourselves, although we carry about a house of sleep, this
flesh of ours, and keep watch with these lights, and this solemn feast
gives us a mind to watch; what wakefulness shall that day give unto us!
Therefore we shall be awake, we shall not sleep. What shall we do? <span
id="fr_4024"></span>[4025](#fn_4024) There will be no works of mercy,
because there will be no misery. Perhaps there will be these necessary
works which there are here now, of sowing, ploughing, cooking, grinding,
weaving? None of these, for there will be no want. Thus there will be no
works of mercy, because misery is past away: where there is no want nor
misery, there will be neither works of necessity nor of mercy. What will
be there? What business shall we have? What action? Will there be no
action, because there is rest? Shall we sit there, and be torpid, and do
nothing? If our love grow cold, our action will grow cold. How then will
that love resting in the face of God, for whom we now long, for whom we
sigh, how will it inflame us, when we shall have come to Him? He for
whom while as yet we see Him not, we so sigh, how will He enlighten us,
when we shall have come to Him? How will He change us? What will He make
of us? What then shall we do, brethren? Let the Psalm tell us: “Blessed
are they who dwell in Thy house.” Why? “They shall praise Thee for ever
and ever.” <span id="fr_4025"></span>[4026](#fn_4025) This will be our
employment, praise of God. Thou lovest and praisest. Thou wilt cease to
praise, if thou cease to love. But thou wilt not cease to love, because
He whom thou seest is such an One as offends thee not by any weariness:
He both satisfies thee, and satisfies thee not. What I say is wonderful.
If I say that He satisfies thee, I am afraid lest as though satisfied
thou shouldest wish to depart, as from a dinner or from a supper. What
then do I say? doth He not satisfy thee? I am afraid again, that if I
say, He doth not satisfy thee, thou shouldest seem to be in want: and
shouldest be as it were empty, and there should be in thee some void
which ought to be filled. What then shall I say, except what can be
said, but can hardly be thought? He both satisfies thee, and satisfies
thee not: for I find both in Scripture. For while He said, “Blessed are
the hungry, for they shall be filled;” <span
id="fr_4026"></span>[4027](#fn_4026) it is again said of Wisdom, “Those
who eat Thee shall hunger again, and those who drink shall thirst
again.” <span id="fr_4027"></span>[4028](#fn_4027) Nay, but He did not
say “again,” but he said, “still:” for “shall thirst again” is as if
once having been filled he departed and digested, and returned to drink.
So it is, “Those who eat Thee shall still hunger:” thus when they eat
they hunger: and those who drink Thee, even thus when drinking, thirst.
What is it, to thirst in drinking? Never to grow weary. If then there
shall be that ineffable and eternal sweetness, what doth He now seek of
us, brethren, but faith unfeigned, firm hope, pure charity? and man may
walk in the way which the Lord hath given, may bear troubles, and
receive consolations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[409:3940](1080097.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p2"></span> Lat. LXXXV. A sermon to the people at
Carthage, delivered on the vigil of a festival, perhaps of St. Cyprian.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[410:3941](1080097.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p5"></span> [Rom.
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[410:3942](1080097.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p6"></span> [Luke xviii.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[410:3943](1080097.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p8"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[410:3944](1080097.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p9"></span> [Luke xvi.
19-24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[410:3945](1080097.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p10"></span> [Gen. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[410:3946](1080097.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p11"></span> [Gen. xxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[411:3947](1080097.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p13"></span> *Non commissor sed dimissor*.

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[411:3948](1080097.htm#fr_3947) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p14"></span> *Apollinarians*.

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[411:3949](1080097.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p15"></span> [Lev. xix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[411:3950](1080097.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p16"></span> [Ps. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[411:3951](1080097.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p17"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[411:3952](1080097.htm#fr_3951) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p18"></span> [Gal. iii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[411:3953](1080097.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p19"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[412:3954](1080097.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p23"></span> [2 Sam. vii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[412:3955](1080097.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p24"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[412:3956](1080097.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p25"></span> [Prov. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[412:3957](1080097.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p26"></span> [Ps. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[412:3958](1080097.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p27"></span> [Wisd. iv.
11](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[413:3959](1080097.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p31"></span> [2 Cor. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[413:3960](1080097.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p32"></span> [Ps. xvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[413:3961](1080097.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p33"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[413:3962](1080097.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p34"></span> [Ps.
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[413:3963](1080097.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p35"></span> *Super nos*.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[413:3964](1080097.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p37"></span> [Ps. cxv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[413:3965](1080097.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p38"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[413:3966](1080097.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p39"></span> *Honoratos*.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[413:3967](1080097.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p40"></span> [Rev. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[413:3968](1080097.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p41"></span> [Ps. lxxxii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[413:3969](1080097.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p42"></span> *Quodlibet aliud*.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[414:3970](1080097.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p43"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[414:3971](1080097.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p46"></span> The Donatist.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[414:3972](1080097.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p47"></span> [Matt. xx.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[414:3973](1080097.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p48"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[414:3974](1080097.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p49"></span> *Contritio*.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[414:3975](1080097.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p50"></span> [Prov. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3975"></span>[415:3976](1080097.htm#fr_3975) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p51"></span> \[He made his little sect the whole
Catholic Church. So now the Roman communion claims to be the whole
Catholic communion, cutting itself off even from the Easterns.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3976"></span>[415:3977](1080097.htm#fr_3976) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p53"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3977"></span>[415:3978](1080097.htm#fr_3977) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p54"></span> \[See [Acts xviii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#026)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p54.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3978"></span>[415:3979](1080097.htm#fr_3978) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p55"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3979"></span>[415:3980](1080097.htm#fr_3979) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p56"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3980"></span>[415:3981](1080097.htm#fr_3980) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p58"></span> [Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3981"></span>[415:3982](1080097.htm#fr_3981) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p59"></span> [Phil.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3982"></span>[415:3983](1080097.htm#fr_3982) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p60"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p60.1"></span>mss</span>. “other such evils.”

<span id="fn_3983"></span>[415:3984](1080097.htm#fr_3983) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p61"></span> *Al*. “of the heart.”

<span id="fn_3984"></span>[415:3985](1080097.htm#fr_3984) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p62.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p63"></span> *Infernum*: used, as our word “hell” in
the Apostles’ Creed, for the place of departed spirits. \[Note he has no
dogma on this point, but speaks of his views as *uncertain*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3985"></span>[416:3986](1080097.htm#fr_3985) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p63.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p64"></span> *Infernum inferius hoc inferno*. Lit.
“a hell than this hell.”

<span id="fn_3986"></span>[416:3987](1080097.htm#fr_3986) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p65"></span> [Rom. viii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3987"></span>[416:3988](1080097.htm#fr_3987) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p66"></span> [Ps. xvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3988"></span>[416:3989](1080097.htm#fr_3988) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p68"></span> So St. Gregory on Job l.<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p68.1"></span> xii. § 14.

<span id="fn_3989"></span>[416:3990](1080097.htm#fr_3989) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p69"></span> St. Gregory on Job, l. xiii. §§ 48, 49.

<span id="fn_3990"></span>[416:3991](1080097.htm#fr_3990) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p70"></span> [Luke xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3991"></span>[416:3992](1080097.htm#fr_3991) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p71"></span> [Luke xvi.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3992"></span>[416:3993](1080097.htm#fr_3992) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p72"></span> *Suspendendus*. The word is used of the
preparation for torture, as in the *gesta Proconsularia* in the case of
Felix of Aptungis, Opp. S. Aug. t. ix. Appendix, when Ingentius, the
forger, was to be threatened with torture, *Proconsul dixit,
Suspendatur*.

<span id="fn_3993"></span>[416:3994](1080097.htm#fr_3993) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p73"></span> *Quia talibus meritis agebantur*.

<span id="fn_3994"></span>[416:3995](1080097.htm#fr_3994) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p73.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p74"></span> \[Note his caution and great
humility.—C.\]

<span id="fn_3995"></span>[416:3996](1080097.htm#fr_3995) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p76"></span> [Rom. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3996"></span>[416:3997](1080097.htm#fr_3996) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p77"></span> [Matt.
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3997"></span>[417:3998](1080097.htm#fr_3997) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p78"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3998"></span>[417:3999](1080097.htm#fr_3998) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p79"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p79.1"></span>mss</span>. “it must needs.”

<span id="fn_3999"></span>[417:4000](1080097.htm#fr_3999) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p79.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p80"></span> [Matt. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p80.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4000"></span>[417:4001](1080097.htm#fr_4000) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p81"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4001"></span>[417:4002](1080097.htm#fr_4001) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p83"></span> [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4002"></span>[417:4003](1080097.htm#fr_4002) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p84"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4003"></span>[417:4004](1080097.htm#fr_4003) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p86"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4004"></span>[417:4005](1080097.htm#fr_4004) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p86.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p87"></span> [Ps. cxli.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4005"></span>[417:4006](1080097.htm#fr_4005) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p89"></span> [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4006"></span>[417:4007](1080097.htm#fr_4006) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p90"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4007"></span>[417:4008](1080097.htm#fr_4007) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p91"></span> [Matt. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4008"></span>[417:4009](1080097.htm#fr_4008) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p92"></span> [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4009"></span>[417:4010](1080097.htm#fr_4009) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p93"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4010"></span>[417:4011](1080097.htm#fr_4010) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p95"></span> [Luke i.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#038)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4011"></span>[417:4012](1080097.htm#fr_4011) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p95.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p96"></span> [Philip. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4012"></span>[418:4013](1080097.htm#fr_4012) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p97"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4013"></span>[418:4014](1080097.htm#fr_4013) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p98"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4014"></span>[418:4015](1080097.htm#fr_4014) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p100"></span> [Matt. xii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4015"></span>[418:4016](1080097.htm#fr_4015) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p101"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
52](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#052)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4016"></span>[418:4017](1080097.htm#fr_4016) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p102"></span> [Wisd. iv.
20](../../../bib/apo/wis004.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p102.1"></span>,
*deducent eos*. LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p102.2"></span>ἐλ™γξει</span>.

<span id="fn_4017"></span>[418:4018](1080097.htm#fr_4017) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p102.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p103"></span> [Wis.
5:3](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003),
[8](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4018"></span>[418:4019](1080097.htm#fr_4018) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p104"></span> [Rom. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4019"></span>[418:4020](1080097.htm#fr_4019) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p106"></span> \[A striking note of the manner of
ancient congregations.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4020"></span>[418:4021](1080097.htm#fr_4020) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p107"></span> [Isa. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p107.1"></span>,
Lat. and E.V. margin.

<span id="fn_4021"></span>[418:4022](1080097.htm#fr_4021) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p108"></span> [Jas. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4022"></span>[418:4023](1080097.htm#fr_4022) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p109"></span> [Ps.
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4023"></span>[418:4024](1080097.htm#fr_4023) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p110"></span> [Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4024"></span>[419:4025](1080097.htm#fr_4024) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p110.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p111"></span> \[See [Ps.
lxxxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p111.1"></span> p. 402, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4025"></span>[419:4026](1080097.htm#fr_4025) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p112"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4026"></span>[419:4027](1080097.htm#fr_4026) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p113"></span> [Matt. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4027"></span>[419:4028](1080097.htm#fr_4027) <span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p113.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVI-p114"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
24.21](../../../bib/apo/sir024.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXXXVI-p114.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXVII](1080098)
