[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080078)  [Next](1080080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LXVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXVIII. <span
id="fr_2683"></span>[2684](#fn_2683) </span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p3"></span>1. Of this Psalm, the title seemeth not
to need operose discussion: for simple and easy it appeareth. For thus
it standeth: “For the end, for David himself a Psalm of a Song.” But in
many Psalms already we have reminded you what is “at the end: for the
end of the Law is Christ for righteousness to every man
believing:” <span id="fr_2684"></span>[2685](#fn_2684) He is the end
which maketh perfect, not that <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_286"></span>which consumeth or destroyeth.
Nevertheless, if any one endeavoureth to inquire, what meaneth, “a Psalm
of a Song:” why not either “Psalm” or “Song,” but both; or what is the
difference between Psalm of Song, and Song of Psalm, because even thus
of some Psalms the titles are inscribed: he will find perchance
something which we leave for men more acute and more at leisure than
ourselves.…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p5"></span>2. “Let God rise up, and let His enemies
be scattered” ([Psa. 68.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p5.1"></span>). Already this hath come to pass, Christ
hath risen up, “who is over all things, God blessed for ever,” <span
id="fr_2685"></span>[2686](#fn_2685) and His enemies have been dispersed
through all nations, to wit, the Jews; in that very place, where they
practised their enmities, being overthrown in war, and thence through
all places dispersed: and now they hate, but fear, and in that very fear
they do that which followeth, “And let them that hate Him flee from His
face.” The flight indeed of the mind is fear. For in carnal flight,
whither flee they from the face of Him who everywhere showeth the
efficacy  <span id="fr_2686"></span>[2687](#fn_2686) of His presence?
“Whither shall I depart,” saith he, “from Thy Spirit, and from Thy face
whither shall I flee?” <span id="fr_2687"></span>[2688](#fn_2687) With
mind, therefore, not with body, they flee; to wit, by being afraid, not
by being hidden; and not from that face which they see not, but from
that which they are compelled to see. For the face of Him hath His
presence in His Church been called.…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p9"></span>3. “As smoke faileth, let them fail”
([Psa. 68.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p9.1"></span>). For they lifted up themselves from the
fires of their hatred unto the vapouring of pride, and against Heaven
setting their mouth, and shouting, “Crucify, Crucify,” <span
id="fr_2688"></span>[2689](#fn_2688) Him taken captive they derided, Him
hanging they mocked: and being soon conquered by that very Person
against whom they swelled victorious, they vanished away. “As wax
melteth from the face of fire, so let sinners perish from the face of
God.” Though perchance in this passage he hath referred to those men,
whose hard-heartedness in tears of penitence is dissolved: yet this also
may be understood, that he threateneth future judgment; because though
in this world like smoke, in lifting up themselves, that is, in priding
themselves, they have melted away, there will come to them at the last
final damnation, so that from His face they will perish for everlasting,
when in His own glory He shall have appeared, like fire, for the
punishment of the ungodly, and the light of the righteous.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p11"></span>4. Lastly, there followeth, “And let
just men be joyous, and exult in the sight of God, let them delight in
gladness” ([Psa. 68.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p11.1"></span>). For then shall they hear, “Come, ye
blessed of My Father, receive ye the kingdom.” <span
id="fr_2689"></span>[2690](#fn_2689) “Let them be joyous,” therefore,
that have toiled, “and exult in the sight of God.” For there will not be
in this exultation, as though it were before men, any empty boasting;
but (it will be) in the sight of Him who unerringly looketh into that
which He hath granted. “Let them delight in gladness:” no longer
exulting with trembling, <span id="fr_2690"></span>[2691](#fn_2690) as
in this world, so long as “human life is a trial upon earth.” <span
id="fr_2691"></span>[2692](#fn_2691) Secondly, he turneth himself to
those very persons to whom he hath given so great hope, and to them
while here living he speaketh and exhorteth: “Sing ye to God, psalm ye
to His name” ([Psa. 68.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p14.2"></span>). Already on this subject in the exposition
of the Title we have before spoken that which seemed meet. He singeth to
God, that liveth to God: He psalmeth to His name, that worketh unto His
Glory. In singing thus, in psalming thus, that is, by so living, by so
working, “a way make ye to Him,” he saith, “that hath ascended above the
setting.” A way make ye to Christ: so that through the beautiful feet of
men telling good tidings,  <span id="fr_2692"></span>[2693](#fn_2692)
the hearts of men believing many have a way opened to Him. For the Same
is He that hath ascended above the “setting:” either because the new
life of one turned to Him receiveth Him not, except the old life shall
have set by his renouncing this world, or because He ascended above the
setting, when by rising again He conquered the downfall of the body.
“For The Lord is His name.” Which if they had known, the Lord of glory
they never would have crucified.  <span
id="fr_2693"></span>[2694](#fn_2693)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p17"></span>5. “Exult ye in the sight of Him,” O ye
to whom hath been said, “Sing ye to God, psalm ye to the name of Him, a
way make ye to Him that hath ascended above the setting,” also “exult in
the sight of Him:” as if “sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing.” <span
id="fr_2694"></span>[2695](#fn_2694) For while ye make a way to Him,
while ye prepare a way whereby He may come and possess the nations, ye
are to suffer in the sight of men many sorrowful things. But not only
faint not, but even exult, not in the sight of men, but in the sight of
God. “In hope rejoicing, in tribulation enduring:” <span
id="fr_2695"></span>[2696](#fn_2695) “exult ye in the sight of Him.” For
they that in the sight of men trouble you, “shall be troubled by the
face of Him, the Father of orphans and Judge of widows” ([Psa.
68.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p19.2"></span>). For desolate they suppose them to be,
from whom ofttimes by the sword of the Word of God <span
id="fr_2696"></span>[2697](#fn_2696) both parents from sons, and
husbands from wives, are severed: but persons destitute and widowed have
the consolation “of the Father of orphans and Judge of widows:” they
have the consolation of Him that say to Him, “For my father and my
mother have forsaken me, but the Lord hath taken up <span
id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_287"></span>me:” <span
id="fr_2697"></span>[2698](#fn_2697) and they that have hoped in the
Lord, continuing in prayers by night and by day: <span
id="fr_2698"></span>[2699](#fn_2698) by whose face those men shall be
troubled when they shall have seen themselves prevail nothing, for that
the whole world hath gone away after Him. <span
id="fr_2699"></span>[2700](#fn_2699) For out of those orphans and
widows, that is, persons destitute of partnership in this world’s hope,
the Lord for Himself doth build a Temple: whereof in continuation he
saith, “The Lord is in His holy place.”

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p24"></span>6. For what is His place he hath
disclosed, when he saith, “God that maketh to dwell men of one mood in a
house” ([Psa. 68.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p24.1"></span>): men of one mind, of one sentiment: this
is the holy place of the Lord. For when he had said, “The Lord is in His
holy place:” as though we were inquiring in what place, since He is
everywhere wholly, and no place of corporal space containeth Him;
forthwith he hath subjoined somewhat, that we should not seek Him apart
from ourselves, but rather being of one mood dwelling in a house, we
should deserve that He also Himself deign to dwell among us. This is the
holy place of the Lord, the thing that most men seek to have, a place
where in prayer they may be hearkened unto.…For as in a great house of a
man, the Lord thereof doth not abide in every place whatsoever, but in
some place doubtless more private and honourable: so God dwelleth not in
all men that are in His house (for He dwelleth not in the vessels of
dishonour), but His holy place are they whom “He maketh to dwell of one
mood,” or “of one manner, in a house.” For what are called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p24.2"></span>τρόποι</span> in Greek,
by both *modi* and *mores* (moods and manners), in Latin may be
interpreted. Nor hath the Greek writer, “Who maketh to dwell,” but only
“maketh to dwell.” “The Lord,” then, “is in His holy place.”…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p25"></span>7. But to prove that by His Grace He
buildeth to Himself this place, not for the sake of the merits preceding
of those persons out of whom He buildeth it, see what followeth: “Who
leadeth forth men fettered, in strength.” For He looseth the heavy bonds
of sins, wherewith they were fettered so that they could not walk in the
way of the commandments: but He leadeth them forth “in strength,” which
before His Grace they had not. “Likewise men provoking that dwell in the
tombs:” that is, every way dead, taken up with dead works. For these men
provoke Him to anger by withstanding justice: for those fettered men
perchance would walk, and are not able, and are praying of God that they
may be able, and are saying to Him, “From my necessities lead me
forth.” <span id="fr_2700"></span>[2701](#fn_2700) By whom being heard,
they give thanks, saying, “Thou hast broken asunder my bonds.” <span
id="fr_2701"></span>[2702](#fn_2701) But these provoking men that dwell
in the tombs, are of that kind, which in another passage the Scripture
pointeth out, saying, “From a dead man, as from one that is not,
confession perisheth.” <span id="fr_2702"></span>[2703](#fn_2702) Whence
there is this saying, “When a sinner shall have come into the depth of
evil things, he despiseth.” <span id="fr_2703"></span>[2704](#fn_2703)
For it is one thing to long for, another thing to fight against
righteousness: one thing from evil to desire to be delivered, another
thing one’s evil doings to defend rather than to confess: both kinds
nevertheless the Grace of Christ leadeth forth in strength. With what
strength, but that wherewith against sin even unto blood they are to
strive? For out of each kind are made meet persons, whereof to construct
His holy place; those being loosened, these being raised to life. For
even of the woman, whom Satan had bound for eighteen years, by His
command He loosed the bonds; <span id="fr_2704"></span>[2705](#fn_2704)
and Lazarus’ death by His voice He overcame. <span
id="fr_2705"></span>[2706](#fn_2705) He that hath done these things in
bodies, is able to do more marvellous things in characters, and to make
men of one mood to dwell in a house: “leading forth men fettered in
strength, likewise men provoking that dwell in the tombs.” <span
id="fr_2706"></span>[2707](#fn_2706)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p33"></span>8. “O God, when Thou wentest forth
before Thy people” ([Psa. 68.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p33.1"></span>). His going forth is perceived, when He
appeareth in His works. But He appeareth not to all men, but to them
that know how to spy out His works. For I do not now speak of those
works which are conspicuous to all men, Heaven and earth and sea and all
things that in them are; but the works whereby He leadeth forth men
fettered in strength, likewise men provoking that dwell in the tombs,
and maketh them of one manner to dwell in a house. Thus He goeth forth
before His people, that is, before those that do perceive this His
Grace. Lastly, there followeth, “When Thou wentest by in the desert, the
earth was moved” ([Psa. 68.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p33.2"></span>). A desert were the nations, which knew not
God: a desert they were, where by God Himself no law had been given,
where no Prophet had dwelled, and foretold the Lord to come. “When,”
then, “Thou wentest by in the desert,” when Thou wast preached in the
nations; “the earth was moved,” to the faith earthly men were stirred
up. But whence was it moved? “For the heavens dropped from the face of
God.” Perchance here some one calleth to mind that time, when in the
desert God was going over before His people, before the sons of Israel,
by day in the pillar of cloud, by night in the brightness of fire; <span
id="fr_2707"></span>[2708](#fn_2707) and determineth that thus it is
that “the heavens dropped from the face of God,” for manna He rained
upon His people: <span id="fr_2708"></span>[2709](#fn_2708) that the
same thing also is that which <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_288"></span>followeth, “Mount Sina from the face of
the God of Israel,” <span id="fr_2709"></span>[2710](#fn_2709) “with
voluntary rain severing God to Thine inheritance” ([Psa.
68.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p36.2"></span>), namely, the God that on Mount Sina spake
to Moses, when He gave the Law, so that the manna is the voluntary rain,
which God severed for His inheritance, that is, for His people; because
them alone He so fed, not the other nations also: so that what next he
saith, “and it was weakened,” is understood of the inheritance being
itself weakened; for they murmuring, fastidiously loathed the manna,
longing for victuals of flesh, and those things on which they had been
accustomed to live in Egypt. <span id="fr_2710"></span>[2711](#fn_2710)
… Lastly, all those men in the desert were stricken down, nor were any
of them except two found worthy to go into the land of promise. <span
id="fr_2711"></span>[2712](#fn_2711) Although even if in the sons of
them that inheritance be said to have been perfected, we ought more
readily to hold to a spiritual sense. For all those things in a figure
did happen to them; <span id="fr_2712"></span>[2713](#fn_2712) until the
day should break, and the shadows should be removed. <span
id="fr_2713"></span>[2714](#fn_2713)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p41"></span>9. May then the Lord open to us that
knock; and may the secret things of His mysteries, as far as Himself
vouchsafeth, be disclosed. For in order that the earth might be moved to
the Truth when into the desert of the Gentiles the Gospel was passing,
“the Heavens dropped from the face of God.” These are the Heavens,
whereof in another Psalm is sung, “The Heavens are telling forth the
glory of God.” <span id="fr_2714"></span>[2715](#fn_2714) … So here
also, “the Heavens dropped;” but “from the face of God.” For even these
very persons have been “saved through faith, and this not of themselves,
but God’s gift it is, not of works, lest perchance any man should be
lifted up. For of Himself we are the workmanship,” <span
id="fr_2715"></span>[2716](#fn_2715) “that maketh men of one mood to
dwell in a house.” <span id="fr_2716"></span>[2717](#fn_2716)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p45"></span>10. But what is that which followeth,
“Mount Sina from the face of the God of Israel”? Must there be
understood “dropped;” so that what he hath called by the name of
Heavens, the same he hath willed to be understood under the name of
Mount Sina also; just as we said that those are called mountains, which
were called Heavens? Nor in this sense ought it to move us that He saith
“mountain,” not mountains, while in that place they were called
“Heavens,” not Heaven: for in another Psalm also after it had been said,
“The Heavens are telling forth the glory of God:” <span
id="fr_2717"></span>[2718](#fn_2717) after the manner of Scripture
repeating the same sense in different words, subsequently there is said,
“And the firmament telleth the works of His hands.” <span
id="fr_2718"></span>[2719](#fn_2718) First he said “Heavens,” not
“Heaven:” and yet afterwards not “firmaments,” but “firmament.” For God
called the firmament Heaven, <span id="fr_2719"></span>[2720](#fn_2719)
as in Genesis hath been written. Thus then Heavens and Heaven, mountains
and mountain, are not a different thing, but the very same thing: just
as Churches many, and the One Church, are not a different thing, but the
very same thing. Why then “Mount Sina, which gendereth unto
bondage”? <span id="fr_2720"></span>[2721](#fn_2720) as saith the
Apostle. Is perchance the Law itself to be understood in Mount Sina, as
that which “the Heavens dropped from the face of God,” in order that the
earth might be moved? And is this the very moving of the earth, when men
are troubled, because the Law they cannot fulfil? But if so it is, this
is the voluntary rain, whereof in confirmation he saith, “Voluntary rain
God severing to Thine inheritance:” because “He hath not done so to any
nation, and His judgment He hath not manifested to them.” <span
id="fr_2721"></span>[2722](#fn_2721) God therefore set apart this
voluntary rain to His inheritance because He gave the Law. And “there
was made weak,” either the Law, or the inheritance. The Law may be
understood to have been made weak, because it was not fulfilled; not
that of itself it is weak, but because it maketh men weak, by
threatening punishment, and not aiding through grace. For also the very
word the Apostle hath used, where he saith, “For that which was
impossible of the Law, wherein it was made weak through the
flesh:” <span id="fr_2722"></span>[2723](#fn_2722) willing to intimate
that through the Spirit it is fulfilled: nevertheless, itself he hath
said is made weak, because by weak men it cannot be fulfilled. But the
inheritance, that is, the people, without any doubt is understood to
have been made weak by the giving to them of the Law. For “the Law came
in, that transgression might abound.” <span
id="fr_2723"></span>[2724](#fn_2723) But that which followeth, “But Thou
hast made it perfect,” to the Law is thus referred, forasmuch as it is
made perfect, that is, is fulfilled after that which the Lord saith in
the Gospel, “I have not come to annul the Law, but to fulfil.” <span
id="fr_2724"></span>[2725](#fn_2724) … There is in these words yet
another sense: which seemeth to me more to approve itself. For much more
in accordance with the context, grace itself is understood to be the
voluntary rain, <span id="fr_2725"></span>[2726](#fn_2725) because with
no preceding merits of works it is given *gratis.* <span
id="fr_2726"></span>[2727](#fn_2726) “For if grace, no longer of works:
otherwise grace no longer is grace.” <span
id="fr_2727"></span>[2728](#fn_2727) …“But to humble men He giveth
grace.” <span id="fr_2728"></span>[2729](#fn_2728) And it was made weak,
but Thou hast made it perfect:” because “virtue in weakness is
perfected.” <span id="fr_2729"></span>[2730](#fn_2729) Some copies
indeed, both Latin and Greek, have not “Mount Sina;” but, “from the face
of the God of Sina, from the face of the God of Israel.” That is, “The
Heavens dropped from the face <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_289"></span>of God:” and, as if enquiry were made of
what God, “from the face of the God,” he saith, “of Sina, from the face
of the God of Israel,” that is, from the face of the God that gave the
Law to the people of Israel. Why then “the Heavens dropped from the face
of God,” from the face of this God, but because thus was fulfilled that
which had been foretold, “Blessing He shall give that hath given the
Law”? <span id="fr_2730"></span>[2731](#fn_2730) The Law whereby to
terrify a man that relieth on human powers; blessing, whereby He
delivereth a man that hopeth in God. Thou then, O God, hast made perfect
Thine inheritance; because it is made weak in itself, in order that it
may be made perfect by Thee.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p60"></span>11. “Thine animals shall dwell therein”
([Psa. 68.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p60.1"></span>). “Thine,” not their own; to Thee subject,
not for themselves free; for Thee needy, not for themselves sufficient.
Lastly, he continueth, “Thou hast prepared in Thine own sweetness for
the needy, O God.” “In Thine own sweetness,” not in his meetness. For
the needy he is, for he hath been made weak, in order that he may be
made perfect: he hath acknowledged himself indigent, that he may be
replenished. This is that sweetness, whereof in another place is said,
“The Lord shall give sweetness, and our land shall give her
fruit:” <span id="fr_2731"></span>[2732](#fn_2731) in order that a good
work may be done not for fear, but for love; not for dread of
punishment, but for love of righteousness. For this is true and sound
freedom. But the Lord hath prepared this for one wanting, not for one
abounding, whose reproach is that poverty: of which sort in another
place is said, “Reproach to these men that abound, and contempt to proud
men.” <span id="fr_2732"></span>[2733](#fn_2732) For those he hath
called proud, whom he hath called them that abound.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p63"></span>12. “The Lord shall give the Word”
([Psa. 68.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p63.1"></span>): to wit, food for His animals which shall
dwell therein. But what shall these animals work to whom He shall give
the word? What but that which followeth? “To them preaching the Gospel
in much virtue.” With what virtue, but with that strength wherein He
leadeth forth men fettered? Perchance also here he speaketh of that
virtue, wherewith in preaching the Gospel they wrought wondrous signs.
Who then “shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much
virtue”? “The King,” he saith, “of the virtues of the Beloved” ([Psa.
68.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p63.2"></span>). The Father therefore is King of the
virtues of the Son. For the Beloved, when there is not specified any
person that is beloved, by a substitution of name, of the Only Son is
understood. Is not the Son Himself King of His virtues, to wit of the
virtues serving Himself? Because with much virtue the King of Virtues
shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel, of Whom it hath been
said, “The Lord of Virtues, He is the King of Glory?”  <span
id="fr_2733"></span>[2734](#fn_2733) But his not having said King of
Virtues, but “King of the Virtues of the beloved,” is a most usual
expression in the Scriptures, if any one observe: which thing chiefly
appeareth in those cases where even the person’s own name is already
expressed, so that it cannot at all be doubted that it is the same
person of whom something is said. Of which sort also is that which in
the Pentateuch in many passages is found: “And Moses did it, as the Lord
commanded Moses.” He said not that which is usual in our expressions,
And Moses did, as the Lord commanded him; but, “Moses did as the Lord
commanded Moses,” as if one person were the Moses whom He commanded, and
another person the Moses who did, whereas it is the very same. In the
New Testament such expressions are most difficult to find. <span
id="fr_2734"></span>[2735](#fn_2734) …“The King,” therefore, “of the
virtues of the Beloved,” thus may be understood, as if it were to be
said, the King of His virtues, because both King of Virtues is Christ,
and the Beloved is the very same Christ. However, this sense hath not so
great urgency, as that no other can be accepted: because the Father also
may be understood as King of the virtues of His Beloved Son, to whom the
Beloved Himself saith, “All Mine are Thine, and Thine Mine.”  <span
id="fr_2735"></span>[2736](#fn_2735) But if perchance it is asked,
whether God the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ can be called King also,
I know not whether any one would dare to withhold this name from Him in
the passage where the Apostle saith, “But to the King of ages, immortal,
invisible, the only God.” <span id="fr_2736"></span>[2737](#fn_2736)
Because even if this be said of the Trinity itself, therein is also God
the Father. But if we do not carnally understand, “O God, Thy Judgment
to the King give Thou, and Thy justice to the Son of the King:” <span
id="fr_2737"></span>[2738](#fn_2737) I know not whether anything else
hath been said than, “to Thy Son.” King therefore is the Father also.
Whence that verse of this Psalm, “King of the virtues of the Beloved;”
in either way may be understood. When therefore he had said, “The Lord
shall give the Word to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue:”
because virtue itself by Him is ruled, and serveth Him by whom it is
given; the Lord Himself, he saith, who shall give the Word to men
preaching the Gospel with much virtue, is the King of the virtues of the
Beloved.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p69"></span>13. In the next place there followeth,
“Of the Beloved, and of the beauty of the House to divide the spoils.”
The repetition belongeth to eulogy. <span
id="fr_2738"></span>[2739](#fn_2738) … But whether it be repeated, or
<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_290"></span>whether it be received as spoken once,
the word which hath been set down, namely, “Beloved,” <span
id="fr_2739"></span>[2740](#fn_2739) I suppose that thus must be
understood that which followeth, “and of the beauty of a house to divide
the spoils;” as if there were said, “Chosen even to divide the spoils of
the beauty of a house,” that is, Chosen even for dividing the spoils.
For beautiful Christ hath made His House, that is, the Church, by
dividing to Her spoils: in the same manner as the Body is beautiful in
the distribution of the members. “Spoils” moreover those are called that
are stripped off from conquered foes. What this is the Gospel adviseth
us in the passage where we read, “No one goeth into the house of a
strong man to spoil his vessels, unless first he shall have bound the
strong man.” <span id="fr_2740"></span>[2741](#fn_2740) Christ therefore
hath bound the devil with spiritual bonds, by overcoming death, and by
ascending from Hell above the Heavens: He hath bound him by the
Sacrament of His Incarnation, because though finding nothing in Him
deserving of death, yet he was permitted to kill: and from him so bound
He took away his vessels as though they were spoils. For he was working
in the sons of disobedience, <span id="fr_2741"></span>[2742](#fn_2741)
of whose unbelief he made use to work his own will. These vessels the
Lord cleansing by the remission of sins, sanctifying these spoils
wrested from the foe laid prostrate and bound, these He hath divided to
the beauty of His House; making some apostles, some prophets, some
pastors and doctors, <span id="fr_2742"></span>[2743](#fn_2742) for the
work of the ministry, for the building up of the Body of Christ. For as
the body is one, and hath many members, and though all the members of
the body are many, the body is one: so also is Christ. <span
id="fr_2743"></span>[2744](#fn_2743) “Are all Apostles? Are all
Prophets? Are all Powers? Have all the gifts of healings? Do all speak
with tongues? Do all interpret?” <span
id="fr_2744"></span>[2745](#fn_2744) “But all these things worketh one
and the same Spirit, dividing to each one his own gifts, as He
willeth.” <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745) And such is the
beauty of the house, whereto the spoils are divided, that a lover
thereof with this fairness being enkindled, crieth out, “O Lord, I have
loved the grace of Thy House.” <span
id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p79"></span>14. Now in that which followeth, he
turneth himself to address the members themselves, whereof the beauty of
the House is composed, saying, “If ye sleep in the midst of the
lots, <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747) wings of a dove
silvered, and between the shoulders thereof in the freshness of gold”
([Psa. 68.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p80.2"></span>). First, we must here examine the order of
the words, in what manner the sentence is ended; which certainly
awaiteth, when there is said, “If ye sleep:” secondly, in that which he
saith, namely, “wings of dove silvered,” whether in the singular number
it must be understood as being, “of this wing” <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748) thereof, or in the plural as,
“these wings.” <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749) But the
singular number the Greek excludeth, where always in the plural we read
it written. But still it is uncertain whether it be these wings; or
whether, “O ye wings,” so as that he may seem to speak to the wings
themselves. Whether therefore by the words which have preceded, that
sentence be ended, so that the order is, “The Lord shall give the Word
to men preaching the Gospel with much virtue, if ye sleep in the midst
of the lots, O ye wings of a dove silvered:” or by these which follow,
so that the order is, “If ye sleep in the midst of the lots, the wings
of a dove silvered with snow shall be whitened in Selmon:” that is, the
wings themselves shall be whitened, if ye sleep in the midst “of the
lots:” so that he may be understood to say this to them that are divided
to the beauty of the House, as it were spoils; that is, if ye sleep in
the “midst of the lots,” O ye that are divided to the beauty of the
House, “through the manifestation of the Spirit unto profit,” <span
id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750) so that “to one indeed is given
through the Spirit the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge,” etc., if then ye sleep in the midst of the lots, then the
wings of a dove silvered with snow shall be whitened in Selmon. It may
also be thus: “If ye being the wings of a dove silvered, sleep in the
midst of the lots, with snow they shall be whitened in Selmon,” so as
that those men be understood who through grace receive remission of
sins. Whence also of the Church Herself, is said in the Song of Songs,
“Who is She that goeth up whitened?” For this promise of God is held out
through the Prophet, saying, “If your sins shall have been like scarlet,
like snow I will whiten them.” It may also thus be understood, so that
in that which hath been said, “wings of a dove silvered,” there be
understood, ye shall be, so that this is the sense, O ye that like as it
were spoils to the beauty of the house are divided, if ye sleep in the
“midst of the lots,” wings of a dove silvered ye shall be: that is, into
higher places ye shall be lifted up, adhering however to the bond of the
Church. For I think no other dove silvered can be better perceived here,
than that whereof hath been said, “One is My dove.” <span
id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751) But silvered She is because with
divine sayings she hath been instructed: for the sayings of the Lord in
another place are called “silver with fire refined, purged
sevenfold.” <span id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) Some great good
thing therefore it is, to sleep in the midst of the lots, which some
would have to be the Two Testaments, so that to “sleep in the midst of
the <span id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_291"></span>lots” <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753) is to rest on the authority of
those Testaments, that is, to acquiesce in the testimony of either
Testament: so that whenever anything out of them is produced and proved,
all strife is ended in peaceful acquiescence.…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p87"></span>15. “Between the shoulders,” however.
This is indeed a part of the body, it is a part about the region of the
heart, at the hinder parts however, that is, at the back: which part of
that dove silvered he saith is “in the greenness of gold,” that is, in
the vigour of wisdom, which vigour I think cannot be better understood
than by love. But why on the back, and not on the breast? Although I
wonder in what sense this word is put in another Psalm, where there is
said, “Between His shoulders He shall overshadow thee, and under His
wings thou shalt hope:” <span id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754)
forasmuch as under wings there cannot be overshadowed anything but what
shall be under the breast. And in Latin, indeed, “between the
shoulders,” perchance in some degree of both parts may be understood,
both before and behind, that we may take shoulders to be the parts which
have the head betwixt them; and in Hebrew perchance the word is
ambiguous, which may in this manner also be understood: but the word
that is in the Greek, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p88.2"></span>μετ€φρενα</span>, signifieth not anything
but at the back, which is “between the shoulders.” Is there for this
reason there the greenness of gold, that is, wisdom and love, because in
that place there are in a manner the roots of the wings? or because in
that place is carried that light burden? For what are even the wings
themselves, but the two commandments of love, whereon hangeth the whole
Law and the Prophets? <span id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755) what is
that same light burden, but that same love <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756) which in these two commandments is
fulfilled? For whatever thing is difficult in a commandment, is a light
thing to a lover. Nor on any other account is rightly understood the
saying, “My burden is light,” <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757)
but because He giveth the Holy Spirit, whereby love is shed abroad in
our hearts, <span id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758) in order that in
love we may do freely that which he that doeth in fear doeth slavishly;
nor is he a lover of what is right, when he would prefer, if so be it
were possible, that what is right should not be commanded.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p93"></span>16. It may also be required, when it
hath not been said, if ye sleep in the lots, but “in the midst of the
lots;” what this is, “in the midst of the lots.” Which expression
indeed, if more exactly it were translated from the Greek, would
signify, “in the midst between the lots,” <span
id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759) which is in no one of the
interpreters I have read: therefore I suppose, that what hath been said
signifieth much the same, to wit the expression, “in the midst of the
lots.” Hence therefore what seemeth to me I will explain. Ofttimes this
word is wont to be used for uniting and pacifying one thing and another,
that they may not mutually disagree: as when God is establishing His
covenant <span id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760) between Himself and
His people, this word the Scripture useth; for instead of that
expression which is in Latin between Me and you, the Greek hath, in the
midst of Me and you. So also of the sign of Circumcision, when God
speaketh to Abraham, He saith, “There shall be a testament between Me
and thee and all thy seed:” <span id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761)
which the Greek hath, in the midst of Me and thee, and the midst of thy
seed. Also when He was speaking to Noe of the bow in the clouds to
establish a sign, <span id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762) this word
very often He repeateth: and that which the Latin copies have, between
Me and you, or between Me and every living soul, and whatever suchlike
expressions there are used, is found in the Greek to be, in the middle
of Me and you, which is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p97.2"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p97.3"></span>νὰ μ™σον</span>. David also and Jonathan
establish a sign between them, <span
id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763) that they may not disagree with a
difference of thought: and that which in Latin is expressed, between
both, in the middle of both, the Greek hath expressed in the same word,
which is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p98.2"></span>‡</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p98.3"></span>νὰ μ™σον</span>. But it was best that in
this passage of the Psalms our translators said not, “among the lots,”
which expression is more suited to the Latin idiom; but, “in the midst
of the lots,” as though “in the midst between the lots,” which rather is
the reading in the Greek, and which is wont to be said in the case of
those things which ought to have a mutual consent.…But why in the
“lots” <span id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764) the Testaments should
be perceived, though this word is Greek, and the Testament is not so
named, the reason is, because through a testament is given inheritance,
which in Greek is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p99.1"></span>κληρονομία</span>, and an heir <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p99.2"></span>κληρονόμος</span> Now
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p99.3"></span>κλῆρος</span> in
Greek is the term for lot, and lots according to the promise of God are
called those parts of the inheritance which were distributed to the
people. <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765) Whence the tribe of
Levi was commanded not to have lot among their brethren, because they
were sustained by tithes from them. For, I think, they that have been
ordained in the grades of the Ecclesiastical Ministry have been called
both Clergy and Clerks, because Matthias by lot was chosen, who we read
was the first that was ordained by the Apostles. <span
id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766) Henceforth, because of inheritance
which is given by testament, as though by that which is made that which
maketh, by the name of “lots” the Testaments themselves are signified.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p102"></span><span id="page_292">p. 292</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_292"></span>17. Nevertheless, to me here another
sense also occurreth, if I mistake not, to be preferred; understanding
by *cleri* the inheritances themselves: so that, whereas the inheritance
of the Old Testament, although in a shadow significant of the future, is
earthly felicity; but the inheritance of the New Testament is
everlasting immortality; to “sleep in the midst of the lots” is not too
earnestly now to seek the former, and still patiently to look for the
latter.…And because so well they have slept, on them, as it were on
wings now flieth, and with praises is exalted, the Church: to wit, the
Dove silvered, in order that by this fame of theirs, posterity having
been invited to imitate them, while in like manner the rest also sleep,
there may be added wings whereby even unto the end of the world
sublimely she may be preached.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p103"></span>18. “While He that is above the
heavens <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767) distinguisheth kings
over Her, with snow they shall be made white in Selmon” ([Psa.
68.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p104.1"></span>). While He “above the heavens,” He that
ascended over all heavens that He might fulfil all things, “while He
distinguisheth kings over Her,” that is, over that same “Dove silvered.”
For the Apostle continueth and saith, and “He hath Himself given some
for Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers.” <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768) For what other
reason is there to distinguish kings over Her, save for the work of the
Ministry, for the edification of the Body of Christ: when she is indeed
Herself the Body of Christ? But they are called kings from ruling: and
what more than the lusts of the flesh, that sin may not reign in their
mortal body to obey the desires thereof, that they yield not their
members instruments of iniquity unto sin, but yield themselves to God,
as though from the dead living, and their members instruments of
righteousness to God? <span id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769) For
thus shall the kings be distinguished from foreigners, because they draw
not the yoke with unbelievers: secondly, in a peaceful manner being
distinguished from one another by their proper gifts. For not all are
Apostles, or all Prophets, or all Teachers, or all have gifts of
healings, or all with tongues do speak, or all interpret. <span
id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770) “But all these things worketh one
and the same Spirit, dividing proper gifts to each one as He
willeth.” <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771) In giving which
Spirit He that is above the Heavens distinguisheth kings over the Dove
silvered. Of which Holy Spirit, when, sent to His Mother full of grace,
the Angel was speaking, to her enquiring in what manner it could come to
pass that she was announced as going to bear, seeing she knew not a
man: <span id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772) …he saith, “The Holy
Spirit shall come over upon thee, and the virtue of the Most Highest
shall overshadow thee,” that is, shall make a shadow for thee,
“wherefore that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called
the Son of God.” <span id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773) That
“shadow” again is understood of a defence against the heat of carnal
lusts: whence not in carnal concupiscence, but in spiritual belief, the
Virgin conceived Christ. But the shadow consisteth of light and body:
and further, The “Word” that “was in the beginning,” <span
id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774) that true Light, <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775) in order that a noonday shadow
might be made for us; “the Word,” I say, “was made Flesh, and dwelled in
us.” <span id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776) …

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p114"></span>19. But this mountain he calleth the
“mountain of God, a mountain fruitful, a mountain full of curds” ([Psa.
68.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p114.1"></span>), or “a mountain fat.” But here what else
would he call fat but fruitful? For there is also a mountain called by
that name, that is to say, Selmon. But what mountain ought we to
understand by “the mountain of God, a mountain fruitful, a mountain full
of curds,” but the same Lord Christ? Of whom also another Prophet saith,
“There shall be manifest in the last times the mountain of the Lord
prepared on the top of the mountains”? <span
id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777) He is Himself the “Mountain full of
curds,” <span id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778) because of the babes
to be fed with grace as though it were with milk; <span
id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779) a mountain rich to strengthen and
enrich them by the excellence of the gifts; for even the milk itself
whence curd is made, in a wonderful manner signifieth grace; for it
floweth out of the overflowing of the mother’s bowels, and of a sweet
compassion unto babes freely it is poured forth. But in the Greek the
case is doubtful, whether it be the nominative or the accusative: for in
that language mountain is of the neuter gender, not of the masculine:
therefore some Latin translators have not translated it, “unto the
Mountain of God,” but, “the Mountain of God.” But I think, “unto Selmon
the Mountain of God,” is better, that is, “unto” the Mountain of God
which is called Selmon: according to the interpretation which, as we
best could, we have explained above.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p118"></span>20. Secondly, in the expression,
“Mountain of God, Mountain full of curds,” Mountain “fruitful,” let no
one dare from this to compare the Lord Jesus Christ with the rest of the
Saints, who are themselves also called mountains of God.…For there were
not wanting men to call Him, some John Baptist, some Elias, some
Jeremias, or one of the Prophets; <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780) He turneth to them and saith, “Why
do ye imagine <span id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781) mountains full
of curds, a mountain,” he saith, “wherein it hath pleased God to dwell
therein”? ([Psa. 68.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p120.1"></span>). <span id="page_293">p. 293</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_293"></span>“Why do ye imagine?” <span
id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782) For as they are a light, because to
themselves also hath been said, “Ye are the Light of the world,” <span
id="fr_2783"></span>[2784](#fn_2783) but something different hath been
called “the true Light which enlighteneth every man,” <span
id="fr_2784"></span>[2785](#fn_2784) so they are mountains; but far
different is the Mountain “prepared on the top of the mountains.” <span
id="fr_2785"></span>[2786](#fn_2785) These mountains therefore in
bearing that Mountain are glorious: one of which mountains saith, “but
from me far be it to glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom to me the world hath been crucified, and I to the
world:” <span id="fr_2786"></span>[2787](#fn_2786) so that “he hath
glorieth, not in himself, but in the Lord may glory.” <span
id="fr_2787"></span>[2788](#fn_2787) “Why” then “do ye imagine mountains
full of curds,” that “Mountain wherein it hath pleased God to dwell
therein”? Not because in other men He dwelleth not, but because in them
through Him. “For in Him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead,” <span
id="fr_2788"></span>[2789](#fn_2788) not in a shadow, as in the temple
made by king Solomon, <span id="fr_2789"></span>[2790](#fn_2789) but
“bodily,” that is, solidly and truly.…“For there is One God, and One
Mediator of God and men, the Man Christ Jesus,” <span
id="fr_2790"></span>[2791](#fn_2790) Mountain of mountains, as Saint of
saints. Whence He saith, “I in them and Thou in Me.” <span
id="fr_2791"></span>[2792](#fn_2791) “Why then do ye imagine mountains
full of curds, the mountain wherein it hath pleased God to dwell in
Him?” For those mountains full of curds that Mountain the Lord shall
inhabit even unto the end, that something they may be to whom He saith,
“for without Me nothing ye are able to do.” <span
id="fr_2792"></span>[2793](#fn_2792)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p132"></span>21. Thus cometh to pass that also which
followeth: “The Chariot of God is of ten thousands manifold:” or “of
tens of thousands manifold:” or, “ten times thousand times manifold”
([Psa. 68.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p132.1"></span>). For one Greek word, which hath there
been used, <span class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p132.2"></span>
μυριοπλ€σιον</span>, each Latin interpreter hath rendered as best he
could, but in Latin it could not be adequately expressed: for a thousand
with the Greeks is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p132.3"></span> χίλια</span>, but <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p132.4"></span>μυρι€δες</span> are a
number of tens of thousands: for one <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p132.5"></span>μυριὰς</span> are ten thousands. Thus a
vast number of saints and believers, who by bearing God become in a
manner the chariot <span id="fr_2793"></span>[2794](#fn_2793) of God, he
hath signified under this name. By abiding in and guiding this, He
conducteth it, as though it were His Chariot, unto the end, as if unto
some appointed place. For, “the beginning is Christ; secondly, that are
of Christ, at the appearing of Him; then the end.” <span
id="fr_2794"></span>[2795](#fn_2794) This is Holy Church: which is that
which followeth, “thousands of men rejoicing.” For in hope they are
joyful, until they be conducted unto the end, which now they look for
through patience. <span id="fr_2795"></span>[2796](#fn_2795) For
admirably, when he had said, “Thousands of men rejoicing:” immediately
he added, “The Lord is in them.” That we may not wonder why they
rejoice, “The Lord is in them.” For through many tribulations we must
needs enter into the kingdom of God, <span
id="fr_2796"></span>[2797](#fn_2796) but, “The Lord is in them.”
Therefore even if they are as it were sorrowful, yet alway
rejoicing, <span id="fr_2797"></span>[2798](#fn_2797) though not now in
that same end, to which they have not yet come, yet in hope they are
rejoicing, and in tribulation patient: for, “The Lord is in them, in
Sina in the holy place.” In the interpretations of Hebrew names, we find
Sina interpreted commandment: and some other interpretations it has, but
I think this to be more agreeable to the present passage. For giving a
reason why those thousands rejoice, whereof the Chariot of God doth
consist, “The Lord,” he saith, “is in them, in Sins in the holy place:”
that is, the Lord is in them, in the commandment; which commandment is
holy, as saith the Apostle: “Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the
commandment is holy, and just, and good.” <span
id="fr_2798"></span>[2799](#fn_2798) …

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p139"></span>22. In the next place, turning his
address to the Lord Himself, “Thou hast gone up,” he saith, “on high,
Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou hast received gifts in men” ([Psa.
68.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p139.1"></span>). Of this the Apostle thus maketh mention,
thus expoundeth in speaking of the Lord Christ: “But unto each one of
us,” he saith, “is given grace after the measure of the giving of
Christ: for which cause he saith, He hath gone up on high, He hath led
captive captivity, He hath given gifts to men.” <span
id="fr_2799"></span>[2800](#fn_2799) …And let it not move us that the
Apostle making mention of that same testimony saith not, “Thou hast
received gifts in men;” but, “He hath given gifts unto men.” For he with
Apostolic authority hath spoken thus according to the faith that the Son
is God with the Father. For in respect of this He hath given gifts to
men, sending to them the Holy Spirit, which is the Spirit of the Father
and of the Son. But forasmuch as the self-same Christ is understood in
His Body which is the Church, wherefore also His members are His saints
and believers, whence to them is said, “But ye are the Body of Christ,
and the members,” <span id="fr_2800"></span>[2801](#fn_2800) doubtless
He hath Himself also received gifts in men. Now Christ hath gone up on
high, and sitteth at the right hand of the Father: <span
id="fr_2801"></span>[2802](#fn_2801) but unless He were here also on the
earth, He would not thence have cried, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me?” <span id="fr_2802"></span>[2803](#fn_2802) When the Same saith
Himself, “Inasmuch as to one of My least ye have done it, to Me ye have
done it:” <span id="fr_2803"></span>[2804](#fn_2803) why do we doubt
that He receiveth in His members, the gifts which the members of Him
receive?

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span> <span id="ii.LXVIII-Page_294"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p145"></span>23. But what is, “Thou hast led
captivity captive”? Is it because He hath conquered death, which was
holding captive those over whom it reigned? Or hath he called men
themselves captivity, who were being held captive under the devil? Which
thing’s mystery even the title of that Psalm <span
id="fr_2804"></span>[2805](#fn_2804) doth contain, to wit, “when the
house was being builded after the captivity:” that is, the Church after
the coming in of the Gentiles. Calling therefore those very men who were
being held captive a captivity, as when “the service” <span
id="fr_2805"></span>[2806](#fn_2805) is spoken of there are understood
those that serve also, that same captivity he saith by Christ hath been
led captive. For why should not captivity be happy, if even for a good
purpose men may be caught? Whence to Peter hath been said, “From
henceforth thou shalt catch men.” <span
id="fr_2806"></span>[2807](#fn_2806) Led captive therefore they are
because caught, and caught because subjugated, being sent under that
gentle yoke, <span id="fr_2807"></span>[2808](#fn_2807) being delivered
from sin whereof they were servants, and being made servants of
righteousness <span id="fr_2808"></span>[2809](#fn_2808) whereof they
were children. Whence also He is Himself in them, that hath given gifts
to men, and hath received gifts in men. And thus in that captivity, in
that servitude, in that chariot, under that yoke, there are not
thousands of men lamenting, but thousands of men rejoicing. For the Lord
is in them, in Sina, in the holy place. <span
id="fr_2809"></span>[2810](#fn_2809) …

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p152"></span>24. But what next doth he adjoin? “For
they that believe not to dwell” ([Psa.
68.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p152.1"></span>): or, as some copies have, “For not
believing to dwell:” for what else are men not believing, but they that
believe not? To whom this hath been said, is not easy to perceive. For
as though a reason were being given of the above words, when it had been
said, “Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou hast received gifts in
men:” there hath been added in continuation, “for they that believe not
to dwell,” that is, not believing that they should dwell. What is this?
Of whom saith he this? Did that captivity, before it passed into a good
captivity, show whence it was an evil captivity? For through not
believing they were possessed by the enemy, “that worketh in the sons of
unbelief: among whom ye were sometime, while ye were living among
them.” <span id="fr_2810"></span>[2811](#fn_2810) By the gifts therefore
of His grace, He that hath received gifts in men, hath led captive that
captivity. For they believed not that they should dwell. For faith hath
thence delivered them, in order that now believing they may dwell in the
House of God, even they too becoming the House of God, and the Chariot
of God, consisting of thousands of men rejoicing.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p154"></span>25. Whence he that was singing of these
things, in the Spirit foreseeing them, even he too being fulfilled with
joy hath burst forth <span id="fr_2811"></span>[2812](#fn_2811) a hymn,
saying, “The Lord God is blessed, blessed is the Lord God from day unto
day” ([Psa. 68.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p155.1"></span>). Which some copies have, “by day daily,”
because the Greeks have it thus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p155.2"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p155.3"></span>μ™ραν καθ’ ἡμ™ραν</span>: which more
exactly would be expressed by, “by day daily.” Which expression I think
signifieth the same as that which hath been said, to wit, “from day unto
day.” For daily this He doeth even unto the end, He leadeth captive
captivity, receiving gifts in men.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p156"></span>26. And because He leadeth that chariot
unto the end, He continueth and saith, “A prosperous journey there shall
make for us the God of our healths, our God, the God of making men safe”
([Psa. 68.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p156.1"></span>). Highly is grace here commended. For who
would be safe, unless He Himself should make whole? But that it might
not occur to the mind, Why then do we die, if through His grace we have
been made safe? immediately he added below, “and the Lord’s is the
outgoing of death:” as though he were saying, Why are thou indignant, O
lot of humanity, that thou hast the outgoing of death? Even thy Lord’s
outgoing was no other than that of death. Rather therefore be comforted
than be indignant: for even “the Lord’s is the outgoing of death.” “For
by hope we have been saved: but if that which we see not we hope for,
through patience we wait for it.” <span
id="fr_2812"></span>[2813](#fn_2812) Patiently therefore even death
itself let us suffer, by the example of Him, who though by no sin He was
debtor to death, and was the Lord, from whom no one could take away
life, but Himself laid it down of Himself, yet had Himself the outgoing
of death.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p158"></span>27. “Nevertheless, God shall break in
pieces the heads of His enemies, the scalp of hair of men walking on in
their transgressions” ([Psa.
68.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p158.1"></span>): that is, too much exalting themselves,
being too proud in their transgressions: wherein at least they ought to
be humble, saying, “O Lord, be Thou merciful to me a sinner.” <span
id="fr_2813"></span>[2814](#fn_2813) But He shall break in pieces their
heads: for he that exalteth himself shall be humbled. <span
id="fr_2814"></span>[2815](#fn_2814) And thus though even of the Lord be
the outgoing of death: nevertheless the same Lord, because He was God,
and died after the flesh of His own will, not of necessity, “shall <span
id="fr_2815"></span>[2816](#fn_2815) break in pieces the heads of His
enemies:” not only of those who mocked and crucified Him, and wagged
their heads, and said, “If Son of God He is, let Him come down from the
Cross;” <span id="fr_2816"></span>[2817](#fn_2816) but also of all men
lifting up themselves against His doctrine, and deriding His death as
though it were of a man. For that very same One of whom hath been said,
“Others He saved, Himself He can<span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_295"></span>not save,” <span
id="fr_2817"></span>[2818](#fn_2817) is the “God of our healths,” and is
the “God of saving men:” but for an example of humility and of patience,
and to efface the handwriting of our sins, He even willed that the
outgoing of death should be His own, that we might not fear that death,
but rather this from which He hath delivered us through that.
Nevertheless, though mocked and dead, “He shall break <span
id="fr_2818"></span>[2819](#fn_2818) in pieces the heads of His
enemies,” of whom He saith, “Raise Thou me up, and I shall render to
them:” <span id="fr_2819"></span>[2820](#fn_2819) whether it be good
things for evil things, while to Himself He subdueth the heads of them
believing, or whether just things for unjust things, while He punisheth
the heads of them proud. For in either way are shattered and broken the
heads of enemies, when from pride they are thrown down, whether by
humility being amended, or whether unto the lowest depths of hell being
hurled.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p166"></span>28. “The Lord hath said, Out of Basan I
will be turned” ([Psa. 68.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p166.1"></span>): or, as some copies have, “Out of Basan I
will turn.” For He turneth that we may be safe, of whom above hath been
said, “God of our healths, and God of saving men.” <span
id="fr_2820"></span>[2821](#fn_2820) For to Him elsewhere also is said,
“O God of virtues, turn Thou us, and show Thy face, and safe we shall
be.” <span id="fr_2821"></span>[2822](#fn_2821) Also in another place,
“Turn us, O God of our healths.” <span
id="fr_2822"></span>[2823](#fn_2822) But he hath said, “Out of Basan I
will turn.” Basan is interpreted confusion. What is then, I will turn
out of confusion, but that there is confounded because of his sins, he
that is praying of the mercy of God that they may be put away? Thence it
is that the Publican dared not even to lift up his eyes to Heaven: <span
id="fr_2823"></span>[2824](#fn_2823) so, on considering himself, was he
confounded; but he went down justified, <span
id="fr_2824"></span>[2825](#fn_2824) because “the Lord hath said, Out of
Basan I will turn.” Basan is also interpreted drought: and rightly the
Lord is understood to turn out of drought, that is, out of scarcity. For
they that think themselves to be in plenty, though they be famished; and
full, though they be altogether empty; are not turned.…“I will turn unto
the deep of the sea.” If, “I will turn,” why, “unto the deep of the
sea”? Unto Himself indeed the Lord turneth, when savingly He turneth,
and He is not surely Himself the deep of the sea. Doth perchance the
Latin expression deceive us, and hath there been put “unto the deep,”
for a translation of what signifieth “deeply”? For He doth not turn
Himself: but He turneth those that in the deep of this world lie sunk
down with the weight of sins, in that place where one that is turned
saith, “From the depths I have cried to Thee, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_2825"></span>[2826](#fn_2825) But if it is not, “I will turn,”
but, “I will be turned unto the deep of the sea;” our Lord is understood
to have said, how by His own mercy He was turned even unto the deep of
the sea, to deliver even those that were sinners in most desperate case.
Though in one Greek copy I have found, not, “unto the deep,” but “in the
depths,” that is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p172.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p172.3"></span>ν βυθοῖς</span>: which strengtheneth the
former sense, because even there God turneth to Himself men crying from
the depths. And even if He be understood Himself there to be turned, to
deliver such sort also, it is not beside the purpose: and so then He
turneth, or else to deliver them is so turned, that His foot is stained
in blood. Which to the Lord Himself the Prophet speaketh: “That Thy foot
may be stained in blood” ([Psa.
68.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p172.4"></span>): that is, in order that they themselves
who are turned to Thee, or to deliver whom Thou art turned, though in
the deep of the sea by the burden of iniquity they may have been sunk,
may make so great proficiency by Thy Grace (for where there hath
abounded sin, there hath superabounded grace <span
id="fr_2826"></span>[2827](#fn_2826) ), that they may become Thy foot
among Thy members, to preach Thy Gospel, and for Thy name’s sake drawing
out a long martyrdom, even unto blood they may contend. For thus, as I
judge, more meetly is perceived His foot stained in blood.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p174"></span>29. Lastly, he addeth, “The tongue of
Thy dogs out of enemies by Himself,” calling those very same that had
been about to strive for the faith of the Gospel, even dogs, as though
barking for their Lord. Not those dogs, whereof saith the Apostle,
“Beware of dogs:” <span id="fr_2827"></span>[2828](#fn_2827) but those
that eat of the crumbs which fall from the table of their masters. For
having confessed this, the woman of Canaan merited to hear, “O woman,
great is thy faith, be it done to thee as thou wilt.” <span
id="fr_2828"></span>[2829](#fn_2828) Dogs commendable, not abominable;
observing fidelity towards their master, and before his house barking
against enemies. Not only “of dogs” he hath said, but “of Thy dogs:” nor
are their teeth praised, but their tongue is: for it was not indeed to
no purpose, not without a great mystery, that Gedeon was bidden to lead
those alone, who should lap the water of the river like dogs; <span
id="fr_2829"></span>[2830](#fn_2829) and of such sort not more than
three hundred among so great a multitude were found. In which number is
the sign of the Cross because of the letter T, which in the Greek
numeral characters signifieth three hundred. Of such dogs in another
Psalm also said, “They shall be turned at even, and hunger they shall
suffer as dogs.” <span id="fr_2830"></span>[2831](#fn_2830) For even
some dogs have been reproved by the Prophet Isaiah, not because they
were dogs, but because they knew not how to bark, and loved to
sleep. <span id="fr_2831"></span>[2832](#fn_2831) In which place indeed
he hath shown, that if they had watched and barked for their Lord, <span
id="page_296">p. 296</span> <span id="ii.LXVIII-Page_296"></span>they
would have been praiseworthy dogs: just as they are praised, of whom is
said, “The tongue of Thy dogs.”…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p180"></span>30. “There have been seen Thy steps, O
God” ([Psa. 68.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p180.1"></span>). The steps are those wherewith Thou hast
come through the world, as though in that chariot Thou wast going to
traverse the round world; which chariot of clouds He intimateth to be
His holy and faithful ones in the Gospel, where He saith, “From this
time <span id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832) ye shall see the Son of
Man coming in the clouds.” <span id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833)
Leaving out that coming wherein He shall be Judge of quick and
dead, <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834) “From this time,” He
saith, “ye shall see the Son of Man coming in clouds.” These “Thy steps
have been seen,” that is, have been manifested, by the revealing the
grace of the New Testament. Whence hath been said, “How beautiful are
the feet of them that proclaim peace, that proclaim good things!” <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835) For this grace and those steps were
lying hid in the Old Testament: but when there came the fulness of time,
and it pleased God to reveal His Son, <span
id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836) that He might be proclaimed among
the Gentiles, “there were seen Thy steps, O God: the steps of my God, of
the <span id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837) King who is in the holy
place.” In what holy place, save in His Temple? “For the Temple of God
is holy,” he saith, “which ye are.” <span
id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p188"></span>31. But in order that those steps might
be seen, “there went before princes conjoined with men psalming, in the
midst of damsels players on timbrels” ([Psa.
68.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p188.1"></span>). The princes are the Apostles: for they
went before, that the peoples might come in multitudes. “They went
before” proclaiming the New Testament: “conjoined with men psalming,” by
whose good works that were even visible, as it were with instruments of
praise, God was glorified. But those same princes are “in the midst of
damsels players on timbrels,” to wit, in an honourable ministry: for
thus in the midst are ministers set over new Churches; for this is
“damsels:” with flesh subdued praising God; for this is “players on
timbrels,” because timbrels are made of skin dried and stretched.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p189"></span>32. Therefore, that no one should take
these words in a carnal sense, and by these words should conceive in his
mind certain choral bands of wantonness, he continueth and saith, “In
the Churches bless ye the Lord” ([Psa.
68.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p189.1"></span>): as though he were saying, wherefore,
when ye hear of damsels, players on timbrels, do ye think of wanton
pleasures? “In the Churches bless ye the Lord.” For the Churches are
pointed out to you by this mystic intimation: the Churches are the
damsels, with new grace decked: the Churches are the players on the
timbrels, with chastened flesh being spiritually tuneful. “In the
Churches,” then, “bless ye the Lord God from the wells of Israel.” For
from thence He first chose those whom He made wells. For from thence
were chosen the Apostles; and they first heard, “He that shall have
drunk of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst, but there
shall be made in him a well of water springing unto life
everlasting.” <span id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839)

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p191"></span>33. “There is Benjamin the younger in a
trance” ([Psa. 68.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p191.1"></span>). There is Paul the last of the Apostles,
who saith, “For even I am an Israelite, out of the seed of Abraham, out
of the tribe of Benjamin.” <span id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840)
But evidently “in a trance,” all men being amazed at a miracle so great
as that of his calling. For a trance is the mind’s going out: which
thing sometimes chanceth through fear; but sometimes through some
revelation, the mind suffering separation from the corporal senses, in
order that that which is to be represented may be represented to the
spirit. Whence even thus may be understood that which here hath been
written, namely, “in a trance;” for when to that persecutor there had
been said <span id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841) from Heaven, “Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me:” <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842) there being taken from him the
light of the eyes of flesh, he made answer to the Lord, whom in spirit
he saw, but they that were with him heard the voice of him replying,
though seeing no one to whom he was speaking. Here also the trance may
be understood to be that one of his, whereof he himself speaking, saith,
that he knew a man caught up even unto the third Heaven; but whether in
the body, or whether out of the body, he knew not: <span
id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843) but that he being caught up into
Paradise, heard ineffable words, which it was not lawful for a man to
speak. “Princes of Juda the leaders of them, princes of Zabulon, princes
of Nephthalim.” Since he is indicating the Apostles as princes, wherein
is even “Benjamin the younger in a trance,” in which words that Paul is
indicated no one doubteth; or when under the name of princes there are
indicated in the Churches all men excelling and most worthy of
imitation: what mean these names of the tribes of Israel?…For the names
are Hebrew: whereof Juda is said to be interpreted confession, Zabulon
habitation of strength, Nephthalim my enlargement. All which words do
intimate to us the most proper princes of the Church, worthy of their
leadership, worthy of imitation, worthy of honours. For the Martyrs in
the Churches hold the highest place, and by the crown of holy worth they
do excel. But however in martyrdom the first thing is confession, <span
id="page_297">p. 297</span> <span id="ii.LXVIII-Page_297"></span>and for
this is next put on strength to endure whatsoever shall have chanced;
then after all things have been endured, straits being ended, breadth
followeth in reward. It may also thus be understood; that whereas the
Apostle chiefly commendeth these three things, faith, hope, love; <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844) confession is in faith, strength in
hope, breadth in love. For of faith the substance is, that with the
heart men believe unto righteousness, but with the mouth confession be
made unto salvation. <span id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845) But in
sufferings of tribulations the thing itself is sorrowful, but the hope
is strong. For, “if that which we see not we hope for, through patience
we wait for it.” <span id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846) But breadth
the shedding abroad of love in the heart doth give. For “love perfected
casteth out fear:” which fear “hath torment,” <span
id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847) because of the straits of the
soul.…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p200"></span>34. “Command, O God, Thy Virtue” ([Psa.
68.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p200.1"></span>). For one is our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom are all things, <span id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848)
and we in Him, of whom we read that He is “the Virtue of God and the
Wisdom of God.” <span id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849) But how doth
God command His Christ, save while He commendeth Him? For “God
commendeth His love in us, in that while yet we were sinners, for us
Christ died.” <span id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850) “How hath He
not also with Him given to us all things?” <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851) “Command, O God, Thy Virtue:
confirm, O God, that which Thou hast wrought in us.” Command by
teaching, confirm by aiding.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p205"></span>35. “From Thy Temple in Jerusalem, to
Thee kings shall offer presents” ([Psa.
68.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p205.1"></span>). Jerusalem, which is our free
mother, <span id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852) because the same also
is Thy holy Temple: from that Temple then, “to Thee kings shall offer
presents.” Whatever kings be understood, whether kings of the earth, or
whether those whom “He that is above the heavens distinguisheth over the
dove silvered;” “to Thee kings shall offer presents.” And what presents
are so acceptable <span id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853) as the
sacrifices of praise? But there is a noise against this praise, from men
bearing the name of Christian, and having diverse opinions. Be there
done that which followeth, “Rebuke Thou the beasts of the cane” <span
id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854) ([Psa.
68.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p208.1"></span>). For both beasts they are, since by not
understanding they do hurt: and beasts of the cane they are, since the
sense of the Scriptures they wrest according to their own
misapprehension. For in the cane the Scriptures are as reasonably
perceived, as language in tongue, according to the mode of expression
whereby the Hebrew or the Greek or the Latin tongue is spoken of, or the
like; that is to say, by the efficient cause the thing which is being
effected is implied. Now it is usual in the Latin language for writing
to be called style, because with the *stilus* it is done: so then cane
also, because with a cane it is done. The Apostle Peter saith, that “men
unlearned and unstable do wrest the Scriptures to their own proper
destruction:” <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855) these are the
beasts of the cane, whereof here is said, “Rebuke Thou the beasts of the
cane.”

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p210"></span>36. Concerning these also is that which
followeth, “The congregation of bulls amid the cows of the peoples, in
order that there may be excluded they that have been tried with
silver.” <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856) Calling them bulls
because of the pride of a stiff and untamed neck: for he is referring to
heretics. But by “the cows of the peoples,” I think souls easily led
astray must be understood, because easily they follow these bulls. For
they lead not astray entire peoples, among whom are men grave and
stable; whence hath been written, “In a people grave I will praise
Thee:” <span id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857) but only the cows
which they may have found among those peoples. “For of these are they
that steal into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins,
who are led with divers lusts, alway learning, and at the knowledge of
the truth never arriving.” <span id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858)
…For, “may be excluded,” hath been said, meaning, may appear, may stand
forth: as he saith, “may be made manifest.” Whence also, in the art of
the silversmith, they are called *exclusores,* who out of the
shapelessness of the lump are skilled to mould the form of a vessel. For
many meanings of the holy Scriptures are concealed, and are known only
to a few of singular intelligence, and are never vindicated so suitably
and acceptably as when our diligence to make answer to heretics
constraineth us. For then even they that neglect the pursuits of
learning, shaking off their slumber, are stirred up to a diligent
hearing, in order that their opponents may be refuted. In a word, how
many senses of holy Scriptures concerning Christ as God have been
vindicated against Photinus, how many concerning Christ as man against
Manichæus, how many concerning the Trinity against Sabellius, how many
concerning the Unity of the Trinity against Arians, Eunomians,
Macedonians? How many concerning the Catholic Church in the whole world
spread abroad, against Donatists, and Luciferians, and others, whoever
they be, that with like error dissent from the truth: how many against
the rest of heretics, whom to enumerate or mention were too long a task,
and for the present work unnecessary?…Of whom, as it were bulls, that
is, not subject to the peaceful and gentle yoke of discipline, the
Apostle maketh mention, in the place where he hath said that such an one
<span id="page_298">p. 298</span> <span
id="ii.LXVIII-Page_298"></span>must be chosen for the Episcopate as is
“able to exhort in sound doctrine and to convince the gainsayers. For
there are many unruly;” <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859) these
are bulls with uplifted neck, impatient of plough and yoke: vain-talkers
and leaders astray of minds; which minds this Psalm hath intimated under
the name of cows.…

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p215"></span>37. “There shall come ambassadors out
of Egypt, Ethiopia shall prevent the hands of Him” ([Psa.
68.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p215.1"></span>). Under the name of Egypt or of Ethiopia,
he hath signified the faith of all nations, from a part the whole:
calling the preachers of reconciliation ambassadors. “For Christ,” he
saith, “we have an embassy, God as it were exhorting through us: we
beseech you for Christ to be reconciled to God.”  <span
id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860) Not then of the Israelites alone,
whence the Apostles were chosen, but also from the rest of the nations
that there should be preachers of Christian peace, in this manner hath
been mystically prophesied. But by that which he saith, “shall prevent
the hands of Him,” he saith this, shall prevent the vengeance of Him: to
wit, by turning to Him, in order that their sins may be forgiven, lest
by continuing sinners they be punished. Which thing also in another
Psalm is said, “Let us come before <span
id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861) the face of Him in
confession.” <span id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862) As by hands he
signifieth vengeance, so by face, revelation and presence, which will be
in the Judgment. Because then, by Egypt and Ethiopia he hath signified
the nations of the whole world; immediately he hath subjoined, “to God
(are) the kingdoms of the earth.” Not to Sabellius, not to Arius, not to
Donatus, not to the rest of the bulls stiff-necked, but “to God (are)
the kingdoms of the earth.” But the greater number of Latin copies, and
especially the Greek, have the verses so punctuated, that there is not
one verse in these words, “to God the kingdoms of the earth,” but, “to
God,” is at the end of the former verse, and so there is said, “Ethiopia
shall come before the hands of her to God,” and then there followeth in
another verse, “Kingdoms of the earth, sing ye to God, psalm ye to the
Lord” ([Psa. 68.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p218.2"></span>). By which punctuation, doubtless to be
preferred by the agreement of many copies, and those deserving of
credit, there seemeth to me to be implied faith which precedeth works:
because without the merits of good works through faith the ungodly is
justified, just as the Apostle said, “To one believing in Him that
justifieth the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness:” <span
id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863) in order that afterwards faith
itself through love may begin to work. For those alone are to be called
good works, <span id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864) which are done
through love of God. But these faith must needs go before, so that from
thence these may begin, not from these this.…This is faith, whereof to
the Church Herself is said in the Song of Songs, “Thou shalt come and
shalt pass hence from the beginning of faith.” <span
id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865) For She hath come <span
id="fr_2866"></span>[2867](#fn_2866) like the chariot of God in
thousands of men rejoicing, having a prosperous course, and She hath
passed over from this world to the Father: in order that there may come
to pass in Her that which the Bridegroom Himself saith, who hath passed
hence from this world to the Father, <span
id="fr_2867"></span>[2868](#fn_2867) “I will that where I am, these also
may be with Me:” <span id="fr_2868"></span>[2869](#fn_2868) but from the
beginning of faith. Because then in order that good works may follow,
faith doth precede; and there are not any good works, save those which
follow faith preceding: nothing else seemeth to have been meant in,
“Ethiopia shall come before the hands of her to God,” but, Ethiopia
shall believe in God. For thus she “shall come before the hands of her,”
that is, the works of her. Of whom, except of Ethiopia herself? For this
in the Greek is not ambiguous: for the word “of her” <span
id="fr_2869"></span>[2870](#fn_2869) there in the feminine gender most
clearly hath been put down. And thus nothing else hath been said than
“Ethiopia shall come before her hands to God,” that is, by believing in
God she shall come before her works. For, “I judge,” saith the Apostle,
“that a man is justified through faith without the works of the Law. Is
He God of the Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles?” <span
id="fr_2870"></span>[2871](#fn_2870) So then Ethiopia, which seemeth to
be the utmost limit of the Gentiles, is justified through faith, without
the works of the Law.…For the expression in Greek, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p226.2"></span>χεῖρα αὐτῆς</span>,
which most copies have, both of “hand of her” and “her own hand” may be
understood: but that which is uncommon in the Greek copies, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXVIII-p226.3"></span>χειρας αὐτῆς</span>, by
both “hands of her” and “her own  <span
id="fr_2871"></span>[2872](#fn_2871) hands,” in Latin may be expressed.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p228"></span>38. Henceforward, as if through
prophecy all things had been discoursed of which now we see fulfilled,
he exhorteth to the praise of Christ, and next He foretelleth His future
Advent. “Kingdoms of earth, sing ye to God, psalm ye to the Lord: psalm
ye to God, who hath ascended above the Heaven of Heavens to the East”
([Psa. 68.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p228.1"></span>). Or, as some copies have it, “who hath
ascended above the Heaven of Heaven to the East.” In these words he
perceiveth not Christ, who believeth not His Resurrection and Ascension.
But hath not “to the East,” which he hath added, expressed the very
spot; since in the quarters of the East is where He rose again, and
whence He ascended? Therefore above the Heaven of Heaven He <span
id="page_299">p. 299</span> <span id="ii.LXVIII-Page_299"></span>sitteth
at the right hand of the Father. This is what the Apostle saith, “the
Same is He that hath ascended above all Heavens.” <span
id="fr_2872"></span>[2873](#fn_2872) For what of Heavens doth remain
after the Heaven of Heaven? Which also we may call the Heavens of
Heavens, just as He hath called the firmament Heaven: <span
id="fr_2873"></span>[2874](#fn_2873) which Heaven, however, even as
Heavens we read of, in the place where there is written, “and let the
waters which are above the Heavens praise the name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_2874"></span>[2875](#fn_2874) And forasmuch as from thence He is
to come, <span id="fr_2875"></span>[2876](#fn_2875) to judge quick and
dead, observe what followeth: “behold, He shall give His voice, the
voice of power.” <span id="fr_2876"></span>[2877](#fn_2876) He that like
a lamb before the shearer of Him was without voice, <span
id="fr_2877"></span>[2878](#fn_2877) “behold shall give His voice,” and
not the voice of weakness, as though to be judged; but “the voice of
power,” as though going to judge. For God shall not be hidden, as
before, and in the judgment of men not opening His mouth; but “God shall
come manifest, our God, and He shall not be silent.” <span
id="fr_2878"></span>[2879](#fn_2878) Why do ye despair, ye unbelieving
men? Why do ye mock? What saith the evil servant? “My Lord delayeth to
come.” <span id="fr_2879"></span>[2880](#fn_2879) “Behold, He shall give
His voice, the voice of power.”

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p237"></span>39. “Give ye glory to God, above Israel
is the magnificence of Him” ([Psa.
68.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p237.1"></span>). Of whom saith the Apostle, “Upon the
Israel of God.” <span id="fr_2880"></span>[2881](#fn_2880) For “not all
that are out of Israel, are Israelites:” <span
id="fr_2881"></span>[2882](#fn_2881) for there is also an Israel after
the flesh. Whence he saith, “See ye Israel after the flesh.” <span
id="fr_2882"></span>[2883](#fn_2882) “For not they that are sons of the
flesh, are sons of God, but sons of promise are counted for a
seed.” <span id="fr_2883"></span>[2884](#fn_2883) Therefore at that time
when without any intermixture of evil men His people shall be, like a
heap purged by the fan, <span id="fr_2884"></span>[2885](#fn_2884) like
Israel in whom guile is not, <span id="fr_2885"></span>[2886](#fn_2885)
then most pre-eminent “above Israel” shall be “the magnificence” of
“Him: and the virtue of Him in the clouds.” For not alone He shall come
to judgment, but with the elders of His people: <span
id="fr_2886"></span>[2887](#fn_2886) to whom He hath promised that they
shall sit upon thrones to judge, <span
id="fr_2887"></span>[2888](#fn_2887) who even shall judge angels. <span
id="fr_2888"></span>[2889](#fn_2888) These be the clouds.

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p247"></span>40. Lastly, lest of anything else the
clouds be understood, he hath in continuation added, “Wonderful is God
in His saints, the God of Israel” ([Psa.
68.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p247.1"></span>). For at that time even most truly and
most fully there shall be fulfilled the name Israel itself, which is one
“seeing God:” for we shall see Him as He is. <span
id="fr_2889"></span>[2890](#fn_2889) “He Himself shall give virtue <span
id="fr_2890"></span>[2891](#fn_2890) and strength to His people, blessed
be God:” to His people now frail and weak. For “we have this treasure in
earthen vessels.” <span id="fr_2891"></span>[2892](#fn_2891) But then by
a most glorious changing even of our bodies, “He Himself shall give
virtue and strength to His people.” For this body is sown in weakness,
shall rise in virtue. <span id="fr_2892"></span>[2893](#fn_2892) He
Himself then shall give the virtue which in His own flesh He hath sent
before, whereof the Apostle saith, “the power of His
Resurrection.” <span id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893) But strength
whereby shall be destroyed the enemy death. <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894) Now then of this long and
difficultly understood Psalm we have at length by His own aid made an
end. “Blessed be God. Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2683"></span>[285:2684](1080079.htm#fr_2683) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. LXVII.

<span id="fn_2684"></span>[285:2685](1080079.htm#fr_2684) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p4"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2685"></span>[286:2686](1080079.htm#fr_2685) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p6"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2686"></span>[286:2687](1080079.htm#fr_2686) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p7"></span> *Effectum*.

<span id="fn_2687"></span>[286:2688](1080079.htm#fr_2687) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p8"></span> [Ps. cxxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2688"></span>[286:2689](1080079.htm#fr_2688) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p10"></span> [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2689"></span>[286:2690](1080079.htm#fr_2689) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p12"></span> [Matt. xxv.
34.](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2690"></span>[286:2691](1080079.htm#fr_2690) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p13"></span> [Ps. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2691"></span>[286:2692](1080079.htm#fr_2691) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p14"></span> [Job vii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p14.1"></span>,
LXX.

<span id="fn_2692"></span>[286:2693](1080079.htm#fr_2692) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p15"></span> [Isa. lii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2693"></span>[286:2694](1080079.htm#fr_2693) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p16"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2694"></span>[286:2695](1080079.htm#fr_2694) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p18"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2695"></span>[286:2696](1080079.htm#fr_2695) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p19"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2696"></span>[286:2697](1080079.htm#fr_2696) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p20"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2697"></span>[287:2698](1080079.htm#fr_2697) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p21"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2698"></span>[287:2699](1080079.htm#fr_2698) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p22"></span> [1 Tim. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2699"></span>[287:2700](1080079.htm#fr_2699) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p23"></span> [John xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2700"></span>[287:2701](1080079.htm#fr_2700) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p26"></span> [Ps. xxv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2701"></span>[287:2702](1080079.htm#fr_2701) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p27"></span> [Ps. cxvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2702"></span>[287:2703](1080079.htm#fr_2702) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p28"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
17.28](../../../bib/apo/sir017.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2703"></span>[287:2704](1080079.htm#fr_2703) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p29"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2704"></span>[287:2705](1080079.htm#fr_2704) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p30"></span> [Luke xiii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2705"></span>[287:2706](1080079.htm#fr_2705) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p31"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2706"></span>[287:2707](1080079.htm#fr_2706) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p32"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2707"></span>[287:2708](1080079.htm#fr_2707) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p34"></span> [Exod. xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2708"></span>[287:2709](1080079.htm#fr_2708) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p35"></span> [Exod. xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2709"></span>[288:2710](1080079.htm#fr_2709) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p36"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2710"></span>[288:2711](1080079.htm#fr_2710) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p36.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p37"></span> [Num.
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2711"></span>[288:2712](1080079.htm#fr_2711) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p38"></span> [Num.
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2712"></span>[288:2713](1080079.htm#fr_2712) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p39"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2713"></span>[288:2714](1080079.htm#fr_2713) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p40"></span> [Sol. Song ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2714"></span>[288:2715](1080079.htm#fr_2714) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p42"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2715"></span>[288:2716](1080079.htm#fr_2715) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p43"></span> [Eph. ii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2716"></span>[288:2717](1080079.htm#fr_2716) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p44"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2717"></span>[288:2718](1080079.htm#fr_2717) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p46"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2718"></span>[288:2719](1080079.htm#fr_2718) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p47"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2719"></span>[288:2720](1080079.htm#fr_2719) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p48"></span> [Gen. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2720"></span>[288:2721](1080079.htm#fr_2720) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p49"></span> [Gal. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2721"></span>[288:2722](1080079.htm#fr_2721) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p50"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2722"></span>[288:2723](1080079.htm#fr_2722) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p51"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2723"></span>[288:2724](1080079.htm#fr_2723) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p52"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2724"></span>[288:2725](1080079.htm#fr_2724) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p53"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2725"></span>[288:2726](1080079.htm#fr_2725) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p54"></span> Grace the voluntary rain.

<span id="fn_2726"></span>[288:2727](1080079.htm#fr_2726) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p55"></span> \[See p. 189, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2727"></span>[288:2728](1080079.htm#fr_2727) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p56"></span> [Rom. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2728"></span>[288:2729](1080079.htm#fr_2728) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p57"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2729"></span>[288:2730](1080079.htm#fr_2729) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p58"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2730"></span>[289:2731](1080079.htm#fr_2730) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p59"></span> [Ps.
84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006), [Ps.
83:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p59.1"></span>. Vulgate nearly so.

<span id="fn_2731"></span>[289:2732](1080079.htm#fr_2731) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p61"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2732"></span>[289:2733](1080079.htm#fr_2732) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p62"></span> [Ps. cxxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2733"></span>[289:2734](1080079.htm#fr_2733) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p63.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p64"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2734"></span>[289:2735](1080079.htm#fr_2734) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p65"></span> [Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2735"></span>[289:2736](1080079.htm#fr_2735) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p66"></span> [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2736"></span>[289:2737](1080079.htm#fr_2736) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p67"></span> [1 Tim. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2737"></span>[289:2738](1080079.htm#fr_2737) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p68"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2738"></span>[289:2739](1080079.htm#fr_2738) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p70"></span> He adds: “This repetition all the
copies have not, and the more careful mark it with a star put before it,
which marks are called asterisks, whereby they would have to be noted,
that there are not in the Septuagint Version, but there are in the
Hebrew, those words which are distinguished by such marks.”

<span id="fn_2739"></span>[290:2740](1080079.htm#fr_2739) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p70.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p71"></span> *Dilecti*, which signifies a love of
choice.

<span id="fn_2740"></span>[290:2741](1080079.htm#fr_2740) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p72"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2741"></span>[290:2742](1080079.htm#fr_2741) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p73"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2742"></span>[290:2743](1080079.htm#fr_2742) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p74"></span> [Eph. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2743"></span>[290:2744](1080079.htm#fr_2743) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p75"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2744"></span>[290:2745](1080079.htm#fr_2744) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p76"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[290:2746](1080079.htm#fr_2745) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p77"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[290:2747](1080079.htm#fr_2746) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p78"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[290:2748](1080079.htm#fr_2747) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p80"></span> \[’<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p80.1"></span>Εὰν κοιμηθῆτε ‡ναμ™σον τῶν κλήρων,
κ.τ.λ.</span>, Sept; *si dormiatis inter medios cleros*, Vulgate; *Inter
medios terminos*, Jerome.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[290:2749](1080079.htm#fr_2748) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p80.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p81"></span> *Hujus pennæ*.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[290:2750](1080079.htm#fr_2749) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p81.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p82"></span> *Hæ pennæ*.

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[290:2751](1080079.htm#fr_2750) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p83"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[290:2752](1080079.htm#fr_2751) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p84"></span> [Song of Sol. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[290:2753](1080079.htm#fr_2752) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p85"></span> [Ps. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[291:2754](1080079.htm#fr_2753) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p86"></span> *Inter medios cleros*.

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[291:2755](1080079.htm#fr_2754) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p88"></span> [Ps. xci.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[291:2756](1080079.htm#fr_2755) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p88.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p89"></span> [Matt. xxii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[291:2757](1080079.htm#fr_2756) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p90"></span> *Charitas*.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[291:2758](1080079.htm#fr_2757) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p91"></span> [Matt. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[291:2759](1080079.htm#fr_2758) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p92"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[291:2760](1080079.htm#fr_2759) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p94"></span> *Inter medium clerorum*. The other
might mean, between or among the middlemost lots.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[291:2761](1080079.htm#fr_2760) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p95"></span> *Testamentum*.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[291:2762](1080079.htm#fr_2761) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p96"></span> [Gen.
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[291:2763](1080079.htm#fr_2762) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p96.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p97"></span> [Gen. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[291:2764](1080079.htm#fr_2763) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p97.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p98"></span> [1 Sam. xx.
42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#042)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[291:2765](1080079.htm#fr_2764) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p98.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p99"></span> *Cleros*.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[291:2766](1080079.htm#fr_2765) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p99.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p100"></span> [Numb. xviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[291:2767](1080079.htm#fr_2766) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p101"></span> [Acts i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[292:2768](1080079.htm#fr_2767) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p104"></span> *Supercœlestis*.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[292:2769](1080079.htm#fr_2768) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p105"></span> [Eph. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[292:2770](1080079.htm#fr_2769) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p105.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p106"></span> [Rom.
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[292:2771](1080079.htm#fr_2770) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p107"></span> [1 Cor.
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[292:2772](1080079.htm#fr_2771) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p107.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p108"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[292:2773](1080079.htm#fr_2772) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p108.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p109"></span> [Luke i.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#034)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[292:2774](1080079.htm#fr_2773) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p109.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p110"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[292:2775](1080079.htm#fr_2774) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p110.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p111"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[292:2776](1080079.htm#fr_2775) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p111.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p112"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[292:2777](1080079.htm#fr_2776) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p112.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p113"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[292:2778](1080079.htm#fr_2777) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p115"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[292:2779](1080079.htm#fr_2778) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p115.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p116"></span> *Incaseatus*.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[292:2780](1080079.htm#fr_2779) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p116.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p117"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[292:2781](1080079.htm#fr_2780) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p118.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p119"></span> [Matt. xvi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[292:2782](1080079.htm#fr_2781) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p119.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p120"></span> *Suspicamini*.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[293:2783](1080079.htm#fr_2782) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p121"></span> Or, “look up to.”

<span id="fn_2783"></span>[293:2784](1080079.htm#fr_2783) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p121.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p122"></span> [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2784"></span>[293:2785](1080079.htm#fr_2784) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p122.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p123"></span> [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2785"></span>[293:2786](1080079.htm#fr_2785) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p123.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p124"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2786"></span>[293:2787](1080079.htm#fr_2786) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p124.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p125"></span> [Gal. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2787"></span>[293:2788](1080079.htm#fr_2787) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p125.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p126"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2788"></span>[293:2789](1080079.htm#fr_2788) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p126.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p127"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2789"></span>[293:2790](1080079.htm#fr_2789) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p127.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p128"></span> [1 Kings viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2790"></span>[293:2791](1080079.htm#fr_2790) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p128.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p129"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2791"></span>[293:2792](1080079.htm#fr_2791) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p129.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p130"></span> [John xvii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#023)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2792"></span>[293:2793](1080079.htm#fr_2792) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p130.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p131"></span> [John xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2793"></span>[293:2794](1080079.htm#fr_2793) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p132.6"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p133"></span> See St. Macarius, *Hom*. 1.

<span id="fn_2794"></span>[293:2795](1080079.htm#fr_2794) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p134"></span> [1 Cor.
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2795"></span>[293:2796](1080079.htm#fr_2795) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p134.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p135"></span> [Rom. xii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2796"></span>[293:2797](1080079.htm#fr_2796) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p135.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p136"></span> [Acts xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2797"></span>[293:2798](1080079.htm#fr_2797) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p136.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p137"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2798"></span>[293:2799](1080079.htm#fr_2798) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p137.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p138"></span> [Rom. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2799"></span>[293:2800](1080079.htm#fr_2799) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p139.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p140"></span> [Eph.
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2800"></span>[293:2801](1080079.htm#fr_2800) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p140.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p141"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p141.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2801"></span>[293:2802](1080079.htm#fr_2801) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p141.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p142"></span> [Mark xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2802"></span>[293:2803](1080079.htm#fr_2802) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p142.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p143"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2803"></span>[293:2804](1080079.htm#fr_2803) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p144"></span> [Matt. xxv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#040)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2804"></span>[294:2805](1080079.htm#fr_2804) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p145.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p146"></span> See Title [Ps.
xcv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p146.1"></span>, Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2805"></span>[294:2806](1080079.htm#fr_2805) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p146.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p147"></span> Militia.

<span id="fn_2806"></span>[294:2807](1080079.htm#fr_2806) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p147.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p148"></span> [Luke v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2807"></span>[294:2808](1080079.htm#fr_2807) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p148.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p149"></span> [Matt. xi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2808"></span>[294:2809](1080079.htm#fr_2808) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p149.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p150"></span> [Rom. vi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2809"></span>[294:2810](1080079.htm#fr_2809) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p150.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p151"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p151.1"></span>.
He adds: “With which sense agreeth another interpretation also, whereby
Sina is interpreted ‘measure.’”

<span id="fn_2810"></span>[294:2811](1080079.htm#fr_2810) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p152.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p153"></span> [Eph. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2811"></span>[294:2812](1080079.htm#fr_2811) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p154.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p155"></span> *Eructavit*.

<span id="fn_2812"></span>[294:2813](1080079.htm#fr_2812) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p156.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p157"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2813"></span>[294:2814](1080079.htm#fr_2813) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p158.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p159"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2814"></span>[294:2815](1080079.htm#fr_2814) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p159.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p160"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2815"></span>[294:2816](1080079.htm#fr_2815) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p160.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p161"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p161.1"></span>mss</span>. “did.”

<span id="fn_2816"></span>[294:2817](1080079.htm#fr_2816) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p161.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p162"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2817"></span>[295:2818](1080079.htm#fr_2817) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p162.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p163"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2818"></span>[295:2819](1080079.htm#fr_2818) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p163.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p164"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p164.1"></span>mss</span>. “breaketh.”

<span id="fn_2819"></span>[295:2820](1080079.htm#fr_2819) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p164.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p165"></span> [Ps. xli.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p165.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2820"></span>[295:2821](1080079.htm#fr_2820) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p166.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p167"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2821"></span>[295:2822](1080079.htm#fr_2821) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p167.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p168"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
19](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#019)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p168.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2822"></span>[295:2823](1080079.htm#fr_2822) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p168.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p169"></span> [Ps. lxxxv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p169.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2823"></span>[295:2824](1080079.htm#fr_2823) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p169.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p170"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2824"></span>[295:2825](1080079.htm#fr_2824) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p170.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p171"></span> [Luke xviii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2825"></span>[295:2826](1080079.htm#fr_2825) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p171.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p172"></span> [Ps. cxxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2826"></span>[295:2827](1080079.htm#fr_2826) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p172.5"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p173"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p173.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2827"></span>[295:2828](1080079.htm#fr_2827) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p174.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p175"></span> [Philip. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p175.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2828"></span>[295:2829](1080079.htm#fr_2828) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p175.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p176"></span> [Matt.
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p176.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2829"></span>[295:2830](1080079.htm#fr_2829) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p176.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p177"></span> [Judg. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p177.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2830"></span>[295:2831](1080079.htm#fr_2830) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p177.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p178"></span> [Ps. lix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p178.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2831"></span>[295:2832](1080079.htm#fr_2831) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p178.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p179"></span> [Isa. lvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p179.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[296:2833](1080079.htm#fr_2832) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p180.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p181"></span> *A modo*.

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[296:2834](1080079.htm#fr_2833) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p181.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p182"></span> [Mark xiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p182.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[296:2835](1080079.htm#fr_2834) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p182.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p183"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[296:2836](1080079.htm#fr_2835) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p183.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p184"></span> [Rom. x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[296:2837](1080079.htm#fr_2836) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p184.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p185"></span> [Gal. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[296:2838](1080079.htm#fr_2837) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p185.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p186"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p186.1"></span>mss</span>. “my.”

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[296:2839](1080079.htm#fr_2838) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p186.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p187"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[296:2840](1080079.htm#fr_2839) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p189.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p190"></span> [John iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[296:2841](1080079.htm#fr_2840) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p191.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p192"></span> [Philip. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[296:2842](1080079.htm#fr_2841) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p192.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p193"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p193.1"></span>mss</span>. “He was about to say.”

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[296:2843](1080079.htm#fr_2842) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p193.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p194"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[296:2844](1080079.htm#fr_2843) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p194.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p195"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p195.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[297:2845](1080079.htm#fr_2844) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p195.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p196"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[297:2846](1080079.htm#fr_2845) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p196.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p197"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[297:2847](1080079.htm#fr_2846) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p197.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p198"></span> [Rom. viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[297:2848](1080079.htm#fr_2847) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p198.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p199"></span> [1 John iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[297:2849](1080079.htm#fr_2848) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p200.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p201"></span> [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p201.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[297:2850](1080079.htm#fr_2849) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p201.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p202"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p202.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[297:2851](1080079.htm#fr_2850) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p202.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p203"></span> [Rom. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p203.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[297:2852](1080079.htm#fr_2851) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p203.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p204"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p204.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[297:2853](1080079.htm#fr_2852) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p205.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p206"></span> [Gal. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p206.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[297:2854](1080079.htm#fr_2853) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p206.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p207"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p207.1"></span>mss</span>. “more acceptable than.”

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[297:2855](1080079.htm#fr_2854) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p207.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p208"></span> Or, “pen” (of cane), *calami*.

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[297:2856](1080079.htm#fr_2855) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p208.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p209"></span> [2 Pet. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[297:2857](1080079.htm#fr_2856) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p210.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p211"></span> See on [Ps.
lv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#000)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p211.1"></span>
p. 216, note 7.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[297:2858](1080079.htm#fr_2857) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p211.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p212"></span> [Ps. xxxv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p212.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[297:2859](1080079.htm#fr_2858) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p212.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p213"></span> [2 Tim.
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p213.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[298:2860](1080079.htm#fr_2859) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p213.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p214"></span> [Titus
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p214.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[298:2861](1080079.htm#fr_2860) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p215.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p216"></span> [2 Cor. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[298:2862](1080079.htm#fr_2861) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p216.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p217"></span> Or, “prevent.”

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[298:2863](1080079.htm#fr_2862) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p217.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p218"></span> [Ps. xcv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p218.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[298:2864](1080079.htm#fr_2863) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p218.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p219"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p219.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[298:2865](1080079.htm#fr_2864) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p219.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p220"></span> *Sola bona opera*.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[298:2866](1080079.htm#fr_2865) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p220.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p221"></span> [Song of Sol.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXVIII-p221.1"></span>, LXX. E.V. “the top of Amana.”

<span id="fn_2866"></span>[298:2867](1080079.htm#fr_2866) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p221.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p222"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LXVIII-p222.1"></span>mss</span>. “shall come,” “shall pass.”

<span id="fn_2867"></span>[298:2868](1080079.htm#fr_2867) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p222.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p223"></span> [John xiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p223.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2868"></span>[298:2869](1080079.htm#fr_2868) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p223.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p224"></span> [John xvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#024)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p224.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2869"></span>[298:2870](1080079.htm#fr_2869) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p224.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p225"></span> Lat. *ejus*, of him or her.

<span id="fn_2870"></span>[298:2871](1080079.htm#fr_2870) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p225.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p226"></span> [Rom. iii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p226.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_2871"></span>[298:2872](1080079.htm#fr_2871) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p226.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p227"></span> *Suas*.

<span id="fn_2872"></span>[299:2873](1080079.htm#fr_2872) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p228.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p229"></span> [Eph. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p229.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2873"></span>[299:2874](1080079.htm#fr_2873) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p229.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p230"></span> [Gen. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p230.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2874"></span>[299:2875](1080079.htm#fr_2874) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p230.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p231"></span> [Ps. cxlviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p231.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2875"></span>[299:2876](1080079.htm#fr_2875) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p231.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p232"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p232.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2876"></span>[299:2877](1080079.htm#fr_2876) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p232.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p233"></span> *Virtutis*.

<span id="fn_2877"></span>[299:2878](1080079.htm#fr_2877) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p233.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p234"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p234.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2878"></span>[299:2879](1080079.htm#fr_2878) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p234.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p235"></span> [Ps. l.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p235.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2879"></span>[299:2880](1080079.htm#fr_2879) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p235.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p236"></span> [Luke xii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#045)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p236.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2880"></span>[299:2881](1080079.htm#fr_2880) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p237.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p238"></span> [Gal. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p238.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2881"></span>[299:2882](1080079.htm#fr_2881) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p238.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p239"></span> [Rom. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p239.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2882"></span>[299:2883](1080079.htm#fr_2882) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p239.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p240"></span> [1 Cor. x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#018)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p240.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2883"></span>[299:2884](1080079.htm#fr_2883) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p240.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p241"></span> [Rom. ix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p241.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2884"></span>[299:2885](1080079.htm#fr_2884) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p241.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p242"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p242.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2885"></span>[299:2886](1080079.htm#fr_2885) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p242.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p243"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p243.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2886"></span>[299:2887](1080079.htm#fr_2886) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p243.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p244"></span> [Isa. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p244.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2887"></span>[299:2888](1080079.htm#fr_2887) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p244.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p245"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p245.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2888"></span>[299:2889](1080079.htm#fr_2888) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p245.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p246"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p246.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2889"></span>[299:2890](1080079.htm#fr_2889) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p247.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p248"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p248.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2890"></span>[299:2891](1080079.htm#fr_2890) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p248.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p249"></span> Or, “power.”

<span id="fn_2891"></span>[299:2892](1080079.htm#fr_2891) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p249.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p250"></span> [2 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p250.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2892"></span>[299:2893](1080079.htm#fr_2892) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p250.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p251"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
43](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#043)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p251.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[299:2894](1080079.htm#fr_2893) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p251.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p252"></span> [Philip. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p252.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[299:2895](1080079.htm#fr_2894) <span
id="ii.LXVIII-p252.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXVIII-p253"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026)<span id="ii.LXVIII-p253.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXIX](1080080)
