[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080098)  [Next](1080100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p1"></span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p1.1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LXXXVIII. <span
id="fr_4069"></span>[4070](#fn_4069) </span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p3"></span>1. The Title of this eighty-seventh
Psalm contains a fresh subject for enquiry: the words <span
id="page_424">p. 424</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_424"></span>occurring here, “for Melech to
respond,” being nowhere else found. We have already given our opinion on
the meaning of the titles *Psalmus Cantici* and *Canticum Psalmi*: <span
id="fr_4070"></span>[4071](#fn_4070) and the words, “sons of Core,” are
constantly repeated, and have often been explained: so also “to the
end;” but what comes next in this title is peculiar. For “Melech” we may
translate into Latin “for the chorus,” for chorus is the sense of the
Hebrew word Melech. <span id="fr_4071"></span>[4072](#fn_4071) …The
Passion of our Lord is here prophesied. Now the Apostle Peter saith,
“Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow His steps;” <span id="fr_4072"></span>[4073](#fn_4072) this is
the meaning of “to respond.” The Apostle John also saith, “As Christ
laid down His life for us, so ought we also to lay down our lives for
the brethren;” <span id="fr_4073"></span>[4074](#fn_4073) this also is
to respond. But the choir signifies concord, which consists in charity:
whoever therefore in imitation of our Lord’s Passion gives up his body
to be burnt, if he have not charity, does not answer in the choir, and
therefore it profiteth him nothing. <span
id="fr_4074"></span>[4075](#fn_4074) Further, as in Latin the terms
Precentor and Succentor are used to denote in music the performer who
sings the first part, and him who takes it up; just so in this song of
the Passion, Christ going before is followed by the choir of martyrs
unto the end of gaining crowns in Heaven. This is sung by “the sons of
Core,” that is, the imitators of Christ’s Passion: as Christ was
crucified in Calvary, which is the interpretation of the Hebrew word
Core.  <span id="fr_4075"></span>[4076](#fn_4075) This also is “the
understanding of Æman the Israelite:” <span
id="fr_4076"></span>[4077](#fn_4076) words occurring at the end of this
title. Æman is said to mean, “his brother:” for Christ deigns to make
those His brethren, who understand the mystery of His Cross, and not
only are not ashamed of it, but faithfully glory in it, not praising
themselves for their own merits, but grateful for His grace: so that it
may be said to each of them, “Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there
is no guile,” <span id="fr_4077"></span>[4078](#fn_4077) just as holy
Scripture says of Israel himself, that he was without guile. <span
id="fr_4078"></span>[4079](#fn_4078)

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p13"></span>2. “O Lord God of my salvation, I have
cried day and night before Thee” ([Psa.
88.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p13.1"></span>). Let us therefore now hear the voice of
Christ singing before us in prophecy, to whom His own choir should
respond either in imitation, or in thanksgiving.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p14"></span>“O let my prayer enter into Thy
presence, incline Thine ear unto my calling” ([Psa.
88.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p14.1"></span>). For even our Lord prayed, not in the
form of God, but in the form of a servant; for in this He also suffered.
He prayed both in prosperous times, that is, by “day,” and in calamity,
which I imagine is meant by “night.” The entrance of prayer into God’s
presence is its acceptance: the inclination of His ear is His
compassionate listening to it: for God has not such bodily members as we
have. The passage is however, as usual, a repetition. <span
id="fr_4079"></span>[4080](#fn_4079)

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p16"></span>3. “For my soul is filled with evils,
and my life draweth nigh unto hell” ([Psa.
88.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p16.1"></span>). Dare we speak of the Soul of Christ as
“filled with evils,” when the passion had strength as far as it had any,
only over the body?…The soul therefore may feel pain without the body:
but without the soul the body cannot. Why therefore should we not say
that the Soul of Christ was full of the evils of humanity, though not of
human sins? Another Prophet says of Him, that He grieved for us: <span
id="fr_4080"></span>[4081](#fn_4080) and the Evangelist says, “And He
took with Him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be
sorrowful and very heavy:” and our Lord Himself saith unto them of
Himself, “My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.” <span
id="fr_4081"></span>[4082](#fn_4081) The Prophet who composed this
Psalm, foreseeing that this would happen, introduces Him saying, “My
soul is full of evils, and My life draweth nigh unto hell.” For the very
same sense is here expressed in other words, as when He said, “My soul
is sorrowful, even unto death.” The words, “My soul is sorrowful,” are
like these, “My soul is full of evils:” and what follows, “even unto
death,” like, “my life draweth nigh unto hell.” These feelings of human
infirmity our Lord took upon Him, as He did the flesh of human
infirmity, and the death of human flesh, not by the necessity of His
condition, but by the free will of His mercy, that He might transfigure
into Himself His own body, which is the Church (the head of which He
deigned to be), that is, His members in His holy and faithful disciples:
that if amid human temptations any one among them happened to be in
sorrow and pain, he might not therefore think that he was separated from
His favour: <span id="page_425">p. 425</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_425"></span>that the body, like the chorus
following its leader, might learn from its Head, that these sorrows were
not sin, but proofs of human weakness. We read of the Apostle Paul, a
chief member in this body, and we hear him confessing that his soul was
full of such evils, when he says, that he feels “great heaviness and
continual sorrow in heart for his brethren according to the flesh, who
are Israelites.” <span id="fr_4082"></span>[4083](#fn_4082) And if we
say that our Lord was sorrowful for them also at the approach of His
Passion, in which they would incur the most atrocious guilt, I think we
shall not speak amiss. Lastly, the very thing said by our Saviour on the
Cross, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do,” <span
id="fr_4083"></span>[4084](#fn_4083) is expressed in this Psalm below,
“I am counted as one of them that go down into the pit” ([Psa.
88.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p20.2"></span>): by them who knew not what they were
doing, when they imagined that He died like other men, subjected to
necessity, and overcome by it. The word “pit” is used for the depth of
woe or of Hell. “I have been as a man that hath no help.”

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p21"></span>4. “Free among the dead” ([Psa.
88.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p21.1"></span>). In these words our Lord’s Person is
most clearly shown: for who else is free among the dead but He who
though in the likeness of sinful flesh is alone among sinners without
sin? <span id="fr_4084"></span>[4085](#fn_4084) …He therefore, “free
among the dead,” who had it in His power to lay down His life, and again
to take it; from whom no one could take it, but He laid it down of His
own free will; who could revive His own flesh, as a temple destroyed by
them, at His will; who, when all had forsaken Him on the eve of His
Passion, remained not alone, because, as He testifies, His Father
forsook Him not; <span id="fr_4085"></span>[4086](#fn_4085) was
nevertheless by His enemies, for whom He prayed, who knew not what they
did, …counted “as one who hath no help; like unto them that are wounded,
and lie in the grave.” But he adds, “Whom thou dost not yet remember:”
and in these words there is to be remarked a distinction between Christ
and the rest of the dead. For though He was wounded, and when dead laid
in the tomb, <span id="fr_4086"></span>[4087](#fn_4086) yet they who
knew not what they were doing, or who He was, regarded Him as like
others who had perished from their wounds, and who slept in the tomb,
who are as yet out of remembrance of God, that is, whose hour of
resurrection has not yet arrived. For thus the Scripture speaks of the
dead as sleeping, because it wishes them to be regarded as destined to
awake, that is, to rise again. But He, wounded and asleep in the tomb,
awoke on the third day, and became “like a sparrow that sitteth alone on
the housetop,” <span id="fr_4087"></span>[4088](#fn_4087) that is, on
the right hand of His Father in Heaven: and now “dieth no more, death
shall no more have dominion over Him.” <span
id="fr_4088"></span>[4089](#fn_4088) Hence He differs widely from those
whom God hath not yet remembered to cause their resurrection after this
manner: for what was to go before in the Head, was kept for the Body in
the end. God is then said to remember, when He does an act: then to
forget, when He does it not: for neither can God forget, as He never
changes, nor remember, as He can never forget. “I am counted” then, by
those who know not what they do, “as a man that hath no help:” while I
am “free among the dead,” I am held by these men “like unto them that
are wounded, and lie in the grave.” Yet those very men, who account thus
of Me, are further said to be “cut away from Thy hand,” that is, when I
was made so by them, “they were cut away from Thy hand;” they who
believed Me destitute of help, are deprived of the help of Thy hand: for
they, as he saith in another Psalm, <span
id="fr_4089"></span>[4090](#fn_4089) have digged a pit before me, and
are fallen into the midst of it themselves. I prefer this interpretation
to that which refers the words, “they are cut away from Thy hand,” to
those who sleep in the tomb, whom God hath not yet remembered: since the
righteous are among the latter, of whom, even though God hath not yet
called them to the resurrection, it is said, that their “souls are in
the hands of God,” <span id="fr_4090"></span>[4091](#fn_4090) that is,
that “they dwell under the defence of the Most High; and shall abide
under the shadow of the God of Heaven.” <span
id="fr_4091"></span>[4092](#fn_4091) But it is those who are cut away
from the hand of God, who believed that Christ was cut off from His
hand, and thus accounting Him among the wicked, dared to slay Him.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p30"></span>5. “They laid Me in the lowest pit”
([Psa. 88.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p30.1"></span>), that is, the deepest pit. For so it is
in the Greek. But what is the lowest pit, but the deepest woe, than
which there is none more deep? Whence in another Psalm it is said, “Thou
broughtest me out also of the pit of misery.” <span
id="fr_4092"></span>[4093](#fn_4092) “In a place of darkness, and in the
shadow of death,” whiles they knew not what they did, they laid Him
there, thus deeming of Him; they knew not Him “whom none of the princes
of this world knew.” <span id="fr_4093"></span>[4094](#fn_4093) By the
“shadow of death,” I know not whether the death of the body is to be
understood, or that of which it is written, “That they walked in
darkness and in the land of the shadow of death, a light is risen on
them,” <span id="fr_4094"></span>[4095](#fn_4094) because by belief they
were brought from out of the darkness and death of sin into light and
life. Such an one those who knew not what they did thought our Lord, and
in their ignorance accounted Him among those whom He came to help, that
they might not be such themselves.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34"></span><span id="page_426">p. 426</span>
<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_426"></span>6. “Thy indignation lieth hard
upon Me” ([Psa. 88.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.1"></span>), or, as other copies have it, “Thy
anger;” or, as others, “Thy fury:” the Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.2"></span>θυμὸς</span> having
undergone different interpretations. For where the Greek copies have
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.3"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.4"></span>ργὴ</span>, no
translator hesitated to express it by the Latin *ira*; but where the
word is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.5"></span>θυμὸς</span>, most object to rendering it
by *ira*, although many of the authors of the best Latin style, in their
translations from Greek philosophy, have thus rendered the word in
Latin. But I shall not discuss this matter further: only if I also were
to suggest another term, I should think “indignation” more tolerable
than “fury,” this word in Latin not being applied to persons in their
senses. What then does this mean, “Thy indignation lieth hard upon Me,”
except the belief of those, who knew not the Lord of Glory? <span
id="fr_4095"></span>[4096](#fn_4095) who imagined that the anger of God
was not merely roused, but lay hard upon Him, whom they dared to bring
to death, and not only death, but that kind, which they regarded as the
most execrable of all, namely, the death of the Cross: whence saith the
Apostle, “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth upon
a tree.” <span id="fr_4096"></span>[4097](#fn_4096) On this account,
wishing to praise His obedience which He carried to the extreme of
humility, he says, “He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death;”
and as this seemed little, he added, “even the death of the
Cross;” <span id="fr_4097"></span>[4098](#fn_4097) and with the same
view as far as I can see, he says in this Psalm, “And all thy
suspensions,” or, as some translate “waves,” others “tossings,” “Thou
hast brought over Me.” We also find in another Psalm, “All thy
suspensions and waves are come in upon Me,” <span
id="fr_4098"></span>[4099](#fn_4098) or, as some have translated better,
“have passed over Me:” for it is <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p38.2"></span>διῆλθον</span> in Greek, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p38.3"></span>εἰσῆλθον</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p38.4"></span>:</span> and where
both expressions are employed, “waves” and “suspensions,” one cannot be
used as equivalent to the other. In that passage we explained
“suspensions” as threatenings, “waves” as the actual sufferings: both
inflicted by God’s judgment: but in that place it is said, “All have
passed over Me,” here, “Thou hast brought all upon Me.” In the other
case, that is, although some evils took place, yet, he said, all those
which are here mentioned passed over; but in this case, “Thou hast
brought them upon Me.” Evils pass over when they do not touch a man, as
things which hang over him, or when they do touch him, as waves. But
when he uses the word “suspensions,” he does not say they passed over,
but, “Thou hast brought them upon Me,” meaning that all which impended
had come to pass. All things which were predicted of His Passion
impended, as long as they remained in the prophecies for future
fulfilment.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p39"></span>7. “Thou hast put Mine acquaintance
far from Me” ([Psa. 88.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p39.1"></span>). If we understand by acquaintance those
whom He knew, it will be all men; for whom knew He not? But He calls
those acquaintance, to whom He was Himself known, as far as they could
know Him at that season: at least so far forth as they knew Him to be
innocent, although they considered Him only as a man, not as likewise
God. Although He might call the righteous whom He approved,
acquaintance, as He calls the wicked unknown, to whom He was to say at
the end, “I know you not.” <span id="fr_4099"></span>[4100](#fn_4099) In
what follows, “and they have set Me for an abhorrence to themselves;”
those whom He called before “acquaintance,” may be meant, as even they
felt horror at the mode of that death: but it is better referred to
those of whom He was speaking above as His persecutors. “I was delivered
up, and did not get forth.” Is this because His disciples were without,
while He was being tried within? <span
id="fr_4100"></span>[4101](#fn_4100) Or are we to give a deeper meaning
to the words, “I cannot get forth” as signifying, “I remained hidden in
My secret counsels, I showed not who I was, I did not reveal Myself, was
not made manifest”? And so it follows,—

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p42"></span>“My eyes became weak from want” ([Psa.
88.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p42.1"></span>). For what eyes are we to understand? If
the eyes of the flesh in which He suffered, we do not read that His eyes
became weak from want, that is, from hunger, in His Passion, as is often
the case; as He was betrayed after His Supper, and crucified on the same
day: if the inner eyes, how were they weakened from want, in which there
was a light that could never fail? But He meant by His eyes those
members in the body, of which He was Himself the head, which, as
brighter and more eminent and chief above the rest, He loved. It was of
this body that the Apostle was speaking, when he wrote, taking his
metaphor from our own body, “If the whole body were an eye, where were
the hearing?” etc. <span id="fr_4101"></span>[4102](#fn_4101) What he
wished understood by these words, he has expressed more clearly, by
adding, “Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in
particular.” <span id="fr_4102"></span>[4103](#fn_4102) Wherefore as
those eyes, that is, the holy Apostles, to whom not flesh and blood, but
the Father which is in Heaven had revealed Him, so that Peter said,
“Thou art Christ, the Son of the Living God,” <span
id="fr_4103"></span>[4104](#fn_4103) when they saw Him betrayed, and
suffering such evils, saw Him not such as they wished, as He did not
come forth, did not manifest Himself in His virtue and power, but still
hidden in His secrecy, <span id="fr_4104"></span>[4105](#fn_4104)
endured everything as a man overcome and enfeebled, <span
id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_427"></span>they
became weak for want, as if their food, their Light, had been withdrawn
from them.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p47"></span>8. He continues, “And I have called
upon Thee.” This indeed He did most clearly, when upon the Cross. But
what follows? “All the day I have stretched forth My hands unto Thee,”
must be examined how it must be taken. For if in this expression we
understand the tree of the Cross, how can we reconcile it with the
“whole day”? Can He be said to have hung upon the Cross during the whole
day, as the night is considered a part of the day? But if day, as
opposed to night, was meant by this expression, even of this day, the
first and no small portion had passed by at the time of His crucifixion.
But if we take “day” in the same sense of time (especially as the word
is used in the feminine, a gender which is restricted to that sense in
Latin, although not so in Greek, as it is always used in the feminine,
which I suppose to be the reason for its translation in the same gender
in our own version), the knot of the question will be drawn tighter: for
how can it mean for the whole space of time, if He did not even for one
day stretch forth His hands on the Cross? Further, should we take the
whole for a part, as Scripture sometimes uses this expression, I do not
remember an instance in which the whole is taken for a part, when the
word “whole” is expressly added. For in the passage of the Gospel where
the Lord saith, “The Son of Man shall be three days and three nights in
the heart of the earth,”  <span id="fr_4105"></span>[4106](#fn_4105) it
is no extraordinary licence to take the whole for the part, the
expression not being for three “whole” days and three whole nights:
since the one intermediate day was a whole one, the other two were
parts, the last being part of the first day, the first part of the last.
But if the Cross is not meant here, but the prayer, which we find in the
Gospel that He poured forth in the form of a servant to God the Father,
where He is said to have prayed long before His Passion, and on the eve
of His Passion, and also when on the Cross, we do not read anywhere that
He did so throughout the whole day. Therefore by the stretched-out hands
throughout the whole day, we may understand the continuation of good
works in which He never ceased from exertion.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p49"></span>9. But as His good works profited only
the predestined to eternal salvation, and not all men, nor even all
those among whom they were done, he adds, “Dost thou show wonders among
the dead?” ([Psa. 88.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p49.1"></span>). If we suppose this relates to those
whose flesh life has left, great wonders have been wrought among the
dead, inasmuch as some of them have revived: <span
id="fr_4106"></span>[4107](#fn_4106) and in our Lord’s descent into
Hell, and His ascent as the conqueror of death, a great wonder was
wrought among the dead. He refers then in these words, “Dost Thou show
wonders among the dead?” to men so dead in heart, that such great works
of Christ could not rouse them to the life of faith: for he does not say
that wonders are not shown to them because they see them not, but
because they do not profit them. For, as he says in this passage, “the
whole day have I stretched forth My hands to Thee:” because He ever
refers all His works to the will of His Father, constantly declaring
that He came to fulfil His Father’s will: <span
id="fr_4107"></span>[4108](#fn_4107) so also, as an unbelieving people
saw the same works, another Prophet saith, “I have spread out my hands
all day unto a rebellious people, that believes not, but
contradicts.” <span id="fr_4108"></span>[4109](#fn_4108) Those then are
dead, to whom wonders have not been shown, not because they saw them
not, but since they lived not again through them. The following verse,
“Shall physicians revive them, and shall they praise Thee?” means, that
the dead shall not be revived by such means, that they may praise Thee.
In the Hebrew there is said to be a different expression: giants being
used where physicians are here: but the Septuagint translators, whose
authority is such that they may deservedly be said to have interpreted
by the inspiration of the Spirit of God owing to their wonderful
agreement, conclude, not by mistake, but taking occasion from the
resemblance in sound between the Hebrew words expressing these two
senses, that the use of the word is an indication of the sense in which
the word giants is meant to be taken. For if you suppose the proud meant
by giants, of whom the Apostle saith, “Where is the wise? where is the
scribe? where is the disputer of this world?”  <span
id="fr_4109"></span>[4110](#fn_4109) there is no incongruity in calling
them physicians, as if by their own unaided skill they promised the
salvation of souls: against whom it is said, “Of the Lord is
safety.” <span id="fr_4110"></span>[4111](#fn_4110) But if we take the
word giant in a good sense, as it is said of our Lord, “He rejoiceth as
a giant to run his course;” <span id="fr_4111"></span>[4112](#fn_4111)
that is Giant of giants, chief among the greatest and strongest, who in
His Church excel in spiritual strength. Just as He is the Mountain of
mountains; as it is written, “And it shall come to pass in the last
days, that the mountain of the Lord’s house shall be manifested in the
top of the mountains:” <span id="fr_4112"></span>[4113](#fn_4112) and
the Saint of saints: there is no absurdity in styling these same great
and mighty men physicians. Whence saith the Apostle, “if by any means I
may provoke to emulation them which are my flesh, and might save some of
them.” <span id="fr_4113"></span>[4114](#fn_4113) But even such
physicians, even though they cure not by their own power (as not even of
their <span id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_428"></span>own do those of the body), yet so far
forth as by faithful ministry they assist towards salvation, can cure
the living, but not raise the dead: of whom it is said, “Dost Thou show
wonders among the dead?” For the grace of God, by which men’s minds in a
certain manner are brought to live a fresh life, so as to be able to
hear the lessons of salvation from any of its ministers whatever, is
most hidden and mysterious. This grace is thus spoken of in the Gospel.
“No man can come to Me, except the Father which hath sent Me draw
him;” <span id="fr_4114"></span>[4115](#fn_4114) …in order to show, that
the very faith by which the soul believes, and springs into fresh life
from the death of its former affections, is given us by God. Whatever
exertions, then, the best preachers of the word, <span
id="fr_4115"></span>[4116](#fn_4115) and persuaders of the truth through
miracles, may make with men, just like great physicians: yet if they are
dead, and through Thy grace have not a second life, “Dost Thou show
wonders among the dead, or shall physicians raise them? and shall they”
whom they raise “praise Thee”? For this confession declares that they
live: not, as it is written elsewhere, “Thanksgiving perisheth from the
dead, as from one that is not.” <span
id="fr_4116"></span>[4117](#fn_4116)

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p61"></span>10. “Shall one show Thy
loving-kindness in the grave, or Thy faithfulness in destruction?”
([Psa. 88.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p61.1"></span>). The word “show” is of course understood
as if repeated, Shall any show Thy faithfulness in destruction?
Scripture loves to connect loving-kindness and faithfulness, especially
in the Psalms. “Destruction” also is a repetition of “the grave,” and
signifies them who are in the grave, styled above “the dead,” in the
verse, “Dost thou show wonders among the dead?” for the body is the
grave of the dead soul; whence our Lord’s words in the Gospel, “Ye are
like unto whited sepulchres, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but
within are full of dead men’s bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye
outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of hypocrisy
and iniquity.” <span id="fr_4117"></span>[4118](#fn_4117)

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p63"></span>11. “Shall thy wondrous works be known
in the dark, and thy righteousness in the land where all things are
forgotten?” ([Psa. 88.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#012)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p63.1"></span>), the dark answers to the land of
forgetfulness: for the unbelieving are meant by the dark, as the Apostle
saith, “For ye were sometimes darkness;” <span
id="fr_4118"></span>[4119](#fn_4118) and the land where all things are
forgotten, is the man who has forgotten God; for the unbelieving soul
can arrive at darkness so intense, “that the fool saith in his heart,
There is no God.” <span id="fr_4119"></span>[4120](#fn_4119) Thus the
meaning of the whole passage may thus be drawn out in its connection:
“Lord, I have called upon Thee,” amid My sufferings; “all day I have
stretched forth my hands unto Thee” ([Psa.
88.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p65.2"></span>). I have never ceased to stretch forth My
works to glorify Thee. Why then do the wicked rage against Me, unless
because “Thou showest not wonders among the dead”? because those wonders
move them not to faith, nor can physicians restore them to life that
they may praise Thee, because Thy hidden grace works not in them to draw
them unto believing: because no man cometh unto Me, but whom Thou hast
drawn. Shall then “Thy loving-kindness be showed in the grave”? that is,
the grave of the dead soul, which lies dead beneath the body’s weight:
“or Thy faithfulness in destruction”? that is, in such a death as cannot
believe or feel any of these things. “For how then in the darkness” of
this death, that is, in the man who in forgetting Thee has lost the
light of his life, “shall Thy wondrous works and Thy righteousness be
known.”…

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p66"></span>12. But that those prayers, the
blessings of which surpass all words, may be more fervent and more
constant, the gift that shall last unto eternity is deferred, while
transitory evils are allowed to thicken. And so it follows: “Lord, why
hast Thou cast off my prayer?” ([Psa.
88.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p66.1"></span>), which may be compared with another
Psalm: <span id="fr_4120"></span>[4121](#fn_4120) “My God, My God, look
upon me; why hast Thou forsaken me?” The reason is made matter of
question, not as if the wisdom of God were blamed as doing so without a
cause; and so here. “Lord, why hast Thou cast off my prayer?” But if
this cause be attended to carefully, it will be found indicated above;
for it is with the view that the prayers of the Saints are, as it were,
repelled by the delay of so great a blessing, and by the adversity they
encounter in the troubles of life, that the flame, thus fanned, may
burst into a brighter blaze.

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p68"></span>13. For this purpose he briefly
sketches in what follows the troubles of Christ’s body. For it is not in
the Head alone that they took place, since it is said to Saul too, “Why
persecutest thou Me?” <span id="fr_4121"></span>[4122](#fn_4121) and
Paul himself, as if placed as an elect member in the same body, saith,
“That I may fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in
my flesh.” <span id="fr_4122"></span>[4123](#fn_4122) “Why then, Lord,
hast Thou cast off my soul? why hidest Thou Thy face from me?”

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p71"></span>“I am poor, and in toils from my youth
up: and when lifted up, I was thrown down, and troubled” ([Psa.
88.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p71.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p72"></span>“Thy wraths went over me: Thy terrors
disturbed me” ([Psa. 88.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p72.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p73"></span>“They came round about me all day like
water: they compassed me about together” ([Psa.
88.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p73.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p74"></span><span id="page_429">p. 429</span>
<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-Page_429"></span>“A friend Thou hast put far from
me: and mine acquaintance from my misery” ([Psa.
88.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#018)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p74.1"></span>). All these evils have taken place, and
are happening in the limbs of Christ’s body, and God turns away His face
from their prayers, by not hearing as to what they wish for, since they
know not that the fulfilment of their wishes would not be good for them.
The Church is “poor,” as she hungers and thirsts in her wanderings for
that food with which she shall be filled in her own country: she is “in
toils from her youth up,” as the very Body of Christ saith in another
Psalm, “Many a time have they overcome me from my youth.” <span
id="fr_4123"></span>[4124](#fn_4123) And for this reason some of her
members are lifted up even in this world, that in them may be the
greater lowliness. Over that Body, which constitutes the unity of the
Saints and the faithful, whose Head is Christ, go the wraths of God: yet
abide not: since it is of the unbelieving only that it is written, that
“the wrath of God abideth upon him.” <span
id="fr_4124"></span>[4125](#fn_4124) The terrors of God disturb the
weakness of the faithful, because all that can happen, even though it
actually happen not, it is prudent to fear; and sometimes these terrors
so agitate the reflecting soul with the evils impending around, that
they seem to flow around us on every side like water, and to encircle us
in our fears. And as the Church while on pilgrimage is never free from
these evils, happening as they do at one moment in one of her limbs, at
another in another, he adds, “all day,” signifying the continuation in
time, to the end of this world. Often too, friends and acquaintances,
their worldly interests at stake, in their terror forsake the Saints; of
which saith the Apostle, “all men forsook me: may it not be laid to
their charge.” <span id="fr_4125"></span>[4126](#fn_4125) But to what
purpose is all this, but that early in the morning, that is, after the
night of unbelief, the prayers of this holy Body may in the light of
faith prevent God, until the coming of that salvation, which we are at
present saved by hoping for, not by having, while we await it with
patience and faithfulness. Then the Lord will not repel our prayers, as
there will no longer be anything to be sought for, but everything that
has been rightly asked, will be obtained: nor will He turn His face away
from us, since we shall see Him as He is: <span
id="fr_4126"></span>[4127](#fn_4126) nor shall we be poor, because God
will be our abundance, all in all: <span
id="fr_4127"></span>[4128](#fn_4127) nor shall we suffer, as there will
be no more weakness: nor after exaltation shall we meet with humiliation
and confusion, as there will be no adversity there: nor bear even the
transient wrath of God, as we shall abide in His abiding love: nor will
His terrors agitate us, because His promises realized will bless us: nor
will our friend and acquaintance, being terrified, be far from us, where
there will be no foe to dread.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4069"></span>[423:4070](1080099.htm#fr_4069) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. LXXXVII. Dictated after the
exposition of [Ps. xlii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p2.1"></span> (see § 14), and perhaps after that of [Ps.
lxviii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p2.2"></span>

<span id="fn_4070"></span>[424:4071](1080099.htm#fr_4070) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p4"></span> On [Ps.
xlvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#000)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p4.1"></span> p. 160; also xlvi. p. 155, note 8.

<span id="fn_4071"></span>[424:4072](1080099.htm#fr_4071) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p5"></span> \[The author here adds: “What other
meaning then can we attach to the words, ‘for the chorus to respond,’
but this, that the choir is to make responses with the singer? And thus
we must suppose that not this only, but other Psalms were chanted,
though they have received different titles, probably for the sake of
variety to relieve weariness: for this Psalm was not the only one held
worthy of choral responses, since it is not the only one which relates
to our Lord’s Passion. If indeed there is any other reason for so great
a variety in the titles, by which it can be shown that all the Psalms
which are distinguished in their titles are so marked, as that the title
of no one of them can be fitted to another, I must confess that I could
not discover it, though I tried long; and whatever I have read on the
subject in the works of my predecessors has not satisfied my hopes, or,
perhaps, my slowness of apprehension. I will therefore explain in
allusion to what mystery the words, ‘for the choir to respond,’ that is,
that the singer should be answered by a choir, seem to me to be
used.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_4072"></span>[424:4073](1080099.htm#fr_4072) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p6"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4073"></span>[424:4074](1080099.htm#fr_4073) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p7"></span> [1 John iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4074"></span>[424:4075](1080099.htm#fr_4074) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4075"></span>[424:4076](1080099.htm#fr_4075) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p9"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4076"></span>[424:4077](1080099.htm#fr_4076) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p10"></span> *Israelitæ*, vulg. *Ezrahitæ*. See
also the title of the next Psalm. Ben. conjectures it may be for
*Zaraite*, as Ethan and Heman are called sons of Zara, [1 Chr.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#006), [1 Kings
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#031)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p10.1"></span>, where Solomon is said to be “wiser than
Ethan the Ezrahite and Heman.” LXX. has *Zarite*.

<span id="fn_4077"></span>[424:4078](1080099.htm#fr_4077) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p11"></span> [John i.
47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4078"></span>[424:4079](1080099.htm#fr_4078) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p12"></span> [Gen. xxv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4079"></span>[424:4080](1080099.htm#fr_4079) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p15"></span> The words, “O let my prayer enter
into Thy presence,” being equivalent to, “Incline Thine ear unto my
calling.”

<span id="fn_4080"></span>[424:4081](1080099.htm#fr_4080) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p17"></span> [Isa. liii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4081"></span>[424:4082](1080099.htm#fr_4081) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p18"></span> [Matt.
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4082"></span>[425:4083](1080099.htm#fr_4082) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p19"></span> [Rom.
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4083"></span>[425:4084](1080099.htm#fr_4083) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p20"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4084"></span>[425:4085](1080099.htm#fr_4084) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p22"></span> [Rom. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4085"></span>[425:4086](1080099.htm#fr_4085) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p23"></span> [John viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4086"></span>[425:4087](1080099.htm#fr_4086) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p24"></span> [Matt.
27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050),
[60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4087"></span>[425:4088](1080099.htm#fr_4087) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p25"></span> [Ps. cii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4088"></span>[425:4089](1080099.htm#fr_4088) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p26"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4089"></span>[425:4090](1080099.htm#fr_4089) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p27"></span> [Ps. lvii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4090"></span>[425:4091](1080099.htm#fr_4090) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p28"></span> [Wisd. iii.
1](../../../bib/apo/wis003.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4091"></span>[425:4092](1080099.htm#fr_4091) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p29"></span> [Ps. xci.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.
\[Noteworthy as the author’s view of the state of the faithful
departed.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4092"></span>[425:4093](1080099.htm#fr_4092) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p31"></span> [Ps. xl.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4093"></span>[425:4094](1080099.htm#fr_4093) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p32"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4094"></span>[425:4095](1080099.htm#fr_4094) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p33"></span> [Isa. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4095"></span>[426:4096](1080099.htm#fr_4095) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p34.6"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p35"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4096"></span>[426:4097](1080099.htm#fr_4096) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p36"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4097"></span>[426:4098](1080099.htm#fr_4097) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p37"></span> [Phil. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4098"></span>[426:4099](1080099.htm#fr_4098) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p38"></span> [Ps. xlii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4099"></span>[426:4100](1080099.htm#fr_4099) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p40"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4100"></span>[426:4101](1080099.htm#fr_4100) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p41"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4101"></span>[426:4102](1080099.htm#fr_4101) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p43"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
17-21](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#017)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4102"></span>[426:4103](1080099.htm#fr_4102) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p44"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#027)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4103"></span>[426:4104](1080099.htm#fr_4103) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p45"></span> [Matt. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4104"></span>[426:4105](1080099.htm#fr_4104) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p46"></span> *In suis interioribus*.

<span id="fn_4105"></span>[427:4106](1080099.htm#fr_4105) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p48"></span> [Matt. xii.
40](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#040)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4106"></span>[427:4107](1080099.htm#fr_4106) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p50"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4107"></span>[427:4108](1080099.htm#fr_4107) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p51"></span> [John vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4108"></span>[427:4109](1080099.htm#fr_4108) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p52"></span> [Isa. lxv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4109"></span>[427:4110](1080099.htm#fr_4109) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p53"></span> [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4110"></span>[427:4111](1080099.htm#fr_4110) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p54"></span> [Ps. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4111"></span>[427:4112](1080099.htm#fr_4111) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p55"></span> [Ps. xix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4112"></span>[427:4113](1080099.htm#fr_4112) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p56"></span> [Isa. ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4113"></span>[427:4114](1080099.htm#fr_4113) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p57"></span> [Rom. xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4114"></span>[428:4115](1080099.htm#fr_4114) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p58"></span> [John vi.
44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4115"></span>[428:4116](1080099.htm#fr_4115) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p59"></span> Ben. refers to P. Lombard, *4 Sent*.
Dist. 18, *Hîc quæritur*.

<span id="fn_4116"></span>[428:4117](1080099.htm#fr_4116) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p60"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
27.26](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#026)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4117"></span>[428:4118](1080099.htm#fr_4117) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p62"></span> [Matt.
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4118"></span>[428:4119](1080099.htm#fr_4118) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p64"></span> [Eph. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4119"></span>[428:4120](1080099.htm#fr_4119) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p65"></span> [Ps. xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4120"></span>[428:4121](1080099.htm#fr_4120) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p67"></span> [Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4121"></span>[428:4122](1080099.htm#fr_4121) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p69"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4122"></span>[428:4123](1080099.htm#fr_4122) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p70"></span> [Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4123"></span>[429:4124](1080099.htm#fr_4123) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p75"></span> [Ps. cxxix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4124"></span>[429:4125](1080099.htm#fr_4124) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p75.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p76"></span> [John iii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#036)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4125"></span>[429:4126](1080099.htm#fr_4125) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p77"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#016)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4126"></span>[429:4127](1080099.htm#fr_4126) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p78"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4127"></span>[429:4128](1080099.htm#fr_4127) <span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LXXXVIII-p79"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="ii.LXXXVIII-p79.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LXXXIX](1080100)
