[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080044)  [Next](1080046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XXXVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XXXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XXXVIII. <span
id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) </span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p3"></span>A psalm to David himself, on the
remembrance of the Sabbath.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p4"></span>1. What doth this recollection of the
Sabbath mean? What is this Sabbath? For it is with groaning that he
“calls it to recollection.” You have both heard already when the Psalm
was read, and you will now hear it when we shall go over it, how great
is his groaning, his mourning, his tears, his misery. But happy he who
is wretched after this manner! Whence the Lord also in the Gospel <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944) called some who mourn blessed. “How
should he be blessed if he is a mourner? How blessed, if he is
miserable?” Nay rather, he would be miserable, if he were not a mourner.
Such an one then let us understand here too, calling the Sabbath to
remembrance (viz.), some mourner or other: and would that we were
ourselves that “some one or other”! For there is here some person
sorrowing, groaning, mourning, calling the Sabbath to remembrance. The
Sabbath is rest. Doubtless he was in some disquietude, who with groaning
was calling the Sabbath to remembrance.…

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p6"></span>2. “O Lord, rebuke me not in Thine
indignation; neither chasten me in Thy hot displeasure” ([Psa.
38.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p6.1"></span>). For it will be that some shall be
chastened in God’s “hot displeasure,” and rebuked in His “indignation.”
And haply not all who are “rebuked” will be “chastened;” yet are there
some that are to be saved in the chastening. <span
id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945) So it is to be indeed, because it is
called “chastening,” <span id="fr_946"></span>[947](#fn_946) but yet it
shall be “so as by fire.” But there are to be some who will be
“rebuked,” and will not be “corrected.” For he will at all events
“rebuke” <span id="fr_947"></span>[948](#fn_947) those to whom He will
say, “I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat.” <span
id="fr_948"></span>[949](#fn_948) … “Neither chasten me in Thy hot
displeasure;” so that Thou mayest cleanse me in this life, and make me
such, that I may after that stand in no need of the cleansing fire, for
those “who are to be saved, yet so as by fire.” <span
id="fr_949"></span>[950](#fn_949) Why? Why, but because they “build upon
the foundation, wood, stubble, and hay.” Now they should build on it,
“gold, silver, and precious stones;” <span
id="fr_950"></span>[951](#fn_950) and should have nothing to fear from
either fire: not only that which is to consume the ungodly for ever, but
also that which is to purge those who are to escape through <span
id="fr_951"></span>[952](#fn_951) the fire. For it is said, “he himself
shall be saved, yet so as by fire.” And because it is said, “he shall be
saved,” that fire is thought lightly of. For all that, though we should
be “saved by fire,” yet will that fire be more grievous than anything
that man can suffer in this life whatsoever. <span
id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) …

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p15"></span>3. Now on what ground does this person
pray that he may not be “rebuked in indignation, nor chastened in hot
displeasure”? (He speaks) as if he would say unto God, “Since the things
which I already suffer are many in number, I pray Thee let them
suffice;” and he begins to enumerate them, by way of satisfying God;
offering what he suffers now, that he may not have to suffer worse evils
hereafter.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p16"></span>4. “For Thine arrows stick fast in me,
and Thy hand presseth me sore” ([Psa.
38.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p16.1"></span>). “There is no soundness in my flesh, from
the face of Thine anger” ([Psa.
38.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p16.2"></span>). He has now begun telling these evils,
which he is suffering here: and yet even this already was from the wrath
of the Lord, because it was of the vengeance of the Lord. “Of what
vengeance?” That which He took upon Adam. For think not that punishment
was not inflicted upon him, or that God had said to no purpose, “Thou
shalt surely die;” <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) or that we
suffer anything in this life, except from that death which we earned by
the original sin.…Whence then do His “arrows stick fast in” him? The
very punishment, the very vengeance, and haply the pains both of mind
and of body, which it is necessary for us to suffer here, these he
describes by these self-same “arrows.” For of these arrows holy Job also
made mention, <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) and said that the
arrows of the Lord stuck fast in him, whilst he was labouring under
those pains. We are used, however, to call God’s words also arrows; but
could he grieve that he should be struck by these? The words of God are
arrows, as it were, that inflame love, not pain.…We may then understand
the “arrows sticking fast,” thus: Thy words are fixed fast in my heart;
and by those words themselves is it come to pass, that I “called the
Sabbath to remembrance:” and that very remembrance of the Sabbath, and
the non-possession of it at present, prevents me from rejoicing at
present; and causes me to acknowledge that there “is neither health in
my very flesh,” neither ought it to be so called when I compare this
sort of soundness to that soundness which I am to possess in the <span
id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_104"></span>everlasting rest; where “this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality,”  <span id="fr_955"></span>[956](#fn_955) and see that in
comparison with that soundness this present kind is but sickness.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p20"></span>5. “Neither is there any rest in my
bones, from the face of my sin.” It is commonly enquired, of what person
this is the speech; and some understand it to be Christ’s, on account of
some things which are here said of the Passion of Christ; to which we
shall shortly come; and which we ourselves shall acknowledge to be
spoken of His Passion. But how could He who had no sin, say, “There is
no rest in my bones, from the face of my sin.”…For if we were to say
that they are not the words of Christ, those words, “My God, My God, why
hast Thou forsaken Me?” <span id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956) will
also not be the words of Christ. For there too you have, “My God, My
God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” “The words of mine offences are far
from my health.” Just as here you have, “from the face of my sins,” so
there also you have, “the words of my offences.” And if Christ is, for
all that, without “sin,” and without “offences,” we begin to think those
words in the Psalm also not to be His. And it is exceedingly harsh and
inconsistent that that Psalm should not relate to Christ, where we have
His Passion as clearly laid open as if it were being read to us out of
the Gospel. For there we have, “They parted My garments among them, and
cast lots upon My vesture.” <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957) Why
should I mention that the first verse of that Psalm was pronounced by
the Lord Himself while hanging on the Cross, with His own mouth, saying,
“My God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?” What did He mean to be
inferred from it, but that the whole of that Psalm relates to Him,
seeing He Himself, the Head of His Body, pronounced it in His own
Person? Now when it goes on to say, “the words of mine offences,” it is
beyond a doubt that they are the words of Christ. Whence then come “the
sins,” but from the Body, which is the Church? Because both the Head and
the Body of Christ are speaking. Why do they speak as if one person
only? Because “they twain,” as He hath said, “shall be one flesh.” <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958) “This” (says the Apostle) “is a great
mystery; but I speak concerning Christ and the Church.”…For why should
He not say, “my sins,” who said, “I was an hungred, and ye gave Me no
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave Me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye
took Me not in. I was sick and in prison, and ye visited Me not.” <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959) Assuredly the Lord was not in prison.
Why should He not say this, to whom when it was said, “When saw we Thee
a hungred, and athirst, or in prison; and did not minister unto Thee?”
He replied, that He spake thus in the person of His Body. “Inasmuch as
ye did it not unto one of the least of Mine, ye did it not unto
Me.” <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) Why should He not say,
“from the face of my sins,” who said to Saul, “Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou Me,” <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) who,
however, being in Heaven, now suffered from no persecutors? But just as,
in that passage, the Head spake for the Body, so here too the Head
speaks the words of the Body; whilst you hear at the same time the
accents of the Head Itself also. Yet do not either, when you hear the
voice of the Body, separate the Head from it; nor the Body, when you
hear the voice of the Head: because “they are no more twain, but one
flesh.” <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962)

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p28"></span>6. “There is no soundness in my flesh
from the face of thine anger.” But perhaps God is unjustly angry with
thee, O Adam; unjustly angry with thee, O son of man; because now
brought to acknowledge that thy punishment, now that thou art a man that
hath been placed in Christ’s Body, thou hast said, “There is no
soundness in my flesh from the face of Thine anger.” Declare the justice
of God’s anger: lest thou shouldest seem to be excusing thyself, and
accusing Him. Go on to tell whence the “anger” of the Lord proceeds.
“There is no soundness in my flesh from the face of Thine anger; neither
is there any rest in my bones.” He repeats what he said before, “There
is no soundness in my flesh;” for, “There is no rest in my bones,” is
equivalent to this. He does not however repeat “from the face of Thine
anger;” but states the cause of the anger of God. “There is no rest in
my bones from the face of my sins.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p29"></span>7. “For mine iniquities have lifted up
my head; and are like a heavy burden too heavy for me to bear” ([Psa.
38.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p29.1"></span>). Here too he has placed the cause first,
and the effect afterwards. What consequence followed, and from what
cause, he has told us. “Mine iniquities have lift up mine head.” For no
one is proud but the unrighteous man, whose head is lifted up. He is
“lifted up,” whose “head is lifted up on high” against God. You heard
when the lesson of the Book of Ecclesiasticus was read: “The beginning
of pride is when a man departeth from God.” <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) He who was the first to refuse to
listen to the Commandment, “his head iniquity lifted up” against God.
And because his iniquities have lifted up his head, what hath God done
unto him? They are “like a heavy burden, too heavy for me to bear”! It
is the part of levity to lift up the head, just as if he who lifts up
his head had nothing to carry. Since therefore that which admits of
being lifted up is light, it receives a weight by which it may be
weighed down. For “his mischief returns upon his own head, and his
violent dealing comes <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_105"></span>down upon his own pate.” <span
id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) “They are like a heavy burden, too
heavy for me to bear.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p32"></span>8. “My wounds stink and are corrupt”
([Psa. 38.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p32.1"></span>). Now he who has wounds is not perfectly
sound. Add to this, that the wounds “stink and are corrupt.” Wherefore
do they “stink”? Because they are “corrupt:” now in what way this is
explained in reference to human life, who doth not understand? Let a man
but have his soul’s sense of smelling sound, he perceives how foully
sins stink. The contrary to which stink of sin, is that savour of which
the Apostle says, “We are the sweet savour of Christ unto God, in every
place, unto them which be saved.” <span
id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) But whence is this, except from hope?
Whence is this, but from our “calling the Sabbath to remembrance”? For
it is a different thing that we mourn over in this life, from that which
we anticipate in the other. That which we mourn over is *stench,* that
which we reckon upon is *fragrance.* Were there not therefore such a
perfume as that to invite us, we should never call the Sabbath to
remembrance. <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966) But since, by the
Spirit, we have such a perfume, as to say to our Betrothed, “Because of
the savour of Thy good ointments we will run after Thee;” <span
id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967) we turn our senses away from our own
unsavourinesses, and turning ourselves to Him, we gain some little
breathing-time. But indeed, unless our evil deeds also did smell rank in
our nostrils, we should never confess with those groans, “My wounds
stink and are corrupt.” And wherefore? “from the face of my
foolishness.” <span id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968) From the same
cause that he said before, “from the face of my sins;” from that same
cause he now says, “from the face of my foolishness.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p37"></span>9. “I am troubled, I am bowed down even
unto the end” ([Psa. 38.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p37.1"></span>). Wherefore was he “bowed down”? Because
he had been “lifted up.” If thou art “humble, thou shalt be exalted;” if
thou exaltest thyself, thou shalt be “bowed down;” for God will be at no
loss to find a weight wherewith to bow thee down.…Let him groan on these
things; that he may receive the other; let him “call the Sabbath to
remembrance,” that he may deserve to arrive at it. For that which the
Jews used to celebrate was but a sign. Of what thing was it the sign? Of
that which he calls to remembrance, who saith, “I am troubled, and am
bowed down even unto the end.” What is meant by even “unto the end”?
Even to death.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p38"></span>“I go mourning all the day long.” “All
day long,” that is, “without intermission.” By “all the day long,” he
means, “all my life long.” But from what time hath he known it? From the
time that he began to “call the Sabbath to remembrance.” For so long as
he “calls to remembrance” what he no longer possesses, wouldest thou not
have him “go mourning”? “All the day long have I gone mourning.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p39"></span>10. “For my soul is filled with
illusions, and there is no soundness in my flesh” ([Psa.
38.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p39.1"></span>). Where there is the whole man, there
there is soul and flesh both. The “soul is filled with illusions;” the
*flesh* hath “no soundness.” What does there remain that can give joy?
Is it not meet that one should “go mourning”? “All the day long have I
gone mourning.” Let mourning be our portion, until our soul be divested
of its illusions; and our body be clothed with soundness. For true
soundness is no other than immortality. How great however are the soul’s
illusions, were I even to attempt to express, when would the time
suffice me? For whose soul is not subject to them? There is a brief
particular that I will remind you of, to show how our soul is filled
with illusions. The presence of those illusions sometimes scarcely
permits us to pray. We know not how to think of material objects without
images, and such as we do not wish, rush in upon the mind; and we wish
to go from this one to that, and to quit that for another. And sometimes
you wish to return to that which you were thinking of before, and to
quit that which you are now thinking of; and a fresh one presents itself
to you; you wish to call up again what you had forgotten; and it does
not occur to you; and another comes instead which you would not have
wished for. Where meanwhile was the one that you had forgotten? For why
did it afterwards occur to you, when it had ceased to be sought after;
whereas, while it was being sought for, innumerable others, which were
not desired, presented themselves instead of it? I have stated a fact
briefly; I have thrown out a kind of hint or suggestion to you,
brethren, taking up which, you may yourselves suggest the rest to
yourselves, and discover what it is to mourn over the “illusions” of our
“soul.” He hath received therefore the punishment of illusion; he hath
forfeited Truth. For just as illusion is the soul’s punishment, so is
Truth its reward. But when we were set in the midst of these illusions,
the Truth Itself came to us, and found us overwhelmed by illusions, took
upon Itself our flesh, or rather took flesh from us; that is, from the
human race. He manifested himself to the eyes of the Flesh, that He
might “by faith” heal those to whom He was going to reveal the Truth
hereafter, that Truth might be manifested to the now healed eye. For He
is Himself “the Truth,” <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969) which He
promised unto us at that time, when His Flesh was to be seen by the eye,
that the foundation might be laid of that Faith, <span id="page_106">p.
106</span> <span id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_106"></span>of which the Truth was
to be the reward. For it was not Himself that Christ showed forth on
earth; but it was His Flesh that He showed. For had He showed Himself,
the Jews would have seen and known Him; but had they “known Him, they
would never have crucified the Lord of Glory.” <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970) But perhaps His disciples saw Him,
when they said unto Him, “Show us the Father, and it sufficeth
us;” <span id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971) and He, to show that it was
not Himself that had been seen by them, added: “Have I been so long with
you, and have ye not known Me, Philip? He that seeth Me, seeth the
Father also.” <span id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972) If then they saw
Christ, wherefore did they yet seek for the Father? For if it were
Christ whom they saw, they would have seen the Father also. They did not
therefore yet see Christ, who desired that the Father should be shown
unto them. To prove that they did not yet see Him, hear that, in another
place, He promised it by way of reward, saying, “He who loveth Me,
keepeth My commandments; and whoso loveth Me, shall be loved of My
Father; and I will love Him and” (as if it were said to Him, “what wilt
Thou give unto him, as Thou lovest him?” He saith), “I will manifest
Myself unto him.” <span id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973) If then He
promises this by way of a reward unto them that love Him, it is manifest
that the vision of the Truth, promised to us, is of such a nature, that,
when we have seen it, we shall no longer say, “My soul is filled with
illusions.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p45"></span>11. “I am become feeble, <span
id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974) and am bowed down greatly” ([Psa.
38.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p46.1"></span>). He who calls to mind the transcendent
height of the Sabbath, sees how “greatly” he is himself “bowed down.”
For he who cannot conceive what is that height of rest, sees not where
he is at present. Therefore another Psalm hath said, “I said in my
trance, I am cast out of the sight of Thine eyes.” <span
id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) For his mind being taken up
thither, <span id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976) he beheld something
sublime; and was not yet entirely there, where what he beheld was; and a
kind of flash, as it were, if one may so speak, of the Eternal Light
having glanced upon him, when he perceived that he was not yet arrived
at this, which he was able after a sort to understand, he saw where he
himself was, and how he was cramped and “bowed down” by human
infirmities. And he says, “I said in my trance, I am cast out of the
sight of Thine eyes.” Such is that certain something which I saw in my
trance, that thence I perceive how far off I am, who am not already
there. He was already there who said that he was “caught up into the
third Heaven, and there heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful
for a man to utter.” <span id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977) But he was
recalled to us, in order that, as requiring to be made perfect, he might
first mourn his infirmity, and afterwards be clothed with might. Yet
encouraged for the ministration of his office by having seen somewhat of
those things, he goes on saying, “I heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for a man to utter.” <span id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978)
Now then what use is it for you to ask, either of me or of any one, the
“things which it is not lawful for man to utter.” If it was not lawful
for him to utter them, to whom is it lawful to hear them? Let us however
lament and groan in Confession; let us own where we are; let us “call
the Sabbath to remembrance,” and wait with patience for what He has
promised, who hath, in His own Person also, showed forth an example of
patience to us. “I am become feeble, and bowed down greatly.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p51"></span>12. “I have roared with the groaning of
my heart.” <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979) You observe the
servants of God generally interceding with groaning; and the reason of
it is asked, and there is nothing apparent, but the groaning of some
servant of God, if indeed it does find its way at all to the ears of a
person placed near him. For there is a secret groaning, which is not
heard by man: yet if the thought of some strong desire has taken so
strong hold of the heart, that the wound of the inner man finds
expression in some uttered exclamation, the reason of it is asked; and a
man says to himself, “Perhaps this is the cause of his groaning;” and,
“Perhaps this or that hath befallen him.” Who can determine, but He in
whose Eyes and Ears he groaned? Therefore he says, “I roared with the
groaning of mine heart;” because if men ever hear a man’s groanings,
they for the most part hear but the groaning of the flesh; they do not
hear him who groans “with the groaning of his heart.” Some one hath
carried off his goods; he “roareth,” but not “with the groaning of his
heart:” another because he has buried his son, another his wife; another
because his vineyard has been injured by a hailstorm; another because
his cask has turned sour; another because some one hath stolen his
beast; another because he has suffered some loss; another because he
fears some man who is his enemy: all these “roar” with the “groaning of
the flesh.” The servant of God, however, because he “roareth” from the
recollection of the Sabbath, where the Kingdom of God is, which flesh
and blood shall not possess, says, “I have roared with the groaning of
my heart.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p53"></span>13. And who observed and noticed the
cause of his groaning? “All my desire is before Thee” ([Psa.
38.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p53.1"></span>). For it is not before men who <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_107"></span>cannot
see the heart, but it is before Thee that all my desire is open! Let
your desire be before Him; and “the Father, who seeth in secret, shall
reward thee.” <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) For it is thy
heart’s desire that is thy prayer; and if thy desire continues
uninterrupted, thy prayer continueth also. For not without a meaning did
the Apostle say, “Pray without ceasing.” <span
id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981) Are we to be “without ceasing” bending
the knee, prostrating the body, or lifting up our hands, that he says,
“Pray without ceasing”? Or if it is in this sense that we say that we
“pray,” this, I believe, we cannot do “without ceasing.” There is
another inward kind of prayer without ceasing, which is the desire of
the heart. Whatever else you are doing, if you do but long for that
Sabbath, you do not cease to pray. If you would never cease to pray,
never cease to long after it. The continuance of thy longing is the
continuance of thy prayer. You will be ceasing to speak, if you cease to
long for it. Who are those who have ceased to speak? They of whom it is
said, “Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax
cold.” <span id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) The freezing of charity
is the silence of the heart; the burning of charity is the cry of the
heart. If love continues still you are still lifting up your voice; if
you are always lifting up your voice, you are always longing after
something; if always longing for something absent, you are calling “the
Sabbath rest to remembrance.” And it is important you should understand
too before whom the “roaring of thine heart” is open. Now then consider
what sort of desires those should be, that are before the eyes of God.
Should it be the desire for the death of our enemy? a thing which men
flatter themselves they lawfully wish for? For sometimes we pray for
what we ought not. Let us consider what they flatter themselves they
pray for lawfully! For they pray that some person may die, and his
inheritance come to them. But let those too, who pray for the death of
their enemies, hear the Lord saying, “Pray for your enemies.”  <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983) Let them not pray for this, that their
enemies may die; but rather pray for this, that they may be reclaimed;
then will their enemies be dead; for from the time that they are
reclaimed, henceforth they will be enemies no longer. “And all my desire
is before Thee.” What if we suppose that our desire is before Him, and
that yet that very “groaning” is not before Him? How can that be, since
our desire itself finds its expression in “groaning”? Therefore follows,
“And my groaning is not hid from Thee.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p58"></span>From Thee indeed it is not hid; but
from many men it is hid. The servant of God sometimes seems to be saying
in humility, “And my groaning is not hid from Thee.” Sometimes also he
seems to smile. Is then that longing dead in his heart? If however there
is the desire within, there is the “groaning” also. It does not always
find its way to the ears of man; but it never ceases to sound in the
ears of God.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p59"></span>14. “My heart is troubled” ([Psa.
38.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p59.1"></span>). Wherefore is it troubled? “And my
courage hath failed me.” Generally something comes upon us on a sudden;
the “heart is troubled;” the earth quakes; thunder is sent from Heaven;
a formidable attack is made upon us, or a horrible sound heard. Perhaps
a lion is seen on the road; the “heart is troubled.” Perhaps robbers lie
in wait for us; the “heart is troubled:” we are filled with a panic
fear; from every quarter something excites anxiety. Wherefore? Because
“my courage hath failed me.” For what would be feared, did that courage
still remain unmoved? Whatever bad tidings were brought, whatever
threatened us, whatever sound was heard, whatever were to fall, whatever
appeared horrible, would inspire no terror. But whence that trouble? “My
courage faileth me.” Wherefore hath my courage failed me? “The light of
mine eyes also is gone from me.” Thus Adam also could not see “the light
of his eyes.” For the “light of his eyes” was God Himself, whom when he
had offended, he fled to the shade, and hid himself among the trees of
Paradise. <span id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) He shrunk in alarm
from the face of God: and sought the shelter of the trees; thenceforth
among the trees he had no more “the light of his eyes,” at which he had
been wont to rejoice.…

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p61"></span>15. “My lovers;” why should I
henceforth speak of my enemies? “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh,
and stood over against me” ([Psa.
38.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p61.1"></span>). Understand this that he saith, “Stood
over against me.” For if they stood over against me, they fell against
themselves. “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh and stood over
against me.” <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985) Let us now
recognise the words of the Head speaking; now let our Head in His
Passion begin to dawn upon us. Yet again when the Head begins to speak,
do not sever the Body from it. If the Head would not separate itself
from the words of the Body, should the Body dare to separate itself from
the sufferings of the Head? Do thou suffer in Christ’s suffering: for
Christ, as it were, sinned in thy infirmity. For just now He spoke of
thy sins, as if speaking in His own Person, and called them His own.…To
those who wished to be near His exaltation, yet thought not of His
humility, He answered and said to them, “Can ye drink of the cup that I
shall drink of?” <span id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) Those
sufferings of the Lord then are <span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_108"></span>our sufferings also: and were each
individual to serve God well, to keep faith truly, to render to each
their dues, and to conduct himself honestly among men, I should like to
see if he does not suffer even that which Christ here details in the
account of His Passion. “My lovers and my neighbours drew nigh, and
stood over against me.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p64"></span>16. “And my neighbours stood afar off.”
Who were the “neighbours” that drew nigh, and who were those who stood
afar off? The Jews were “neighbours” because “near kinsmen,” they drew
near even when they crucified Him: the Apostles also were His
“neighbours;” and they also “stood afar off,” that they might not have
to suffer with Him. This may also be understood thus: “My friends,” that
is, those who feigned themselves “My friends:” for they feigned
themselves His friends, when they said, “We know that Thou teachest the
way of God in truth;” <span id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987) when they
wished to try Him, whether tribute ought to be paid to Cæsar; when He
convinced them out of their own mouth, they wished to seem to be His
friends. “But He needed not that any should testify of man, for He
Himself knew what was in man;” <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)
so that when they spoke unto Him words of friendship, He answered them,
“Why tempt ye Me, ye hypocrites?” <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989) “My friends and my neighbours” then
“drew near and stood over against me, and my neighbours stood afar off.”
You understand what I said. I called those neighbours who “drew nigh,”
and at the same time “stood afar off.” For they “drew nigh” in the body,
but “stood afar off” in their heart. Who were in the body so near to Him
as those who lifted Him on the Cross? Who in heart so as those who
blasphemed Him? Hear this sort of distance described by the Prophet
Isaiah; observe this nearness and distance at one and the same time.
“This people honours Me with their lips:” behold, with their body they
draw near; “but their heart is far from Me.” <span
id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) The same persons are at the same time
“near” and “afar off” also: with their lips they are near, in heart afar
off. However, because the Apostles also stood afar off, through fear, we
understand it more simply and properly of them; so that we mean by it,
that some drew near, and others stood afar off; since even Peter, who
had followed more boldly than the rest, was still so far off, that being
questioned and alarmed, he thrice denied the Lord, with whom he had
promised to “be ready to die.” Who afterwards that, from being afar off,
he might be made to draw nigh, heard after the resurrection the
question, “Lovest thou Me?” and said, “I love Thee;” <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991) and by so saying was brought “nigh,”
even as by denying Him, he had become “far off;” till with the threefold
confession of love, he had put away from him his threefold denial. “And
my neighbours stood afar off.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p70"></span>17. “They also that sought after my
soul were preparing violence against me” ([Psa.
38.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p70.1"></span>). It is now plain who “sought after His
soul;” viz. those who had not His soul, in that they were not in His
Body. They who were “seeking after His soul,” were far removed from His
soul; but they were “seeking it” to destroy it. For His soul may be
“sought after” in a right way also. For in another passage  <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) He finds fault with some persons,
saying, “There is no man to care for My soul.” He finds fault with some
for not seeking after His soul; and again, with others for seeking after
it. Who is he that seeketh after His soul in the right way? He who
imitates His sufferings. Who are they that sought after His soul in the
wrong way? Even those who “prepared violence against Him,” and crucified
Him.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p72"></span>18. He goes on: “Those who sought after
My faults had spoken vanity.” What is, “sought after My faults”? They
sought after many things, and found them not. Perhaps He may have meant
this: “They sought for criminal charges against me.” For they sought for
somewhat to say against Him, and “they found not.” <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993) For they were seeking to find evil
things to say of “the Good;” crimes of the Innocent; When would they
find such things in Him, who had no sin? But because they had to seek
for sins in Him who had no sin, it remained for them to invent that
which they could not find. Therefore, “those who sought after My faults
have spoken vanity,” i.e., untruth, “and imagined deceit all the day
long;” that is, they meditated treachery without intermission. You know
how atrocious false-witness was borne against the Lord, before He
suffered. You know how atrocious false-witness was borne against Him,
even after His resurrection. For those soldiers who watched His
sepulchre of whom Isaiah spake, “I will appoint the wicked for His
burial” <span id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994) (for they were wicked
men, and would not speak the truth, and being bribed they disseminated a
lie), consider what “vanity” they spake. They also were examined, and
they said, “While we slept, His disciples came and stole Him
away.” <span id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) This it is, “to speak
vanity.” For if they were sleeping, how could they know what had been
done?

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p76"></span>19. He saith then, “But I as a deaf man
heard not” ([Psa. 38.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p76.1"></span>). He who replied not to what He heard,
did, as it were, not hear them. “But I as a deaf man heard not. And I
was as <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_109"></span>a dumb man that openeth not his mouth.”
And he repeats the same things again.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p77"></span>“And I became as a man that heareth
not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs” ([Psa.
38.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p77.1"></span>). As if He had nothing to say unto them,
as if He had nothing wherewith to reproach them. Had He not already
reproached them for many things? Had He not said many things, and also
said, “Woe unto you, Scribes and Pharisees,” <span
id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996) and many things besides? Yet when He
suffered, He said none of these things; not that He had not what to say,
but He waited for them to fulfil all things, and that all the prophecies
might be fulfilled of Him, of whom it had been said, “And as a sheep
before her shearer is dumb, so openeth He not His mouth.” <span
id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997) It behoved Him to be silent in His
Passion, though not hereafter to be silent in Judgment. For He had come
to be judged, then, who was hereafter coming to judge; and who was for
this reason to come with great power to judge, that He had been judged
in great humility.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p80"></span>20. “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope;
Thou wilt hear, O Lord, my God” ([Psa.
38.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p80.1"></span>). As if it were said to Him, “Wherefore
openedst thou not thy mouth? Wherefore didst Thou not say, ‘Refrain’?
Wherefore didst Thou not rebuke the unrighteous, while hanging on the
Cross?” He goes on and says, “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou, O
Lord my God, wilt hear.” He warns you what to do, should tribulation
haply befall. For you seek to defend yourself, and perhaps your defence
is not listened to by any one. Then are you confounded, as if you had
lost your cause; because you have none to defend or to bear testimony in
your favour. “Keep” but your “innocence” within, where no one can
pervert thy cause. False-witness has prevailed against you before men.
Will it then prevail before God, where your cause has to be pleaded?
When God shall be Judge, there shall be no other witness than your own
conscience. In the presence of a just judge, and of your own conscience,
fear nothing but your own cause. If you have not a bad cause, you will
have no accuser to dread; no false-witness to confute, nor witness to
the truth to look for. Do but bring into court a good conscience, that
you may say, “For in Thee, O Lord, do I hope; Thou, O Lord my God, wilt
hear.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p81"></span>21. “For I said, Let not mine enemies
ever rejoice over me. And when my feet slip, they magnify themselves
against me” ([Psa. 38.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p81.1"></span>). Again He returns to the infirmity of His
Body: and again the Head takes heed of Its “feet.” The Head is not in
such a manner in Heaven, as to forsake what It has on earth; He
evidently sees and observes us. For sometimes, as is the way of this
life, our feet are “turned aside,” and they slip by falling into some
sin; there the tongues of the enemy rise up with the bitterest
malignity. From this then we discern what they really had in view, even
while they kept silence. Then they speak with an unsparing harshness;
rejoicing to have discovered what they ought to have grieved for. “And I
said, Lest at any time my adversaries should rejoice over me.” I said
this indeed; and yet it was perhaps for my correction that Thou hast
caused them to “magnify themselves against me, when my feet slipped;”
that is to say, when I stumbled, they were elated, and said many things.
For pity, not insult, was due from them to the weak; even as the Apostle
speaks: “Brethren, if a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are
spiritual restore such an one in the spirit of meekness;” and he
combines the reason why: “considering thyself also, lest thou also be
tempted.” <span id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998) Not such as these were
the persons of whom He speaks: “And when my feet slipped, they rejoiced
greatly against me;” but they were such as those of whom He says
elsewhere: “They that hate me will rejoice if I fall.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p83"></span>22. “For I am prepared for the
scourges” ([Psa. 38.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p83.1"></span>). Quite a magnificent expression; as if He
were saying, “It was even for this that I was born; that I might
suffer.” For He was not to be born, <span
id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999) but from Adam, to whom the scourge is
due. But sinners are in this life sometimes not scourged at all, or are
scourged less than their deserts: because the wickedness of their heart
is given over as already desperate. Those, however, for whom eternal
life is prepared, must needs be scourged in this life: for that sentence
is true: “My son, faint not under the chastening of the Lord, neither be
weary when thou art rebuked of Him.” <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000) “For whom the Lord loveth He
chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001) Let not mine enemies therefore
insult over me; let “them not magnify themselves;” and if my Father
scourgeth me, “I am prepared for the scourge;” because there is an
inheritance in store for me. Thou wilt not submit to the scourge: the
inheritance is not bestowed upon thee. For “every son” must needs be
scourged. So true it is that “every son” is scourged, that He spared not
even Him who had no sin. For “I am prepared for the scourges.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p87"></span>23. “And my sorrow is continually
before me.” What “sorrow” is that? Perhaps, a sorrow for my scourge.
And, in good truth, my brethren, in good truth, let me say unto you, men
do mourn for their scourges, not for the causes on account of which they
are scourged. Not such was the person here. Listen, my brethren: If
<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_110"></span>any person suffers any loss, he is more
ready to say, “I did not deserve to suffer it,” than to consider why he
suffered it, mourning the loss of money, not mourning over that of
righteousness. If thou hast sinned, mourn for the loss of thy inward
treasure. Thou hast nothing in thy house, but perhaps thou art still
more empty in heart; but if thine heart is full of its Good, even thy
God, why dost thou not say, “The Lord gave, the Lord hath taken away; as
it pleased the Lord was it done. Blessed be the Name of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002) Whence then was it that He was
grieving? Was it for the “scourging” wherewith He was scourged? God
forbid. “And my sorrow” (says He) “is continually before me.” And as if
we were to say, “What sorrow? whence comes that sorrow?” he says: “For I
declare mine iniquity; and I will have a care for my sin” ([Psa.
38.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p88.2"></span>). See here the reason for the sorrow! It
is not a sorrow occasioned by the scourge; not one for the remedy, not
for the wound. For the scourge is a remedy against sins. Hear, brethren;
We are Christians, and yet if any one’s son dies, he mourns for him but
does not mourn for him if he sins. It is then, when he sees him sinning,
that he ought to make mourning for him, to lament over him. It is then
he should restrain him, and give him a rule to live by; should impose a
discipline upon him: or if he has done so, and the other has not taken
heed, then was the time when he ought to have been mourned over; then he
was more fatally dead whilst living in luxury, than when, by death, he
brought his luxury to its close: at that time, when he was doing such
things in thine house, he was not only “dead, but he stank also.” <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003) These things were worthy to be
lamented, the others were such as might well be endured; those, I say,
were tolerable, these worthy to be mourned over. They were to be mourned
over in the same way that you have heard this person mourn over them:
“For I declare mine iniquity. I will have a care for my sin.” Be not
free from anxiety when you have confessed your sin, as if always able to
confess thy sin, and to commit it again. Do thou “declare thine iniquity
in such a manner, as to have a care for thy sin.” What is meant by
“having a care of thy sin”? To have a care of thy wound. If you were to
say, “I will have a care of my wound,” what would be meant by it, but I
will do my endeavour to have it healed. For this is “to have a care for
one’s sin,” to be ever struggling, ever endeavouring, ever exerting
one’s self, earnestly and zealously, to heal one’s wound. Behold! thou
art from day to day mourning over thy sins; but perhaps thy tears indeed
flow, but thy hands are unemployed. Do alms, redeem <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004) thy sins, let the poor rejoice of
thy bounty, that thou also mayest rejoice of the Grace of God. He is in
want; so art thou in want also: he is in want at thy hands; so art thou
also in want at God’s hand. Dost thou despise one who needs thy aid; and
shall God not despise thee when thou needest His? Do thou therefore
supply the needs of him who is in want of thine aid; that God may supply
thy needs within. <span id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005) This is the
meaning of, “I will have a care for my sin.” I will do all that ought to
be done, to blot out and to heal my sin. “And I will have a care for my
sin.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p92"></span>24. “But mine enemies live” ([Psa.
38.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p92.1"></span>). They are well off: they rejoice in
worldly prosperity, while I am suffering, and “roaring with the groaning
of my heart.” In what way do His enemies “live,” in that He hath said of
them already, that they have “spoken vanity”? Hear in another Psalm
also: “Whose sons are as young plants; firmly rooted.” But above He had
said, “Whose mouth speaketh vanity. Their daughters polished after the
similitude of a temple: their garners full bursting forth more and more;
their cattle fat, their sheep fruitful, multiplying in their streets; no
hedge falling into ruin; no cry in their streets.” <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006) “Mine enemies” then “live.” This is
their life; this life they praise; this they set their hearts upon: this
they hold fast to their own ruin. For what follows? They pronounce “the
people that is in such a case” blessed. But what sayest thou, who “hast
a care for thy sin”? What sayest thou, who “confessest thine iniquity”?
He says, “Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007)

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p95"></span>“But mine enemies live, and are
strengthened against me, and they that hate me wrongfully are
multiplied.” What is “hate me wrongfully”? They hate me, who wish their
good, whereas were they simply requiting evil for evil, they would not
be righteous; were they not to requite with good the good done to them,
they would be ungrateful: they, however, who “hate wrongfully,” actually
return evil for good. Such were the Jews; Christ came unto them with
good things; they requited Him evil for good. Beware, brethren, of this
evil; it soon steals <span id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) upon us.
Let no one of you think himself to be far removed from the danger,
because we said, “Such were the Jews.” Should a brother, wishing your
good, rebuke you, and you hate him, you are like them. And observe, how
easily, how soon it is produced; and avoid an evil so great, a sin so
easily committed.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p97"></span>25. “They also that render evil for
good, were speaking evil of me, because I have pursued the thing that is
just” ([Psa. 38.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p97.1"></span>). There<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>
<span id="ii.XXXVIII-Page_111"></span>fore was it that I was requited
evil for good. What is meant by “pursued after the thing that is just”?
Not forsaken it. That you might not always understand *persecutio* in a
bad sense, He means by *persecutus* pursued after, thoroughly followed.
“Because I have followed the thing that is just.” Hear also our Head
crying with a lamentable voice in His Passion: “And they cast Me forth,
Thy Darling, even as a dead man in abomination.” <span
id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009) Was it not enough that He was
“dead”? wherefore “in abomination” also? Because He was crucified. For
this death of the Cross was a great abomination in their eyes, as they
did not perceive that it was spoken in prophecy, “Cursed is every one
that hangeth on a tree.” <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010) For
He did not Himself bring death; but He found it here, propagated from
the curse of the first man; and this same death of ours, which had
originated in sin, He had taken upon Himself, and hung on the Tree. Lest
therefore some persons should think (as some of the Heretics think),
that our Lord Jesus Christ had only a false body of flesh; and that the
death by which He made satisfaction on the Cross was not a real death,
the Prophet notices this, and says, “Cursed is every one that hangeth on
a tree.” He shows then that the Son of God died a true death, the death
which was due to mortal flesh: lest if He were not “accursed,” you
should think that He had not truly died. But since that death was not an
illusion, but had descended from that original stock, which had been
derived from the curse, when He said, “Ye shall surely die:” <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011) and since a true death assuredly
extended even to Him, that a true life might extend itself to us, the
curse of death also did extend to Him, that the blessing of life might
extend even unto us. “And they cast Me forth, Thy Darling, even as a
dead man in abomination.”

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p101"></span>26. “Forsake me not, O Lord; O my God,
depart not from me” ([Psa. 38.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p101.1"></span>). Let us speak in Him, let us speak
through Him (for He Himself intercedeth for us), and let us say,
“Forsake me not, O Lord my God.” And yet He had said, “My God! My God!
why hast Thou forsaken Me?” <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012)
and He now says, “O My God, depart not from Me.” If He does not forsake
the body, did He forsake the Head? Whose words then are these but the
First Man’s? To show then that He carried about Him a true body of flesh
derived from him, He says, “My God, My God why hast Thou forsaken Me?”
God had not forsaken Him. If He does not forsake Thee, who believest in
Him, could the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, One God, forsake
Christ? But He had transferred to Himself the person of the First Man.
We know by the words of an Apostle, that “our old man is crucified with
Him.” <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013) We should not, however,
be divested of our old nature, had He not been crucified “in weakness.”
For it was to this end that He came that we may be renewed in Him,
because it is by aspiration after Him, and by following the example of
His suffering, that we are renewed. Therefore that was the cry of
infirmity; that cry, I mean, in which it was said, “Why hast Thou
forsaken Me?” Thence was it said in that passage above, “the words of
mine offences.” As if He were saying, These words are transferred to My
Person from that of the sinner.

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p104"></span>27. “Depart not from me. Make haste to
help me, Lord of my salvation” ([Psa.
38.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p104.1"></span>). This is that very “salvation,”
Brethren, concerning which, as the Apostle Peter saith, “Prophets have
enquired diligently,” <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) and
though they have enquired diligently, yet have not found it. But they
searched into it, and foretold of it; while we have come and have found
what they sought for. And see, we ourselves too have not as yet received
it; and after us shall others also be born, and shall find, what they
also shall not receive, and shall pass away, that we may, all of us
together, receive the “penny of salvation in the end of the day,” with
the Prophets, the Patriarchs, and the Apostles. For you know that the
hired servants, or labourers, were taken into the vineyard at different
times; yet did they all receive their wages on an equal footing. <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015) Apostles, then, and Prophets, and
Martyrs, and ourselves also, and those who will follow us to the end of
the world, it is in the End itself that we are to receive everlasting
salvation; that beholding the face of God, and contemplating His Glory,
we may praise Him for ever, free from imperfection, free from any
punishment of iniquity, free from every perversion of sin: praising Him;
and no longer longing after Him, but now clinging to Him for whom we
used to long to the very end, and in whom we did rejoice, in hope. For
we shall be in that City, where God is our Bliss, God is our Light, God
is our Bread, God is our Life; whatever good thing of ours there is, at
being absent from which we now grieve, we shall find in Him. In Him will
be that “rest,” which when we “call to remembrance” now, we cannot
choose but grieve. For that is the “Sabbath” which we “call to
remembrance;” in the recollection of which, so great things have been
said already; and so great things ought to be said by us also, and ought
never to cease being said by us, not with our lips indeed, but in our
heart: for therefore do our lips cease to speak, that we may cry out
with our hearts. <span id="fr_1016"></span>[1017](#fn_1016)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_943"></span>[103:944](1080045.htm#fr_943) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. XXXVII.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[103:945](1080045.htm#fr_944) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p5"></span> [Matt. v.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[103:946](1080045.htm#fr_945) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p7"></span> *Futuri sunt in emendatione quidam
salvi*.

<span id="fn_946"></span>[103:947](1080045.htm#fr_946) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p8"></span> *Emendatio* (alluding to *emendes* in
the Latin of v. 1.).

<span id="fn_947"></span>[103:948](1080045.htm#fr_947) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p9"></span> *Utique arguet*.

<span id="fn_948"></span>[103:949](1080045.htm#fr_948) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p10"></span> [Matt. xxv.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_949"></span>[103:950](1080045.htm#fr_949) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p11"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_950"></span>[103:951](1080045.htm#fr_950) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p12"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_951"></span>[103:952](1080045.htm#fr_951) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p13"></span> *Per*.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[103:953](1080045.htm#fr_952) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p14"></span> \[See Augustin’s ideas as to a
*possible* meaning of the text [1 Cor. iii.
11-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p14.1"></span> in vol. ii. this series, p. 474. He there
propounds, *as a conjecture merely*, a purification of some souls in the
intermediate state, which he does not care to reject. It is not his own
theory; he says, I do not contradict; *possibly* it is true.” He thus
proves there was no *dogma* of any sort of purgatory in his day, and
even this theory is entirely inconsistent with the dogma as expounded in
the Trent Catechism.—C.\]

<span id="fn_953"></span>[103:954](1080045.htm#fr_953) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p17"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[103:955](1080045.htm#fr_954) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p18"></span> [Job vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[104:956](1080045.htm#fr_955) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p19"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_956"></span>[104:957](1080045.htm#fr_956) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p21"></span> [Ps. xxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[104:958](1080045.htm#fr_957) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p22"></span> [Ps. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[104:959](1080045.htm#fr_958) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p23"></span> [Gen. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[104:960](1080045.htm#fr_959) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p24"></span> [Matt.
25:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#042),
[43](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#043)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[104:961](1080045.htm#fr_960) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p25"></span> [Matt.
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#044),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#045)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[104:962](1080045.htm#fr_961) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p26"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[104:963](1080045.htm#fr_962) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p27"></span> [Matt. xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[104:964](1080045.htm#fr_963) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p30"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.12](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p30.1"></span>. \[Note “as a Lesson:” part of Divine
Service.—C.\]

<span id="fn_964"></span>[105:965](1080045.htm#fr_964) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p31"></span> [Ps. vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[105:966](1080045.htm#fr_965) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p33"></span> [2 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[105:967](1080045.htm#fr_966) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p34"></span> \[[Isa. lviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p34.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_967"></span>[105:968](1080045.htm#fr_967) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p35"></span> [Cant.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[105:969](1080045.htm#fr_968) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p36"></span> [Ps. xxxviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[105:970](1080045.htm#fr_969) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p40"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[106:971](1080045.htm#fr_970) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p41"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[106:972](1080045.htm#fr_971) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p42"></span> [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[106:973](1080045.htm#fr_972) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p43"></span> [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[106:974](1080045.htm#fr_973) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p44"></span> [John xiv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[106:975](1080045.htm#fr_974) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p46"></span> St. Augustin, *infirmatus*; E.V.
“troubled;” Prayer Book, “feeble;” Vulgate, *afflictus*.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[106:976](1080045.htm#fr_975) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p47"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[106:977](1080045.htm#fr_976) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p48"></span> *Assumpta mente*.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[106:978](1080045.htm#fr_977) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p49"></span> [2 Cor.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[106:979](1080045.htm#fr_978) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p50"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[106:980](1080045.htm#fr_979) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p52"></span> *Rugiebam a gemitu cordis mei*. E.V.
“by reason of the disquietness.”

<span id="fn_980"></span>[107:981](1080045.htm#fr_980) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p54"></span> [Matt. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[107:982](1080045.htm#fr_981) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p55"></span> [1 Thess. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[107:983](1080045.htm#fr_982) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p56"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[107:984](1080045.htm#fr_983) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p57"></span> [Matt. v.
44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[107:985](1080045.htm#fr_984) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p60"></span> [Gen. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[107:986](1080045.htm#fr_985) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p62"></span> E.V. “and my friends stand aloof.”

<span id="fn_986"></span>[107:987](1080045.htm#fr_986) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p63"></span> [Matt. xx.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[108:988](1080045.htm#fr_987) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p65"></span> [Matt. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[108:989](1080045.htm#fr_988) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p66"></span> [John ii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#025)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[108:990](1080045.htm#fr_989) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p67"></span> [Matt. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#018)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[108:991](1080045.htm#fr_990) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p68"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[108:992](1080045.htm#fr_991) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p69"></span> [John xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[108:993](1080045.htm#fr_992) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p71"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[108:994](1080045.htm#fr_993) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p73"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
60](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#060)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[108:995](1080045.htm#fr_994) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p74"></span> [Isa. liii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p74.1"></span>.
St. Augustin, *Ponam malos pro sepulturâ ejus*. Vulgate, *Dabit impios*,
etc.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[108:996](1080045.htm#fr_995) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p75"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[109:997](1080045.htm#fr_996) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p78"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[109:998](1080045.htm#fr_997) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p79"></span> [Isa. liii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[109:999](1080045.htm#fr_998) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p82"></span> [Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[109:1000](1080045.htm#fr_999) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p84"></span> *Al*. “He would not suffer.”

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[109:1001](1080045.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p84.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p85"></span> [Prov. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[109:1002](1080045.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p86"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[110:1003](1080045.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p88"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[110:1004](1080045.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p88.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p89"></span> [John xi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[110:1005](1080045.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p90"></span> *Fiant, redimantur*.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[110:1006](1080045.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p90.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p91"></span> *Al*. “fill thine inward parts.”

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[110:1007](1080045.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p93"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[110:1008](1080045.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p93.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p94"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[110:1009](1080045.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p96"></span> *Cito subintrat*.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[111:1010](1080045.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p98"></span> A few <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p98.1"></span>mss</span>. of LXX. note this to be added
here.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[111:1011](1080045.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p99"></span> [Deut. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[111:1012](1080045.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p99.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p100"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[111:1013](1080045.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p101.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p102"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[111:1014](1080045.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p102.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p103"></span> [Rom. vi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[111:1015](1080045.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p105"></span> [1 Pet. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p105.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[111:1016](1080045.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p105.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p106"></span> [Matt. xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[111:1017](1080045.htm#fr_1016) <span
id="ii.XXXVIII-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p107"></span> \[[Heb. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009)<span id="ii.XXXVIII-p107.1"></span>.
The Sabbath that “remaineth” is the only Sabbath our author sees in this
Psalm.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XXXIX](1080046)
