[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080158)  [Next](1080160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXVI"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXVI. <span
id="fr_5491"></span>[5492](#fn_5491) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p3"></span>1. …How man had come into captivity, let
us ask the Apostle Paul.…For he saith: “For we know that the Law is
spiritual, but I am carnal, sold under sin.” <span
id="fr_5492"></span>[5493](#fn_5492) Behold whence we became captives;
because we were sold under sin. Who sold us? We ourselves, who consented
to the seducer. We could sell ourselves; we could not redeem ourselves.
We sold ourselves by consent of sin, we are redeemed in the faith of
righteousness. For innocent blood was given for us, that we might be
redeemed. Whatsoever blood he shed in persecuting the righteous, what
kind of blood did he shed? Righteous men’s blood, indeed, he shed; they
were Prophets, righteous men, our fathers, and Martyrs. Whose blood he
shed, yet all coming of the offspring of sin. One blood he shed of Him
who was not justified, <span id="fr_5493"></span>[5494](#fn_5493) but
born righteous: by shedding that blood, he lost those whom he held. For
they <span id="page_604">p. 604</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVI-Page_604"></span>for whom innocent blood was given were
redeemed, and, turned back from their captivity, they sing this Psalm.

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p6"></span>2. “When the Lord turned back the
captivity of Sion, we became as those that are comforted” ([Psa.
126.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p6.1"></span>). He meant by this to say, we became joyful.
When? “When the Lord turned back the captivity of Sion.” What is Sion?
Jerusalem, the same is also the eternal Sion. How is Sion eternal, how
is Sion captive? In angels eternal, in men captive. For not all the
citizens of that city are captives, but those who are away from thence,
they are captives. Man was a citizen of Jerusalem, but sold under sin he
became a pilgrim. Of his progeny was born the human race, and the
captivity of Sion filled all lands. And how is this captivity of Sion a
shadow of that Jerusalem? The shadow of that Sion, which was granted to
the Jews, in an image, in a figure, was in captivity in Babylonia, and
after seventy years that people turned back to its own city. <span
id="fr_5494"></span>[5495](#fn_5494) …But when all time is past, then we
return to our country, as after seventy years that people returned from
the Babylonish captivity, for Babylon is this world; since Babylon is
interpreted “confusion.”…So then this whole life of human affairs is
confusion, which belongeth not unto God. In this confusion, in this
Babylonish land, Sion is held captive. But “the Lord hath turned back
the captivity of Sion.” “And we became,” he saith, “as those that are
comforted.” That is, we rejoiced as receiving consolation. Consolation
is not save for the unhappy, consolation is not save for them that
groan, that mourn. Wherefore, “as those that are comforted,” except
because we are still mourning? We mourn for our present lot, we are
comforted in hope: when the present is passed by, of our mourning will
come everlasting joy, when there will be no need of consolation, because
we shall be wounded with no distress. But wherefore saith he “as” those
that are comforted, and saith not comforted? This word “as,” is not
always put for likeness: when we say “As,” it sometimes refers to the
actual case, sometimes to likeness: here it is with reference to the
actual case.…Walk therefore in Christ, and sing rejoicing, sing as one
that is comforted; because He went before thee who hath commanded thee
to follow Him.

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p8"></span>3. “Then was our mouth filled with joy,
and our tongue with exultation” ([Psa.
126.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p8.1"></span>). That mouth, brethren, which we have in our
body, how is it “filled with joy”? It useth not to be “filled,” save
with meat, or drink, or some such thing put into the mouth. Sometimes
our mouth is filled; and it is more that we say to your holiness, <span
id="fr_5495"></span>[5496](#fn_5495) when we have our mouth full, we
cannot speak. But we have a mouth within, that is, in the heart, whence
whatsoever proceedeth, if it is evil, defileth us, if it is good,
cleanseth us. For concerning this very mouth ye heard when the Gospel
was read. For the Jews reproached the Lord, because His disciples ate
with unwashen hands. <span id="fr_5496"></span>[5497](#fn_5496) They
reproached who had cleanness without; and within were full of stains.
They reproached, whose righteousness was only in the eyes of men. But
the Lord sought our inward cleanness, which if we have, the outside must
needs be clean also. “Cleanse,” He saith, “the inside,” and “the outside
shall be clean also.” <span id="fr_5497"></span>[5498](#fn_5497) …

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p12"></span>4. But let us return to what was just now
read from the Gospel, relating to the verse before us, “Our mouth was
filled with joy, and our tongue with delight:” for we are inquiring what
mouth and what tongue. Listen, beloved brethren. The Lord was scoffed
at, because His disciples ate with unwashed hands. The Lord answered
them as was fitting, and said unto the crowds whom He had called unto
Him, “Hear ye all, and understand: not that which goeth into the mouth
defileth a man; but that which cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a
man.” <span id="fr_5498"></span>[5499](#fn_5498) What is this? when He
said, what goeth into the mouth, He meant only the mouth of the body.
For meat goeth in, and meats defile not a man; because, “All things are
clean to the clean;” and, “every creature of God is good, and none to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.” <span
id="fr_5499"></span>[5500](#fn_5499) …

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p15"></span>5. Guard the mouth of thy heart from
evil, and thou wilt be innocent: the tongue of thy body will be
innocent, thy hands will be innocent; even thy feet will be innocent,
thy eyes, thy ears, will be innocent; all thy members will serve under
righteousness, because a righteous commander hath thy heart. “Then shall
they say among the heathen, the Lord hath done great things for them.”

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p16"></span>6. “Yea, the Lord hath done great things
for us already, whereof we rejoice” ([Psa.
126.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p16.1"></span>). Consider, my brethren, if Sion doth not at
present say this among the heathen, throughout the whole world; consider
if men are not running unto the Church. In the whole world our
redemption is received; Amen is answered. The dwellers in Jerusalem,
therefore, captive, destined to return, pilgrims, sighing for their
country, speak thus among the heathen. What do they say? “The Lord hath
done great things for us, whereof we rejoice.” Have they done anything
for themselves? They have done ill with themselves, for they have sold
themselves under sin. The Redeemer came, and did the good things for
them.

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p17"></span>7. “Turn our captivity, O Lord, as the
torrents in the south” ([Psa.
126.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p17.1"></span>). Consider, my <span id="page_605">p.
605</span> <span id="ii.CXXVI-Page_605"></span>brethren, what this
meaneth.…As torrents are turned in the south, so turn our captivity. In
a certain passage Scripture saith, in admonishing us concerning good
works, “Thy sins also shall melt away, even as the ice in fair warm
weather.” <span id="fr_5500"></span>[5501](#fn_5500) Our sins therefore
bound us. How? As the cold bindeth the water that it run not. Bound with
the frost of our sins, we have frozen. But the south wind is a warm
wind: when the south wind blows, the ice melts, and the torrents are
filled. Now winter streams are called torrents; for filled with sudden
rains they run with great force. We had therefore become frozen in
captivity; our sins bound us: the south wind the Holy Spirit hath blown:
our sins are forgiven us, we are released from the frost of iniquity; as
the ice in fair weather, our sins are melted. Let us run unto our
country, as the torrents in the south.…

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p19"></span>8. For the next words are, “They that sow
in tears, shall reap in joy” ([Psa.
126.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p19.1"></span>). In this life, which is full of tears, let
us sow. What shall we sow? Good works. Works of mercy are our seeds: of
which seeds the Apostle saith, “Let us not be weary in well doing; for
in due season we shall reap if we faint not.” <span
id="fr_5501"></span>[5502](#fn_5501) Speaking therefore of almsgiving
itself, what saith he? “This I say; he that soweth sparingly, shall reap
also sparingly.” <span id="fr_5502"></span>[5503](#fn_5502) He therefore
who soweth plentifully, shall reap plentifully: he who soweth sparingly,
shall reap also sparingly: and he that soweth nothing, shall reap
nothing. Why do ye long for ample estates, where ye may sow plentifully?
There is not a wider field on which ye can sow than Christ, who hath
willed that we should sow in Himself. Your soil is the Church; sow as
much as ye can. But thou hast not enough to do this. Hast thou the will?
 <span id="fr_5503"></span>[5504](#fn_5503) As what thou hadst would be
nothing, if thou hadst not a good will; so do not despond, because thou
hast not, if thou hast a good will. For what dost thou sow? Mercy. And
what wilt thou reap? Peace. Said the Angels, Peace on earth unto rich
men? No, but, “Peace on earth unto men of a good will.” <span
id="fr_5504"></span>[5505](#fn_5504) Zacchæus had a strong will,
Zacchæus had great charity. <span id="fr_5505"></span>[5506](#fn_5505)
…Did then that widow who cast her two farthings into the treasury, sow
little? Nay, as much as Zacchæus. For she had narrower means, but an
equal will. She gave her two mites <span
id="fr_5506"></span>[5507](#fn_5506) with as good a will as Zacchæus
gave the half of his patrimony. If thou consider what they gave, thou
wilt find their gifts different; if thou look to the source, thou wilt
find them equal; she gave whatever she had, and he gave what he had.…But
if they are beggars whose profession is asking alms, in trouble they
also have what to bestow upon one another. God hath not so forsaken
them, but that they have wherein they may be tried by their bestowing of
alms. This man cannot walk; he who can walk, lendeth his feet to the
lame; he who seeth, lendeth his eyes to the blind; and he who is young
and sound, lendeth his strength to the old or the infirm, carrieth him:
the one is poor, the other is rich.

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p26"></span>9. Sometimes also the rich man is found
to be poor, and something is bestowed upon him by the poor. Somebody
cometh to a river, so much the more delicate as he is more rich; he
cannot pass over: if he were to pass over with bare limbs, he would
catch cold, would be ill, would die: a poor man more active in body
cometh up: he carries the rich man over; he giveth alms unto the rich.
Think not therefore those only poor, who have not money.…Thus love ye,
thus be ye affectioned unto one another. Attend not solely to
yourselves: but to those who are in want around you. But because these
things take place in this life with troubles and cares, faint not. Ye
sow in tears, ye shall reap in joy.

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p27"></span>10. How, my brethren? When the farmer
goeth forth with the plough, carrying seed, is not the wind sometimes
keen, and doth not the shower sometimes deter him? He looketh to the
sky, seeth it lowering, shivers with cold, nevertheless goeth forth, and
soweth. For he feareth lest while he is observing the foul weather, and
awaiting sunshine, the time may pass away, and he may not find anything
to reap. Put not off, my brethren; sow in wintry weather, sow good
works, even while ye weep; for, “They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.” They sow their seed, good will, and good works. “They went on
their way and wept, casting their seed” ([Psa.
126.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXVI-p27.1"></span>). Why did they weep? Because they were among
the miserable, and were themselves miserable. It is better, my brethren,
that no man should be miserable, than that thou shouldest do
alms.…Nevertheless, as long as there are objects for its exercise, let
us not fail amid those troubles to sow our seed. Although we sow in
tears, yet shall we reap in joy. For in that resurrection of the dead,
each man shall receive his own sheaves, that is, the produce of his
seed, the crown of joys and of delight. Then will there be a joyous
triumph, when we shall laugh at death, wherein we groaned before: then
shall they say to death, “O death, where is thy strife? O death, where
is thy sting?” <span id="fr_5507"></span>[5508](#fn_5507) But why do
they now rejoice? Because “they bring their sheaves with them.”

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p29"></span>11. In this Psalm we have chiefly
exhorted you to do deeds of alms, because it is thence that we ascend;
and ye see that he who ascend<span id="page_606">p. 606</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVI-Page_606"></span>eth, singeth the song of steps. Remember:
do not love to descend, instead of to ascend, but reflect upon your
ascent: because he who descended from Jerusalem to Jericho fell among
thieves. <span id="fr_5508"></span>[5509](#fn_5508) …The Samaritan as He
passed by slighted us not: He healed us, He raised us upon His beast,
upon His flesh; He led us to the inn, that is, the Church; He entrusted
us to the host, that is, to the Apostle; He gave two pence, whereby we
might be healed, <span id="fr_5509"></span>[5510](#fn_5509) the love of
God, and the love of our neighbour. The Apostle spent more; for, though
it was allowed unto all the Apostles to receive, as Christ’s soldiers,
pay from Christ’s subjects, <span id="fr_5510"></span>[5511](#fn_5510)
that Apostle, nevertheless, toiled with his own hands, and excused the
subjects the maintenance owing to him. <span
id="fr_5511"></span>[5512](#fn_5511) All this hath already happened: if
we have descended, and have been wounded; let us ascend, let us sing,
and make progress, in order that we may arrive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5491"></span>[603:5492](1080159.htm#fr_5491) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p2"></span> Lat. CXXV. A song of degrees. A sermon to
the people.

<span id="fn_5492"></span>[603:5493](1080159.htm#fr_5492) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p4"></span> [Rom. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5493"></span>[603:5494](1080159.htm#fr_5493) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p5"></span> Or, “made righteous.”

<span id="fn_5494"></span>[604:5495](1080159.htm#fr_5494) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p7"></span> [Jer.
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), [Jer.
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5495"></span>[604:5496](1080159.htm#fr_5495) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p9"></span> \[A bishop seems to have been
present.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5496"></span>[604:5497](1080159.htm#fr_5496) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p10"></span> [Matt. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p10.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_5497"></span>[604:5498](1080159.htm#fr_5497) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p11"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5498"></span>[604:5499](1080159.htm#fr_5498) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p13"></span> [Matt.
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5499"></span>[604:5500](1080159.htm#fr_5499) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p14"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5500"></span>[605:5501](1080159.htm#fr_5500) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p18"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
3.17](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#017)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5501"></span>[605:5502](1080159.htm#fr_5501) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p20"></span> [Gal. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5502"></span>[605:5503](1080159.htm#fr_5502) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p21"></span> [2 Cor. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5503"></span>[605:5504](1080159.htm#fr_5503) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p22"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CXXVI-p22.1"></span>mss</span>. “have a good will.”

<span id="fn_5504"></span>[605:5505](1080159.htm#fr_5504) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p23"></span> [Luke ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5505"></span>[605:5506](1080159.htm#fr_5505) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p24"></span> [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5506"></span>[605:5507](1080159.htm#fr_5506) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p25"></span> [Luke xxi.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5507"></span>[605:5508](1080159.htm#fr_5507) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p28"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5508"></span>[606:5509](1080159.htm#fr_5508) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p30"></span> [Luke x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5509"></span>[606:5510](1080159.htm#fr_5509) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p31"></span> [Luke
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#035),
[37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#037)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5510"></span>[606:5511](1080159.htm#fr_5510) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p32"></span> *Provincialibus*. [1 Cor. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5511"></span>[606:5512](1080159.htm#fr_5511) <span
id="ii.CXXVI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVI-p33"></span> [1 Thess.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#007),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#009), [2 Thess.
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXXVI-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXVII](1080160)
