[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080161)  [Next](1080163) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXIX"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXIX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXIX-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXIX. <span
id="fr_5545"></span>[5546](#fn_5545) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p3"></span>1. The Psalm which we have sung is short:
but as it is written in the Gospel of Zacchæus <span id="page_611">p.
611</span> <span id="ii.CXXIX-Page_611"></span>that he was “little of
stature,” <span id="fr_5546"></span>[5547](#fn_5546) but mighty in
works; as it is written of that widow who cast two mites into the
treasury, little was the money, but great was her charity; <span
id="fr_5547"></span>[5548](#fn_5547) thus also this Psalm, if thou count
the words, is short; if thou weigh the sentiments, is great.…Let the
Spirit of God speak, let It speak to us, let It sing to us; whether we
wish or wish not to dance, let It sing. For as he who danceth, moveth
his limbs to the time; so they who dance according to the commandment of
God, in their works obey the sound. What therefore saith the Lord in the
Gospel to those who refuse to do this? “We have piped unto you, and ye
have not danced: we have mourned unto you, and ye have not
lamented.” <span id="fr_5548"></span>[5549](#fn_5548) Let Him therefore
sing; we trust in God’s mercy, for there will be those by whom He
consoleth us. For they who are obstinate, continuing in wickedness,
although they hear the Word of God, by their offences daily disturb the
Church. Of such this Psalm speaketh; for thus it beginneth.

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p7"></span>2. “Many a time have they fought against
me from my youth up” ([Psa. 129.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p7.1"></span>). The Church speaketh of those whom She
endureth: and as if it were asked, “Is it now?” The Church is of ancient
birth: since saints have been so called, the Church hath been on earth.
At one time the Church was in Abel only, and he was fought against by
his wicked and lost brother Cain. <span
id="fr_5549"></span>[5550](#fn_5549) At one time the Church was in Enoch
alone: and he was translated from the unrighteous. <span
id="fr_5550"></span>[5551](#fn_5550) At one time the Church was in the
house of Noah alone, and endured all who perished by the flood, and the
ark alone swam upon the waves, and escaped to shore. <span
id="fr_5551"></span>[5552](#fn_5551) At one time the Church was in
Abraham alone, and we know what he endured from the wicked. The Church
was in his brother’s son, Lot, alone, and in his house, in Sodom, and he
endured the iniquities and perversities of Sodom, until God freed him
from amidst them. <span id="fr_5552"></span>[5553](#fn_5552) The Church
also began to exist in the people of Israel: She endured Pharaoh and the
Egyptians. The number of the saints began to be also in the Church, that
is, in the people of Israel; Moses and the rest of the saints endured
the wicked Jews, the people of Israel. We come unto our Lord Jesus
Christ: the Gospel was preached in the Psalms. <span
id="fr_5553"></span>[5554](#fn_5553) …For this reason, lest the Church
wonder now, or lest any one wonder in the Church, who wisheth to be a
good member of the Church, let him hear the Church herself his Mother
saying to him, Marvel not at these things, my son: “Many a time have
they fought against me from my youth up.”

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p13"></span>3. “Now may Israel say.” She now seemeth
to be speaking of herself: for she seemed not to have commenced herself,
but to have answered. But to whom hath she replied? To them that think
and say, How great evils do we endure, how great are the scandals that
every day thicken, as the wicked enter into the Church, and we have to
endure them? But let the Church reply through some, that is, through the
voice of the stronger, let her reply to the complaints of the weak, and
let the stable confirm the unstable, and the full-grown the infant, and
let the Church say, “Many a time have they vexed me from my youth up”
([Psa. 129.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p13.1"></span>). Let the Church say this: let her not fear
it. For what is the meaning of this addition, “From my youth up,” after
the words, “Many a time have they fought against me”? At present the old
age of the Church is assailed: but let her not fear. Hath she then
failed to arrive at old age, because they have not ceased to fight
against her from her youth up? have they been able to blot her out? Let
Israel comfort herself, let the Church console herself with past
examples. Why have they fought against me? “For they could not prevail
against me.”

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p14"></span>4. “Upon my back have sinners built; they
have done their iniquity afar off” ([Psa.
129.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p14.1"></span>). Why have they fought against me? Because
“they could not prevail upon me.” What is this? They could not build
upon me. I consented not with them unto sin. For every wicked man
persecuteth the good on this account, because the good man consenteth
not with him to evil. Suppose he do some evil, and the Bishop censure
him not, the Bishop is a good man: suppose the Bishop censure him, the
Bishop is a bad man. Suppose he carry off anything, let the man robbed
be silent, he is a good man: let him only speak and rebuke, even though
he doth not reclaim his goods, he is everything bad. He is bad then who
blameth the robber, and he is good who robbeth!…Heed not that such an
one speaketh to thee: it is a wicked man through whom It speaketh to
thee; but the word of God, that speaketh to thee, is not wicked.  <span
id="fr_5554"></span>[5555](#fn_5554) Accuse God: accuse Him, if thou
canst!

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p16"></span>5. Thou accusest a man of avarice, and he
accuseth God on the ground that He made gold. Be not covetous. And God,
thou repliest, should not make gold. This now remaineth, because thou
canst not restrain thine evil deeds, thou accusest the good works of
God: the Creator and Architect of the world displeaseth thee. He ought
not to make the sun either; for many contend concerning the lights of
their windows, and <span id="page_612">p. 612</span> <span
id="ii.CXXIX-Page_612"></span>drag each other before courts of law. O if
we could restrain our vices! for all things are good, because a good God
made all things: and His works praise Him, when their goodness is
considered by him who hath the spirit of considering them, the spirit of
piety and wisdom. <span id="fr_5555"></span>[5556](#fn_5555) …

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p18"></span>6. Lend not money at interest. Thou
accusest Scripture which saith, “He that hath not given his money upon
usury.” <span id="fr_5556"></span>[5557](#fn_5556) I wrote not this: it
went not forth first from my mouth: hear God. He replieth: let not the
clergy lend upon usury. Perchance he who speaketh to thee, lendeth not
at interest: but if he do so lend, suppose that he doth so lend; doth He
who speaketh through him lend at interest? If he doth what he enjoineth
thee, and thou dost it not; thou wilt go into the flame, he into the
kingdom. If he doth not what he enjoineth thee, and equally with thee
doth evil deeds, and preaches duties which he doth not; ye will both
equally go into the flames. The hay will burn; but “the word of the Lord
abideth for evermore.” <span id="fr_5557"></span>[5558](#fn_5557) …

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p21"></span>7. “The righteous Lord shall hew the
necks of the sinners” ([Psa.
129.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p21.1"></span>).…Which of us doth not fix his eyes upon the
earth, like the Publican, and say, “Lord, be merciful unto me a
sinner”? <span id="fr_5558"></span>[5559](#fn_5558) If therefore all are
sinners, and none is found without sin; all must fear the sword that
hangs above their neck, because “the righteous Lord shall hew the necks
of the sinners.” I do not imagine, my brethren, of all sinners; but in
the member which He striketh, He marks what sinners He striketh. For it
is not said, The righteous Lord will hew the hands of the sinners; or
their feet; but because proud sinners were meant to be understood, and
all proud men carry lofty necks, and not only do evil deeds, but even
refuse to acknowledge them to be such, and when they are rebuked,
justify themselves: <span id="fr_5559"></span>[5560](#fn_5559) …as it is
written in Job (he was speaking of an ungodly sinner), “he runneth
against God, even upon his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers;” <span id="fr_5560"></span>[5561](#fn_5560) so he here nameth
the neck, because it is thus thou exaltest thyself, and dost not fix
thine eyes upon the ground, and beat thy breast. Thou shouldest cry unto
Him, as it is cried in another Psalm, “I said, Lord, be merciful unto
me, for I have sinned against Thee.” <span
id="fr_5561"></span>[5562](#fn_5561) Since thou dost not choose to say
this, but justifiest thy deeds against the Word of God; what followeth
in Scripture cometh upon thee: the righteous Lord shall hew the necks of
sinners.

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p26"></span>8. “Let them be confounded and turned
backward, as many as have evil will at Sion” ([Psa.
129.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p26.1"></span>). They who hate Sion, hate the Church: Sion
is the Church. And they who hypocritically enter into the Church, hate
the Church. They who refuse to keep the Word of God, hate the Church:
“Upon my back have they built:” what will the Church do, save endure the
burden even unto the end?

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p27"></span>9. But what saith he of them? The next
words are, “Let them be even as the grass of the house tops: that
withereth before it be plucked up” ([Psa.
129.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p27.1"></span>). The grass of the house tops is that which
groweth on house tops, on a tiled roof: it is seen on high, and hath not
a root. How much better would it be if it grew lower, and how much more
joyfully would it bloom? As it is, it riseth higher to a quicker
withering. It hath not yet been plucked up, yet hath it withered: not
yet have they received sentence from the judgment of God, and already
they have not the sap of bloom. Observe their works, and see that they
have withered.…The reapers will come, but they fill not their sheaves
from these. For the reapers will come, and will gather the wheat into
the barn, and will bind the tares together, and cast them into the fire.
Thus also is the grass of the house tops cleared off, and whatever is
plucked from it, is thrown into the fire; because it had withered even
before it was plucked up. The reaper filleth not his hands thence. His
next words are, “Whereof the reaper filleth not his hand; neither he
that bindeth up the sheaves his bosom” ([Psa.
129.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p27.2"></span>). And, “the reapers are the angels,” <span
id="fr_5562"></span>[5563](#fn_5562) the Lord saith.

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p29"></span>10. “So that they who go by say not so
much as, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we have blessed you in
the name of the Lord” ([Psa.
129.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p29.1"></span>). For ye know, brethren, when men pass by
others at work, it is customary to address them, “The blessing of the
Lord be upon you.” <span id="fr_5563"></span>[5564](#fn_5563) And this
was especially the custom in the Jewish nation. No one passed by and saw
any one doing any work in the field, or in the vineyard, or in harvest,
or anything of the sort; it was not lawful to pass by without a
blessing.…Who are the passers by? They who have already passed hence to
their country through this road, that is, through this life: the
Apostles were passers by in this life, the Prophets were passers by.
Whom did the Prophets and Apostles bless? Those in whom they saw the
root of charity? But those whom they found lifted on high on their house
tops, and proud in the bosses of their bucklers, they declared against
these what they were doomed to become, but they gave them no blessing.
Ye therefore who read in the Scriptures, find all those wicked men whom
the <span id="page_613">p. 613</span> <span
id="ii.CXXIX-Page_613"></span>Church beareth, who are declared cursed,
pertain unto Antichrist, pertain unto the devil, pertain to the chaff,
pertain to the tares.…But they who say, None save God sanctifieth, nor
is any man good save by the gift of God; they bless in the name of the
Lord, not in their own name: because they are the friends of the
bridegroom, <span id="fr_5564"></span>[5565](#fn_5564) they refuse to be
adulterers of the bride.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5545"></span>[610:5546](1080162.htm#fr_5545) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p2"></span> Lat. CXXVIII. A sermon to the people.

<span id="fn_5546"></span>[611:5547](1080162.htm#fr_5546) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p4"></span> [Luke xix.
2-9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5547"></span>[611:5548](1080162.htm#fr_5547) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p5"></span> [Mark
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042),
[44](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#044)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5548"></span>[611:5549](1080162.htm#fr_5548) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p6"></span> [Matt. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5549"></span>[611:5550](1080162.htm#fr_5549) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p8"></span> [Gen. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5550"></span>[611:5551](1080162.htm#fr_5550) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p9"></span> [Gen. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5551"></span>[611:5552](1080162.htm#fr_5551) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p10"></span> [Gen.
vi.-viii](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5552"></span>[611:5553](1080162.htm#fr_5552) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p11"></span> [Gen.
xiii.-xx](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5553"></span>[611:5554](1080162.htm#fr_5553) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p12"></span> [Ps.
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005), [Heb.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p12.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5554"></span>[611:5555](1080162.htm#fr_5554) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p15"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CXXIX-p15.1"></span>mss</span>. “Heed not through whom It
speaketh to thee, but take heed that it is That which speaketh to thee.
He is evil through whom It speaketh to thee, but the Word of God that
speaketh to thee is not evil.”

<span id="fn_5555"></span>[612:5556](1080162.htm#fr_5555) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p17"></span> <span id="ii.CXXIX-p17.1"></span>Song of
Three Children, ver. 35, etc.

<span id="fn_5556"></span>[612:5557](1080162.htm#fr_5556) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p19"></span> [Ps. xv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5557"></span>[612:5558](1080162.htm#fr_5557) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p20"></span> [Isa. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p20.1"></span>.
\[On this subject see p. 99, note 2, *supra*. But it is well to study
this and other Fathers *passim* on this most perplexing matter. Comp.
[Acts 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029), [Deut.
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#020), [Matt.
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CXXIX-p20.2"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5558"></span>[612:5559](1080162.htm#fr_5558) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p22"></span> [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5559"></span>[612:5560](1080162.htm#fr_5559) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p23"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CXXIX-p23.1"></span>mss</span>. add, “I did not this, but the
stars.”

<span id="fn_5560"></span>[612:5561](1080162.htm#fr_5560) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p24"></span> [Job xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5561"></span>[612:5562](1080162.htm#fr_5561) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p25"></span> [Ps. xli.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5562"></span>[612:5563](1080162.htm#fr_5562) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p28"></span> [Matt. xiii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#039)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5563"></span>[612:5564](1080162.htm#fr_5563) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p30"></span> \[Note this Christian usage of the fifth
century.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5564"></span>[613:5565](1080162.htm#fr_5564) <span
id="ii.CXXIX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXIX-p31"></span> [John iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXXIX-p31.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXX](1080163)
