[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080107)  [Next](1080109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCVII"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCVII. <span
id="fr_4452"></span>[4453](#fn_4452) </span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p3"></span>1. …This Psalm is entitled, “A Psalm of
David’s, when his land was restored.” Let us refer the whole to Christ,
if we wish to keep the road of a right understanding: let us not depart
from the corner stone, <span id="fr_4453"></span>[4454](#fn_4453) lest
our understanding suffer a fall: in Him let that become fixed, which
wavered with unstable motion; let that rest upon Him, which before was
waving to and fro in uncertainty. Whatever doubt a man hath in his mind
when he heareth the Scriptures of God, let him not depart from Christ;
when Christ hath been revealed to him in the words, let him then be
assured that he hath understood; but before he arriveth at the
understanding of Christ, let him not presume that he hath understood.
“For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believeth.” <span id="fr_4454"></span>[4455](#fn_4454) What doth this
mean, and how are these words understood in Christ, “When his land was
restored”?…

<span id="ii.XCVII-p6"></span>2. The earth restored is the resurrection
of the flesh; for after His resurrection, all those things which are
sung of in the Psalm were done. Let us then hear a Psalm full of joy on
the restoration of the Earth. Let the Lord our God excite in us a hope
and a pleasure worthy of so great a thing; may He rule our discourse,
that it be fit for your hearts, that whatever joy our heart doth feel in
such sights, He may bring on to our tongue, and thence conduct it into
your ears, then to your heart, thence to your actions.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p7"></span>3. …“The Lord is King, let the earth be
glad: yea, let the multitude of the isles be joyous” ([Psa.
97.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVII-p7.1"></span>).
It is so indeed, because the word of God hath been preached not in the
continent alone, but also in those isles which lie in mid sea: even
these are full of Christians, full of the servants of God. For the sea
doth not retard Him who made it. Where ships can approach, cannot the
words of God? The isles are filled. But figuratively the isles may be
taken for all the Churches. Why isles? Because the waves of all
temptations roar around them. But as an isle may be beaten by the waves
which on every side dash around it, yet cannot be broken, and rather
itself doth break the advancing waves, than by them is broken: so also
the Churches of God, springing up throughout the world, have suffered
the persecutions of the ungodly, who roar around them on every side; and
behold the isles stand fixed, and at last the sea is calmed.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p8"></span>4. “Clouds and darkness are round about
Him: righteousness and judgment are the direction of His seat” ([Psa.
97.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p8.1"></span>).…The Lord Himself saith: “For judgment I am
come into this world; that they which see not might see, and that they
which see might be made blind.” <span
id="fr_4455"></span>[4456](#fn_4455) They who seem unto themselves to
see, who think themselves wise, who think healing not needful for them,
that they may be made blind, may not understand. And that “they which
see not may see;” that they who confess their blindness may obtain to be
enlightened. Let there be therefore “clouds and darkness round about
Him,” for those who have not understood Him: for those who confess and
humble themselves, “righteousness and judgment are the direction of His
seat.” He called those who believe in Him His seat: for from them hath
He made Himself a seat, since in them Wisdom sitteth; for the Son of God
is the Wisdom of God. But we have heard from another passage of
Scripture a strong confirmation of this interpretation. “The soul of the
righteous is the seat of Wisdom.” <span
id="fr_4456"></span>[4457](#fn_4456) Because then they who have believed
in Him have been made righteous: justified by faith, they have become
His own seat: He sitteth in them, judging from them, and guiding them.…

<span id="ii.XCVII-p11"></span>5. “There shall go a fire before Him, and
burn up His enemies on every side” ([Psa.
97.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p11.1"></span>). We remember having read in the Gospel, He
shall say, “Depart into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels.” <span id="fr_4457"></span>[4458](#fn_4457) I do not think it is
said of that fire. Why do I not? Because he speaketh of some fire, which
shall go before Him, before He cometh to judgment. For it is said, that
the fire goeth before Him, and burneth up His enemies on every side,
that is, throughout the whole world. That fire will burn after His
advent: this, on the contrary, will go before Him. What fire then is
this?…Behold, we have understood the fire that goeth before Him, that is
to be understood of a kind of temporal punishment of the unbelieving and
ungodly: let us understand the fire, if possible, of the salvation of
the redeemed also; for thus we had proposed. The Lord Himself saith:
<span id="page_476">p. 476</span> <span id="ii.XCVII-Page_476"></span>“I
am come to send fire on the earth:” <span
id="fr_4458"></span>[4459](#fn_4458) “fire” in the same way as a
“sword;” as in another passage He saith, that He was not come to send
peace, but a sword, upon earth. <span
id="fr_4459"></span>[4460](#fn_4459) The sword to divide, the fire to
burn: but each salutary: for the sword of His own word hath in salutary
wise separated us from evil habits. For He brought a sword, and
separated every believer either from his father who believed not in
Christ, or from his mother in like manner unbelieving: or at least, if
we were born of Christian parents, from his ancestors. For no man among
us had not either a grandsire, or great grandsire, or some ancestry
among the heathen, and in that unbelief which is accursed before God. We
are separated from that which we were before; but the sword which
separateth, but slayeth not, hath cut between us. In the same way the
fire also: “I am come to send fire upon the earth.” Believers in Him
were set on fire, they received the flame of love: and for this reason
when the Holy Spirit itself had been sent to the Apostles, It thus
appeared: “cloven tongues, like as of fire.” <span
id="fr_4460"></span>[4461](#fn_4460) Burning with this fire they set out
on their march through the world, to burn and set on fire His enemies on
every side. What enemies of His? They who forsaking the God who made
them, adored the idols they had made.…

<span id="ii.XCVII-p16"></span>6. “His lightnings gave shine unto the
world” ([Psa. 97.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p16.1"></span>). This is great joy. Do we not see? is it
not clear? His lightnings have shined unto the whole world: His enemies
have been set on fire, and burnt. All that gainsaid hath been burnt, and
“His lightnings have given shine unto the world.” How have they shone?
That the world might at length believe. Whence were the lightnings? From
the clouds. What are the clouds of God? The preachers of the truth. But
thou seest a cloud, misty and dark in the sky, and it hath I know not
what hidden within it. If there be lightning from the cloud, a
brightness shineth forth: from that which thou didst despise, hath burst
forth that which thou mayest dread. Our Lord Jesus Christ therefore sent
His Apostles, as His preachers, like clouds: they were seen as men, and
were despised; as clouds appear, and are despised, until what thou
wonderest at gleameth from them. For they were in the first place men
encumbered with flesh, weak; then, men of low station, unlearned,
ignoble: but there was within what could lighten forth; there was in
them what could flash abroad. Peter a fisherman approached, prayed, and
the dead arose. <span id="fr_4461"></span>[4462](#fn_4461) His human
form was a cloud, the splendour of the miracle was the lightning. So in
their words, so in their deeds, when they do things to be wondered at,
and utter words to be wondered at, “His lightnings gave shine unto the
world; the earth saw it, and was afraid.” Is it not true? Doth not the
whole Christian world at length exclaim, Amen, afraid at the lightnings
which burst forth from those clouds?

<span id="ii.XCVII-p18"></span>7. “The hills melted like wax at the
presence of the Lord” ([Psa. 97.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p18.1"></span>). Who are the hills? The proud. Every high
thing raising itself against God, at the deeds of Christ and of the
Christians, trembled, yielded, and when I say, what hath been already
said, “melted,” a better word cannot be found. “The hills melted like
wax at the presence of the Lord.” Where is the elevation of powers?
where the hardness of the unbelieving? The Lord was a fire unto them,
they melted at His presence like wax; so long hard, until that fire was
applied. Every height hath been levelled; it dareth not now blaspheme
Christ: and though the Pagan believeth not in Him, he blasphemeth Him
not; though not as yet become a living stone, yet the hard hill hath
been subdued. “At the presence of the Lord of the whole earth:” not of
the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, as the Apostle saith; for He is
not the God of the Jews alone, but of the Gentiles also. <span
id="fr_4462"></span>[4463](#fn_4462) He is therefore the Lord of the
whole earth, the Lord Jesus Christ born in Judæa, but not born for Judæa
alone, because before He was born He created all men; and He who
created, also new created, all men.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p20"></span>8. “The heavens have declared His
righteousness: and all the people have seen His glory” ([Psa.
97.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p20.1"></span>). What heavens have declared? “The heavens
declare the glory of God.” <span id="fr_4463"></span>[4464](#fn_4463)
Who are the heavens? Those who have become His seat; for as God sitteth
in the heavens, so doth He sit in the Apostles, so doth He sit in the
preachers of the Gospel. Even thou, if thou wilt, shalt be a heaven.
Dost thou wish to be so? Purge from thy heart the earth. If thou hast
not earthly lusts, and hast not in vain uttered the response, that thou
hast “lifted up thy heart,” thou shalt be a heaven. <span
id="fr_4464"></span>[4465](#fn_4464) “If ye be risen with Christ,” saith
the Apostle to believers, “set your affection on things above, not on
things of the earth.” <span id="fr_4465"></span>[4466](#fn_4465) Thou
hast begun to set thine affection upon things above, not on things upon
earth; hast thou not become a heaven? Thou carriest flesh, and in thy
heart thou art already a heaven; for thy conversation will be in
heaven. <span id="fr_4466"></span>[4467](#fn_4466) Being such, thou also
declarest Christ; for who of the faithful declareth not
Christ?…Therefore the whole Church preacheth Christ, and the heavens
declare His righteousness; for all the faithful, whose care it is to
gain unto God those who have not yet <span id="page_477">p. 477</span>
<span id="ii.XCVII-Page_477"></span>believed, and who do this from love,
are heavens. From them God thundereth forth the terror of His judgment;
and he who was unbelieving trembleth, and is alarmed, and believeth. He
shows unto men what power Christ had throughout the world, by pleading
with them, and leading them to love Christ. For how many this day have
led their friends either to some pantomimist, or flute-player? Why,
except from their liking him? And do ye love Christ. For He who
conquered the world hath exhibited such spectacles, as that no man can
say that he findeth in them cause for blame. For each person’s favourite
in the theatre is often vanquished there. But no man is vanquished in
Christ: there is no reason for shame. Seize, lead, draw, whom ye may: be
without fear, ye are leading unto Him, who displeaseth not those who see
Him; and ask ye Him to enlighten them, that they may behold to good
account.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p25"></span>9. “Confounded be all they that worship
carved images” ([Psa. 97.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p25.1"></span>). Hath not this come to pass? Have they not
been confounded? Are they not daily confounded? For carved images are
images wrought by the hand. Why are all who worship carved images
confounded? Because all people have seen His glory. All nations now
confess the glory of Christ: let those who worship stones be ashamed.
Because those stones were dead, we have found a living Stone; indeed
those stones never lived, so that they cannot be called even dead; but
our Stone is living, and hath ever lived with the Father, and though He
died for us, He revived, and liveth now, and death shall no more have
dominion over Him. <span id="fr_4467"></span>[4468](#fn_4467) This glory
of His the nations have acknowledged; they leave the temples, they run
to the Churches. Do they still seek to worship carved images? Have they
not chosen to forsake their idols? They have been forsaken by their
idols. “Who glory in their idols.” But there is a certain disputer who
seemeth unto himself learned, and saith, I do not worship that stone,
nor that image which is without sense;…I worship not this image but I
adore  <span id="fr_4468"></span>[4469](#fn_4468) what I see, and serve
him whom I see not. Who is that? Some invisible deity, he replieth, who
presideth over that image. By giving this account of their images, they
seem to themselves able disputants, because they do not worship idols,
and yet do worship devils. “The things,” brethren, saith the Apostle,
“which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice unto devils, and not to
God; we know that an idol is nothing: and that what the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God; and I would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils.” <span
id="fr_4469"></span>[4470](#fn_4469) Let them not therefore excuse
themselves on this ground, that they are not devoted to insensate idols;
they are rather devoted to devils, which is more dangerous. For if they
were only worshipping idols, as they would not help them, so they would
not hurt them; but if thou worship and serve devils, they themselves
will be thy masters.…

<span id="ii.XCVII-p29"></span>10. But observe holy men, who are like
the Angels. When thou hast found some holy man who serveth God, if thou
wish to worship him instead of God, he forbiddeth thee: he will not
arrogate to himself the honour due to God, he will not be unto thee as
God, but be with thee under God. Thus did the holy Apostles Paul and
Barnabas. They preached the word of God in Lycaonia. When they had
performed wonderful works in Lycaonia, the people of that country
brought victims, and wished to sacrifice to them, calling Barnabas
Jupiter, and Paul Mercury: they were not pleased. Did they perchance
refuse to be sacrificed to, because they abhorred to be compared to
devils? No, but because they shuddered at divine honour being paid to
men. Their own words show this: it is no guess of ours; for the text of
the book goeth on to say how they were moved. <span
id="fr_4470"></span>[4471](#fn_4470) …Just then, as good men forbade
those who had wished to worship them as gods, and wish rather that God
alone be worshipped, God alone be adored, to God alone sacrifice be
offered, not to themselves; so also all the holy Angels seek His glory
whom they love; endeavour to impel and to excite to the contemplation of
Him all whom they love: Him they declare to them, not themselves, since
they are angels; and because they are soldiers, they study only how to
seek the glory of their Captain; but if they have sought their own
glory, they are condemned as usurpers. <span
id="fr_4471"></span>[4472](#fn_4471) Such were the devil and his angels;
he claimed for himself divine honour, and for all his demons; he filled
the Pagan temples, and persuaded them to offer images and sacrifices to
himself. Was it not better to worship holy Angels than devils? They
answer: we do not worship devils; we worship angels, as ye call them,
the powers and the ministers of the great God. I wish ye would worship
them: ye would easily learn from themselves not to worship them.  <span
id="fr_4472"></span>[4473](#fn_4472) Hear an Angel teaching. He was
teaching a disciple of Christ, and showing him many wonders in the
Revelation of John: and when some wonderful vision had been shown him,
he trembled, and fell down at the Angel’s feet; but that Angel, who
sought not but the glory of God, said, “See thou do it not; for I am a
fellow-servant of thee, and of thy brethren the prophets.” <span
id="fr_4473"></span>[4474](#fn_4473) What then, my brethren? Let no man
say, I fear lest the Angel may be angry <span id="page_478">p.
478</span> <span id="ii.XCVII-Page_478"></span>with me, if I worship him
not as my God. He is then angry with thee, when thou hast chosen to
worship him: for he is righteous, and loveth God. As devils are angry if
they are not worshipped, so are Angels angry if they are worshipped
instead of God. But lest the weak and trembling heart perchance say unto
itself: If then the demons are incensed because they are not worshipped,
I fear to offend them; what can even their chief the devil do unto thee?
If he had any power over us no one of us would remain. Are not daily so
many things said against him by the mouth of Christians, and yet the
harvest of Christians increaseth. When thou art angry with the most
depraved of thy slaves, thou givest him the name, “Satan,” Devil.
Perhaps in this thou dost err, since thou sayest it to a man, and thy
immoderate anger hurrieth thee to revile the image of God: and yet thou
choosest a term thou deeply hatest, to apply to him. If he could, would
he not revenge himself? But it is not allowed: and he doth so much only
as is allowed him. For when he wished to tempt Job, he had to ask power
to do so: <span id="fr_4474"></span>[4475](#fn_4474) and he could do
nothing had he not received power. Why then dost thou not fearlessly
worship God, without whose will no one hurteth thee, and by whose
permission thou art chastened, not overcome? For if it shall have
pleased the Lord thy God to permit some man to hurt thee, or some
spirit: He will chasten thee, that thou mayest cry unto Him: <span
id="fr_4475"></span>[4476](#fn_4475) “Confounded,” therefore, “be all
they that delight in vain gods: worship Him, all ye His angels.” Let
Pagans learn to worship God: they wish to worship Angels: let them
imitate Angels, and worship Him who is worshipped by Angels. “Worship
Him, all ye His angels.” Let that Angel worship who was sent to
Cornelius (for worshipping Him he sent Cornelius to Peter), himself
Peter’s fellow-servant; let him worship Christ, Peter’s Lord. “Worship
Him, all ye gods!”

<span id="ii.XCVII-p36"></span>11. “Sion heard of it, and rejoiced”
([Psa. 97.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p36.1"></span>). What did Sion hear? That all His Angels
worship Him.…For the Church was not as yet among the Gentiles; in Judæa
the Jews had some of them believed, and the very Jews who believed
thought that they only belonged to Christ: the Apostles were sent to the
Gentiles, Cornelius was preached to; Cornelius believed, was baptized,
and they who were with Cornelius were also baptized.  <span
id="fr_4476"></span>[4477](#fn_4476) But ye know what happened, that
they might be baptized: the reader indeed hath not reached this point,
but, nevertheless, some recollect; and let those who do not recollect,
hear briefly from me. The Angel was sent to Cornelius: the Angel sent
Cornelius to Peter; Peter came to Cornelius. And because Cornelius and
his household were Gentiles, and uncircumcised: lest they might hesitate
to give the Gospel to the uncircumcised: before Cornelius and his
household were baptized, the Holy Spirit came, and filled them, and they
began to speak with tongues. Now the Holy Spirit had not fallen upon any
one who had not been baptized: but upon these It fell before baptism.
For Peter might hesitate whether he might baptize the uncircumcised: the
Holy Spirit came, they began to speak with tongues; the invisible gift
was given, and took away all doubt about the visible Sacrament; they
were all baptized.…What did Sion hear, and rejoice at? That the Gentiles
also had received the word of God. One wall had come, but the corner
existed not as yet. The name Sion is here peculiarly given to the Church
which was in Judæa. “Sion heard of it, and rejoiced: and the daughters
of Judah were glad.” Thus it is written, “The apostles and brethren that
were in Judæa heard.” See if the daughters of Judæa rejoiced not. What
did they hear? “That the Gentiles had also received the word of
God.”…Therefore, “The daughters of Judah rejoiced because of Thy
judgments, O Lord.” What is, because of Thy judgments? Because in any
nation, and in any people, he that serveth Him is accepted of Him: <span
id="fr_4477"></span>[4478](#fn_4477) for He is not the God of the Jews
only, but also of the Gentiles. <span
id="fr_4478"></span>[4479](#fn_4478)

<span id="ii.XCVII-p40"></span>12. See if this be not the reason for the
joy of the daughters of Judah. “For Thou, Lord, art most high over all
the earth” ([Psa. 97.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p40.1"></span>). Not in Judæa alone, but over Jerusalem;
not over Sion only, but over all the earth. To this whole earth the
judgments of God prevailed, so that it assembled its nations from every
quarter: judgments with which they who have cut themselves off have no
communion: they neither hear the prophecy, nor see its completion; “For
Thou, Lord, art most high over all the earth: Thou art exalted far above
all gods.” What is “far”?  <span id="fr_4479"></span>[4480](#fn_4479)
For it is said of Christ. What then meaneth “far,” except that Thou
mayest be acknowledged coequal with the Father? What meaneth, “above all
gods”? Who are they? Idols have not life, have not sense: devils have
life and sense; but they are evil. What great thing is it that Christ is
exalted above devils? He is exalted above devils: but neither is this
very great; the heathen gods indeed are devils, <span
id="fr_4480"></span>[4481](#fn_4480) but “He is far above all gods.”
Even men are styled gods: “I have said, Ye are gods: and ye are all the
children of the Most Highest:” again it is written, “God standeth in the
congregation of princes: He is a Judge among gods.” <span
id="fr_4481"></span>[4482](#fn_4481) Jesus Christ our Lord is exalted
above all: not only <span id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="ii.XCVII-Page_479"></span>above idols, not only above devils; but
above all righteous men. Even this is not enough; above all Angels also:
for whence otherwise is this, “Worship Him, all ye gods”? “Thou art far
exalted above all gods.”

<span id="ii.XCVII-p44"></span>13. What then do we all, who have
assembled before Him, before Him who is exalted far above all gods? He
hath given us a brief commandment, “O ye that love the Lord, see that ye
hate the thing which is evil!” ([Psa.
97.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p44.1"></span>). Christ doth not deserve that with Him thou
shouldest love avarice. Thou lovest Him: thou shouldest hate what He
hateth. There is a man who is thine enemy, he is what thou art; ye are
the work of one Creator, with the same nature: and yet if thy son were
to speak unto thine enemy, and come to his house, and constantly
converse with him, thou wouldest be inclined to disinherit him; because
he speaketh with thine enemy. And how so? Because thou seemest to say
justly, Thou art my enemy’s friend, and seekest thou aught of my
property? Attend then. Thou lovest Christ: avarice is Christ’s foe; why
speak with her? I say not, speak with her; why dost thou serve her? For
Christ commandeth thee to do many things, and thou dost them not; she
commandeth thee, and thou dost them. Christ commandeth thee to clothe
the poor man: and thou dost it not; avarice biddeth thee defraud, and
this thou dost in preference. If such be the case, if such thou art, do
not very confidently promise thyself Christ’s heritage. But thou sayest,
I love Christ. Hence it appeareth that thou lovest what is good, if thou
shalt be found to hate what is evil.…

<span id="ii.XCVII-p45"></span>14. Because then he had said above, “see
that ye hate the thing which is evil,” lest ye should fear to hate evil,
lest he should kill thee, he addeth instantly, “The Lord preserveth the
souls of His servants.” Hear Him preserving the souls of His servants,
and saying, “Fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul.” <span id="fr_4482"></span>[4483](#fn_4482) He who hath most
power against thee, slayeth the body. What hath he done unto thee? What
he also did to the Lord thy God. Why lovest thou to have what Christ
hath, if thou fearest to suffer what Christ did? He came to bear thy
life, temporal, weak, subject unto death. Surely fear to die, if thou
canst avoid dying. What thou canst not avoid through thy nature, why
dost thou not undergo by faith? Let the adversary who threateneth take
away from thee that life, God giveth thee another life: for He gave thee
this life also, and without His will even this shall not be taken from
thee; but if it be His will that it be taken from thee, He hath a life
to give thee in exchange; fear not to be robbed for His sake. Art thou
unwilling to put off a patched garment? He will give thee a robe of
glory. What robe dost thou tell me of? “This corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.” <span
id="fr_4483"></span>[4484](#fn_4483) This very flesh of thine shall not
perish. Thine enemy can rage as far as to thy death: he hath not power
beyond, either over thy soul, or even over thy flesh; for although he
scatter thy flesh about, he hindereth not the resurrection. Men were
fearful for their life: and what said the Lord unto them? “The very
hairs of your head are all numbered.” <span
id="fr_4484"></span>[4485](#fn_4484) Dost thou, who losest not a single
hair, fear the loss of thy life? All things are numbered with God. He
who created all things, will restore all things. They were not, and they
were created: they were, and shall they not be restored?…“He shall
deliver them from the hand of the ungodly.”

<span id="ii.XCVII-p49"></span>15. But perhaps thou wilt say, I lose
this light. “There is sprung up a light for the righteous” ([Psa.
97.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p49.1"></span>). What light fearest thou thou mayest lose?
fearest thou thou mayest be in darkness? Fear not thou mayest lose
light; nay, fear lest while thou art guarding against the loss of this
light, thou mayest lose that true light. For we see to whom that light
is given which thou fearest losing, and with whom it is shared. Do the
righteous only see this sun, when He maketh it rise over the just and
unjust, and raineth upon the just and unjust? <span
id="fr_4485"></span>[4486](#fn_4485) Wicked men, robbers, the unchaste,
beasts, flies, worms, see that light together with thee. What sort of
light doth He keep for the righteous, who giveth this even to such as
these? Deservedly the Martyrs beheld this light in faith; for they who
despised this light of the sun, had some light in their eyes, which they
longed for, who rejected this. Do you imagine that they were really in
misery, when they walked in chains? Spacious was the prison to the
faithful, light were the chains to the confessors. They who preached
Christ amid their torments, had joy in the iron-chair. What light hath
sprung up for the righteous? Not that which springeth up for the
unrighteous; not that which He causeth to rise over the good and bad.
There is a different light which springeth up to the righteous; of which
light, that never rose upon themselves, the unrighteous shall in the end
say, “Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness hath not shined upon us, and the sun of righteousness rose
not upon us.” <span id="fr_4486"></span>[4487](#fn_4486) Behold, by
loving this sun they have lain in the darkness of the heart. What did it
profit them to have seen with their eyes this sun, and not in mind to
have seen that light? Tobit was blind, but he used to teach his son the
way of God. Ye know this, that Tobit warned his son, and said <span
id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span id="ii.XCVII-Page_480"></span>to him,
“Son, give alms of thy substance; because that alms suffer not to come
into darkness.” <span id="fr_4487"></span>[4488](#fn_4487) Even he who
was in darkness spoke thus.…Dost thou wish to know that light? Be
true-hearted. What is, be true-hearted? Be not of a crooked heart before
God, withstanding His will, and wishing to bend Him unto thee, and not
to rule thyself to please Him; and thou wilt feel the joyful gladness
which all the true-hearted know.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p53"></span>16. “Be glad, ye righteous” ([Psa.
97.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XCVII-p53.1"></span>). Perhaps already the faithful hearing the
word, “Be glad,” are thinking of banquets, preparing cups, waiting for
the season of roses; because it is said, “Be glad, ye righteous!” See
what followeth, “Be glad in the Lord.” Thou art waiting for the season
of spring, that thou mayest be glad: thou hast the Lord for joyful
gladness, the Lord is always with thee, He hath no special season; thou
hast Him by night, thou hast Him by day. Be true-hearted; and thou hast
ever joy from Him. For that joy which is after the fashion of the world,
is not true joy. Hear the prophet Isaiah: “There is no joy, saith my
God, to the wicked.” <span id="fr_4488"></span>[4489](#fn_4488) What the
wicked call joy is not joy, such as he knew who made no account of their
joy: let us believe him, brethren. He was a man, but he knew both kinds
of joy. He certainly knew the joys of the cup, for he was a man, he knew
the joy of the table, he knew the joys of marriage, he knew those joys
worldly and luxurious. He who knew them saith with confidence, “There is
no joy to the wicked, saith the Lord.” But it is not man who speaks, it
is the Lord.…But thou sayest, I see not that light which Isaiah saw.
Believe, and thou shalt see it. For perhaps thou hast not the eye to see
it; for it is an eye by which that beauty is discerned. For as there is
an eye of the flesh, by means of which this light is seen: so there is
an eye of the heart, by which that joy is perceived: perhaps that eye is
wounded, dimmed, disturbed by passion, by avarice, by indulgence, by
senseless lust; thine eye is disturbed: thou canst not see that light.
Believe, before thou seest: thou shalt be healed, and shalt see.

<span id="ii.XCVII-p55"></span>17. “And confess to the remembrance of
His holiness.” Now made glad, now rejoicing in the Lord, confess unto
Him; for unless it were His will, ye would not rejoice in Him. For the
Lord Himself saith: “These things I have spoken to you: that in Me ye
might have peace. But in the world ye shall have tribulation.” <span
id="fr_4489"></span>[4490](#fn_4489) If ye are Christians, look for
tribulations in this world; look not for more peaceful and better times.
Brethren, ye deceive yourselves; what the Gospel doth not promise you,
promise not to yourselves. Ye know what the Gospel saith; we are
speaking to Christians; we ought not to disobey the faith. The Gospel
saith this, that in the last times many evils, many stumbling-blocks,
many tribulations, much iniquity, shall abound; but he that shall endure
unto the end, the same shall be saved. <span
id="fr_4490"></span>[4491](#fn_4490) “The love,” it saith, “of many
shall wax cold.” Whosoever then hath been stedfastly fervent in spirit,
as the Apostle saith, “fervent in spirit,” <span
id="fr_4491"></span>[4492](#fn_4491) his love shall not wax cold:
because “the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost,
which is given unto us.” <span id="fr_4492"></span>[4493](#fn_4492) Let
no man therefore promise himself what the Gospel doth not promise.
Behold, happier times will come, and I am doing this, and purchasing
this. It is good for thee to listen to Him who is not deceived, nor hath
deceived any man, who promised thee joy not here, but in Himself; and
when all here hath passed away, to hope that with Him thou wilt for ever
reign; lest when thou dost wish to reign here, thou mayest neither enjoy
gladness here, nor find it there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4452"></span>[475:4453](1080108.htm#fr_4452) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p2"></span> Lat. XCVI. A discourse to the people.

<span id="fn_4453"></span>[475:4454](1080108.htm#fr_4453) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p4"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.XCVII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4454"></span>[475:4455](1080108.htm#fr_4454) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p5"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4455"></span>[475:4456](1080108.htm#fr_4455) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p9"></span> [John ix.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039)<span id="ii.XCVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4456"></span>[475:4457](1080108.htm#fr_4456) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p10"></span> [Prov.
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#023), [1 Cor.
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="ii.XCVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4457"></span>[475:4458](1080108.htm#fr_4457) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p12"></span> [Matt. xxv.
41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041)<span id="ii.XCVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4458"></span>[476:4459](1080108.htm#fr_4458) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p13"></span> [Luke xii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049)<span id="ii.XCVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4459"></span>[476:4460](1080108.htm#fr_4459) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p14"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034)<span id="ii.XCVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4460"></span>[476:4461](1080108.htm#fr_4460) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p15"></span> [Acts ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4461"></span>[476:4462](1080108.htm#fr_4461) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p17"></span> [Acts ix.
40](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#040)<span id="ii.XCVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4462"></span>[476:4463](1080108.htm#fr_4462) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p19"></span> [Rom. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029)<span id="ii.XCVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4463"></span>[476:4464](1080108.htm#fr_4463) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p21"></span> [Ps. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4464"></span>[476:4465](1080108.htm#fr_4464) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p22"></span> \[See on this, *Dignum*, etc., p. 332,
note 1, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4465"></span>[476:4466](1080108.htm#fr_4465) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p23"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)<span id="ii.XCVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4466"></span>[476:4467](1080108.htm#fr_4466) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p24"></span> [Philip. iii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020)<span id="ii.XCVII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4467"></span>[477:4468](1080108.htm#fr_4467) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p26"></span> [Rom. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009)<span id="ii.XCVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4468"></span>[477:4469](1080108.htm#fr_4468) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p27"></span> *i.e*. fall down before.

<span id="fn_4469"></span>[477:4470](1080108.htm#fr_4469) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004), [1 Cor.
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#021)<span id="ii.XCVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4470"></span>[477:4471](1080108.htm#fr_4470) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p30"></span> [Acts
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)<span id="ii.XCVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4471"></span>[477:4472](1080108.htm#fr_4471) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p31"></span> *Tyranni*.

<span id="fn_4472"></span>[477:4473](1080108.htm#fr_4472) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p32"></span> \[See Origen, vol. iv. p. 544.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4473"></span>[477:4474](1080108.htm#fr_4473) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p33"></span> [Rev. xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCVII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4474"></span>[478:4475](1080108.htm#fr_4474) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p34"></span> [Job i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCVII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4475"></span>[478:4476](1080108.htm#fr_4475) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p35"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#018)<span id="ii.XCVII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4476"></span>[478:4477](1080108.htm#fr_4476) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p37"></span> [Acts x.
47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)<span id="ii.XCVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4477"></span>[478:4478](1080108.htm#fr_4477) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p38"></span> [Ps. xcvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#035)<span id="ii.XCVII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4478"></span>[478:4479](1080108.htm#fr_4478) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p39"></span> [Rom. iii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029)<span id="ii.XCVII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4479"></span>[478:4480](1080108.htm#fr_4479) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p41"></span> *Nimis*.

<span id="fn_4480"></span>[478:4481](1080108.htm#fr_4480) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p42"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCVII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4481"></span>[478:4482](1080108.htm#fr_4481) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p43"></span> [Ps.
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCVII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4482"></span>[479:4483](1080108.htm#fr_4482) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p46"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ii.XCVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4483"></span>[479:4484](1080108.htm#fr_4483) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p47"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="ii.XCVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4484"></span>[479:4485](1080108.htm#fr_4484) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p48"></span> [Matt. x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#030)<span id="ii.XCVII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4485"></span>[479:4486](1080108.htm#fr_4485) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p50"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.XCVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4486"></span>[479:4487](1080108.htm#fr_4486) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p51"></span> [Wisd. v.
6](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCVII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4487"></span>[480:4488](1080108.htm#fr_4487) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p52"></span> [Tob.
4:7](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#007),
[10](../../../bib/apo/tob004.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4488"></span>[480:4489](1080108.htm#fr_4488) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p54"></span> [Isa. lvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021)<span id="ii.XCVII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4489"></span>[480:4490](1080108.htm#fr_4489) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p56"></span> [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span id="ii.XCVII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4490"></span>[480:4491](1080108.htm#fr_4490) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p57"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
3-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCVII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4491"></span>[480:4492](1080108.htm#fr_4491) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p58"></span> [Rom. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCVII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4492"></span>[480:4493](1080108.htm#fr_4492) <span
id="ii.XCVII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCVII-p59"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCVII-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCVIII](1080109)
