[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080119)  [Next](1080121) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CIX"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CIX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CIX-p1.2"></span>Psalm CIX. <span
id="fr_4914"></span>[4915](#fn_4914) </span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p3"></span>1. Every one who faithfully readeth the Acts
of the Apostles, acknowledgeth that this Psalm containeth a prophecy of
Christ; for it evidently appeareth that what is here written, “let his
days be few, and let another take his office,” is prophesied of Judas,
the betrayer of Christ.…For as some things are said which seem
peculiarly to apply to the Apostle Peter, and yet are not clear in their
meaning, unless when referred to the Church, whom he is acknowledged to
have figuratively represented, on account of the primacy <span
id="fr_4915"></span>[4916](#fn_4915) which he bore among the Disciples;
as it is written, “I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven,” <span id="fr_4916"></span>[4917](#fn_4916) and other passages
of the like purport: so Judas doth represent those Jews who were enemies
of Christ, who both then hated Christ, and now, in their line of
succession, this species of wickedness continuing, hate Him. Of these
men, and of this people, not only may what we read more openly
discovered in this Psalm be conveniently understood, but also those
things which are more expressly stated concerning Judas himself.

<span id="ii.CIX-p6"></span>2. The Psalm, then, beginneth thus: “O God,
<span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span id="ii.CIX-Page_537"></span>be
not silent as to my praise; for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, the mouth
of the deceitful is opened upon me” ([Psa.
109.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001)<span id="ii.CIX-p6.1"></span>).
Whence it appeareth, both that the blame, which the ungodly and the
deceitful is not silent of, is false, and that the praise, which God is
not silent of, is true. “For God is true, but every man a liar;” <span
id="fr_4917"></span>[4918](#fn_4917) for no man is true, except him in
whom God speaketh. But the highest praise is that of the only-begotten
Son of God, in which He is proclaimed even that which He is, the
only-begotten Son of God. But this did not appear, but, when His
weakness appeared, lay hid, when the mouth of the ungodly and deceitful
was opened upon Him; and for this reason his mouth was opened, because
His virtue was concealed: and he saith, “the mouth of the deceitful was
opened,” because the hatred which was covered by deceit burst out into
language.

<span id="ii.CIX-p8"></span>3. “They have spoken against me with false
tongues” ([Psa. 109.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CIX-p8.1"></span>): then chiefly when they praised him as a “good
Master” with insidious adulation. Whence it is elsewhere said: “and they
that praised me, are sworn together against me.” <span
id="fr_4918"></span>[4919](#fn_4918) Next, because they burst into
cries, “Crucify Him, crucify Him;” <span
id="fr_4919"></span>[4920](#fn_4919) he hath added, “They compassed me
about also with words of hatred.” They who with a treacherous tongue
spoke words seemingly of love, and not of hatred, “against me,” since
they did this insidiously; afterwards “compassed me about with words”
not of false and deceitful love, but of open “hatred, and fought against
me without a cause.” For as the pious love Christ for nought, so do the
wicked hate Him for nought; for as truth is earnestly sought by the best
men on its own account, without any advantage, external to itself, in
view, so is wickedness sought by the worst men. Whence among secular
authors it is said of a very bad man, “he was wicked and cruel for no
object.” <span id="fr_4920"></span>[4921](#fn_4920)

<span id="ii.CIX-p12"></span>4. “In place,” saith he, “of loving me,
they detracted from me” ([Psa.
109.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003)<span id="ii.CIX-p12.1"></span>).
There are six different acts of this class, which may, when mentioned,
very easily be borne in mind; (1) to return good for evil, (2) not to
return evil for evil; (3) to return good for good, (4) to return evil
for evil; (5) not to return good for good, (6) to return evil for good.
The two first of these belong to the good, and the first of these two is
the better; the two last belong to the wicked, and the latter of the two
is the worse; the two middle to a sort of middle class of persons, but
the first of these borders upon the good, the latter on the bad. We
should remark these things in the holy Scriptures. Our Lord Himself
returneth good for evil, who “justifieth the ungodly;” <span
id="fr_4921"></span>[4922](#fn_4921) and who, when hanging upon the
Cross, said, “Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do.” <span id="fr_4922"></span>[4923](#fn_4922) …

<span id="ii.CIX-p15"></span>5. But after he had said, “in place of
loving me, they detracted from me;” what doth he add? “But I gave myself
unto prayer.” He said not indeed what he prayed, but what can we better
understand than for them themselves? For they were detracting greatly
from Him whom they crucified, when they ridiculed Him as if He were a
man, whom in their opinion they had conquered; from which Cross He said,
“Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do;” so that while
they in the depth of their malignity were rendering evil for good, He in
the height of His goodness was rendering good for evil.…The divine words
then teach us by our Lord’s example, that when we feel others ungrateful
to us, not only in that they do not repay us with good, but even return
evil for good, we should pray; He indeed for others who were raging
against Him, or in sorrow, or endangered in faith; but we for ourselves
in the first place, that we may by the mercy and aid of God conquer our
own mind, by which we are borne on to the desire of revenge, when any
detraction is made from us, either in our presence or our absence.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p16"></span>6. He addeth, “Thus have they rewarded me
evil for good” ([Psa. 109.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CIX-p16.1"></span>). And as if we asked, what evil? for what
good? “And hatred,” he saith, “for my good will.” This is the sum total
of their great guilt. For how could the persecutors injure Him who died
of His own free-will, and not by compulsion? But this very hatred is the
greatest crime of the persecutor, although it be the willing atonement
of the sufferer. And he hath sufficiently explained the sense of the
above words, “In place of loving me,” since they owed love not as a
general duty only, but in return for His love: in that he hath here
added, “for my good will.” This love He mentioneth in the Gospel, when
He saith, “How often would I have gathered thy children together, and
thou wouldest not!” <span id="fr_4923"></span>[4924](#fn_4923)

<span id="ii.CIX-p18"></span>7. He then beginneth to prophesy what they
should receive for this very impiety; detailing their lot in such a
manner, as if he wished its realization from a desire of revenge. Some
not understanding this mode of predicting the future, under the
appearance of wishing evil, suppose hatred to be returned for hatred,
and an evil will for an evil will, since in truth it belongeth to few to
distinguish, in what way the punishment of the wicked pleaseth the
accuser, who longeth to satiate his enmity; and in how widely different
a way it pleaseth the judge, who with a righteous mind punisheth sins.
For the former returneth evil for evil: but the judge when he punisheth
doth <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="ii.CIX-Page_538"></span>not return evil for evil, since he returneth
justice to the unjust; and what is just, is surely good. He therefore
punisheth not from delight in another’s misery, which is evil for evil:
but from love of justice, which is good for evil.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p19"></span>8. “Set thou an ungodly man to be ruler
over him; and let Satan stand at his right hand” ([Psa.
109.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005)<span id="ii.CIX-p19.1"></span>).
Though the complaint had been before concerning many, the Psalm is now
speaking of one.…Since therefore he is here speaking of the traitor
Judas, who, according to the Scripture in the Acts of the Apostles, was
to be punished with the penalty due to him, <span
id="fr_4924"></span>[4925](#fn_4924) what meaneth, “set thou an ungodly
man over him,” save him whom in the next verse he mentioneth by name,
when he saith, “and let Satan stand at his right hand”? He therefore who
refused to be subject unto Christ, deserved this, that he should have
the devil set over him, that is, that he should be subject unto the
devil.…For this reason also it is said of those who, preferring the
pleasures of this world to God, styled the people blessed who have such
and such things, “their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.” <span
id="fr_4925"></span>[4926](#fn_4925) …

<span id="ii.CIX-p22"></span>9. “When sentence is given upon him, let
him be condemned, and let his prayer be turned into sin” ([Psa.
109.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006)<span id="ii.CIX-p22.1"></span>).
For prayer is not righteous except through Christ, whom he sold in his
atrocious sin: but the prayer which is not made through Christ, not only
cannot blot out sin, but is itself turned into sin. But it may be
inquired on what occasion Judas could have so prayed, that his prayer
was turned into sin. I suppose that before he betrayed the Lord, while
he was thinking of betraying Him; for he could no longer pray through
Christ. For after he betrayed Him, and repented of it, if he prayed
through Christ, he would ask for pardon; if he asked for pardon, he
would have hope; if he had hope, he would hope for mercy; if he hoped
for mercy, he would not have hanged himself in despair.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p23"></span>10. “Let his days be few” ([Psa.
109.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007)<span id="ii.CIX-p23.1"></span>).
By “his days,” he meant the days of his apostleship, which were few;
since before the Passion of our Lord, they were ended by his crime and
death. And as if it were asked, What then shall become of that most
sacred number twelve, within which our Lord willed, not without a
meaning, to limit His twelve first Apostles? he at once addeth, “and let
another take his office.” As much as to say, let both himself be
punished according to his desert, and let his number be filled up.

<span id="ii.CIX-p24"></span>11. “Let his children be fatherless, and
his wife a widow” ([Psa. 109.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CIX-p24.1"></span>). After his death, both his children were
fatherless, and his wife a widow. “Let his children be vagabonds, and be
carried away, and beg their bread” ([Psa.
109.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009)<span id="ii.CIX-p24.2"></span>).
By “vagabonds” he meaneth, uncertain whither to go, destitute of all
help. “Let them be driven from their habitations.” He here explaineth
what he had said above, “Let them be carried away.” How all this
happened to his wife and children, the following verses explain.

<span id="ii.CIX-p25"></span>12. “Let the extortioner search out all his
substance, and let the strangers spoil his labour” ([Psa.
109.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CIX-p25.1"></span>). “Let there be no man to help him” ([Psa.
109.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CIX-p25.2"></span>): that is, to guard his posterity; wherefore
followeth, “nor to have compassion on his fatherless children”

<span id="ii.CIX-p26"></span>13. But as even orphans may, without one to
help them, and without a guardian, nevertheless increase amid trouble
and want, and preserve their race by descent; he next saith, “Let his
posterity be destroyed; and in the next generation let his name be clean
put out” ([Psa. 109.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CIX-p26.1"></span>): that is, let what hath been generated by him
generate no more, and quickly pass away.

<span id="ii.CIX-p27"></span>14. But what is it that he next addeth?
“Let the wickedness of his fathers be had in remembrance in the sight of
the Lord, and let not the sin of his mother be done away” ([Psa.
109.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CIX-p27.1"></span>). Is it to be understood, that even the sins
of his fathers shall be visited upon him? For upon him they are not
visited, who hath been changed in Christ, and hath ceased to be the
child of the wicked, by not having imitated their conduct.  <span
id="fr_4926"></span>[4927](#fn_4926) …And to these words, “I will visit
the sins of the fathers upon the children,” <span
id="fr_4927"></span>[4928](#fn_4927) is added, “who hate Me;” that is,
hate Me as their fathers hated Me: so that as the effect of imitating
the good is that even their own sins are blotted out, so the imitation
of the wicked causeth men to suffer not their own deservings only, but
those also of those whom they have imitated.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p30"></span>15. “Let them alway be against <span
id="fr_4928"></span>[4929](#fn_4928) the Lord” ([Psa.
109.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#014)<span
id="ii.CIX-p31.1"></span>). “Against the Lord,” meaneth in the Lord’s
sight: for other translators have rendered this line, “let them be
always in the sight of the Lord;” while others have rendered it, “let
them be before the Lord alway;” as it is elsewhere said, “Thou hast set
our misdeeds in Thy sight.” <span id="fr_4929"></span>[4930](#fn_4929)
By “alway,” he meaneth that this great crime should be without pardon,
both here, and in a future life. “Let the memorial of them perish from
off the earth:” that is, of his father and of his mother. By memorial of
them, he meaneth, that which is preserved by successive generations:
this he prophesied should perish from the earth, because both Judas
himself, and his sons, who were the memorial of his father and mother,
without any succeeding offspring, as it is said above, were consumed in
the short space of one generation. <span
id="fr_4930"></span>[4931](#fn_4930) …

<span id="ii.CIX-p34"></span><span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="ii.CIX-Page_539"></span>16. “And that, because he remembered not to
act mercifully” ([Psa. 109.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CIX-p34.1"></span>); either Judas, or the people itself. But
“remembered not” is better understood of the people: for if they slew
Christ, they might well remember the deed in penitence, and act
mercifully towards His members, whom they most perseveringly persecuted.
For this reason he saith, “but persecuted the poor man and the beggar”
([Psa. 109.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CIX-p34.2"></span>). It may indeed be understood of Judas; for
the Lord did not disdain to become poor, when He was rich, that we might
be enriched by His poverty. <span id="fr_4931"></span>[4932](#fn_4931)
But how shall I understand the word “beggar,” save perhaps because He
said to the Samaritan woman, “Give me to drink,” <span
id="fr_4932"></span>[4933](#fn_4932) and on the Cross He said, “I
thirst.” <span id="fr_4933"></span>[4934](#fn_4933) But as to what
followeth, I do not see how it can be understood of our Head Himself,
that is, the Saviour of His own body, whom Judas persecuted. For after
saying, “He persecuted the poor man and the beggar:” he addeth, “and to
slay,” that is, “that he might slay Him,” for some have so rendered it,
“Him that was pricked at the heart.” This expression is not commonly
used except of the stings of past sins in the sorrows of penitence; as
it is said of those who, when they had heard the Apostles after our
Lord’s ascension, were “pricked in heart,” even they who had slain the
Lord.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p38"></span>17. The Psalm then continueth: “His delight
was in cursing, and it shall happen to him” ([Psa.
109.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CIX-p38.1"></span>). Although Judas loved cursing, both in
stealing from the money bag, and selling and betraying the Lord:
nevertheless, that people more openly loved cursing, when they said,
“His blood be on us, and on our children.” <span
id="fr_4934"></span>[4935](#fn_4934) “He loved not blessing, therefore
it shall be far from him.” Such was Judas indeed, since he loved not
Christ, in whom is everlasting blessing; but the Jewish people still
more decidedly refused blessing, unto whom he who had been enlightened
by the Lord said, “Will ye also be His disciples?” <span
id="fr_4935"></span>[4936](#fn_4935) “He clothed himself with cursing,
like as with a raiment:” either Judas, or that people. “And it came into
his bowels like water.” <span id="fr_4936"></span>[4937](#fn_4936) Both
without, then, and within; without, like a garment; within, like water:
since he hath come before the judgment-seat of Him “who hath power to
destroy both body and soul in hell;” <span
id="fr_4937"></span>[4938](#fn_4937) the body without, the soul within.
“And like oil into his bones.” He showeth that he worketh evil with
delight, and storeth up cursing for himself, that is, everlasting
punishment; for blessing is eternal life. For at present evil deeds are
his delight, flowing like water into his bowels, like oil into his
bones; but it is styled cursing, because God hath appointed torments for
such men.

<span id="ii.CIX-p43"></span>18. “Let it be unto him as the cloak which
covereth him” ([Psa. 109.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CIX-p43.1"></span>). Since he hath before spoken of the cloak,
why doth he repeat it? When he said, “He clothed himself with cursing as
with a raiment;” doth the raiment with which he is “covered” differ from
that with which he is “clothed”? For every man is clothed with his
tunic, covered with his cloak; and what is this, save boasting in
iniquity, even in the sight of men? “and as the girdle,” he saith, “that
he is alway girded withal.” Men are girded chiefly that they may be
better fit for toil, that they may not be hindered by the folds of their
dress. He therefore girdeth himself with curses, who designeth an evil
which he hath carefully contrived, not on a sudden impulse, and who
learneth in such a manner to do evil, that he is always ready to commit
it.

<span id="ii.CIX-p44"></span>19. “This is the work of them that slander
me before the Lord” ([Psa. 109.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CIX-p44.1"></span>). He said not, “their reward,” but, “their
work:” for it is clear that by the clothing, covering, water, oil, and
girdle, he was describing the very works by which eternal curses are
procured. It is not then one Judas, but many, of whom it is said, “This
is the work of them that slander me before the Lord.” Although indeed
the plural number might have been put for the singular; even as, when
Herod died, it was said by the Angel, “They are dead which sought the
young Child’s life.” <span id="fr_4938"></span>[4939](#fn_4938) But who
slander Christ more before the Lord, than they who slander the very
words of the Lord, by declaring that it is not He whom the Law of the
Lord and His Prophets announced beforehand? “And of those that speak
evil against my soul:” by denying that He, when He had willed, could
have arisen: though He saith, “I have power to lay down My life, and I
have power to take it again.” <span id="fr_4939"></span>[4940](#fn_4939)

<span id="ii.CIX-p47"></span>20. “But work Thou with me, O Lord God”
([Psa. 109.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020)<span
id="ii.CIX-p47.1"></span>). Some have thought “mercifully” should be
understood, some have actually added it; but the best copies have the
words thus: “But work Thou with me, O Lord God, for Thy Name’s sake.”
Whence a higher sense should not be passed over, supposing the Son to
have thus addressed the Father, “Deal Thou with Me,” since the works of
the Father and of the Son are the same. Where although we understand
mercy,—for these words follow, “for sweet is Thy mercy,”—because he said
not, “In me,” or, “over me;” or anything of this sort: but, “work Thou
with Me;” we rightly understand that the Father and Son together work
mercifully towards the vessels of mercy. <span
id="fr_4940"></span>[4941](#fn_4940) “Work with me,” <span
id="fr_4941"></span>[4942](#fn_4941) <span id="page_540">p. 540</span>
<span id="ii.CIX-Page_540"></span>may also be understood to mean, help
me. We use this expression in our daily language, when we are speaking
of anything which is in our favour; “It works with us.” For the Father
aideth the Son, as far as the Deity aideth Man, on account of His having
assumed the “form of a servant,” to which Man, God, and to which “Form
of a servant,” the Lord too is Father. For in the “form of God,” the Son
needeth not aid, for He is equally all-powerful with the Father, on
which account He also is the helper of men.…And because when he had
said, “Work Thou with me,” he added, “for Thy Name’s sake,” he hath
commended grace. For without previous deserving works, human nature was
raised to such a height, that the whole in one, the Word and Flesh, that
is, God and Man, was styled the Only-begotten Son of God. And this was
done that that which had been lost might be sought by Him who had
created it, through that which had not been lost; whence the following
words, “For Thy mercy is sweet.”

<span id="ii.CIX-p50"></span>21. “O deliver me, for I am needy and poor”
([Psa. 109.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CIX-p50.1"></span>). Need and poverty is that weakness, through
which He was crucified. <span id="fr_4942"></span>[4943](#fn_4942) “And
my heart is disturbed within me.” This alludeth to those words which He
spoke when His Passion was drawing near, “My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.” <span id="fr_4943"></span>[4944](#fn_4943)

<span id="ii.CIX-p53"></span>22. “I go hence like a shadow that
declineth” ([Psa. 109.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CIX-p53.1"></span>). By this he signified death itself. For as
night comes of the shadow’s declining, so death comes of mortal flesh.
“And am driven away as the locusts.” This I think would be more suitably
understood of His members, that is, of His faithful disciples. That he
might make it much plainer, he preferred writing “locusts” in the plural
number: although many may be understood where the singular number is
used, as in that passage, “He spake, and the locust came;”  <span
id="fr_4944"></span>[4945](#fn_4944) but it would have been more
obscure. His disciples, then, were driven away, that is, were put to
flight by persecutors, either the multitude of whom He wished to be
signified by the word locusts, or their passing from one place to
another.

<span id="ii.CIX-p55"></span>23. “My knees are weak through fasting”
([Psa. 109.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CIX-p55.1"></span>). We read, that our Lord Christ underwent a
fast of forty days: <span id="fr_4945"></span>[4946](#fn_4945) but had
fasting so great power over Him, that His knees were weakened? Or is
this more suitably understood of His members, that is, of His saints?
“And my flesh is changed because of the oil;” <span
id="fr_4946"></span>[4947](#fn_4946) because of spiritual grace. Whence
Christ was so called from the Greek word, *chrisma,* which signifies
unction. But the flesh was changed through the oil, not for the worse,
but for the better, that is, rising from the dishonour of death to the
glory of immortality.…His flesh was not yet changed. But whether the
Holy Spirit be represented by water through the notion of ablution or
irrigation, or by oil through that of exultation and the inflaming of
charity; It doth not differ from Itself, because Its types are
different. For there is a great difference between the lion and the
lamb, and yet Christ is represented by both.…

<span id="ii.CIX-p58"></span>24. “I became also a reproach unto them”
([Psa. 109.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CIX-p58.1"></span>): through the death of the Cross. “For Christ
hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us.” <span id="fr_4947"></span>[4948](#fn_4947) “They looked upon Me,
and shaked their heads.” Because they beheld His crucifixion, without
beholding His resurrection: they saw when His knees were weakened, they
saw not when His flesh was changed.

<span id="ii.CIX-p60"></span>25. “Help me, O Lord my God: O save me
according to Thy mercy” ([Psa.
109.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CIX-p60.1"></span>). This may be referred to the whole, both to
the Head and to the body: to the Head, owing to His having taken the
form of a servant; to the body, on account of the servants themselves.
For He might even in them have said unto God, “Help Me:” and, “O save
Me:” as in them He said unto Paul, “Why persecutest thou Me”?  <span
id="fr_4948"></span>[4949](#fn_4948) The following words, “according to
Thy mercy,” describe grace given gratuitously, not according to the
merit of works.

<span id="ii.CIX-p62"></span>26. “And let them know how that this is Thy
Hand, and that Thou, Lord, hast made it” ([Psa.
109.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#026)<span
id="ii.CIX-p62.1"></span>). He said, “Let them know,” of those for whom
He even prayed while they were raging; for even those who afterwards
believed in Him were among the crowd who shook their heads in mockery of
Him. But let those who ascribe unto God the shape of the human body,
learn in what sense God hath a hand. Let us therefore understand, that
the Hand of God meaneth Christ: whence it is elsewhere said, “Unto whom
is the arm of the Lord revealed?” <span
id="fr_4949"></span>[4950](#fn_4949) …

<span id="ii.CIX-p64"></span>27. “Though they curse, yet bless Thou”
([Psa. 109.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CIX-p64.1"></span>). Vain therefore and false is the cursing of
the sons of men, that have pleasure in vanity, and seek a lie; <span
id="fr_4950"></span>[4951](#fn_4950) but when God blesseth, He doth what
He saith. “Let them be confounded that rise up against me.” For their
imagining that they have some power against Me, is the reason that they
rise up against Me; but when I shall have been exalted above the
heavens, and My glory shall have commenced spreading over the whole
earth, they shall be confounded. “But Thy servant shall rejoice:” either
on the right hand of the Father, or in His members when they rejoice,
both in hope <span id="page_541">p. 541</span> <span
id="ii.CIX-Page_541"></span>among temptations, and after temptations for
evermore.

<span id="ii.CIX-p66"></span>28. “Let my slanderers be clothed with
shame” ([Psa. 109.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CIX-p66.1"></span>): that is, let it shame them to have slandered
me. But this may also be understood as a blessing, in that they are
amended. “And let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as
with a double cloak;” for *diplois* is a double cloak; that is, let them
be confounded both within and without: both before God and before men.

<span id="ii.CIX-p67"></span>29. “As for me, I will confess
greatly <span id="fr_4951"></span>[4952](#fn_4951) unto the Lord with my
mouth” ([Psa. 109.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029)<span
id="ii.CIX-p68.4"></span>).…Is He said to “praise among the multitude”
because He is with His Church here even unto the end of the world; <span
id="fr_4952"></span>[4953](#fn_4952) so that we may understand by “among
the multitude,” that He is honoured by this very multitude? For he is
said to be in the midst, unto whom the chief honour is paid. But if the
heart is, as it were, that which is mid-most of a man, no better
construction can be put on this passage than this, I will praise Him in
the hearts of many. For Christ dwelleth through faith in our
hearts; <span id="fr_4953"></span>[4954](#fn_4953) and therefore he
saith, “with my mouth,” that is, with the mouth of my body, which is the
Church.

<span id="ii.CIX-p71"></span>30. “For He stood at the right hand of the
poor” ([Psa. 109.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030)<span
id="ii.CIX-p71.1"></span>). It was said of Judas, “Let Satan stand at
his right hand;” since he chose to increase his riches by selling
Christ; but here the Lord stood at the right hand of the poor, that the
Lord Himself might be the poor man’s riches. “He stood at the right hand
of the poor,” not to multiply the years of a life that one day must end,
nor to increase his stores, nor to render him strong in the strength of
the body, or secure for a time; “but,” he saith, “to save my soul from
the persecutors.” Now the soul is rendered safe from the persecutors, if
we do not consent to them unto evil; but there is no such consent to
them when the Lord standeth at the right hand of the poor, that he may
not give way through his very poverty, that is, weakness. This aid was
given to the Body of Christ in the case of all the holy Martyrs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4914"></span>[536:4915](1080120.htm#fr_4914) <span
id="ii.CIX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p2"></span> Lat. CVIII.

<span id="fn_4915"></span>[536:4916](1080120.htm#fr_4915) <span
id="ii.CIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p4"></span> \[That he was *facile princeps* in the
original college, nobody denies; that he had any supremacy over his
brethren, all antiquity, as well as Holy Scripture, disproves. The keys
were equally given to the others. See A.N.F. vol. viii. p. 601 *et
seq*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4916"></span>[536:4917](1080120.htm#fr_4916) <span
id="ii.CIX-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p5"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span id="ii.CIX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4917"></span>[537:4918](1080120.htm#fr_4917) <span
id="ii.CIX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p7"></span> [Rom. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)<span id="ii.CIX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4918"></span>[537:4919](1080120.htm#fr_4918) <span
id="ii.CIX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p9"></span> [Ps. cii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.CIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4919"></span>[537:4920](1080120.htm#fr_4919) <span
id="ii.CIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p10"></span> [John xix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="ii.CIX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4920"></span>[537:4921](1080120.htm#fr_4920) <span
id="ii.CIX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p11"></span> Sallust. *Bell. Cat.* i.

<span id="fn_4921"></span>[537:4922](1080120.htm#fr_4921) <span
id="ii.CIX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p13"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.CIX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4922"></span>[537:4923](1080120.htm#fr_4922) <span
id="ii.CIX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p14"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.CIX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4923"></span>[537:4924](1080120.htm#fr_4923) <span
id="ii.CIX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p17"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037)<span id="ii.CIX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4924"></span>[538:4925](1080120.htm#fr_4924) <span
id="ii.CIX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p20"></span> [Acts i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020)<span id="ii.CIX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4925"></span>[538:4926](1080120.htm#fr_4925) <span
id="ii.CIX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p21"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011)<span id="ii.CIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4926"></span>[538:4927](1080120.htm#fr_4926) <span
id="ii.CIX-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p28"></span> [Ezek.
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)<span id="ii.CIX-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4927"></span>[538:4928](1080120.htm#fr_4927) <span
id="ii.CIX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p29"></span> [Exod. xx.
5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)<span id="ii.CIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4928"></span>[538:4929](1080120.htm#fr_4928) <span
id="ii.CIX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p31"></span> *Contra*.

<span id="fn_4929"></span>[538:4930](1080120.htm#fr_4929) <span
id="ii.CIX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p32"></span> [Ps. xc.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008)<span id="ii.CIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4930"></span>[538:4931](1080120.htm#fr_4930) <span
id="ii.CIX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p33"></span> \[Here he inquires whether Judas, in
Hades, could know the condition of his family; and he replies, “It is
indeed a great question, and not one to be discussed at present, because
it belongeth to a labour of greater extent, whether, or to what degree,
or in what manner, the spirits of the dead are aware of what is passing
around us.” He compares [Luke 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CIX-p33.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4931"></span>[539:4932](1080120.htm#fr_4931) <span
id="ii.CIX-p34.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p35"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="ii.CIX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4932"></span>[539:4933](1080120.htm#fr_4932) <span
id="ii.CIX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p36"></span> [John iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007)<span id="ii.CIX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4933"></span>[539:4934](1080120.htm#fr_4933) <span
id="ii.CIX-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p37"></span> [John xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CIX-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4934"></span>[539:4935](1080120.htm#fr_4934) <span
id="ii.CIX-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p39"></span> Matt. xxxii. 25<span
id="ii.CIX-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4935"></span>[539:4936](1080120.htm#fr_4935) <span
id="ii.CIX-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p40"></span> [John ix.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#027)<span id="ii.CIX-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4936"></span>[539:4937](1080120.htm#fr_4936) <span
id="ii.CIX-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p41"></span> \[It seems to me there is here a reference
to the water of jealousy, [Num. 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#023), [Acts
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#018)<span id="ii.CIX-p41.1"></span>.
As to oil, generally a blessing, compare [Ps.
55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021), [Prov.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#004)<span id="ii.CIX-p41.2"></span>.
“For envy they delivered Him.” [Prov. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030)<span
id="ii.CIX-p41.3"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4937"></span>[539:4938](1080120.htm#fr_4937) <span
id="ii.CIX-p41.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p42"></span> [Matt. x.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="ii.CIX-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4938"></span>[539:4939](1080120.htm#fr_4938) <span
id="ii.CIX-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p45"></span> [Matt. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020)<span id="ii.CIX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4939"></span>[539:4940](1080120.htm#fr_4939) <span
id="ii.CIX-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p46"></span> [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span id="ii.CIX-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4940"></span>[539:4941](1080120.htm#fr_4940) <span
id="ii.CIX-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p48"></span> [Rom. ix.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#023)<span id="ii.CIX-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4941"></span>[539:4942](1080120.htm#fr_4941) <span
id="ii.CIX-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p49"></span> *Fac Mecum*.

<span id="fn_4942"></span>[540:4943](1080120.htm#fr_4942) <span
id="ii.CIX-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p51"></span> [2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span id="ii.CIX-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4943"></span>[540:4944](1080120.htm#fr_4943) <span
id="ii.CIX-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p52"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span id="ii.CIX-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4944"></span>[540:4945](1080120.htm#fr_4944) <span
id="ii.CIX-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p54"></span> [Ps. cv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#034)<span id="ii.CIX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4945"></span>[540:4946](1080120.htm#fr_4945) <span
id="ii.CIX-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p56"></span> [Matt. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002)<span id="ii.CIX-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4946"></span>[540:4947](1080120.htm#fr_4946) <span
id="ii.CIX-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p57"></span> \[Strange that our author’s power of
association fails to connect this with [John xii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007)<span id="ii.CIX-p57.1"></span>, and
so with another incident in the history of Judas, quite to his purpose.
See this series, vol. vi. p. 174.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4947"></span>[540:4948](1080120.htm#fr_4947) <span
id="ii.CIX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p59"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span id="ii.CIX-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4948"></span>[540:4949](1080120.htm#fr_4948) <span
id="ii.CIX-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p61"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.CIX-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4949"></span>[540:4950](1080120.htm#fr_4949) <span
id="ii.CIX-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p63"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.CIX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4950"></span>[540:4951](1080120.htm#fr_4950) <span
id="ii.CIX-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p65"></span> [Ps. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002)<span id="ii.CIX-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4951"></span>[541:4952](1080120.htm#fr_4951) <span
id="ii.CIX-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p68"></span> \[He says: “The word *nimis* is used in
Latin to express excess, the contrary to *parum*, which meaneth
deficiency. The Greek word for *nimis* is ˆ<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CIX-p68.1"></span>γαν</span>: but this verse hath <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CIX-p68.2"></span>σφόδρα</span>, not ˆ<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CIX-p68.3"></span>γαν</span>; which our
translators have sometimes rendered by *nimis*, sometimes by *valdè*
(‘very much’). Now if *nimis* be taken as equivalent to *valdè*, it may
be understood of praise: for this confession signifieth praise. For the
next words are, ‘and I will praise Him among the multitude.’”—C.\]

<span id="fn_4952"></span>[541:4953](1080120.htm#fr_4952) <span
id="ii.CIX-p68.5"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p69"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.CIX-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4953"></span>[541:4954](1080120.htm#fr_4953) <span
id="ii.CIX-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CIX-p70"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="ii.CIX-p70.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CX](1080121)
