[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080064)  [Next](1080066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LVI"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LVI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LVI-p1.2"></span>Psalm LVI. <span
id="fr_2073"></span>[2074](#fn_2073) </span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p3"></span>1. Just as when we are going to enter into
any house, we look on the title to see whose it is and to whom it
belongeth, lest perchance inopportunely we burst into a place whereunto
we ought not; and again, in order that we may not through timidity
withdraw from that which we ought to enter: as if in a word we were to
read, These estates belong to such an one or to such an one: so on the
lintel of this Psalm we have inscribed, “At the end, for the people that
from holy men were put afar off, to David himself, at the inscription of
the Title, when the Allophyli held him in Gath.” <span
id="fr_2074"></span>[2075](#fn_2074) Let us therefore take knowledge of
the people that from holy men were put afar off at the inscription of
the Title. For this doth belong to that David whom now ye know how to
understand spiritually. For there is here commended to our notice no
other than He of whom hath been said, “The end of the Law is Christ for
righteousness to every man believing.” <span
id="fr_2075"></span>[2076](#fn_2075) Therefore when thou hearest “at the
end,” unto Christ give heed, lest tarrying in the way thou arrive not at
the end.…

<span id="ii.LVI-p6"></span>2. Who are then the people that from holy
men were put afar off at the inscription of the Title? Let the Title
itself declare to us that people. For there was written a certain title
at the Passion of the Lord, when the Lord was crucified: there was in
that place a Title inscribed in Hebrew, in Greek, and in Latin, “The
King of the Jews;” <span id="fr_2076"></span>[2077](#fn_2076) in three
tongues as <span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="ii.LVI-Page_219"></span>though by three witnesses the Title was
confirmed: because “in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall stand
every word.” <span id="fr_2077"></span>[2078](#fn_2077) …

<span id="ii.LVI-p9"></span>3. What therefore meaneth that which to the
title itself still belongeth, namely, that “the Allophyli held him in
Geth”? Geth was a certain city of the *Allophyli,* <span
id="fr_2078"></span>[2079](#fn_2078) that is, of *strangers*, to wit, of
people afar from holy men. All they that refuse Christ for King become
strangers. Wherefore strangers are they made? Because even that vine,
though by Him planted, when it had become sour what heard it? “Wherefore
hast thou been turned into sourness, O alien vine?” <span
id="fr_2079"></span>[2080](#fn_2079) It hath not been said, My vine:
because if Mine, sweet; if sour, not Mine; if not Mine, surely alien.
“There held him,” then, “Allophyli in Geth.” We find indeed, brethren,
David himself, son of Jesse, king of Israel, to have been in a strange
land among the Allophyli, when he was sought by Saul, and was in that
city and with the king of that city, <span
id="fr_2080"></span>[2081](#fn_2080) but that there he was detained we
read not. Therefore our David, the Lord Jesus Christ out of the seed of
that David, not alone they held, but there hold Him still Allophyli in
Geth. Of Geth we have said that it is a city. But the interpretation of
this name, if asked for, signifieth “press.”…How therefore here is He
held in Geth? Held in a winepress is His Body, that is, His Church. What
is, in a winepress? In pressings. But in a winepress fruitful is the
pressing. A grape on the vine sustaineth no pressing, whole it seemeth,
but nothing thence floweth: it is thrown into a winepress, is trodden,
is pressed; harm seemeth to be done to the grape, but this harm is not
barren; nay, if no harm had been applied, barren it would have remained.

<span id="ii.LVI-p13"></span>4. Let whatsoever holy men therefore that
are suffering pressing from those that have been put afar off from the
saints, give heed to this Psalm, let them perceive here themselves, let
them speak what here is spoken, that suffer what here is spoken
of.…Private enmities therefore let no one think of, when about to hear
the words of this Psalm: “Know ye that for us the wrestling is not
against flesh and blood, but against princes and powers, and spiritual
things of wickedness,” <span id="fr_2081"></span>[2082](#fn_2081) that
is, against the devil and his angels; because even when we suffer men
that annoy us, he is instigating, he is inflaming, as it were his
vessels he is moving. Let us give heed therefore to two enemies, him
whom we see, and him whom we see not; man we see, the devil we see not;
man let us love, of the devil beware; for man pray, against the devil
pray, and let us say to God, “Have pity on me, O Lord, for man hath
trodden me down” ([Psa. 56.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)<span
id="ii.LVI-p14.2"></span>). Fear not because man hath trodden thee down:
have thou wine, a grape thou hast become in order that thou shouldest be
trodden. “All day long warring he hath troubled me,” every one that hath
been put afar off from the saints. But why should not here be understood
even the devil himself? Is it because mention is made of “man”? <span
id="fr_2082"></span>[2083](#fn_2082) doth therefore the Gospel err,
because it hath said, “A man that is an enemy hath done this”? <span
id="fr_2083"></span>[2084](#fn_2083) But by a kind of figure may he also
be called a man, <span id="fr_2084"></span>[2085](#fn_2084) and yet not
be a man. Whether therefore it was him whom he that said these words was
beholding, or whether it was the people and each one that was put afar
off from holy men, through which kind the devil troubleth the people of
God, who cleave to holy men, who cleave to the Holy One, who cleave to
the King, at the title of which King being indignant they were as though
beaten back, and put afar off: let him say, “Have pity on me, O Lord,
for man hath trodden me down:” and let him faint not in this treading
down, knowing Him on whom he is calling, and by whose example he hath
been made strong. The first cluster in the winefat pressed is Christ.
When that cluster by passion was pressed out, <span
id="fr_2085"></span>[2086](#fn_2085) there flowed that whence “the cup
inebriating is how passing beautiful!” <span
id="fr_2086"></span>[2087](#fn_2086) Let His Body likewise say, looking
upon its Head, “Have pity on me, O Lord, for man hath trodden me down:
all day long warring he hath troubled me.” “All day long,” at all times.
Let no one say to himself, There have been troubles in our fathers’
time, in our time there are not. If thou supposest thyself not to have
troubles, not yet hast thou begun to be a Christian. And where is the
voice of the Apostle, “But even all that will live godly in Christ,
persecutions shall suffer.” <span id="fr_2087"></span>[2088](#fn_2087)
If therefore thou sufferest not any persecution for Christ, take heed
lest not yet thou hast begun godly to live in Christ. But when thou hast
begun godly to live in Christ, thou hast entered into the winepress;
make ready thyself for pressings: but be not thou dry, lest from the
pressing nothing go forth.

<span id="ii.LVI-p21"></span>5. “Mine enemies have trodden me down all
day long” ([Psa. 56.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002)<span
id="ii.LVI-p21.1"></span>). They that have been put afar off from holy
men, these are mine enemies. All day long: already it hath been said,
“From the height <span id="fr_2088"></span>[2089](#fn_2088) of the day.”
What meaneth, “from the height of the day”? Perchance it is a high thing
to understand. And no wonder, because <span id="page_220">p. 220</span>
<span id="ii.LVI-Page_220"></span>the height of the day it is. For
perchance they for this reason have been put afar off from holy men,
because they were not able to penetrate the height of the day, whereof
the Apostles are twelve shining hours. Therefore they that crucified
Him, as if man, in the day have erred. But why have they suffered
darkness, so that they should be put afar off from holy men? Because on
high the day was shining, Him in the height hidden they knew not. “For
if they had known, never the Lord of Glory would they have
crucified.” <span id="fr_2089"></span>[2090](#fn_2089) …

<span id="ii.LVI-p24"></span>6. “For many men that war against me, shall
fear” ([Psa. 56.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LVI-p24.1"></span>). Shall fear when? When the day shall have
passed away, wherein they are high. For for a time high they are, when
the time of their height is finished they will fear. “But I in Thee will
hope, O Lord.” He saith not, “But I will not fear:” but, “Many men, that
war against me, shall fear.” When there shall have come that day of
Judgment, then “shall mourn for themselves all the tribes of the
earth.” <span id="fr_2090"></span>[2091](#fn_2090) When there shall have
appeared the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, then secure shall be all
holy men. For that thing shall come which they hoped for, which they
longed for, the coming whereof they prayed for: but to those men no
place for repentance shall remain, because in that time wherein fruitful
might have been repentance, their heart they hardened against a warning
Lord. Shall they too raise up a wall against a judging God? The
godliness of this man do thou indeed acknowledge, and if in that Body
thou art, imitate him. When he had said, “Many men, that war against me,
shall fear:” he did not continue, “But I will not fear;” lest to his own
powers ascribing his not fearing, he too should be amid high temporal
things, and through pride temporal he should not deserve to come to rest
everlasting: rather he hath made thee to perceive whence he shall not
fear. “But I,” he saith, “in thee will hope, O Lord:” he hath not spoken
of his confidence: but of the cause of his confidence. For if I shall
not fear, I may also by hardness of heart not fear, for many men by too
much pride fear nothing.…

<span id="ii.LVI-p26"></span>7. “In God I will praise my discourses, in
God I have <span id="fr_2091"></span>[2092](#fn_2091) hoped: I will not
fear what flesh doeth to me” ([Psa.
56.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVI-p27.2"></span>).
Wherefore? Because in God I will praise my discourses. If in thyself
thou praisest thy discourses: I say not that thou art not to fear; it is
impossible that thou have not to fear. For thy discourses either false
thou wilt have, and therefore thine own, because false: or if thy
discourses shall be true, and thou shalt deem thyself not to have them
from God but of thyself to speak; true they will be, but thou wilt be
false: but if thou shalt have known that thou canst say nothing true in
the wisdom of God, in the faith of the Truth, save that which from Him
thou hast received, of whom is said, “For what hast thou which thou hast
not received?” <span id="fr_2092"></span>[2093](#fn_2092) Then in God
thou art praising thy discourses, in order that in God thou mayest be
praised by the discourses of God.…“In God I have hoped, I will not fear
what flesh doeth to me.” Wast thou not the same that a little before
wast saying, “Have pity on me, O Lord, for man hath trodden me down; all
day long warring he hath troubled me”? <span
id="fr_2093"></span>[2094](#fn_2093) How therefore here, “I will not
fear what flesh doeth to me”? What shall he do to thee? Thou thyself a
little before hast said, “Hath trodden me down, hath troubled me.”
Nothing shall he do, when these things he shall do? He hath had regard
to the wine which floweth from treading, and hath made answer, Evidently
he hath trodden down, evidently hath troubled; but what to me shall he
do? A grape I was, wine I shall be: “In God I have hoped, I will not
fear what flesh doeth to me.”

<span id="ii.LVI-p30"></span>8. “All day long my words they abhorred”
([Psa. 56.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LVI-p30.1"></span>). Thus they are, ye know. Speak truth, preach
truth, proclaim Christ to the heathen, proclaim the Church to heretics,
proclaim to all men salvation: they contradict, they abhor my words. But
when my words they abhor, whom think ye they abhor, save Him in whom I
shall praise my discourses? “All day long my words they abhorred.” Let
this at least suffice, let them abhor words, no farther let them
proceed, censure, reject! Be it far from them! Why should I say this?
When words they reject, when words they hate, those words which from the
fount of truth flow forth, what would they do to him through whom the
very words are spoken? what but that which followeth, “Against me all
the counsels of them are for evil?” If the bread itself they hate, how
spare they the basket wherein it is ministered? “Against me all the
counsels of them are for evil.” If so even against the Lord Himself, let
not the Body disdain that which hath gone before in the Head, to the end
that the Body may cleave to the Head. Despised hath been thy Lord, and
wilt thou have thyself be honoured by those men that have been put afar
off from holy men? Do not for thyself wish to claim that which in Him
hath not gone before. “The disciple is not greater than his Master; the
servant is not greater than his Lord. If the Master of the family they
have called Beelzebub, how much more them of His household?” <span
id="fr_2094"></span>[2095](#fn_2094) Against me all the counsels of them
are for evil.”

<span id="ii.LVI-p32"></span>9. “They shall sojourn, and shall hide”
([Psa. 56.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006)<span
id="ii.LVI-p32.1"></span>). To sojourn is to be in a strange land. <span
id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span id="ii.LVI-Page_221"></span>Sojourners
is a term used of those then that live in a country not their own. Every
man in this life is a foreigner: in which life ye see that with flesh we
are covered round, through which flesh the heart cannot be seen.
Therefore the Apostle saith, “Do not before the time judge anything,
until the Lord come, and He shall enlighten the hidden things of
darkness, and shall manifest the thoughts of the heart; and then praise
shall be to each one from God.” <span
id="fr_2095"></span>[2096](#fn_2095) Before that this be done, in this
sojourning of fleshly life every one carrieth his own heart, and every
heart to every other heart is shut. Furthermore, those men of whom the
counsels are against this man for evil, “shall sojourn, and shall hide:”
because in this foreign abode they are, and carry flesh, they hide guile
in heart; whatsoever of evil they think, they hide. Wherefore? Because
as yet this life is a foreign one. Let them hide; that shall appear
which they hide, and they too will not be hidden. There is also in this
hidden thing another interpretation, which perchance will be more
approved of. For out of those men that have been put afar off from holy
men, there creep in certain false brethren, and they cause worse
tribulations to the Body of Christ; because they are not altogether
avoided as if entirely aliens.…Not even those men nevertheless let us
fear, brethren: “I will not fear what flesh doeth to me.” Even if they
sojourn, even if they go in, even if they feign, even if they hide,
flesh they are: do thou in the Lord hope, nothing to thee shall flesh
do. But he bringeth in tribulation, bringeth in treading down. There is
added wine, because the grape is pressed: thy tribulation will not be
unfruitful: another seeth thee, imitateth thee: because thou also in
order that thou mightest learn to bear such a man, to thy Head hast
looked up, that first cluster, unto whom there hath come in a man that
he might see, hath sojourned, and hath hidden, to wit, the traitor
Judas. All men, therefore, that with false heart go in, sojourning and
hiding, do not thou fear: the father of these same men, Judas, with thy
Lord hath been: and He indeed knew him; although Judas the traitor was
sojourning and hiding, nevertheless, the heart of him was open to the
Lord of all: <span id="fr_2096"></span>[2097](#fn_2096) knowingly He
chose one man, whereby He might give comfort to thee that wouldest not
know whom thou shouldest avoid. For He might have not chosen Judas,
because He knew Judas: for He saith to His disciples, “Have not I chosen
you twelve, and one out of you is a devil?” <span
id="fr_2097"></span>[2098](#fn_2097) Therefore even a devil was chosen.
Or if chosen he was not, how is it that He hath chosen twelve, and not
rather eleven? Chosen even he is, but for another purpose. Chosen were
eleven for the work of probation, chosen one for the work of
temptation. <span id="fr_2098"></span>[2099](#fn_2098) Whence could He
give an example to thee, that wouldest not know what men thou shouldest
avoid as evil, of what men thou shouldest beware as false and
artificial, sojourning and hiding, except He say to thee, Behold, with
Myself I have had one of those very men! There hath gone before an
example, I have borne, to suffer I have willed that which I knew, in
order that to thee knowing not I might give consolation. That which to
Me he hath done, the same he will do to thee also: in order that he may
be able to do much, in order that he may make much havoc, he will
accuse, false charges he will allege.…

<span id="ii.LVI-p37"></span>10. “These same men shall mark my heel.”
For they shall sojourn and hide in such sort, that they may mark where a
man slippeth. Intent they are upon the heel, to see when a slip may
chance to be made; in order that they may detain the foot for a fall, or
trip up the foot for a stumble; certes that they may find that which
they may accuse. And what man so walketh, that nowhere he slippeth? For
example, how speedily is a slip made even in tongue? For it is written,
“Whosoever in tongue stumbleth not, the same is a perfect man.” <span
id="fr_2099"></span>[2100](#fn_2099) What man I pray would dare himself
to call or deem perfect? Therefore it must needs be that every one slip
in tongue. But let them that shall sojourn and shall hide, carp at all
words, seeking somewhere to make snares and knotty false accusations,
wherein they are themselves entangled before those whom they strive to
entangle: in order that they may themselves be taken and perish before
that they catch other men in order to destroy them.…Whatever good thing
I have said, whatever true thing I have said, of God I have said it, and
from God have said it: whatever other thing perchance I have said, which
to have said I ought not, as a man I have said, but under God I have
said. He that strengtheneth one walking, doth menace one straying,
forgive one acknowledging, recalleth the tongue, recalleth him that
slipped.…Attend thou unto the discourses of him whom thou blamest,
whether perchance he may teach thee something to thy health. And what,
he saith, shall he be able to teach to my health, that hath so slipped
in word? This very thing perchance he is teaching thee to thy health,
that thou be not a carper at words, but a gatherer of precepts. “As my
soul hath undergone.” I speak of that which I have undergone. He was
speaking as one experienced: “As my soul hath undergone. They shall
sojourn and hide.” Let my soul undergo all men, men without barking, men
within hiding, let it undergo. From without <span id="page_222">p.
222</span> <span id="ii.LVI-Page_222"></span>coming, like a river cometh
temptation: on the Rock let it find thee, let it strike against, not
throw thee down; the house hath been founded upon a Rock. <span
id="fr_2100"></span>[2101](#fn_2100) Within he is, he shall sojourn and
hide: suppose chaff is near thee, let there come in the treading of
oxen, let there come in the roller of temptations; thou art cleansed,
the other is crushed.

<span id="ii.LVI-p40"></span>11. “For nothing Thou shalt save them”
([Psa. 56.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LVI-p40.1"></span>). He hath taught us even for these very men to
pray. However “they shall sojourn and hide,” however deceitful they be,
however dissemblers and liers in wait they be; do thou pray for them,
and do not say, Shall God amend even such a man, so evil, so perverse?
Do not despair: give heed to Him whom thou askest, not him for whom thou
askest. The greatness of the disease seest thou, the might of the
Physician seest thou not? “They shall sojourn and hide: as my soul hath
undergone.” Undergo, pray: and there is done what? “For nothing Thou
shalt save them.” Thou shalt make them safe so as that nothing to Thee
it may be, that is, so that no labour to Thee it may be. With men they
are despaired of, but Thou with a word dost heal; Thou wilt not toil in
healing, though we are astounded in looking on. There is another sense
in this verse, “For nothing Thou shalt save them:” with not any merits
of their going before Thou shalt save them.…They shall not bring to Thee
he-goats, rams, bulls, not gifts and spices shall they bring Thee in Thy
temple, not anything of the drink-offering of a good conscience do they
pour thereon; all in them is rough, all foul, all to be detested: and
though they to Thee bring nothing whereby they may be saved; “For
nothing Thou shalt save them,” that is, with the free gift of Thy
Grace.…

<span id="ii.LVI-p41"></span>12. “In anger the peoples Thou shalt bring
down.” Thou art angry and dost bring down, dost rage and save, dost
terrify and call. Thou fillest with tribulations all things, in order
that being set in tribulations men may fly to Thee, lest by pleasures
and a wrong security they be seduced. From Thee anger is seen, but that
of a father. A father is angry with a son, the despiser of his
injunctions: being angry with him he boxeth him, striketh, pulleth the
ear, draggeth with hand, leadeth to school. How many men have entered,
how many men have filled the House of the Lord, in the anger of Him
brought down, that is, by tribulations terrified and with faith filled?
For to this end tribulation stirreth up; in order to empty the vessel
which is full of wickedness, so as that it may be filled with grace.

<span id="ii.LVI-p42"></span>13. “O God, my life I have told out to
Thee” ([Psa. 56.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LVI-p42.1"></span>). For that I live hath been Thy doing, and for
this reason I tell out my life to Thee. But did not God know that which
He had given? What is that which thou tellest out to Him? Wilt thou
teach God? Far be it. Therefore why saith he, “I have told out to Thee”?
Is it perchance because it profiteth Thee that I have told out my life?
And what doth it profit God? To the advantage of God it doth profit. I
have told out to God my life, because that life hath been God’s doing.
In like manner as his life Paul the Apostle did tell out, saying, “I
that before was a blasphemer and a persecutor and injurious,” he shall
tell out his life. “But mercy I have obtained.” <span
id="fr_2101"></span>[2102](#fn_2101) He hath told out his life, not for
himself, but for Him: because he hath told it out in such sort, that in
Him men believe, not for his own advantages, but for the advantages of
Him.…“O God, my life I have told out to Thee. Thou hast put my tears in
Thy sight.” Thou hast hearkened to me imploring Thee. “As also in Thy
promise.” Because as Thou hadst promised this thing, so Thou hast done.
Thou hast said Thou wouldest hearken to one weeping. I have believed, I
have wept, I have been hearkened unto; I have found Thee merciful in
promising, true in repaying.

<span id="ii.LVI-p44"></span>14. “Turned be mine enemies backward”
([Psa. 56.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009)<span
id="ii.LVI-p44.1"></span>). This thing to these very men is profitable,
no ill to these men he is wishing. For to go before they are willing,
therefore to be amended they are not willing. Thou warnest thine enemy
to live well, that he amend himself: he scorneth, he rejecteth thy word:
“Behold him that adviseth me; behold him from whom I am to hear the
commandments whereby I shall live!” To go before thee he willeth, and in
going before is not amended. He mindeth not that thy words are not
thine, he mindeth not that thy life to God thou tellest out, not to
thyself. In going before therefore he is not amended: it is a good thing
for him that he be turned backward, and follow him whom to go before he
willed. The Lord to His disciples was speaking of His Passion that was
to be. Peter shuddered, and saith, “Far be it, O Lord;” <span
id="fr_2102"></span>[2103](#fn_2102) he that a little before had said,
“Thou art the Christ, Son of the living God,” having confessed God,
feared for Him to die, as if but a man. But the Lord who so came that He
might suffer (for we could not otherwise be saved unless with His blood
we were redeemed), a little before had praised the confession of
Peter.…But immediately when the Lord beginneth to speak of His Passion,
he feared lest He should perish by death, whereas we ourselves should
perish unless He died; and he saith, “Far be it, O Lord, <span
id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span id="ii.LVI-Page_223"></span>this thing
shall not be done.” And the Lord, to him to whom a little before He had
said, “Blessed thou art, and upon this Rock I will build my Church,”
saith, “Go back behind, Satan, an offence thou art to Me.” Why therefore
“Satan” is he, that a little before was “blessed,” and a “Rock”? “For
thou savourest not the things which are of God,” He saith, “but those
things which are of man.”  <span id="fr_2103"></span>[2104](#fn_2103) A
little before *he savoured* the things which are of God: because “not
flesh and blood hath revealed to thee, but My Father which is in the
Heavens.” When in God he was praising his discourse, not Satan but
Peter, from *petra*: but when of himself and out of human infirmity,
carnal love of man, which would be for an impediment to his own
salvation, and that of the rest, Satan he is called. Why? Because to go
before the Lord he willed, and earthly counsel to give to the heavenly
Leader. “Far be it, O Lord, this thing shall not be done.” Thou sayest,
“Far be it,” and thou sayest, “O Lord:” surely if Lord He is, in power
He doeth: if Master He is, He knoweth what He doeth, He knoweth what He
teacheth. But thou willest to lead thy Leader, teach thy Master, command
thy Lord, choose for God: much thou goest before, go back behind. Did
not this too profit these enemies? “Turned be Mine enemies backward;”
but let them not remain backward. For this reason let them be turned
backward, lest they go before; but so that they follow, not so that they
remain.

<span id="ii.LVI-p47"></span>15. “In whatsoever day I shall have called
upon Thee, behold I have known that my God art Thou” ([Psa.
56.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVI-p47.1"></span>).
A great knowledge. He saith not, “I have known that God Thou art:” but,
“that *my* God art Thou.” For thine He is, when thee He succoureth:
thine He is, when thou to Him art not an alien. Whence is said, “Blessed
the people of whom is the Lord the God of the same.”  <span
id="fr_2104"></span>[2105](#fn_2104) Wherefore “of whom is”? For of whom
is He not? Of all things indeed God He is: but of those men the God
peculiarly He is said to be, that love Him, that hold Him, that possess
Him, that worship Him, as though belonging to His own House: the great
family of Him are they, redeemed by the great blood of the Only Son. How
great a thing hath God given to us, that His own we should be, and He
should be ours! But in truth foreigners afar have been put from holy
men, sons alien they are. See what of them is said in another Psalm: “O
Lord, deliver me,” he saith, “from the hand of alien sons, of whom the
mouth hath spoken vanity, and the right hand of them is a right hand of
iniquity.” <span id="fr_2105"></span>[2106](#fn_2105) …

<span id="ii.LVI-p50"></span>16. Let us therefore love God, brethren,
purely and chastely. There is not a chaste heart, if God for reward it
worshippeth. How so? Reward of the worship of God shall not we have? We
shall have evidently, but it is God Himself whom we worship. Himself for
us a reward shall be, because “we shall see Him as He is.” <span
id="fr_2106"></span>[2107](#fn_2106) Observe that a reward <span
id="fr_2107"></span>[2108](#fn_2107) thou shalt obtain.…I will tell you,
brethren: in these human alliances consider a chaste heart, of what sort
it is towards God: certainly human alliances are of such sort, that a
man doth not love his wife, that loveth her because of her portion: a
woman her husband doth not chastely love, that for these reasons loveth
him, because something he hath given, or because much he hath given.
Both a rich man is a husband, and one that hath become a poor man is a
husband. How many men proscribed, by chaste wives have been the more
beloved! Proved have been many chaste marriages by the misfortunes of
husbands: that the wives might not be supposed to love any other object
more than their husband, not only have they not forsaken, but the more
have they obeyed. If therefore a husband of flesh freely is loved, if
chastely he is loved; and a wife of flesh freely is loved, if chastely
she is loved; in what manner must God be loved, the true and
truth-speaking Husband of the soul, making fruitful unto the offspring
of everlasting life, and not suffering us to be barren? Him, therefore,
so let us love, as that any other thing besides Himself be not loved:
and there takes place in us that which we have spoken of, that which we
have sung, because even here the voice is ours: “In whatsoever day I
shall have called upon Thee, behold, I have known that my God art Thou.”
This is to call upon God, freely to call upon Him. Furthermore, of
certain men hath been said what? “Upon the Lord they have not
called.” <span id="fr_2108"></span>[2109](#fn_2108) The Lord they seemed
as it were to call unto themselves and they besought Him about
inheritances, about increasing money, about lengthening this life, about
the rest of temporal things: and concerning them the Scripture saith
what? “Upon the Lord they have not called.” Therefore there followeth
what? “There they have feared with fear, where there was no fear.” What
is, “where there was no fear”? Lest money should be stolen from them,
lest anything in their house should be made less; lastly, lest they
should have less of years in this life, than they hoped for themselves:
but there have they trembled with fear, where there was no fear.…“In God
I will praise the word, in the Lord I will praise the discourse” ([Psa.
56.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#010)<span id="ii.LVI-p53.2"></span>):
“in God I have hoped, I will not fear what man doeth unto me” <span
id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="ii.LVI-Page_224"></span>([Psa.
56.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011)<span id="ii.LVI-p53.3"></span>).
Now this is the very sense which above <span
id="fr_2109"></span>[2110](#fn_2109) hath been repeated.

<span id="ii.LVI-p55"></span>17. “In me, O God, are Thy vows, which I
will render of praise to Thee” ([Psa.
56.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVI-p55.1"></span>).
“Vow ye, and render to the Lord your God.” <span
id="fr_2110"></span>[2111](#fn_2110) What vow, what render? Perchance
those animals which were offered at the altars aforetime? No such thing
offer thou: in thyself is what thou mayest vow and render. From the
heart’s coffer bring forth the incense of praise; from the store of a
good conscience bring forth the sacrifice of faith. Whatsoever thing
thou bringest forth, kindle with love. In thyself be the vows, which
thou mayest render of praise to God. Of what praise? For what hath He
granted thee? “For Thou hast rescued my soul from death” ([Psa.
56.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#013)<span id="ii.LVI-p56.2"></span>).
This is that very life which he telleth out to Him: “O God, my life I
have told out to Thee.” <span id="fr_2111"></span>[2112](#fn_2111) For I
was what? Dead. Through myself I was dead: through Thee I am what?
Alive. Therefore “in me, O God, are Thy vows, which I will render of
praise to Thee.” Behold I love my God: no one doth tear Him from me:
that which to Him I may give, no one doth tear from me, because in the
heart it is shut up. With reason is said with that former confidence,
“What should man do unto me?” <span id="fr_2112"></span>[2113](#fn_2112)
Let man rage, let him be permitted to rage, be permitted to accomplish
that which he attempteth: what is he to take away? Gold, silver, cattle,
men servants, maid servants, estates, houses, let him take away all
things: doth he by any means take away the vows, which are in me, which
I may render of praise to God? The tempter was permitted to tempt a holy
man, Job; <span id="fr_2113"></span>[2114](#fn_2113) in one moment he
took away all things: whatever of possessions he had had, he carried
off: took away inheritance, slew heirs; and this not little by little,
but in a crowd, at one blow, at one swoop, so that all things were on a
sudden announced: when all was taken away, alone there remained Job, but
in him were vows of praise, which he might render to God, in him
evidently there were: the coffer of his holy breast the thieving devil
had not rifled, full he was of that wherefrom he might sacrifice. Hear
what he had, hear what he brought forth: “The Lord hath given, the Lord
hath taken away; as hath pleased the Lord, so hath been done: be the
name of the Lord blessed.” <span id="fr_2114"></span>[2115](#fn_2114) O
riches interior, whither thief doth not draw near! God Himself had given
that whereof He was receiving; He had Himself enriched him with that
whereof to Him he was offering that which He loved. Praise from thee God
requireth, thy confession God requireth. But from thy field wilt thou
give anything? He hath Himself rained in order that thou mayest have.
From thy coffer wilt thou give anything? He hath Himself put in that
which thou art to give. What wilt thou give, which from Him thou hast
not received? “For what hast thou which thou hast not received?” <span
id="fr_2115"></span>[2116](#fn_2115) From the heart wilt thou give? He
too hath given faith, hope, and charity: this thou must bring forth:
this thou must sacrifice. But evidently all the other things the enemy
is able to take away against thy will; this to take away he is not able,
unless thou be willing. These things a man will lose even against his
will: and wishing to have gold, will lose gold; and wishing to have
house, will lose house: faith no one will lose, except him that shall
have despised her.

<span id="ii.LVI-p62"></span>18. “Because Thou hast rescued my soul from
death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from slipping: that I may be
pleasing before God in the light of the living” ([Psa.
56.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#013)<span id="ii.LVI-p62.1"></span>).
With reason he is not pleasing to alien sons, that are put afar off from
holy men, because they have not the light of the living, whence they may
see that which to God is pleasing. “Light of the living,” is light of
the immortal, light of holy men. He that is not in darkness, is pleasing
in the light of the living. A man is observed, and the things which
belong to him; no one knoweth of what sort he is: God seeth of what sort
he is. Sometimes even the devil himself he escapeth; except he tempt, he
findeth not: just as concerning that man of whom just now I have made
mention:…“Doth Job by any means worship God for nought?” <span
id="fr_2116"></span>[2117](#fn_2116) For this was true light, this the
light of the living, that *gratis* he should worship God. God saw in the
heart of His servant His gratuitous worship. For that heart was pleasing
in the sight of the Lord in the light of the living: the devil’s sight
he escaped, because in darkness he was. God admitted the tempter, not in
order that He might Himself know that which He did know, but in order
that to us to be known and imitated He might set it forth. Admitted was
the tempter; he took away everything, there remained the man bereft of
possessions, bereft of family, bereft of children, full of God. A wife
certainly was left. <span id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117) Merciful
do ye deem the devil, that he left him a wife? He knew through whom he
had deceived Adam.…With wound smitten from head even unto feet, whole
nevertheless within, he made answer to the woman tempting, out of the
light of the living, out of the light of his heart: “thou hast spoken as
though one of the unwise women,” <span
id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118) that is, as though one that hath
not the light of the living. For the light of the living is wisdom, and
the darkness of unwise men is folly. Thou hast spoken as though one of
the unwise women: my flesh thou seest, the light of my heart thou seest
not. For she then might more have loved her husband, if the inte<span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span id="ii.LVI-Page_225"></span>rior
beauty she had known, and had beheld the place where he was beautiful
before the eyes of God: because in Him were vows which he might render
of praise to God. How entirely the enemy had forborne to invade that
patrimony! How whole was that which he was possessing, and that because
of which yet more to be possessed he hoped for, being to go on “from
virtues unto virtue.” <span id="fr_2119"></span>[2120](#fn_2119)
Therefore, brethren, to this end let all these things serve us, that God
*gratis* we love, in Him hope always, neither man nor devil fear.
Neither the one nor the other doeth anything, except when it is
permitted: permitted for no other reason can it be, except because it
doth profit us. Let us endure evil men, let us be good men: because even
we have been evil. Even as nothing <span
id="fr_2120"></span>[2121](#fn_2120) God shall save men, of whom we dare
to despair. Therefore of no one let us despair, for all men whom we
suffer let us pray, from God let us never depart. Our patrimony let Him
be, our hope let Him be, our safety let Him be. He is Himself here a
comforter, there a remunerator, everywhere Maker-alive, and of life the
Giver, not of another life, but of that whereof hath been said, “I am
the Way, and the Truth, and the Life:” <span
id="fr_2121"></span>[2122](#fn_2121) in order that both here in the
light of faith, and there in the light of sight, as it were in the light
of the living, in the sight of the Lord we may be pleasing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2073"></span>[218:2074](1080065.htm#fr_2073) <span
id="ii.LVI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p2"></span> Lat. LV. A discourse to the people of
Carthage. A Paris <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LVI-p2.1"></span>ms</span>. has the title, “*Incipit Carthagine
Sermo habitus in Basilicâ Restitutâ, Feriâ V. de Psalmo LV*.—*Ben*.

<span id="fn_2074"></span>[218:2075](1080065.htm#fr_2074) <span
id="ii.LVI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p4"></span> [1 Sam. xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010)<span id="ii.LVI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2075"></span>[218:2076](1080065.htm#fr_2075) <span
id="ii.LVI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p5"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2076"></span>[218:2077](1080065.htm#fr_2076) <span
id="ii.LVI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p7"></span> [John xix.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)<span id="ii.LVI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2077"></span>[219:2078](1080065.htm#fr_2077) <span
id="ii.LVI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p8"></span> [Matt.
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016), [Deut.
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)<span id="ii.LVI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2078"></span>[219:2079](1080065.htm#fr_2078) <span
id="ii.LVI-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p10"></span> The usual name of the Philistines in LXX.
and Vulgate.

<span id="fn_2079"></span>[219:2080](1080065.htm#fr_2079) <span
id="ii.LVI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p11"></span> [Jer. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="ii.LVI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2080"></span>[219:2081](1080065.htm#fr_2080) <span
id="ii.LVI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p12"></span> [1 Sam. xxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010)<span id="ii.LVI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2081"></span>[219:2082](1080065.htm#fr_2081) <span
id="ii.LVI-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p14"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2082"></span>[219:2083](1080065.htm#fr_2082) <span
id="ii.LVI-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p15"></span> So <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LVI-p15.1"></span>mss</span>. edd. “because he is not called
man.”

<span id="fn_2083"></span>[219:2084](1080065.htm#fr_2083) <span
id="ii.LVI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p16"></span> [Matt. xiii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#028)<span id="ii.LVI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2084"></span>[219:2085](1080065.htm#fr_2084) <span
id="ii.LVI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p17"></span> \[Angels are so called. [Dan.
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#021), [Acts
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#026)<span id="ii.LVI-p17.1"></span>.
Compare [Mark 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005), [Rev.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)<span id="ii.LVI-p17.2"></span>;
also this vol. p. 117, note 7, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2085"></span>[219:2086](1080065.htm#fr_2085) <span
id="ii.LVI-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p18"></span> [Isa. lxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2086"></span>[219:2087](1080065.htm#fr_2086) <span
id="ii.LVI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p19"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)<span id="ii.LVI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2087"></span>[219:2088](1080065.htm#fr_2087) <span
id="ii.LVI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p20"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2088"></span>[219:2089](1080065.htm#fr_2088) <span
id="ii.LVI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p22"></span> Or, “depth.”

<span id="fn_2089"></span>[220:2090](1080065.htm#fr_2089) <span
id="ii.LVI-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p23"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LVI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2090"></span>[220:2091](1080065.htm#fr_2090) <span
id="ii.LVI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p25"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span id="ii.LVI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2091"></span>[220:2092](1080065.htm#fr_2091) <span
id="ii.LVI-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p27"></span> Or, “will hope,” <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LVI-p27.1"></span> mss</span>.

<span id="fn_2092"></span>[220:2093](1080065.htm#fr_2092) <span
id="ii.LVI-p27.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p28"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2093"></span>[220:2094](1080065.htm#fr_2093) <span
id="ii.LVI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p29"></span> [Ps. lvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2094"></span>[220:2095](1080065.htm#fr_2094) <span
id="ii.LVI-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p31"></span> [Matt.
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025)<span id="ii.LVI-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2095"></span>[221:2096](1080065.htm#fr_2095) <span
id="ii.LVI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p33"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="ii.LVI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2096"></span>[221:2097](1080065.htm#fr_2096) <span
id="ii.LVI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p34"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.LVI-p34.1"></span>mss</span>. “guilty before the Lord.”

<span id="fn_2097"></span>[221:2098](1080065.htm#fr_2097) <span
id="ii.LVI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p35"></span> [John vi.
70](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#070)<span id="ii.LVI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2098"></span>[221:2099](1080065.htm#fr_2098) <span
id="ii.LVI-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p36"></span> \[See A.N.F. vol. i. pp. 40, 117, 153,
157, vi. 207.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2099"></span>[221:2100](1080065.htm#fr_2099) <span
id="ii.LVI-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p38"></span> [Jas. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002)<span id="ii.LVI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2100"></span>[222:2101](1080065.htm#fr_2100) <span
id="ii.LVI-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p39"></span> [Matt. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025)<span id="ii.LVI-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2101"></span>[222:2102](1080065.htm#fr_2101) <span
id="ii.LVI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p43"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.LVI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2102"></span>[222:2103](1080065.htm#fr_2102) <span
id="ii.LVI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p45"></span> [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="ii.LVI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2103"></span>[223:2104](1080065.htm#fr_2103) <span
id="ii.LVI-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p46"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="ii.LVI-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2104"></span>[223:2105](1080065.htm#fr_2104) <span
id="ii.LVI-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p48"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015)<span id="ii.LVI-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2105"></span>[223:2106](1080065.htm#fr_2105) <span
id="ii.LVI-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p49"></span> [Ps. cxliv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#011)<span id="ii.LVI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2106"></span>[223:2107](1080065.htm#fr_2106) <span
id="ii.LVI-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p51"></span> [1 John iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)<span id="ii.LVI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2107"></span>[223:2108](1080065.htm#fr_2107) <span
id="ii.LVI-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p52"></span> *Al*. “what reward.”

<span id="fn_2108"></span>[223:2109](1080065.htm#fr_2108) <span
id="ii.LVI-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p53"></span> [Ps. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2109"></span>[224:2110](1080065.htm#fr_2109) <span
id="ii.LVI-p53.4"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p54"></span> [Ps. lvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVI-p54.1"></span>, p.
220, *supra*.

<span id="fn_2110"></span>[224:2111](1080065.htm#fr_2110) <span
id="ii.LVI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p56"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)<span id="ii.LVI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2111"></span>[224:2112](1080065.htm#fr_2111) <span
id="ii.LVI-p56.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p57"></span> [Ps. lvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)<span id="ii.LVI-p57.1"></span>, p.
222, *supra*.

<span id="fn_2112"></span>[224:2113](1080065.htm#fr_2112) <span
id="ii.LVI-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p58"></span> [Ps. lvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#011)<span id="ii.LVI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2113"></span>[224:2114](1080065.htm#fr_2113) <span
id="ii.LVI-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p59"></span> [Job i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVI-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2114"></span>[224:2115](1080065.htm#fr_2114) <span
id="ii.LVI-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p60"></span> [Job i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021)<span id="ii.LVI-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2115"></span>[224:2116](1080065.htm#fr_2115) <span
id="ii.LVI-p60.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p61"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVI-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2116"></span>[224:2117](1080065.htm#fr_2116) <span
id="ii.LVI-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p63"></span> [Job i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVI-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[224:2118](1080065.htm#fr_2117) <span
id="ii.LVI-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p64"></span> [Job ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVI-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[224:2119](1080065.htm#fr_2118) <span
id="ii.LVI-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p65"></span> [Job ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010)<span id="ii.LVI-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2119"></span>[225:2120](1080065.htm#fr_2119) <span
id="ii.LVI-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p66"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVI-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2120"></span>[225:2121](1080065.htm#fr_2120) <span
id="ii.LVI-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p67"></span> *Pro nihilo*.

<span id="fn_2121"></span>[225:2122](1080065.htm#fr_2121) <span
id="ii.LVI-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVI-p68"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVI-p68.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LVII](1080066)
