[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080004)  [Next](1080006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="I_1"></span> <span id="page_1">p. 1</span> <span
id="I_1-Page_1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span id="I_1-p1.1"></span>St.
Augustin on the Psalms.</span>

<span id="I_1-p2"></span>————————————

<span id="I_1-p3"></span><span id="I_1-p3.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="I_1-p3.2"></span>Psalm I.</span>

<span id="I_1-p4"></span>1. “<span class="c21"><span
id="I_1-p4.1"></span>Blessed</span> is the man that hath not gone away
in the counsel of the ungodly” ([Psa.
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="I_1-p4.2"></span>). This
is to be understood of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord Man. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) “Blessed is the man that hath not gone away
in the counsel of the ungodly,” as “the man of earth did,” <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) who consented to his wife deceived by the
serpent, to the transgressing the commandment of God. “Nor stood in the
way of sinners.” For He came indeed in the way of sinners, by being born
as sinners are; but He “stood” not therein, for that the enticements of
the world held Him not. “And hath not sat in the seat of pestilence.” He
willed not an earthly kingdom, with pride, which is well taken for “the
seat of pestilence;” for that there is hardly any one who is free from
the love of rule, and craves not human glory. For a “pestilence” is
disease widely spread, and involving all or nearly all. Yet “the seat of
pestilence” may be more appropriately understood of hurtful doctrine;
“whose word spreadeth as a canker.” <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7)
The order too of the words must be considered: “went away, stood, sat.”
For he “went away,” when he drew back from God. He “stood,” when he took
pleasure in sin. He “sat,” when, confirmed in his pride, he could not go
back, unless set free by Him, who neither “hath gone away in the counsel
of the ungodly, nor stood in the way of sinners, nor sat in the seat of
pestilence.”

<span id="I_1-p8"></span>2. “But his delight is in the law of the Lord,
and in His law will he meditate by day and by night ([Psa.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="I_1-p8.1"></span>). The
law is not made for a righteous man,” <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8)
says the Apostle. But it is one thing to be in the law, another under
the law. Whoso is in the law, acteth according to the law; whoso is
under the law, is acted upon according to the law: the one therefore is
free, the other a slave. Again, the law, which is written and imposed
upon the servant, is one thing; the law, which is mentally discerned by
him who needeth not its “letter,” is another thing. “He will meditate by
day and by night,” is to be understood either as without ceasing; or “by
day” in joy, “by night” in tribulations. For it is said, “Abraham saw my
day, and was glad:” <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) and of
tribulation it is said, “my reins also have instructed me, even unto the
night.” <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10)

<span id="I_1-p12"></span>3. “And he shall be like a tree planted hard
by the running streams of waters” ([Psa.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003)<span id="I_1-p12.1"></span>); that
is either Very “Wisdom,” <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) which
vouchsafed to assume man’s nature for our salvation; that as man He
might be “the tree planted hard by the running streams of waters;” for
in this sense can that too be taken which is said in another Psalm, “the
river of God is full of water.” <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) Or
by the Holy Ghost, of whom it is said, “He shall baptize you in the Holy
Ghost;” <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and again, “If any man
thirst, let him come unto Me, and drink;” <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) and again, “If thou knewest the gift of
God, and who it is that asketh water of thee, thou wouldest have asked
of Him, and He would have given thee living water, of which whoso
drinketh shall never thirst, but it shall be made in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life.” <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) Or, “by the running streams of waters”
may be by the sins of the people, because first the waters are called
“peoples” in the Apocalypse; <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) and
again, by “running stream” is not unreasonably understood “fall,” which
hath relation to sin. That “tree” then, that is, our Lord, from the
running streams of water, that is, from the sinful people’s drawing them
by the way into the roots of His discipline, will “bring forth fruit,”
that is, will establish Churches; “in His season,” that is, after He
hath been glorified by His Resurrection and Ascension into heaven. For
then, by the sending of the Holy Ghost to the Apostles, and by the
confirming of their faith in Him, and their mission to the world, He
made the Churches to “bring forth fruit.” “His leaf also shall not
fall,” that is, His Word shall not be in vain. For, “all flesh is grass,
and the glory of man as the flower of grass; the grass withereth, <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="I_1-Page_2"></span>and the flower
falleth, but the word of the Lord abideth for ever. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) And whatsoever He doeth shall prosper”
that is, whatsoever that tree shall bear; which all must be taken of
fruit and leaves, that is, deeds and words.

<span id="I_1-p20"></span>4. “The ungodly are not so,” they are not so,
“but are like the dust which the wind casteth forth from the face of the
earth” ([Psa. 1.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)<span
id="I_1-p20.1"></span>). “The earth” is here to be taken as that
stedfastness in God, with a view to which it is said, “The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance, yea, I have a goodly heritage.” <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) With a view to this it is said, “Wait on
the Lord and keep His ways, and He shall exalt thee to inherit the
earth.” <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) With a view to this it is
said, “Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.” <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) A comparison too is derived hence, for as
this visible earth supports and contains the outer man, so that earth
invisible the inner man. “From the face of” which “earth the wind
casteth forth the ungodly,” that is, pride, in that it puffeth him up.
On his guard against which he, who was inebriated by the richness of the
house of the Lord, and drunken of the torrent stream of its pleasures,
saith, “Let not the foot of pride come against me.”  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) From this earth pride cast forth him who
said, “I will place my seat in the north, and I will be like the Most
High.” <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) From the face of the earth
it cast forth him also who, after that he had consented and tasted of
the forbidden tree that he might be as God, hid himself from the Face of
God. <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) That his earth has reference
to the inner man, and that man <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) is
cast forth thence by pride, may be particularly seen in that which is
written, “Why is earth and ashes proud? Because, in his life, he cast
forth his bowels.” <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) For, whence he
hath been cast forth, he is not unreasonably said to have cast forth
himself.

<span id="I_1-p29"></span>5. “Therefore the ungodly rise not in the
judgment” ([Psa. 1.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)<span
id="I_1-p29.1"></span>): “therefore,” namely, because “as dust they are
cast forth from the face of the earth.” And well did he say that this
should be taken away from them, which in their pride they court, namely,
that they may judge; so that this same idea is more clearly expressed in
the following sentence, “nor sinners in the counsel of the righteous.”
For it is usual for what goes before, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) to be thus repeated more clearly. So that
by “sinners” should be understood the “ungodly;” what is before “in the
judgment,” should be here “in the counsel of the righteous.” Or if
indeed the ungodly are one thing, and sinners another, so that although
every ungodly man is a sinner, yet every sinner is not ungodly; “The
ungodly rise not in the judgment,” that is, they shall rise indeed, but
not that they should be judged, for they are already appointed to most
certain punishment. But “sinners” do not rise “in counsel of the just,”
that is, that they may judge, but peradventure that they may be judged;
so as of these it were said, “The fire shall try every man’s work of
what sort it is. If any man’s work abide, he shall receive a reward. If
any man’s work shall be burned, he shall then suffer loss: but he
himself shall be saved; yet so as by fire.”

<span id="I_1-p31"></span>6. “For the Lord knoweth the way of the
righteous” ([Psa. 1.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)<span
id="I_1-p31.1"></span>). As it is said, medicine knows health, but knows
not disease, and yet disease is recognised by the art of medicine. In
like manner can it be said that “the Lord knoweth the way of the
righteous,” but the way of the ungodly He knoweth not. Not that the Lord
is ignorant of anything, and yet He says to sinners, “I never knew
you.” <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) “But the way of the ungodly
shall perish;” is the same as if it were said, the way of the ungodly
the Lord knoweth not. But it is expressed more plainly that this should
be not to be known of the Lord, namely, to “perish;” and this to be
known of the Lord, namely, to “abide;” so as that to be should appertain
to the knowledge of God, but to His not knowing not to be. For the Lord
saith, “<span class="c21"><span id="I_1-p32.2"></span>I Am</span> that
<span class="c21"><span id="I_1-p32.3"></span>I Am</span>,” and, “<span
class="c21"><span id="I_1-p32.4"></span>I Am</span> hath sent me.” <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[1:6](1080005.htm#fr_5) <span
id="I_1-p4.3"></span>

<span id="I_1-p5"></span> *Homine Dominico*. This term as applied to our
Lord, St. Augustin disallows in his *Retractat*. i. 19. \[He would not
have objected to the expression of our translator, “the Lord Man,” as
above. It is the adjective *Dominicus* to which he objects, because it
is ambiguous, *quasi* Man *of the* Lord.—C.\]

<span id="fn_6"></span>[1:7](1080005.htm#fr_6) <span
id="I_1-p5.1"></span>

<span id="I_1-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="I_1-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[1:8](1080005.htm#fr_7) <span
id="I_1-p6.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p7"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span id="I_1-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[1:9](1080005.htm#fr_8) <span
id="I_1-p8.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p9"></span> [1 Tim. i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[1:10](1080005.htm#fr_9) <span
id="I_1-p9.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p10"></span> [John 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[1:11](1080005.htm#fr_10) <span
id="I_1-p10.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p11"></span> [Ps. xvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)<span id="I_1-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[1:12](1080005.htm#fr_11) <span
id="I_1-p12.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p13"></span> [Prov.
viii](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#000)<span id="I_1-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[1:13](1080005.htm#fr_12) <span
id="I_1-p13.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p14"></span> [Ps. lxv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[1:14](1080005.htm#fr_13) <span
id="I_1-p14.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p15"></span> [Matt. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[1:15](1080005.htm#fr_14) <span
id="I_1-p15.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p16"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="I_1-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[1:16](1080005.htm#fr_15) <span
id="I_1-p16.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p17"></span> [John 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014)<span id="I_1-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[1:17](1080005.htm#fr_16) <span
id="I_1-p17.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p18"></span> [Rev. xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015)<span id="I_1-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[2:18](1080005.htm#fr_17) <span
id="I_1-p18.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p19"></span> [Isa. xl.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[2:19](1080005.htm#fr_18) <span
id="I_1-p20.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p21"></span> [Ps. 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006)<span id="I_1-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[2:20](1080005.htm#fr_19) <span
id="I_1-p21.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p22"></span> [Ps. xxxvii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#034)<span id="I_1-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[2:21](1080005.htm#fr_20) <span
id="I_1-p22.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p23"></span> [Matt. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)<span id="I_1-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[2:22](1080005.htm#fr_21) <span
id="I_1-p23.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p24"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011)<span id="I_1-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[2:23](1080005.htm#fr_22) <span
id="I_1-p24.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p25"></span> [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="I_1-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[2:24](1080005.htm#fr_23) <span
id="I_1-p25.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p26"></span> [Gen. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)<span id="I_1-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[2:25](1080005.htm#fr_24) <span
id="I_1-p26.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p27"></span> Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="I_1-p27.1"></span>mss</span>. “the inner man.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[2:26](1080005.htm#fr_25) <span
id="I_1-p27.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p28"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
10.9](../../../bib/apo/sir010.htm#009)<span id="I_1-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[2:27](1080005.htm#fr_26) <span
id="I_1-p29.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p30"></span> Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="I_1-p30.1"></span>mss</span>. “what is darkly said.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[2:28](1080005.htm#fr_27) <span
id="I_1-p31.2"></span>

<span id="I_1-p32"></span> [Matt. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)<span id="I_1-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[2:29](1080005.htm#fr_28) <span
id="I_1-p32.5"></span>

<span id="I_1-p33"></span> [Exod. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="I_1-p33.1"></span>.
\[Irenæus, p. 419, vol. i. A.N.F.; also Tertull. p. 682, vol. iii.
A.N.F.; same series elsewhere.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm II](1080006)
