[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080005)  [Next](1080007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="II_1"></span> <span id="II_1-p0.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="II_1-p1.1"></span>Psalm II.</span>

<span id="II_1-p2"></span>1. “Why do the heathen rage, and the people
meditate vain things?” ([Psa. 2.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001)<span
id="II_1-p2.1"></span>). “The kings of the earth have stood up, and the
rulers taken counsel together, against the Lord, and against His Christ”
([Psa. 2.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span
id="II_1-p2.2"></span>). It is said, “why?” as if it were said, in vain.
For what they wished, namely, Christ’s destruction, they accomplished
not; for this is spoken of our Lord’s persecutors, of whom also mention
is made in the Acts of the Apostles. <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="II_1-p4"></span>2. “Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast
away their yoke from us” ([Psa.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003)<span id="II_1-p4.1"></span>).
Although it admits of another acceptation, yet is it more fitly
understood as in the person of those who are said to “meditate vain
things.” So that “let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their
yoke from us,” may be, let us do our endeavour, that the Christian
religion do not bind us, nor be imposed upon us.

<span id="II_1-p5"></span>3. “He that dwelleth in the heavens shall
laugh them to scorn, and the Lord shall have them in derision” ([Psa.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)<span id="II_1-p5.1"></span>). The
sentence is repeated; for “He who dwelleth in the heavens,” is
afterwards put, “the Lord;” and for “shall <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>
<span id="II_1-Page_3"></span>laugh them to scorn,” is afterwards put,
“shall have them in derision.” Nothing of this however must be taken in
a carnal sort, as if God either laugheth with cheek, or derideth with
nostril; but it is to be understood of that power which He giveth to His
saints, that they seeing things to come, namely, that the Name and rule
of Christ is to pervade posterity and possess all nations, should
understand that those men “meditate a vain thing.” For this power
whereby these things are foreknown is God’s “laughter” and “derision.”
“He that dwelleth in the heavens shall laugh them to scorn.” If by
“heavens” we understand holy souls, by these God, as foreknowing what is
to come, will “laugh them to scorn, and have them in derision.”

<span id="II_1-p6"></span>4. “Then He shall speak unto them in His
wrath, and vex them in His sore displeasure” ([Psa.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005)<span id="II_1-p6.1"></span>). For
showing more clearly how He will “speak unto them,” he added, He will
“vex them;” so that “in His wrath,” is, “in His sore displeasure.” But
by the “wrath and sore displeasure” of the Lord God must not be
understood any mental perturbation; but the might whereby He most justly
avengeth, by the subjection of all creation to His service. For that is
to be observed and remembered which is written in the Wisdom of Solomon,
“But Thou, Lord of power, judgest with tranquillity, and with great
favour orderest us.” <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) The “wrath” of
God then is an emotion which is produced in the soul which knoweth the
law of God, when it sees this same law transgressed by the sinner. For
by this emotion of righteous souls many things are avenged. Although the
“wrath” of God can be well understood of that darkening of the mind,
which overtakes those who transgress the law of God.

<span id="II_1-p8"></span>5. “Yet am I set by Him as King upon Sion, His
holy hill, preaching His decree” ([Psa.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span id="II_1-p8.1"></span>). This
is clearly spoken in the Person of the very Lord our Saviour Christ. But
if Sion signify, as some interpret, beholding, we must not understand it
of anything rather than of the Church, where daily is the desire raised
of beholding the bright glory of God, according to that of the Apostle,
“but we with open face beholding the glory of the Lord.” <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) Therefore the meaning of this is, Yet I
am set by Him as King over His holy Church; which for its eminence and
stability He calleth a mountain. “Yet I am set by Him as King.” I, that
is, whose “bands” they were meditating “to break asunder,” and whose
“yoke” to “cast away.” “Preaching His decree.” Who doth not see the
meaning of this, seeing it is daily practised?

<span id="II_1-p10"></span>6. “The Lord hath said unto me, Thou art My
Son, to-day have I begotten Thee” ([Psa.
2.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)<span id="II_1-p10.1"></span>).
Although that day may also seem to be prophetically spoken of, on which
Jesus Christ was born according to the flesh; and in eternity there is
nothing past as if it had ceased to be, nor future as if it were not
yet, but present only, since whatever is eternal, always is; yet as
“today” intimates presentiality, a divine interpretation is given to
that expression, “To-day have I begotten Thee,” whereby the uncorrupt
and Catholic faith proclaims the eternal generation of the power and
Wisdom of God, who is the Only-begotten Son.

<span id="II_1-p11"></span>7. “Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the
nations for Thine inheritance” ([Psa.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="II_1-p11.1"></span>).
This has at once a temporal sense with reference to the Manhood which He
took on Himself, who offered up Himself as a Sacrifice in the stead of
all sacrifices, who also maketh intercession for us; so that the words,
“ask of Me,” may be referred to all this temporal dispensation, which
has been instituted for mankind, namely, that the “nations” should be
joined to the Name of Christ, and so be redeemed from death, and
possessed by God. “I shall give Thee the nations for Thine inheritance,”
which so possess them for their salvation, and to bear unto Thee
spiritual fruit. “And the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy
possession.” The same repeated, “The uttermost parts of the earth,” is
put for “the nations;” but more clearly, that we might understand all
the nations. And “Thy possession” stands for “Thine inheritance.”

<span id="II_1-p12"></span>8. “Thou shalt rule them with a rod of iron,”
with inflexible justice, and “Thou shalt break them like a potter’s
vessel” ([Psa. 2.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span
id="II_1-p12.1"></span>); that is, “Thou shalt break” in them earthly
lusts, and the filthy doings of the old man, and whatsoever hath been
derived and inured from the sinful clay. “And now understand, ye kings”
([Psa. 2.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010)<span
id="II_1-p12.2"></span>). “And now;” that is, being now renewed, your
covering of clay worn out, that is, the carnal vessels of error which
belong to your past life, “now understand,” ye who now are “kings;” that
is, able now to govern all that is servile and brutish in you, able now
too to fight, not as “they who beat the air, but chastening your bodies,
and bringing them into subjection.” <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)
“Be instructed, all ye who judge the earth.” This again is a repetition;
“Be instructed” is instead of “understand;” and “ye who judge the earth”
instead of “ye kings.” For He signifies the spiritual by “those who
judge the earth.” For whatsoever we judge, is below us; and whatsoever
is below the spiritual man, is with good reason called “the earth;”
because it is defiled with earthly corruption.

<span id="II_1-p14"></span>9. “Serve the Lord with fear;” lest what is
<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="II_1-Page_4"></span>said, “Ye
kings and judges of the earth,” turn into pride: “And rejoice with
trembling” ([Psa. 2.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span
id="II_1-p14.1"></span>). Very excellently is “rejoice” added, lest
“serve the Lord with fear” should seem to tend to misery. But again,
lest this same rejoicing should run on to unrestrained
inconsiderateness, there is added “with trembling,” that it might avail
for a warning, and for the careful guarding of holiness. It can also be
taken thus, “And now ye kings understand;” that is, And now that I am
set as King, be ye not sad, kings of the earth, as if your excellency
were taken from you, but rather “understand and be instructed.” For it
is expedient for you, that ye should be under Him, by whom understanding
and instruction are given you. And this is expedient for you, that ye
lord it not with rashness, but that ye “serve the Lord” of all “with
fear,” and “rejoice” in bliss most sure and most pure, with all caution
and carefulness, lest ye fall therefrom into pride.

<span id="II_1-p15"></span>10. “Lay hold of discipline, <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) lest at any time the Lord be angry, and
ye perish from the righteous way” ([Psa.
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)<span id="II_1-p16.2"></span>).
This is the same as, “understand,” and, “be instructed.” For to
understand and be instructed, this is to lay hold of discipline. Still
in that it is said, “lay hold of,” it is plainly enough intimated that
there is some protection and defence against all things which might do
hurt unless with so great carefulness it be laid hold of. “Lest at any
time the Lord be angry,” is expressed with a doubt, not as regards the
vision of the prophet to whom it is certain, but as regards those who
are warned; for they, to whom it is not openly revealed, are wont to
think with doubt of the anger of God. This then they ought to say to
themselves, let us “lay hold of discipline, lest at any time the Lord be
angry, and we perish from the righteous way.” Now, how “the Lord be
angry” is to be taken, has been said above. And “ye perish from the
righteous way.” This is a great punishment, and dreaded by those who
have had any perception of the sweetness of righteousness; for he who
perisheth from the way of righteousness, in much misery will wander
through the ways of unrighteousness.

<span id="II_1-p17"></span>11. “When His anger shall be shortly kindled,
blessed are all they who put their trust in Him;” that is, when the
vengeance shall come which is prepared for the ungodly and for sinners,
not only will it not light on those “who put their trust in” the Lord,
but it will even avail for the foundation and exaltation of a kingdom
for them. For he said not, “When His anger shall be shortly kindled,”
safe “are all they who put their trust in Him,” as though they should
have this only thereby, to be exempt from punishment; but he said,
“blessed;” in which there is the sum and accumulation of all good
things. Now the meaning of “shortly” I suppose to be this, that it will
be something sudden, whilst sinners will deem it far off and long to
come.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[2:30](1080006.htm#fr_29) <span
id="II_1-p2.3"></span>

<span id="II_1-p3"></span> [Acts iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026)<span id="II_1-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[3:31](1080006.htm#fr_30) <span
id="II_1-p6.2"></span>

<span id="II_1-p7"></span> [Wisd. xii.
18](../../../bib/apo/wis012.htm#018)<span id="II_1-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[3:32](1080006.htm#fr_31) <span
id="II_1-p8.2"></span>

<span id="II_1-p9"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)<span id="II_1-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[3:33](1080006.htm#fr_32) <span
id="II_1-p12.3"></span>

<span id="II_1-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span id="II_1-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[4:34](1080006.htm#fr_33) <span
id="II_1-p15.1"></span>

<span id="II_1-p16"></span> \[This reading is corrected by St. Jerome in
his Hebraic Psalter, and our Authorized Version “Kiss the Son” is
sustained by the best authorities. See a forcible elucidation in Bishop
Wordsworth’s *Commentary on Psalms*. [Ps.
ii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#000)<span id="II_1-p16.1"></span>—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm III](1080007)
