[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080117)  [Next](1080119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CVII"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CVII. <span
id="fr_4870"></span>[4871](#fn_4870) </span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p3"></span>1. This Psalm commendeth unto us the
mercies of God, proved in ourselves, and is therefore the sweeter to the
experienced. And it is a wonder if it can be pleasing to any one, except
to him who has learned in his own case, what he hears in this Psalm. Yet
was it written not for any one or two, but for the people of God, and
set forth that it might know itself therein as in a mirror. Its title
needeth not now to be treated, for it is Halleluia, and again Halleluia.
Which we have a custom of singing at a certain time in our solemnities,
after an old tradition of the Church: nor is it without a sacred meaning
that we sing it on particular days. <span
id="fr_4871"></span>[4872](#fn_4871) Halleluia we sing indeed on certain
days, <span id="fr_4872"></span>[4873](#fn_4872) but every day we think
it. For if in this word is signified the praise of God, though not in
the mouth of the flesh, yet surely in the mouth of the heart. “His
praise shall ever be in my mouth.” <span
id="fr_4873"></span>[4874](#fn_4873) But that the title hath Halleluia
not once only but twice, is not peculiar to this Psalm, but the former
also hath it so. And as far as appears from its text, that was sung of
the people of Israel, but this is sung of the universal Church of God,
spread through the whole world. Perchance, it not unfitly hath Halleluia
twice, because we cry, Abba, Father. Since Abba is nothing else but
Father, yet not without meaning the Apostle said, “in whom we cry, Abba,
Father;”  <span id="fr_4874"></span>[4875](#fn_4874) but because one
wall indeed coming to the Corner Stone crieth Abba, but the other, from
the other side crieth Father; viz., in that Corner Stone, <span
id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span id="ii.CVII-Page_533"></span>“who is
our Peace, who hath made both one.”…

<span id="ii.CVII-p8"></span>2. “Confess unto the Lord that He is sweet,
because for aye in His mercy” ([Psa.
107.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001)<span id="ii.CVII-p8.1"></span>).
This confess ye that He is sweet: if ye have tasted, confess. But he
cannot confess, who hath not chosen to taste, for whence shall he say
that that is sweet, which he knoweth not. But ye if ye have tasted how
sweet the Lord is, <span id="fr_4875"></span>[4876](#fn_4875) “Confess
ye to the Lord that He is sweet.” If ye have tasted with eagerness,
break forth <span id="fr_4876"></span>[4877](#fn_4876) with confession.
“For aye is His mercy,” that is, for ever. For here “for aye,” is so
put, since also in some other places of Scripture, for aye, that is,
what in Greek is called <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CVII-p10.1"></span> εἰς αἰῶνα</span>, is understood for ever. For
His mercy is not for a time, so as not to be for ever, since for this
purpose His present mercy is over men, that they may live with the
Angels for ever.

<span id="ii.CVII-p11"></span>3. “Let them say who are redeemed of the
Lord, whom He hath redeemed from the hand of their enemies” ([Psa.
107.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CVII-p11.1"></span>). Redeemed indeed it seems was also the
people of Israel from the land of Egypt, from the hand of slavery, from
fruitless labours, from miry works; yet let us see whether those who say
these things, are they who were freed by the Lord from Egypt. It is not
so. But who are they? “Those whom He redeemed.” Still one might take it
also of them, as redeemed from the hand of their enemies, that is, of
the Egyptians. Let them be expressed exactly who they are, for whom this
Psalm would be sung. “He gathered them from the lands;” these might
still be the lands of Egypt, for there are many lands even in one
province. Let him speak openly. “From the east and the west, from the
north and the sea” ([Psa. 107.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CVII-p11.2"></span>). Now then we understand these redeemed, in
the whole circle of the earth. This people of God, freed from a great
and broad Egypt, is led, as through the Red Sea, <span
id="fr_4877"></span>[4878](#fn_4877) that in Baptism it may make an end
of its enemies. For by the sacrament as it were of the Red Sea, that is
by Baptism consecrated with the Blood of Christ, the pursuing Egyptians,
the sins, are washed away.…“But all these things happened to them in a
figure, and were written for our admonition, on whom the ends of the
ages have come.” <span id="fr_4878"></span>[4879](#fn_4878) …

<span id="ii.CVII-p14"></span>4. “They wandered in the wilderness, in a
dry place, they found not the way of a city to dwell in” ([Psa.
107.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.1"></span>). We have heard a wretched wandering; what of
want? “Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them” ([Psa.
107.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.2"></span>). But wherefore did it faint? for what good?
For God is not cruel, but He maketh Himself known, in that it is
expedient for us, that He be entreated by us fainting, and that aiding
us He be loved. And therefore after this wandering, and hunger, and
thirst, “And they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and He delivered
them out of their distress” ([Psa.
107.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.3"></span>). And what did He for them, as they were
wandering? “And He led them in the right way” ([Psa.
107.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.4"></span>). They found not the way of a city to dwell
in, with hunger and thirst they were vexed and faint, “and He led them
into the right way, that they might go into a city to dwell in.” How He
helped their hunger and thirst, He saith not, but even this expect ye:
“Let them confess unto the Lord His mercies, and His wonders towards the
children of men” ([Psa. 107.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.5"></span>). Tell them, ye that are experienced, to the
inexperienced; ye that are already in the way, already directed towards
finding the city, already at last free from hunger and thirst. “Because
He hath satisfied the empty soul, and filled the hungry soul with good
things” ([Psa. 107.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CVII-p14.6"></span>).

<span id="ii.CVII-p15"></span>5. “Them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death, fast bound in beggary and iron” ([Psa.
107.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CVII-p15.1"></span>). Whence this, but that thou wast attributing
things to thyself? that thou wast not owning the grace of God? that thou
wast rejecting the counsel of God <span
id="fr_4879"></span>[4880](#fn_4879) concerning thee? For see what He
addeth: “Because they rebelled against the words of the Lord through
pride” ([Psa. 107.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CVII-p16.2"></span>), not knowing the righteousness of God, and
wishing to establish their own, <span
id="fr_4880"></span>[4881](#fn_4880) “and they were bitter against the
counsel of the Most High.” “And their heart was brought low in labour”
([Psa. 107.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CVII-p17.2"></span>). And now fight against lust; if God cease to
aid thou mayest strive, thou canst not conquer. And when thou shalt be
pressed by thine evil, thy heart will be brought low in labour, so that
now with humbled heart thou mayest learn to cry out, “O wretched man
that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” <span
id="fr_4881"></span>[4882](#fn_4881) …Freed, thou wilt confess the
mercies of the Lord. “And they cried unto the Lord when they were
troubled, and He delivered them out of their distresses” ([Psa.
107.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CVII-p18.2"></span>). They were freed from the second temptation.
There remains that of weariness and loathing. But first see what He did
for them when freed. “And He led them out of darkness and the shadow of
death, and brake their bonds asunder” ([Psa.
107.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#014)<span
id="ii.CVII-p18.3"></span>). “Let them confess to the Lord His mercies,
and His wonders to the children of men” ([Psa.
107.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CVII-p18.4"></span>). Wherefore? what difficulties hath He
overcome? “Because He brake the gates of brass, and snapped the bars of
iron” ([Psa. 107.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CVII-p18.5"></span>). “He took them up from the way of their
iniquity, for because of their unrighteousnesses they were brought low”
([Psa. 107.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CVII-p18.6"></span>). Because they gave honour to themselves, not
to God, because they were establishing their own <span id="page_534">p.
534</span> <span id="ii.CVII-Page_534"></span>righteousness, not knowing
the righteousness of God, <span id="fr_4882"></span>[4883](#fn_4882)
they were brought low. They found that they were helpless without His
aid, who were presuming on their own strength alone.

<span id="ii.CVII-p20"></span>6. “Their soul abhorred all manner of
meat” ([Psa. 107.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CVII-p20.1"></span>). Now they suffer satiety. They are sick of
satiety. They are in danger from satiety. Unless perchance thou thinkest
they could be killed with famine, but cannot with satiety. See what
followeth. When he had said, “Their soul abhorred all manner of meat,”
lest thou shouldest think them, as it were, safe of their fulness, and
not rather see that they would die of satiety: “And they came near,” he
saith, “even unto the gates of death.” What then remaineth? That even
when the word of God delighteth thee, thou account it not to thyself;
nor for this be puffed up with any sort of arrogance, and having an
appetite for food, proudly spurn at those who are in danger from
satiety. “And they cried out unto the Lord when they were in trouble,
and He delivered them out of their distresses” ([Psa.
107.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CVII-p20.2"></span>). And because it was a sickness not to be
pleased, “He sent His Word, and healed them” ([Psa.
107.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020)<span
id="ii.CVII-p20.3"></span>). See what evil there is in satiety; see
whence He delivers, to whom he crieth that loathes his food. “He sent
His Word, and healed them, and snatched them,” from whence? not from
wandering, not from hunger, not from the difficulty of overcoming sins,
but “from their corruption.” It is a sort of corruption of the mind to
loathe what is sweet. Therefore also of this benefit, as of the others
before, “Let them confess to the Lord His mercies, and His wonders unto
the sons of men” ([Psa. 107.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CVII-p20.4"></span>). “And sacrifice the sacrifice of praise”
([Psa. 107.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#022)<span
id="ii.CVII-p20.5"></span>). For now that He may be praised, the Lord is
sweet, “and let them tell out His works with gladness.” Not with
weariness, not with sadness, not with anxiety, not with loathing, but
“with gladness.”

<span id="ii.CVII-p21"></span>7. …“They who go down on the sea in ships,
doing their business on the mighty waters” ([Psa.
107.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.1"></span>); that is, amongst many peoples. For that
waters are often put for peoples, the Apocalypse of John is witness,
when on John’s asking what those waters were, it was answered him, they
are peoples. They then who do their business on mighty waters, “they
have seen the works of the Lord, and His wonders in the deep” ([Psa.
107.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.2"></span>). For what is deeper than human hearts? hence
often break forth winds; storms of sedition, and dissensions, disturb
the ship. And what is done in them? God, willing that both they who
steer, and they who are conveyed, should cry unto Him, “He spake, and
the breath of the storm stood” ([Psa.
107.25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.3"></span>). What is, stood? Abode, continued, still
disturbeth, long tosseth; rageth, and passeth not away. “For He spake,
and the breath of the storm stood.” And what did that breath of the
storm? “They go up even to the heavens,” in daring; “They go down even
into the deeps” ([Psa. 107.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#026)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.4"></span>), in fearing. “Their soul wasted in
miseries.” “They were disturbed, and moved like a drunken man” ([Psa.
107.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#027)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.5"></span>). They who sit at the helm, and they who
faithfully love the ship, feel what I say. Certainly, when they speak,
when they read, when they interpret, they appear wise. Woe for the
storm! “and all their wisdom,” he saith, “was swallowed up.” Sometimes
all human counsels fail; whichever way one turns himself, the waves
roar, the storm rageth, the arms are powerless: where the prow may
strike, to what wave the side may be exposed, whither the stricken ship
may be allowed to drift, from what rocks she must be kept back lest she
be lost, is impossible for her pilots to see. And what is left but that
which follows? “And they cried out unto the Lord when they were
troubled, and He delivered them from their distresses” ([Psa.
107.28](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.6"></span>). “And He commanded the storm, and it stood
unto clear air” ([Psa. 107.29](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#029)<span
id="ii.CVII-p21.7"></span>), “and the waves of it were still.” Hear on
this point the voice of a steersman, one that was in peril, was brought
low, was freed. “I would not,” he saith, “have you ignorant, brethren,
of our distress, which befell us in Asia, that “we were pressed above
strength, and above measure” (I see all his “wisdom swallowed up”), “so
that we were weary,” he saith, “even of life.” <span
id="fr_4883"></span>[4884](#fn_4883) …

<span id="ii.CVII-p23"></span>“And they were glad, because they were
still, and He brought them into the haven of their desire” ([Psa.
107.30](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#030)<span
id="ii.CVII-p23.1"></span>). “Let His mercies confess unto the Lord, and
His wonders towards the sons of men” ([Psa.
107.31](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#031)<span
id="ii.CVII-p23.2"></span>). Everywhere, without exception, let not our
merits, not our strength, not our wisdom, “confess unto the Lord,” but,
“His mercies.” Let Him be loved in every deliverance of ours, who has
been invoked in every distress.

<span id="ii.CVII-p24"></span>8. “And let them exalt Him in the assembly
of the people, and praise Him in the seat of the elders” ([Psa.
107.32](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#032)<span
id="ii.CVII-p24.1"></span>). Let them exalt, let them praise, peoples
and elders, merchants and pilots. For what hath He done in this
assembly? What hath He established? Whence hath He rescued it? What hath
He granted it? Even as He resisted the proud, and gave grace to the
humble: <span id="fr_4884"></span>[4885](#fn_4884) the proud, that is,
the first people of the Jews, arrogant, and extolling itself on its
descent from Abraham, and because to that nation “were entrusted the
oracles of God.” <span id="fr_4885"></span>[4886](#fn_4885) These things
did not avail them unto soundness, but unto pride of heart, rather to
swelling than to greatness. What then did God, resisting the <span
id="page_535">p. 535</span> <span id="ii.CVII-Page_535"></span>proud,
but giving grace to the humble; cutting off the natural branches for
their pride; grafting in the wild olive for its humility?

<span id="ii.CVII-p27"></span>“He made the rivers a wilderness” ([Psa.
107.33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033)<span
id="ii.CVII-p27.1"></span>). Waters did run there, prophecies were in
course. Seek now a prophet among the Jews; thou findest none. For “He
made the outgoings of waters to be thirst.” Let them say, “Now there is
no prophet more, and He will not know us any more.” <span
id="fr_4886"></span>[4887](#fn_4886) “A fruitful land to be saltpools”
([Psa. 107.34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034)<span
id="ii.CVII-p28.2"></span>). Thou seekest there the faith of Christ,
thou findest not: thou seekest a prophet, thou findest not: thou seekest
a sacrifice, thou findest not: thou seekest a temple, thou findest none.
Wherefore this? “From the wickedness of them that dwell therein.” Behold
how He resisteth the proud: hear how He giveth grace to the humble. “He
made the wilderness to be a standing water, and the dry ground to be
outgoings of waters” ([Psa.
107.35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#035)<span
id="ii.CVII-p28.3"></span>). “And He caused the hungry to dwell there”
([Psa. 107.36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036)<span
id="ii.CVII-p28.4"></span>). Because to Him it was said, “Thou art a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedec.” <span
id="fr_4887"></span>[4888](#fn_4887) For thou seekest a sacrifice among
the Jews; thou hast none after the order of Aaron. Thou seekest it after
the order of Melchizedec; thou findest it not among them, but through
the whole world it is celebrated in the Church. “From the rising of the
sun to the setting thereof the name of the Lord is praised.” <span
id="fr_4888"></span>[4889](#fn_4888) …“And they sowed fields, and
planted vineyards, and gat fruit of corn” ([Psa.
107.37](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#037)<span
id="ii.CVII-p30.2"></span>): at which that workman rejoiceth, who saith,
“Not because I desire a gift, but I seek fruit.” <span
id="fr_4889"></span>[4890](#fn_4889) “And He blessed them, and they were
multiplied exceedingly, and their cattle were not diminished” ([Psa.
107.38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#038)<span
id="ii.CVII-p31.2"></span>). This standeth. For “the foundation of God
standeth sure; because the Lord knoweth them that are His.” <span
id="fr_4890"></span>[4891](#fn_4890) They are called “beasts of burden,”
and “cattle,” that walk simply in the Church, yet are useful; not much
learned, but full of faith. Therefore, whether spiritual or carnal, “He
blessed them.”

<span id="ii.CVII-p33"></span>9. “And they became few, and were vexed”
([Psa. 107.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039)<span
id="ii.CVII-p33.1"></span>). Whence this? From athwart? Nay, from
within. For that they should “become few,” “They went out from us, but
they were not of us.” <span id="fr_4891"></span>[4892](#fn_4891) But
therefore he speaketh as of these, of whom he spake before, that they
may be discerned with understanding; because he speaketh as if of the
same, because of the sacraments they have in common. For they belong to
the people of God, though not by the virtue, yet surely by the
appearance of piety: for concerning them we have heard the Apostle, “In
the last times there shall come grievous times, for there shall be men
lovers of themselves.”  <span id="fr_4892"></span>[4893](#fn_4892) The
first evil is, “lovers of themselves;” that is, as being pleased with
themselves. Would that they were not pleasing to themselves, and were
pleasing to God: would that they would cry out in their difficulties,
and be freed from their distresses. But while they presumed greatly on
themselves, “they were made few.” It is manifest, brethren: all who
separate themselves from unity become few. For they are many; but in
unity, while they are not parted from unity. For when the multitude of
unity hath begun no more to belong to them, in heresy and schism, they
are few. “And they were vexed, from distress of miseries and grief.”
“Contempt was poured on princes” ([Psa.
107.40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040)<span
id="ii.CVII-p35.2"></span>). For they were rejected by the Church of
God, and the more because they wished to be princes, therefore they were
despised, and became salt that had lost its savour, cast out abroad, so
that it is trodden under foot of men.  <span
id="fr_4893"></span>[4894](#fn_4893) “And He led them astray in the
pathless place, and not in a way.” Those above in the way, those
directed to a city, and finally led thither, not led astray; but these,
where there was no way, led astray. What is, “Led them astray”? God
“gave them up to their own hearts’ lusts.” <span
id="fr_4894"></span>[4895](#fn_4894) For “led astray” means this, gave
them up to themselves. For if thou enquire closely, it is they that lead
themselves astray.…“And He helped the poor out of beggary” ([Psa.
107.41](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#041)<span
id="ii.CVII-p37.2"></span>). What meaneth this, brethren? Princes are
despised, and the poor helped. The proud are cast aside, and the humble
provided for.…“And made him households like sheep.” Thou understandest
one poor man and one beggar of him concerning whom he said, “He hath
helped the poor out of misery:” this poor man is now many households,
this poor man is many nations; many Churches are one Church, one nation,
one household, one sheep. These are great mysteries, great types, how
profound, how full of hidden meanings; how sweetly discovered, since
long hidden. Therefore, “the righteous will consider this, and rejoice:
and the mouth of all wickedness shall be stopped” ([Psa.
107.42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042)<span
id="ii.CVII-p37.3"></span>). That wickedness that doth prate against
unity, and compelleth truth to be made manifest, shall be convicted, and
have its mouth stopped.

<span id="ii.CVII-p38"></span>10. “Who is wise? and he will consider
these things; and will understand the mercies of the Lord” ([Psa.
107.43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043)<span
id="ii.CVII-p38.1"></span>).…Not his own deservings, not his own
strength, not his own power; but “the mercies of the Lord;” who, when he
was wandering and in want, led him back to the path, and fed him; who,
when he was struggling against the difficulties of his sins, and bound
down with the fetters of habit, released and freed him; who, when he
loathed the Word of God, <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="ii.CVII-Page_536"></span>and was almost dying with a kind of
weariness, restored him by sending him the medicine of His Word; who,
when he was endangered among the risks of shipwreck and storm, stilled
the sea, and brought him into port; who, finally, placed him in that
people, where He giveth grace to the humble; not in that where he
resisteth the proud; and hath made him His own, that remaining within he
may be multiplied, not that going out he may be minished. The righteous
see this, and rejoice. “The mouth,” therefore, “of all wickedness shall
be stopped.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4870"></span>[532:4871](1080118.htm#fr_4870) <span
id="ii.CVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p2"></span> Lat. CVI.

<span id="fn_4871"></span>[532:4872](1080118.htm#fr_4871) <span
id="ii.CVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p4"></span> \[It was not used in Lent, and was a
feature of the Easter solemnities. See [Ps.
cxi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#000)<span id="ii.CVII-p4.1"></span>
*infra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4872"></span>[532:4873](1080118.htm#fr_4872) <span
id="ii.CVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p5"></span> See on [Ps.
cxi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#000)<span id="ii.CVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_4873"></span>[532:4874](1080118.htm#fr_4873) <span
id="ii.CVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001)<span id="ii.CVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4874"></span>[532:4875](1080118.htm#fr_4874) <span
id="ii.CVII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p7"></span> [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ii.CVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4875"></span>[533:4876](1080118.htm#fr_4875) <span
id="ii.CVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p9"></span> [1 Pet. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#003)<span id="ii.CVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4876"></span>[533:4877](1080118.htm#fr_4876) <span
id="ii.CVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p10"></span> *Eructate*.

<span id="fn_4877"></span>[533:4878](1080118.htm#fr_4877) <span
id="ii.CVII-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p12"></span> [Exod. xiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)<span id="ii.CVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4878"></span>[533:4879](1080118.htm#fr_4878) <span
id="ii.CVII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p13"></span> [1 Cor. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011)<span id="ii.CVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4879"></span>[533:4880](1080118.htm#fr_4879) <span
id="ii.CVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p16"></span> [Luke vii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030)<span id="ii.CVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4880"></span>[533:4881](1080118.htm#fr_4880) <span
id="ii.CVII-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p17"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="ii.CVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4881"></span>[533:4882](1080118.htm#fr_4881) <span
id="ii.CVII-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p18"></span> [Rom. vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)<span id="ii.CVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4882"></span>[534:4883](1080118.htm#fr_4882) <span
id="ii.CVII-p18.7"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p19"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="ii.CVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4883"></span>[534:4884](1080118.htm#fr_4883) <span
id="ii.CVII-p21.8"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p22"></span> [2 Cor. i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#008)<span id="ii.CVII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4884"></span>[534:4885](1080118.htm#fr_4884) <span
id="ii.CVII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p25"></span> [Jas. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="ii.CVII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4885"></span>[534:4886](1080118.htm#fr_4885) <span
id="ii.CVII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p26"></span> [Rom. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span id="ii.CVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4886"></span>[535:4887](1080118.htm#fr_4886) <span
id="ii.CVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p28"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#009)<span id="ii.CVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4887"></span>[535:4888](1080118.htm#fr_4887) <span
id="ii.CVII-p28.5"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p29"></span> [Ps. cx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004)<span id="ii.CVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4888"></span>[535:4889](1080118.htm#fr_4888) <span
id="ii.CVII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p30"></span> [Ps.
113:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#003), [Mal.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)<span id="ii.CVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4889"></span>[535:4890](1080118.htm#fr_4889) <span
id="ii.CVII-p30.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p31"></span> [Philip. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#017)<span id="ii.CVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4890"></span>[535:4891](1080118.htm#fr_4890) <span
id="ii.CVII-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p32"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="ii.CVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4891"></span>[535:4892](1080118.htm#fr_4891) <span
id="ii.CVII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p34"></span> [1 John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span id="ii.CVII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4892"></span>[535:4893](1080118.htm#fr_4892) <span
id="ii.CVII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p35"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002)<span id="ii.CVII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4893"></span>[535:4894](1080118.htm#fr_4893) <span
id="ii.CVII-p35.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p36"></span> [Matt. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)<span id="ii.CVII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4894"></span>[535:4895](1080118.htm#fr_4894) <span
id="ii.CVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CVII-p37"></span> [Rom. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024)<span id="ii.CVII-p37.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CVIII](1080119)
