[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080165)  [Next](1080167) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXXIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXXIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXXIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXXIII. <span
id="fr_5626"></span>[5627](#fn_5626) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p3"></span>1. This is a short Psalm, but one well
known and quoted. “Behold, how good and how pleasant is it, that
brethren should dwell together in unity” ([Psa.
133.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p3.1"></span>). So sweet is that sound, that even they
who know not the Psalter, sing that verse. …

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p4"></span>2. For these same words of the Psalter,
this sweet sound, that honeyed melody, as well of the mind as of the
hymn, did even beget the Monasteries. By this sound were stirred up the
brethren who longed to dwell together. This verse was their trumpet. It
sounded through the whole earth, and they who had been divided, were
gathered together. The summons of God, the summons of the Holy Spirit,
the summons of the Prophets, were not heard in Judah, yet were heard
through the whole world. They were deaf to that sound, amid whom it was
sung; they were found with their ears open, of whom it was said, “They
shall see him, who were not told of him; they shall understand who heard
not.” <span id="fr_5627"></span>[5628](#fn_5627) Yet, most beloved, if
we reflect, the very blessing hath sprung from that wall <span
id="fr_5628"></span>[5629](#fn_5628) of circumcision. For have all the
Jews perished? and whence were the Apostles, the sons of the Prophets,
the sons of the exiles? <span id="fr_5629"></span>[5630](#fn_5629) He
speaks as to them who know. Whence those five hundred, who saw the Lord
after His resurrection, whom the Apostle Paul commemorates? <span
id="fr_5630"></span>[5631](#fn_5630) Whence those hundred and
twenty, <span id="fr_5631"></span>[5632](#fn_5631) who were together in
one place after the resurrection of the Lord, and His ascension into
heaven, on whom when gathered into one place the Holy Spirit descended
on the day of Pentecost, sent down from heaven, sent, even as He was
promised? <span id="fr_5632"></span>[5633](#fn_5632) All were from
thence, and they first dwelt together in unity; who sold all they had,
and laid the price of their goods at the Apostles’ feet, as is read in
the Acts of the Apostles. <span id="fr_5633"></span>[5634](#fn_5633) And
distribution was made to each one as he had need, <span
id="fr_5634"></span>[5635](#fn_5634) and none called anything his own,
but they had all things common. And what is “together in unity”? They
had, he says, one mind and one heart God-wards. <span
id="fr_5635"></span>[5636](#fn_5635) So they were the first who heard,
Behold how good and how pleasant is it, that brethren dwell together.
They were the first to hear, but heard it not alone.…

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p14"></span>3. From the words of this Psalm was
taken the name of Monks, that no one may reproach you who are Catholics
by reason of the name. When you with justice reproach heretics by reason
of the Circelliones, <span id="fr_5636"></span>[5637](#fn_5636) that
they may be <span id="page_623">p. 623</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-Page_623"></span>saved by shame, they reproach you on the
score of the Monks.…

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p16"></span>4. Moreover, beloved, there are they
who are false Monks, and we know men of this kind; but the pious
brotherhood is not annulled, because of them who profess to be what they
are not. There are false Monks, as there are false men among the Clergy,
and among the faithful. <span id="fr_5637"></span>[5638](#fn_5637) …

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p18"></span>5. Since the Psalm says, “Behold, how
good and how pleasant is it, that brethren should dwell together in
one,” why then should we not call Monks so? for *Monos <span
id="fr_5638"></span>[5639](#fn_5638)* is one. Not one in any manner, for
a man in a crowd is one, but though he can be called one along with
others, he cannot be *Monos,* that is, alone, for *Monos* means “one
alone.” They then who thus live together as to make one man, so that
they really possess what is written, “one mind and one heart,” <span
id="fr_5639"></span>[5640](#fn_5639) many bodies, but not many minds;
many bodies, but not many hearts; can rightly be called *Monos,* that
is, one alone. <span id="fr_5640"></span>[5641](#fn_5640) …

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p22"></span>6. Let the Psalm tell us what they are
like. “As the ointment on the head, which descended to the beard, to
Aaron’s beard, which descended to the fringe of his garment” ([Psa.
133.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p22.1"></span>). What was Aaron? A priest. Who is a
priest, except that one Priest, who entered into the Holy of Holies? Who
is that priest, save Him, who was at once Victim and Priest? save Him
who when he found nothing clean in the world to offer, offered Himself?
The ointment is on his head, because Christ is one whole with the
Church, but the ointment comes from the head. Our Head is Christ
crucified and buried; He rose again, and ascended into heaven; and the
Holy Spirit came from the head. Whither? To the beard. The beard
signifies the courageous; the beard distinguishes the grown men, the
earnest, the active, the vigorous. So that when we describe such, we
say, he is a bearded man. Thus that ointment descended first upon the
Apostles, descended upon those who bore the first assaults of the world,
and therefore the Holy Spirit descended on them. For they who first
began to dwell together in unity, suffered persecution, but because the
ointment descended to the beard, they suffered, but were not conquered.…

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p23"></span>7. “As the dew of Hermon, which fell
upon the hills of Sion” ([Psa.
133.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p23.1"></span>). He would have it understood, my
brethren, that it is of God’s grace that brethren dwell together in
unity.…

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p24"></span>8. But ye should know what Hermon is.
It is a mountain far distant from Jerusalem, that is, from Sion. And so
it is strange that he says thus: As the dew of Hermon, which fell upon
the mountains of Sion, since mount Hermon is far distant from Jerusalem,
for it is said to be over Jordan. Let us then seek out some
interpretation of Hermon. The word is Hebrew, and we learn its meaning
from them who know that language. Hermon is said to mean, a light set on
a high place. For from Christ comes the dew. No light is set on a high
place, save Christ. How is He set on high? First on the cross,
afterwards in heaven. Set on high on the cross when He was humbled;
humbled, but His humiliation could not but be high. The ministry of man
grew less and less, as was signified in John; the ministry of God in our
Lord Jesus Christ increased, as was shown at their birth. The former was
born, as the tradition of the Church shows, on the 24th of June, when
the days begin to shorten. The Lord was born on the 25th of December,
when the days begin to lengthen. Here John himself confessing, “He must
increase, but I must decrease.” <span
id="fr_5641"></span>[5642](#fn_5641) And the passion of each shows this.
The Lord was exalted on the cross; John was diminished by beheading.
Thus the light set on high is Christ, whence is the dew of Hermon.…But
if he have the dew of Hermon, which fell on the hill of Sion, he is
quiet, peaceable, humble, submissive, pouring forth prayer in place of
murmuring. For murmurers are admirably described in a certain passage of
the Scriptures, “The heart of a fool is as the wheel of a cart.”  <span
id="fr_5642"></span>[5643](#fn_5642) What is the meaning of “the heart
of a fool is as the wheel of a cart”? It carries hay, and creaks. The
wheel of a cart cannot cease from creaking. Thus there are many
brethren, who do not dwell together, save in the body. But who are they
who dwell together? They of whom it is said, “And they had one mind and
one heart towards God.” <span id="fr_5643"></span>[5644](#fn_5643)

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p28"></span>9. “Because there the Lord commanded
blessing.” Where did He command it? Among the brethren who dwell
together. There He enjoined blessing, there they who dwell with one
heart bless God. For thou blessest not God in division of heart.…Art
thou straitened on earth? Depart, have thy habitation in heaven. How
shall I, a man clothed in flesh, enslaved to the flesh, thou wilt say,
have my habitation in heaven. First go in heart, whither thou wouldest
<span id="page_624">p. 624</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-Page_624"></span>follow in the body. Do not hear, “Lift
up your hearts,” with a deaf ear. Keep thy heart lifted up, and no one
will straiten thee in heaven.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5626"></span>[622:5627](1080166.htm#fr_5626) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXXII. A public discourse, in
which he defends the Monks against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_5627"></span>[622:5628](1080166.htm#fr_5627) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p5"></span> [Isa. lxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5628"></span>[622:5629](1080166.htm#fr_5628) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p6"></span> Alluding to the two walls, Jewish and
Gentile, meeting in the corner. See on [Ps.
lix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p6.1"></span>
§ 5, p. 243, and on [Ps. xcv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p6.2"></span> § 6, p. 468.

<span id="fn_5629"></span>[622:5630](1080166.htm#fr_5629) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p7"></span> [Ps. cxxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p7.1"></span>.
*Excussi*, a literal translation of the Greek LXX. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXXIII-p7.2"></span>ἐκτετιναγμἐνοι</span>.
This translation of the ambiguous Hebrew root רעַנָ which means to shake
out, or expel, and רעַג a young man, is preferred by the LXX. to the
“young men” of our version. St. Augustin’s interpretation see on [Ps.
cxxvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p7.3"></span> § 7, p. 608.

<span id="fn_5630"></span>[622:5631](1080166.htm#fr_5630) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p8"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5631"></span>[622:5632](1080166.htm#fr_5631) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p9"></span> [Acts i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5632"></span>[622:5633](1080166.htm#fr_5632) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p10"></span> [Acts ii.
1-4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5633"></span>[622:5634](1080166.htm#fr_5633) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p11"></span> [Acts
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5634"></span>[622:5635](1080166.htm#fr_5634) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p12"></span> [Acts ii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#045)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5635"></span>[622:5636](1080166.htm#fr_5635) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p13"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5636"></span>[622:5637](1080166.htm#fr_5636) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p15"></span> The Circumcelliones were a wandering
kind of Anchorites, who lived under no rule, and were guilty of various
irregularities, and who were censured by the forty-second Canon of the
Council of Trullo. Confer also Papias: St. Jerome, *Ep*. 22, § 34;
Hunneric’s *Edict. Vict. Vitens*. lib. 3. A number of these, in Africa,
took up the cause of Donatus in a fanatical manner, and perpetrated
various acts of violence under pretence of religion, robbing and beating
whom they would, sending threatening notices, etc., and sometimes
seeking death, or even committing suicide under the name of Martyrdom.
See on [Ps. xi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p15.1"></span> p. 42, note 4, on [Ps.
lv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p15.2"></span>
p. 218, note 1, on [Ps. xcvi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p15.3"></span> p. 473, note 8, and S. Optatus, b. iii. c.
iv. p. 59, where a historical account is given. Ducange refers to St.
Augustin, *Ep*. 48, 50, 61, 68; *Contra Parmenian*, b. i. cap. 11;
*Contra Crescon*. b. iii. c. 42, 47; *Collat. Carthag*. 3, cap. 174,
281; Possidius, *Life of St. Augustin*, c. 10, 11; *Auctor
Prædestinati*, b. i. hæres 69, etc. Also *Cod. Theod. Cen*. 52, *De
Hæreticis*, but doubtfully as to its application. \[See Gibbon, *D. and
F*. cap. xxi. note 157, ed. Milman.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5637"></span>[623:5638](1080166.htm#fr_5637) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p17"></span> \[See A.N.F. vol. vi. p. 279.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5638"></span>[623:5639](1080166.htm#fr_5638) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p19.1"></span>μόνος</span>, Gr.

<span id="fn_5639"></span>[623:5640](1080166.htm#fr_5639) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p20"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5640"></span>[623:5641](1080166.htm#fr_5640) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p21"></span> \[The institution has perished even in
many parts of unreformed Europe, only because of the intolerable evils
of their corrupt and degenerate condition.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5641"></span>[623:5642](1080166.htm#fr_5641) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p25"></span> [John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5642"></span>[623:5643](1080166.htm#fr_5642) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p26"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
33.5](../../../bib/apo/sir033.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5643"></span>[623:5644](1080166.htm#fr_5643) <span
id="ii.CXXXIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p27"></span> [Acts iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)<span id="ii.CXXXIII-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXXIV](1080167)
