[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080034)  [Next](1080036) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XXXI"></span> <span id="ii.XXXI-p0.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.XXXI-p1.1"></span>Psalm XXXI. <span
id="fr_681"></span>[682](#fn_681) </span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p3"></span>*To the end, a psalm of David himself, an
ecstasy.* <span id="fr_682"></span>[683](#fn_682)

<span id="ii.XXXI-p5"></span>1. To the end a Psalm of David Himself, the
Mediator strong of hand in persecutions. For the word ecstasy, which is
added to the title, signifies a transport of the mind, which is produced
either by a panic, or by some revelation. But in this Psalm the panic of
the people of God troubled by the persecution of all the heathen, and by
the failing of faith throughout the world, is principally seen. But
first the Mediator Himself speaks: then the People redeemed by His Blood
gives thanks: at last in trouble it speaks at length, which is what
belongs to the ecstasy; but the Person of the Prophet himself is twice
interposed, near the end, and at the end.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p6"></span>2. “In Thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let Me
not be put to confusion for ever” ([Psa.
31.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#001)<span id="ii.XXXI-p6.1"></span>).
In Thee, O Lord, have I trusted, let Me never be confounded, whilst they
shall insult Me as one like other men. “In Thy righteousness rescue Me,
and deliver Me.” And in Thy righteousness rescue Me from the pit of
death, and deliver Me out of their company.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p7"></span>3. “Bend down Thine ear unto Me” ([Psa.
31.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002)<span id="ii.XXXI-p7.1"></span>).
Hear Me in My humiliation, nigh at hand unto Me. “Make haste to deliver
Me.” Defer not to the end of the world, as with all who believe on Me,
My separation from sinners. “Be unto Me a God who protecteth Me.” Be
unto Me God, and Protector. “And a house of refuge, that Thou mayest
save Me.” And as a house, wherein taking refuge I may be saved.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p8"></span>4. “For Thou art My strength, and My
refuge” ([Psa. 31.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p8.1"></span>). For Thou art unto Me My strength to bear My
persecutors, and My refuge <span id="page_69">p. 69</span> <span
id="ii.XXXI-Page_69"></span>to escape them. “And for Thy Name’s sake
Thou shalt be My guide, and shalt nourish Me.” And that by Me Thou
mayest be known to all the Gentiles. I will in all things follow Thy
will; and, by assembling, by degrees, Saints unto Me, Thou shalt fulfil
My body, and My perfect stature.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p9"></span>5. “Thou shalt bring Me out of this trap,
which they have hidden for Me” ([Psa.
31.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#004)<span id="ii.XXXI-p9.1"></span>).
Thou shalt bring Me out of these snares, which they have hidden for Me.
“For Thou art My Protector.”

<span id="ii.XXXI-p10"></span>6. “Into Thy hands I commend My Spirit”
([Psa. 31.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p10.1"></span>). To Thy power I commend My Spirit, soon to
receive It back. “Thou hast redeemed Me, O Lord God of truth.” Let the
people too, redeemed by the Passion of their Lord, and joyful in the
glorifying of their Head, say, “Thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of
truth.”

<span id="ii.XXXI-p11"></span>7. “Thou hatest them that hold to vanity
uselessly” ([Psa. 31.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p11.1"></span>). Thou hatest them that hold to the false
happiness of the world. “But I have trusted in the Lord.”

<span id="ii.XXXI-p12"></span>8. “I will be glad, and rejoice in Thy
mercy:” which doth not deceive me. “For Thou hast regarded My
humiliation:” wherein Thou hast subjected me to vanity in hope. <span
id="fr_683"></span>[684](#fn_683) “Thou hast saved my soul from
necessities” ([Psa. 31.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p13.2"></span>). Thou hast saved my soul from the
necessities of fear, that with a free love it may serve Thee.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p14"></span>9. “And hast not shut me up into the hands
of the enemy” ([Psa. 31.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p14.1"></span>). And hast not shut me up, that I should have
no opening for recovering unto liberty, and be given over for ever into
the power of the devil, ensnaring me with the desire of this life, and
terrifying me with death. “Thou hast set my feet in a large room.” The
resurrection of my Lord being known, and mine own being promised me, my
love, having been brought out of the straits of fear, walks abroad in
continuance, into the expanse of liberty.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p15"></span>10. “Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am
troubled” ([Psa. 31.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p15.1"></span>). But what is this unlooked-for cruelty of
the persecutors, striking such dread into me? “Have mercy on me, O
Lord.” For I am now no more alarmed for death, but for torments and
tortures. “Mine eye hath been disordered by anger.” I had mine eye upon
Thee, that Thou shouldest not abandon me: Thou art angry, and hast
disordered it. “My soul, and my belly.” By the same anger my soul hath
been disturbed, and my memory, whereby I retained what my God hath
suffered for me, and what He hath promised me.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p16"></span>11. “For my life hath failed in pain”
([Psa. 31.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p16.1"></span>). For my life is to confess Thee, but it
failed in pain, when the enemy had said, Let them be tortured until they
deny Him. “And my years in groanings.” The time that I pass in this
world is not taken away from me by death, but abides, and is spent in
groanings. “My strength hath been weakened by want.” I want the health
of this body, and racking pains come on me: I want the dissolution of
the body, and death forbears to come: and in this want my confidence
hath been weakened. “And my bones have been disturbed.” And my
stedfastness hath been disturbed.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p17"></span>12. “I have been made a reproach above all
mine enemies” ([Psa. 31.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p17.1"></span>). All the wicked are my enemies; and
nevertheless they for their wickednesses are tortured only till they
confess: I then have overpassed their reproach, I, whose confession
death doth not follow, but racking pains follow upon it. “And to my
neighbours too much.” This hath seemed too much to them, who were
already drawing near to know Thee, and to hold the faith that I hold.
“And a fear to mine acquaintance.” And into my very acquaintance I
struck fear by the example of my dreadful tribulation. “They that did
see me, fled without from me.” Because they did not understand my inward
and invisible hope, they fled from me into things outward and visible.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p18"></span>13. “I have been forgotten, as one dead
from the heart” ([Psa. 31.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p18.1"></span>). And they have forgotten me, as if I were
dead from their hearts. “I have become as a lost vessel.” I have seemed
to myself to be lost to all the Lord’s service, living in this world,
and gaining none, when all were afraid to join themselves unto me.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p19"></span>14. “For I have heard the rebuking of many
dwelling by in a circuit” ([Psa.
31.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p19.1"></span>). For I have heard many rebuking me, in the
pilgrimage of this world near me, following the circuit of time, and
refusing to return with me to the eternal country. “Whilst they were
assembling themselves together against me, they conspired that they
might take my soul.” That my soul, which should by death easily escape
from their power, might consent unto them, they imagined a device,
whereby they would not suffer me even to die.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p20"></span>15. “But I have hoped in Thee, O Lord; I
have said, Thou art my God” ([Psa.
31.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#014)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p20.1"></span>). For Thou hast not changed, that Thou
shouldest not save, Who dost correct.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p21"></span>16. “In Thy hands” are “my lots” ([Psa.
31.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#015)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p21.1"></span>). In Thy power are my lots. For I see no
desert for which out of the universal ungodliness of the human race Thou
hast elected me particularly to salvation. And though there be with Thee
some just and secret order in my election, yet I, from whom this is hid,
have attained by lot unto my Lord’s vesture. <span
id="fr_684"></span>[685](#fn_684) “Deliver me from the <span
id="page_70">p. 70</span> <span id="ii.XXXI-Page_70"></span>hands of
mine enemies, and from them that persecute me.”

<span id="ii.XXXI-p23"></span>17. “Make Thy Face to shine upon Thy
servant” ([Psa. 31.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#016)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p23.1"></span>). Make it known to men, who do not think that
I belong unto Thee, that Thy Face is bent upon me, and that I serve
Thee. “Save me in Thy mercy.”

<span id="ii.XXXI-p24"></span>18. “O Lord, let me not be confounded, for
I have called upon Thee” ([Psa.
31.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p24.1"></span>). O Lord, let me not be put to shame by those
who insult me, for that I have called upon Thee. “Let the ungodly be
ashamed, and be brought down to hell.” Let them rather who call upon
stones be ashamed, and made to dwell with darkness. <span
id="fr_685"></span>[686](#fn_685)

<span id="ii.XXXI-p26"></span>19. “Let the deceitful lips be made dumb”
([Psa. 31.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#018)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p26.1"></span>). In making known to the peoples Thy
mysteries wrought in me, strike with dumb amazement the lips of them
that invent falsehood of me. “Which speak iniquity against the
Righteous, in pride and contempt.” Which speak iniquity against Christ,
in their pride and contempt of Him as a crucified man.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p27"></span>20. “How great” is “the multitude of Thy
sweetness, O Lord” ([Psa. 31.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p27.1"></span>). Here the Prophet exclaims, having sight of
all this, and admiring how manifoldly plenteous is Thy sweetness, O
Lord. “Which Thou hast hid for them that fear Thee.” Even those, whom
Thou correctest, Thou lovest much: but lest they should go on
negligently from relaxed security, Thou hidest from them the sweetness
of Thy love, for whom it is profitable to fear Thee. “Thou hast
perfected it for them that hope in Thee.” But Thou hast perfected this
sweetness for them that hope in Thee. For Thou dost not withdraw from
them what they look for perseveringly even unto the end. “In sight of
the sons of men.” For it does not escape the notice of the sons of men,
who now live no more after Adam, but after the Son of Man. “Thou wilt
hide them in the hidden place of Thy Countenance:” which seat Thou shalt
preserve for everlasting in the hidden place of the knowledge of Thee
for them that hope in Thee. “From the troubling of men.” So that now
they suffer no more trouble from men.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p28"></span>21. “Thou wilt protect them in Thy
tabernacle from the contradiction of tongues” ([Psa.
31.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p28.1"></span>). But here meanwhile whilst evil tongues
murmur against them, saying, Who hath come thence? Thou wilt protect
them in the tabernacle, that of faith in those things, which the Lord
wrought and endured for us in time.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p29"></span>22. “Blessed be the Lord; for He hath made
His mercy marvellous, in the city of compassing” ([Psa.
31.21](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#021)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p29.1"></span>). Blessed be the Lord, for after the
correction of the sharpest persecutions He hath made His mercy
marvellous to all throughout the world, in the circuit of human
society. <span id="fr_686"></span>[687](#fn_686)

<span id="ii.XXXI-p31"></span>23. “I said in my ecstasy” <span
id="fr_687"></span>[688](#fn_687) ([Psa.
31.22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p32.1"></span>). Whence that people again speaking saith, I
said in my fear, when the heathen were raging horribly against me. “I
have been cast forth from the sight of Thine eyes.” For if Thou hadst
regard to me, Thou wouldest not suffer me to endure these things.
“Therefore Thou heardest, O Lord, the voice of my prayer, when I cried
unto Thee.” Therefore putting a limit to correction, and showing that I
have part in Thy care, Thou heardest, O Lord, the voice of my prayer,
when I raised it high <span id="fr_688"></span>[689](#fn_688) out of
tribulation.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p34"></span>24. “Love the Lord, all ye His saints”
([Psa. 31.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p34.1"></span>). The Prophet again exhorts, having sight of
these things, and saith, “Love the Lord, all ye His saints; for the Lord
will require truth.” Since “if the righteous shall scarcely be saved,
where shall the sinner and the ungodly appear?” <span
id="fr_689"></span>[690](#fn_689) “And He will repay them that do
exceeding proudly.” And He will repay them who even when conquered are
not converted, because they are very proud.

<span id="ii.XXXI-p36"></span>25. “Quit you like men, and let your heart
be strengthened” ([Psa. 31.24](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#024)<span
id="ii.XXXI-p36.1"></span>): working good without fainting, that ye may
reap in due season. “All ye who trust in the Lord:” that is, ye who duly
fear and worship Him, trust ye in the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_681"></span>[68:682](1080035.htm#fr_681) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p2"></span> Lat. XXX.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[68:683](1080035.htm#fr_682) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p4"></span> \[Borrowed from the Septuagint, where it
is anticipated from ver. 22. See p. 70, *infra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_683"></span>[69:684](1080035.htm#fr_683) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p13"></span> [Rom. viii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020)<span id="ii.XXXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[69:685](1080035.htm#fr_684) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p22"></span> [John xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span id="ii.XXXI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[70:686](1080035.htm#fr_685) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p25"></span> *Umbris socientur*.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[70:687](1080035.htm#fr_686) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p30"></span> \[Compare Hippolytus, vol. v. p. 202,
A.N.F.—C.\]

<span id="fn_687"></span>[70:688](1080035.htm#fr_687) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p32"></span> \[Elsewhere St. Augustin explains the
word “ecstasy” as sometimes=transport, sometimes=panic. See his sermon
on this Psalm, usually following this exposition.—C.\]

<span id="fn_688"></span>[70:689](1080035.htm#fr_688) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p33"></span> *Nimis*.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[70:690](1080035.htm#fr_689) <span
id="ii.XXXI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XXXI-p35"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.XXXI-p35.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XXXII](1080036)
