[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080170)  [Next](1080172) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p1"></span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p1.1"></span><span class="c20"><span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXXVIII. <span
id="fr_5699"></span>[5700](#fn_5699) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p3"></span>1. The title of this Psalm is brief and
simple, and need not detain us; since we know whose resemblance David
wore, and since in him we recognise ourselves also, for we too are
members of that Body. The whole title is, “To David himself.” Let us see
then, what is to David himself. The title of the Psalm is wont to tell
us what is treated of within it: but in this, since the title informs us
not of this, but tells us only to Whom it is chanted, the first verse
tells us what is treated of in the whole Psalm, “I will confess to
Thee.” This confession then let us hear. But first I remind you, that
the term confession in Scripture, when we speak of confession to God, is
used in two senses, of sin, and of praise. But confession of sin all
know, confession of praise few attend to. So well known is confession of
sin, that, wherever in Scripture we hear the words, “I will confess to
Thee, O Lord,” or, <span id="page_633">p. 633</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-Page_633"></span>“we will confess to Thee,” forthwith,
through habitually understanding in this way, our hands hurry to beating
our breast: so entirely are men wont not to understand confession to be
of aught, save of sin. But was then our Lord Jesus Christ Himself too a
sinner, who saith in the Gospel, “I confess to Thee, Father, Lord of
heaven and earth”? <span id="fr_5700"></span>[5701](#fn_5700) He goeth
on to say what He confesseth, that we might understand His confession to
be of praise, not of sin, “I confess to Thee, Father, Lord of heaven and
earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
hast revealed them unto babes.” He praised the Father, he praised God,
because He despiseth not the humble, but the proud. And such confession
are we now going to hear, of praise of God, of thanksgiving. “With my
whole heart.” My whole heart I lay upon the altar of Thy praise, an
whole burnt-offering <span id="fr_5701"></span>[5702](#fn_5701) of
praise I offer to Thee.…“I will confess to Thee, O Lord, with my whole
heart: for Thou hast heard the words of my mouth” ([Psa.
138.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p5.2"></span>). What mouth, save my heart? For there
have we the voice which God heareth, which ear of man knoweth not at
all. We have then a mouth within, there do we ask, thence do we ask, and
if we have prepared a lodging or an house for God, there do we speak,
there are we heard. “For He is not far from every one of us, for in Him
we live, and move, and have our being.” <span
id="fr_5702"></span>[5703](#fn_5702) Nought maketh thee far off from
God, save sin only. Cast down the middle wall of sin, and thou art with
Him whom thou askest.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p7"></span>2. “And before the Angels will I sing
unto Thee.” Not before men will I sing, but before the Angels. My song
is my joy; but my joy in things below is before men, my joy in things
above before the Angels. For the wicked knoweth not the joy of the just:
“There is no joy, saith my God, to the wicked.” <span
id="fr_5703"></span>[5704](#fn_5703) The wicked rejoiceth in his tavern,
the martyr in his chain. In what did that holy Crispina rejoice, whose
festival is kept to-day? She rejoiced when she was being seized, when
she was being carried before the judge, when she was being put into
prison, when she was being brought forth bound, when she was being
lifted up on the scaffold, <span id="fr_5704"></span>[5705](#fn_5704)
when she was being heard, when she was being condemned: in all these
things she rejoiced; and the wretches thought her wretched, when she was
rejoicing before the Angels.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p10"></span>3. “I will worship toward Thy holy
Temple” ([Psa. 138.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p10.1"></span>). What holy Temple? That where we shall
dwell, where we shall worship. For we hasten that we may adore. Our
heart is pregnant and cometh to the birth, and seeketh where it may
bring forth. What is the place where God is to be worshipped?…“The
Temple of God is holy,” saith the Apostle, “which Temple ye are.” <span
id="fr_5705"></span>[5706](#fn_5705) But assuredly, as is manifest, God
dwelleth in the Angels. Therefore when our joy, being in spiritual
things, not in earthly, taketh up a song to God, to sing before the
Angels, that very assembly of Angels is the Temple of God, we worship
toward God’s Temple. There is a Church below, there is a Church above
also; the Church below, in all the faithful; the Church above, in all
the Angels. But the God of Angels came down to the Church below, and
Angels ministered to Him on earth, <span
id="fr_5706"></span>[5707](#fn_5706) while He ministered to us; for, “I
came not,” saith He, “to be ministered unto, but to minister.” <span
id="fr_5707"></span>[5708](#fn_5707) …The Lord of Angels died for man.
Therefore, “I will worship toward Thy holy Temple;” I mean, not the
temple made with hands, but that which Thou hast made for Thyself.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p14"></span>4. “And I will confess to Thy Name in
Thy mercy and Thy truth.”…These also which Thou hast given to me, do I
according to my power give to Thee in return: mercy, in aiding others;
truth, in judging. By these God aideth us, by these we win God’s favour.
Rightly, therefore, “All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth.” No
other ways are there whereby He can come to us, no other whereby we can
come to Him. “For Thou hast magnified Thy holy Name over everything.”
What sort of thanksgiving is this, brethren? He hath magnified His holy
Name over Abraham. Of Abraham was born Isaac; over that house God was
magnified; then Jacob; God was magnified, who said, “I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” Then came his
twelve sons. The name of the Lord was magnified over Israel. Then came
the Virgin Mary. Then Christ our Lord, “dying for our sins, rising again
for our justification,”  <span id="fr_5708"></span>[5709](#fn_5708)
filling the faithful with His Holy Spirit, sending forth men to proclaim
throughout the Gentiles, “Repent ye,” etc. <span
id="fr_5709"></span>[5710](#fn_5709) Behold, “He hath magnified His holy
Name above all things.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p17"></span>5. “In what day soever I call upon
Thee, do Thou quickly hear me” ([Psa.
138.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p17.1"></span>). Wherefore, “quickly”? Because Thou hast
said, “While yet thou art speaking I will say, Lo, here I am.” <span
id="fr_5710"></span>[5711](#fn_5710) Wherefore, “quickly”? Because now I
seek not earthly happiness, I have learnt holy longings from the New
Testament. I seek not earth, nor earthly abundance, nor temporal health,
nor the overthrow of my enemies, nor riches, nor rank: nought of these
do I seek: <span id="page_634">p. 634</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-Page_634"></span>therefore “quickly hear me.” Since Thou
hast taught me what to seek, grant what I seek.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p19"></span>6. Let us see then what he seeketh,
with what right he hath said, “quickly hear me.” For what seekest thou,
that thou shouldest quickly be heard? “Thou shalt multiply me.” In many
ways may multiplication be understood.…For men are multiplied in their
soul with cares: a man seemeth to be multiplied in soul, in whom vices
even are multiplied. That is the multiplication of want, not of fulness.
What then dost thou desire, thou who hast said, “quickly hear me,” and
hast withdrawn thyself entirely from the body, from every earthly thing,
from every earthly desire, so as to say to God, “Thou shalt multiply me
in my soul”? Explain yet further what thou desirest. Thou shalt multiply
me, saith he, in my soul “with virtue.”…

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p20"></span>7. “Let all the kings of the earth
confess to Thee, O Lord” ([Psa.
138.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p20.1"></span>). So shall it be, and so it is, and that
daily; and it is shown that it was not said in vain, save that it was
future. But neither let them, when they confess to Thee, when they
praise Thee, desire earthly things of Thee. For what shall the kings of
the earth desire? Have they not already sovereignty? Whatever more a man
desire on earth, sovereignty is the highest point of his desire. What
more can he desire? It must needs be some loftier eminence. But perhaps
the loftier it is, the more dangerous. And therefore the more exalted
kings are in earthly eminence, the more ought they to humble themselves
before God. What do they do? “Because they have heard all the words of
Thy mouth.” In a certain nation were hidden the Law and the Prophets,
“all the words of Thy mouth:” in the Jewish nation alone were “all the
words of Thy mouth,” the nation which the Apostle praiseth, saying,
“What advantage hath the Jew? Much every way; chiefly because that unto
them were committed the oracles of God.” These were the words of
God. <span id="fr_5711"></span>[5712](#fn_5711) …What meant Gideon’s
fleece? It is like the nation of the Jews in the midst of the world,
which had the grace of sacraments, not indeed openly manifested, but
hidden in a cloud, or in a veil, like the dew in the fleece. <span
id="fr_5712"></span>[5713](#fn_5712) The time came when the dew was to
be manifested in the floor; it was manifested, no longer hidden. Christ
alone is the sweetness of dew: Him alone thou recognisest not in
Scripture, for whom Scripture was written. But yet, “they have heard all
the words of thy mouth.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p23"></span>8. “And let them sing in the paths of
the Lord, that great is the glory of the Lord” ([Psa.
138.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p23.1"></span>). Let all the kings of the earth sing in
the paths of the Lord. In what paths? Those that are spoken of above,
“in Thy mercy and Thy truth.” Let not then the kings of the earth be
proud, let them be humble. Then let them sing in the ways of the Lord,
if they be humble: let them love, and they shall sing. We know
travellers that sing; they sing, and hasten to reach the end of their
journey. There are evil songs, such as belong to the old man; to the new
man belongeth a new song. Let then the kings of the earth too walk in
Thy paths, let them walk and sing in Thy paths. Sing what? that “great
is the glory of the Lord,” not of kings.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p24"></span>9. See how he willed that kings should
sing on their way, humbly bearing the Lord, not lifting themselves up
against the Lord. For if they lift themselves up, what follows? “For the
Lord is high, and hath respect unto the lowly” ([Psa.
138.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p24.1"></span>). Do kings then desire that He have
respect unto them? Let them be humble. What then? if they lift
themselves up to pride, can they escape His eyes? Lest perchance,
because thou hast heard, “He hath respect unto the lowly,” thou choose
to be proud, and say in thy soul, God hath respect unto the lowly, He
hath not respect unto me, I will do what I will. O foolish one! wouldest
thou say this, if thou knewest what thou oughtest to love? Behold, even
if God willeth not to see thee, dost thou not fear this very thing, that
He willeth not to see thee?…The lofty then, it seemeth, He hath not
respect unto, for it is the lowly He respecteth. “The lofty”—what? “He
considereth from afar.” What then gaineth the proud? To be seen from
afar, not to escape being seen. And think not that thou must needs be
safe on that account, for that He seeth less clearly, who seeth thee
from afar. For thou indeed seest not clearly, what thou seest from afar;
God, although He see thee from afar, seeth thee perfectly, yet is He not
with thee. This thou gainest, not that thou art less perfectly seen, but
that thou art not with Him by whom thou art seen. But what doth the
lowly gain? “The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a contrite heart.”
Let the proud then lift himself up as much as he will, certainly God
dwelleth on high, God is in heaven: wishest thou that He come nigh to
thee? Humble thyself. For the higher will He be above thee, the more
thou liftest thyself up.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p25"></span>10. “If I walk in the midst of
tribulation, Thou shalt revive me” ([Psa.
138.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p25.1"></span>). True it is: whatsoever tribulation thou
art in, confess, call on Him; He freeth thee, He reviveth thee.…Love the
other life, and thou shalt see that this life is tribulation, whatever
prosperity it shine with, whatever delights it abound and overflow with;
since not yet have we that joy most safe and free from all temptation,
which God reserveth for us in the end, without doubt it is <span
id="page_635">p. 635</span> <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-Page_635"></span>tribulation. Let us understand then
what tribulation he meaneth here too, brethren. Not as though he said,
“If perchance there shall any tribulation have befallen me, Thou shalt
free me therefrom.” But how saith he? “If I walk,” etc.; that is,
otherwise Thou wilt not revive me, unless I walk in the midst of
tribulation.

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p26"></span>11. “Thou hast stretched forth Thine
hand over the wrath of mine enemies, and Thy right hand hath made me
safe.” Let mine enemies rage: what can they do? They can take my money,
strip, proscribe, banish me; afflict me with grief and tortures; at
last, if they be allowed, even kill me: can they do aught more? But over
that which mine enemies can do, Thou hast stretched forth Thine hand.
For mine enemies cannot separate me from Thee: but Thou avengest me the
more, the more Thou as yet delayest.…Yet not to make me despair; for it
follows, “and Thy right hand hath made me safe.”

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p27"></span>12. “Thou, Lord, shalt recompense for
me” ([Psa. 138.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p27.1"></span>). I recompense not: Thou shalt
recompense. Let mine enemies rage their full: Thou shalt recompense what
I cannot.…“Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves,” saith the Apostle,
“but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is Mine,
I will repay, saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_5713"></span>[5714](#fn_5713) There is here another sense not to
be neglected, perhaps even to be preferred. “Lord” Christ, “Thou shalt
repay for me.” For I, if I repay, have seized; Thou hast paid what Thou
hast not seized. Lord, Thou shalt “repay for me.” Behold Him repaying
for us. They came to Him, who exacted tribute: <span
id="fr_5714"></span>[5715](#fn_5714) they used to demand as tribute a
didrachma, that is, two drachmas for one man; they came to the Lord to
pay tribute; or rather, not to Him, but to His disciples, and they said
to them, “Doth not your Master pay tribute?” They came and told Him. He
saith unto Peter, “lest we should offend them, go thou to the sea, and
cast an hook, and take up the fish that first cometh up: and when thou
hast opened his mouth, thou shalt find a stater:  <span
id="fr_5715"></span>[5716](#fn_5715) that take, and give for Me and
thee.” The first that riseth from the sea, is the First-begotten from
the dead. In His mouth we find two didrachmas, that is, four drachmas:
in His mouth we find the four Gospels. By those four drachmas we are
free from the claims of this world, by the four Evangelists we remain no
longer debtors; for there the debt of all our sins is paid. He then hath
repaid for us, thanks to His mercy. He owed nothing: He repaid not for
Himself: He repaid for us.…

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p31"></span>13. “Lord, Thy mercy is for
everlasting.”…Not for a time only do I desire to be freed. “Thy mercy is
for everlasting,” wherewith Thou hast freed the martyrs, and so hast
quickly taken them from this life. “Despise not Thou the works of Thine
own hands.” I say not, Lord, “despise not the works of my hands:” of
mine own works I boast not. “I sought,” indeed, “the Lord with my hands
in the night season before Him, and have not been deceived;” but yet I
praise not the works of mine own hands; I fear lest, when Thou shalt
look into them, Thou find more sins in them than deserts. Behold in me
Thy Work, not mine: for mine if Thou seest, Thou condemnest; Thine, if
Thou seest, Thou crownest. For whatever good works there be of mine,
from Thee are they to me; and so they are more Thine than mine. <span
id="fr_5716"></span>[5717](#fn_5716) Therefore whether in regard that we
are men, or in regard that we have been changed and justified from our
iniquity, Lord, “despise not Thou the works of Thine own hands.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5699"></span>[632:5700](1080171.htm#fr_5699) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXXVII.

<span id="fn_5700"></span>[633:5701](1080171.htm#fr_5700) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p4"></span> *Confiteor Tibi*. [Matt. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5701"></span>[633:5702](1080171.htm#fr_5701) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p5"></span> \[He adds: “A whole burnt offering is
a sacrifice where the whole is burnt, for the Greek word <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p5.1"></span>ὅλον</span>,
(*holocaustum*, Lat.) meaneth ‘whole.’”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5702"></span>[633:5703](1080171.htm#fr_5702) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p6"></span> [Acts
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5703"></span>[633:5704](1080171.htm#fr_5703) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p8"></span> [Isa.
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#022), [Isa.
57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5704"></span>[633:5705](1080171.htm#fr_5704) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p9"></span> *Catasta*.

<span id="fn_5705"></span>[633:5706](1080171.htm#fr_5705) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p11"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5706"></span>[633:5707](1080171.htm#fr_5706) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p12"></span> [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5707"></span>[633:5708](1080171.htm#fr_5707) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p13"></span> [Matt. xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5708"></span>[633:5709](1080171.htm#fr_5708) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p15"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5709"></span>[633:5710](1080171.htm#fr_5709) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p16"></span> [Matt. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5710"></span>[633:5711](1080171.htm#fr_5710) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p18"></span> [Isa. lviii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5711"></span>[634:5712](1080171.htm#fr_5711) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p21"></span> [Rom.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5712"></span>[634:5713](1080171.htm#fr_5712) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p22"></span> [Judg.
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#037),
[39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#039)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5713"></span>[635:5714](1080171.htm#fr_5713) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p28"></span> [Rom. xii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5714"></span>[635:5715](1080171.htm#fr_5714) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p29"></span> [Matt. xvii.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5715"></span>[635:5716](1080171.htm#fr_5715) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p30"></span> That is, two didrachmas.

<span id="fn_5716"></span>[635:5717](1080171.htm#fr_5716) <span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXXVIII-p32"></span> [Eph. ii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXXIX](1080172)
