[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080144)  [Next](1080146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p1"></span> *<span class="c2"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p1.1"></span>Samech.</span>*

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p2"></span>112. “I have hated the unrighteous; and
Thy law have I loved” ([Psa.
119.113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p2.1"></span>). He saith not, I hate the wicked, and love
the righteous; or, I hate iniquity, and love Thy law; but, after saying,
“I have hated the unrighteous,” he explains why, by adding, “and Thy law
have I loved;” to show, that he did not hate human nature in unrighteous
men, but their unrighteousness whereby they are foes to the law, which
he loveth.

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p3"></span>113. He next addeth: “Thou art my helper
and my taker up” ([Psa. 119.114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p3.1"></span>): “my helper,” to do good works: “my taker
up,” to escape evil ones. In the next words, “I have hoped more on Thy
word,” he speaketh as a son of promise.

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p4"></span>114. But what is the meaning of the
following verse: “Away from me, ye wicked, and I will search the
commandments of my God”? ([Psa.
119.115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p4.1"></span>). For he saith not, I will perform; but, “I
will search.” In order, therefore, that he may diligently and perfectly
learn that law, he bids the wicked depart from him, and even forcibly
driveth them away from his company. For the wicked exercise us in the
fulfilment of the commandments, but lead us away from searching into
them; not only when they persecute, or wish to litigate with us; but
even when they court us, and honour us, and yet expect us to occupy
ourselves in aiding their own vicious and busy desire, and to bestow our
time upon them; or at least harass the weak, and compel them to bring
their causes before us: to whom we dare not say, “Man, who made me a
judge or a divider over you?” <span id="fr_5297"></span>[5298](#fn_5297)
For the Apostle instituted ecclesiastical judges of such causes,
forbidding Christians to contend in the forum. <span
id="fr_5298"></span>[5299](#fn_5298) …Certainly, on account of those who
carry on law suits pertinaciously with one another, and, when they
harass the good, scorn our judgments, and cause us to lose the time that
should be employed upon things divine; surely, I say, on account of
these men we also may exclaim in these words of the Body of Christ,
“Away from me, ye wicked! and I will search the commandments of my God.”

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p7"></span>115. “O stablish me according to Thy
word and I shall live: and let me not be disappointed of my hope” ([Psa.
119.116](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#116)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p7.1"></span>). He who had before said, “Thou art my
taker up,” prayeth that he may be more and more borne up, and be led
unto that, for the sake of which he endureth so many troubles; trusting
that he may there live in a truer sense, than in these dreams of human
affairs. For it is said of the future, “and I shall live,” as if we did
not live in this dead body. While “we await the redemption of our body,
we are saved by hope, and hoping for that we see not, we await with
patience.” <span id="fr_5299"></span>[5300](#fn_5299) But hope
disappointeth not, if the love of God be spread abroad in our hearts
through the Holy Spirit which is given unto us. <span
id="fr_5300"></span>[5301](#fn_5300) And, as though it were answered him
in silence, Thou dost not wish to be disappointed of thy hope? Cease not
to meditate upon My righteousnesses: and, feeling that this meditation
is usually hindered by the weaknesses of the soul, “Help me,” he saith,
“and I shall be safe; yea, I will meditate in Thy righteousnesses
always” ([Psa. 119.117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p9.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p10"></span>116. “Thou hast scorned all,” or, as it
seems more closely translated from the Greek, “Thou hast brought to
nought all them that depart from Thy righteousnesses: for their thought
is unrighteous” ([Psa. 119.118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p10.1"></span>). For this reason he exclaimed, “Help Thou
me, and I shall be safe; yea, I will meditate in Thy righteousnesses
always:” because God bringeth to nought all those who depart from His
righteousnesses. But why do they depart? Because “their thought is,” he
saith, “unrighteous.” They advance in that direction, while they depart
from God. All deeds, good or bad, proceed from the thoughts: in his
thoughts every man is innocent, in his thoughts every man is guilty.…

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11"></span>117. The next words in the Psalm are,
“I have counted,” or “thought,” or “esteemed, all the ungodly of the
earth as transgressors” ([Psa.
119.119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11.1"></span>). In the Latin version many different
renderings are given of the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11.3"></span>λογισ€μην</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11.4"></span>;</span> but this passage hath a deep
meaning. For the following words, “Therefore have I ever loved Thy
testimonies:” make it far more profound. For the Apostle saith, “The law
worketh wrath;” and, explaining these words, he addeth, “For where no
law is, there is no transgression:” <span
id="fr_5301"></span>[5302](#fn_5301) thereby showing that not all are
transgressors. For all have not the law. That all have not the law, he
declareth more explicitly in another passage, “as many as have sinned
without law, shall also perish without law.” <span
id="fr_5302"></span>[5303](#fn_5302) What then meaneth, “I have held all
the ungodly of the earth as transgressors”? “As transgressors;” or
rather “transgressing,” for the Greek saith, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p13.2"></span>παραβαίνοντας</span>, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p13.3"></span>παραβ€τας</span>.…<span
id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span id="ii.CXIX.xv-Page_580"></span>“The
law entered that sin might abound.” But since all sins are remitted
through grace, not only those which are committed without the law, but
those also which are committed in the law; he addeth, “But where sin
abounded, grace did much more abound.” <span
id="fr_5303"></span>[5304](#fn_5303) …But, indeed, when the Apostle
said, “As many as have sinned without law, shall perish without law,” he
was speaking of that law which God gave to His people Israel through
Moses His servant.…For some even Catholic expositors, from a want of
sufficient heedfulness, have pronounced contrary to the truth, that
those who have sinned without the law perish; and that those who have
sinned in the law, are only judged, and do not perish, as if they should
be considered destined to be cleansed by means of transitory
punishments, as he of whom it is said, “he himself shall be saved, yet
so as by fire.” <span id="fr_5304"></span>[5305](#fn_5304) …The Psalmist
also hath subjoined: “Therefore I loved Thy testimonies.” <span
id="fr_5305"></span>[5306](#fn_5305) As if he should say: Since the law,
whether given in paradise, or implanted by nature, or promulgated in
writing, hath made all the sinners of the earth transgressors;
“Therefore I loved Thy testimonies,” which are in Thy laws of Thy grace;
so that not my but Thy righteousness is in me. For the law profiteth
unto this end, that it send us forward unto grace. For not only because
it testifieth towards the manifestation of the righteousness of God,
which is without the law; but also in this very point that it rendereth
men transgressors, so that the letter even slayeth, it driveth us to fly
unto the quickening Spirit, through whom the whole of our sins may be
blotted out, and the love of righteous deeds be inspired. <span
id="fr_5306"></span>[5307](#fn_5306) …

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18"></span>118. The grace of God, then, being
known, which alone freeth from transgression, which is committed through
knowledge of the law, he saith, in prayer, “Fix with nails my flesh in
Thy fear” ([Psa. 119.120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18.1"></span>). For this some Latin interpreters have
literally rendered the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18.2"></span>καθήλωσον</span>, which that language has
expressed in one word. Some have preferred to render by the word
*confige,* without adding *clavis;* and while they thus desire to
construe one Latin by one Greek word, have failed to express the full
meaning of the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18.3"></span>καθήλωσον</span>, because in *confige*
nails are not mentioned, but <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18.4"></span> καθήλωσον</span> cannot be taken but of
nails, nor can “fix with nails” be expressed without using two words in
Latin.…Hath he added, “For I have feared Thy judgments”? What meaneth,
“Fix me in Thy fear: for I have feared”? If he had already feared, or if
he was now fearing, why did he still pray God to crucify his flesh in
His fear? Did he wish so much additional fear imparted to him as would
suffice for crucifying his flesh, that is, his carnal lusts and
affections; as though he should say, Perfect in me the fear of Thee; for
I have feared Thy judgments? But there is here even a higher sense,
which must, as far as God alloweth, be derived from searching the
recesses of this Scripture: that is, in the chaste fear of Thee, which
abideth from age to age, let my carnal desires be quenched; <span
id="fr_5307"></span>[5308](#fn_5307) “For I have feared Thy judgments,”
when the law, which could not give me righteousness, threatened me
punishment.…For the inclination to sin liveth, and it then appeareth in
deed, when impunity may be hoped for. But when punishment is considered
sure to follow, it liveth latently: nevertheless it liveth. For it would
rather it were lawful to sin, and it grieveth that what the law
forbiddeth, is not lawful; because it is not spiritually delighted with
the blessing of the law, but carnally feareth the evil which it
threateneth. <span id="fr_5308"></span>[5309](#fn_5308) But that love,
which casteth out this fear, feareth with a chaste fear to sin, although
no punishment follow; because it doth not even judge that impunity will
follow, since from love of righteousness it considereth the very sin
itself a punishment. With such a fear the flesh is crucified; since
carnal delights, which are forbidden rather than avoided by the letter
of the law, are overcome by the delight in spiritual blessings, and also
when the victory is perfected are destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5297"></span>[579:5298](1080145.htm#fr_5297) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p5"></span> [Luke xii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5298"></span>[579:5299](1080145.htm#fr_5298) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p6"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
1-6](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5299"></span>[579:5300](1080145.htm#fr_5299) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p8"></span> [Rom. viii.
23-25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5300"></span>[579:5301](1080145.htm#fr_5300) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p9"></span> [Rom. v.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5301"></span>[579:5302](1080145.htm#fr_5301) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p11.5"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p12"></span> [Rom. iv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#015)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5302"></span>[579:5303](1080145.htm#fr_5302) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p13"></span> [Rom. ii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5303"></span>[580:5304](1080145.htm#fr_5303) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p13.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p14"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5304"></span>[580:5305](1080145.htm#fr_5304) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p15"></span> \[A fundamental objection to the
doctrine of purgatory.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5305"></span>[580:5306](1080145.htm#fr_5305) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p16"></span> \[The author adds: “Some copies read
‘always,’ some do not. If it be correct, it must be understood to mean,
during our present life on earth.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5306"></span>[580:5307](1080145.htm#fr_5306) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p17"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5307"></span>[580:5308](1080145.htm#fr_5307) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p18.5"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p19"></span> [Ps. xix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5308"></span>[580:5309](1080145.htm#fr_5308) <span
id="ii.CXIX.xv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXIX.xv-p20"></span> \[Hence “attrition” is not sufficient
to obtain remission.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ain.](1080146)
