[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080046)  [Next](1080048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XL"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XL-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XL-p1.2"></span>Psalm XL. <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086) </span>

<span id="ii.XL-p3"></span>1. Of all those things which our Lord Jesus
Christ has foretold, we know part to have been already accomplished,
part we hope will be accomplished hereafter. All of them, however, will
be fulfilled, because He is “the Truth” who speaks them, and requires of
us to be as “faithful,” as He Himself speaks them faithfully.…

<span id="ii.XL-p4"></span>2. Let us say then what this Psalm says. “I
waited patiently for the Lord” ([Psa.
40.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#001)<span id="ii.XL-p4.1"></span>). I
waited patiently for the promise of no mere mortal who can both deceive
and be himself deceived: I waited for the consolation of no mere mortal,
who may be consumed by sorrow of his own, before he gives me comfort.
Should a brother mortal attempt to comfort me, when he himself is in
sorrow likewise? Let us mourn in company; let us weep together, let us
“wait patiently” together, let us join our prayers together also. Whom
did I wait for but for the Lord? The Lord, who though He puts off the
fulfilment of His promises, yet never recalls them? He will make it
good; assuredly He will make it good, because He has made many of His
promises good already: and of God’s truth we ought to have no fears,
even if as yet He had made none of them good. Lo! let us henceforth
think thus, “He has promised us everything; He has not as yet given us
possession of anything; He is a sponsible Promiser; a faithful
Paymaster: do you but show yourself a dutiful exactor of what is
promised; and if you be “weak,” if you be one of the little ones, claim
the promise of His mercy. Do you not see tender <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087) lambs striking their dams’ teats
with their heads, in order that they may get their fill of milk?…“And He
took heed unto me, and heard my cry.” He took heed to it, and He heard
it. See thou hast not waited in vain. His eyes are over thee. His ears
turned towards thee. For, “the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous,
and His ears are open unto their cry.” <span
id="fr_1088"></span>[1089](#fn_1088) What then? Did He not see thee,
when thou usedst to do evil and to blaspheme Him? What then becomes of
what is said in that very Psalm, “The face of the Lord is upon them that
do evil”? <span id="fr_1089"></span>[1090](#fn_1089) But for what end?
“that He may cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.” Therefore,
even when thou wert wicked, He “took heed *of* thee;” but He “took no
heed *to* thee.” <span id="fr_1090"></span>[1091](#fn_1090) So then to
him who “waited patiently for the Lord,” it was not enough to say, “He
took heed *of* me, He says, “He took heed *to* me;” that is, He took
heed by comforting me, that He might do me good. What was it that He
took heed to? “and He heard my cry.”

<span id="ii.XL-p9"></span>3. And what hath He accomplished for thee?
What hath He done for thee? “He brought me up also out of a horrible
pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet upon a rock, and established
my goings” ([Psa. 40.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XL-p9.1"></span>). He hath given us great blessings already: and
still He is our debtor; but let him who hath this part of the debt
repaid already, believe that the rest will be also, seeing that he ought
to have believed even before he received anything. Our Lord has employed
facts themselves to persuade us, that He is a faithful promiser, a
liberal giver. What then <span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_120"></span>has He already done? “He has brought me out
of a horrible pit.” What horrible pit is that? It is the depth of
iniquity, from the lusts of the flesh, for this is meant by “the miry
clay.” <span id="fr_1091"></span>[1092](#fn_1091) Whence hath He brought
thee out? Out of a certain deep, out of which thou criedst out in
another Psalm, “Out of the deep have I called unto Thee, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[1093](#fn_1092) And those who are already “crying
out of the deep,” are not absolutely in the lowest deep: the very act of
crying is already lifting them up. There are some deeper in the deep,
who do not even perceive themselves to be in the deep. Such are those
who are proud despisers, not pious entreaters for pardon; not tearful
criers for mercy: but such as Scripture thus describes. “The
sinner <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1094](#fn_1093) when he comes into the
depth of evil despiseth.” <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1095](#fn_1094) For
he is deeper in the deep, who is not satisfied with being a sinner,
unless instead of confessing he even defends his sins. But he who has
already “cried out of the deep,” hath already lifted up his head in
order that he might “cry out of the deep,” has been heard already, and
has been “brought out of the horrible pit, and out of the mire and
clay.” He already has faith, which he had not before; he has hope, which
he was before without; he now walks in Christ, who before used to go
astray in the devil. For on that account it is that he says, “He hath
set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.” Now “that Rock was
Christ.” <span id="fr_1095"></span>[1096](#fn_1095) Supposing that we
are “upon the rock,” and that our “goings are ordered,” still it is
necessary that we continue to walk; that we advance to something
farther. For what did the Apostle Paul say when now upon the Rock, when
his “goings had now been established”? “Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect: Brethren, I count not myself to
have apprehended.” <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1097](#fn_1096) What then
has been done for thee, if thou hast not apprehended? On what account
dost thou return thanks, saying, “But I have obtained mercy”? <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1098](#fn_1097) Because his goings are now
established, because he now walks on the Rock?…Therefore, when he was
saying, “I press forward toward the prize of my high calling,” because
“his feet were now set on the Rock,” and “his goings were ordered,”
because he was now walking on the right way, he had something to return
thanks for; something to ask for still; returning thanks for what he had
received already, while he was claiming that which still remained due.
For what things already received was he giving thanks? For the remission
of sins, for the illumination of faith; for the strong support of hope,
for the fire of charity. But in what respects had he still a claim of
debt on the Lord? “Henceforth,” he says, “there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness.” There is therefore something due me still. What
is it that is due? “A crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that day.” He was at first a loving
Father to “bring him forth from the horrible pit;” to forgive his sins,
to rescue him from “the mire and clay;” hereafter he will be a
“righteous Judge,” requiting to him walking rightly, what He promised;
to him (I say), unto whom He had at the first granted that power to walk
rightly. He then as a “righteous Judge” will repay; but whom will he
repay? “He that endureth unto the end, the same shall be saved.” <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[1099](#fn_1098)

<span id="ii.XL-p18"></span>4. “And He hath put a new song in my mouth.”
What new song is this? “Even a hymn unto our God” ([Psa.
40.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)<span id="ii.XL-p18.1"></span>).
Perhaps you used to sing hymns to strange gods; old hymns, because they
were uttered by the “old man,” not by the “new man;” let the “new man”
be formed, and let him sing a “new song;” being himself made “new,” let
him love those “new” things by which he is himself made new. For what is
more Ancient than God, who is before all things, and is without end and
without beginning? He becomes “new” to thee, when thou returnest to Him;
because it was by departing from Him, that thou hadst become old; and
hadst said, “I have waxed old because of all mine enemies.” <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[1100](#fn_1099) We therefore utter “a hymn unto our
God;” and the hymn itself sets us free. “For I will call upon the Lord
to praise Him, and I will be safe from all mine enemies.” For a hymn is
a song of praise. Call on God to “praise” Him, not to find fault with
Him.…

<span id="ii.XL-p20"></span>5. If haply any one asks, what person is
speaking in this Psalm? I would say briefly, “It is Christ.” But as ye
know, brethren, and as we must say frequently, Christ sometimes speaks
in His own Person, in the Person of our Head. For He Himself is “the
Saviour of the Body.” <span id="fr_1100"></span>[1101](#fn_1100) He is
our Head; the Son of God, who was born of the Virgin, suffered for us,
“rose again for our justification,” sitteth “at the right hand of God,”
to “make intercession for us:” <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101) who is also to recompense to the
evil and to the good, in the judgment, all the evil and the good that
they have done. He deigned to be come our Head; to become “the Head of
the Body,” by taking of us that flesh in which He should die for us;
that flesh which He also raised up again for our sakes, that in that
flesh He might place before us an instance of the resurrection; that we
might learn to hope for <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_121"></span>that of which we heretofore despaired, and
might henceforth have our feet upon the rock, and might walk in Christ.
He then sometimes speaks in the name of our Head; sometimes also He
speaks of us who are His members. For both when He said, “I was an
hungred, and ye gave Me meat,” <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102) He spoke on behalf of His members,
not of Himself: and when He said, “Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
Me?” <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103) the Head was crying on
behalf of its members: and yet He did not say, “Why dost thou persecute
My members?” but, “Why persecutest thou Me?” If He suffers in us, then
shall we also be crowned in Him. Such is the love of Christ. What is
there can be compared to this? This is the thing on account of which “He
hath put a hymn in our mouth,” and this He speaks on behalf of His
members.

<span id="ii.XL-p25"></span>6. “The just shall see, and shall fear, and
shall trust in the Lord.” “The just shall see.” Who are the just? The
faithful; because it is “by faith that the just shall live.” <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[1105](#fn_1104) For there is in the Church this
order, some go before, others follow; and those who go before make
themselves “an example” to those who follow; and those who follow
imitate those who go before. But do those then follow no one, who
exhibit themselves as an ensample to them that come after? If they
follow no one at all, they will fall into error. These persons then must
themselves also follow some one, that is, Christ Himself.…“The just,”
therefore, “shall see, and shall fear.” They see a narrow way on the one
hand; on the other side, “a broad road:” on this side they see few, on
the other many. But thou art a just man; count them not, but weigh them;
bring “a just balance,” not a “deceitful” one: because thou art called
just. “The just shall see, and fear,” applies to thee. Count not
therefore the multitudes of men that are filling the “broad ways,” that
are to fill the circus tomorrow; celebrating with shouts the City’s
Anniversary,  <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1106](#fn_1105) while they
defile the City itself by evil living. Look not at them; they are many
in number; and who can count them? But there are a few travelling along
the narrow road. Bring forth the balance, I say. Weigh them; see what a
quantity of chaff you lift up on the one side, against a few grains of
corn on the other. Let this be done by “the just,” the “believers,” who
are to follow. And what shall they who precede do? Let them not be
proud, let them not “exalt themselves;” let them not deceive those who
follow them. How may they deceive those who follow them? By promising
them salvation in themselves. What then ought those who follow to do?
“The just shall see, and fear: and shall trust in the Lord;” not in
those who go before them. But indeed they fix their eyes on those who go
before them, and follow and imitate them; but they do so, because they
consider from Whom they have received the grace to go before them; and
because they trust in Him.  <span id="fr_1106"></span>[1107](#fn_1106)
Although therefore they make these their models, they place their trust
in Him from whom the others have received the grace whereby they are
such as they are. “The just shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in
the Lord.” Just as in another Psalm, “I lift up mine eyes unto the
hills,” <span id="fr_1107"></span>[1108](#fn_1107) we understand by
hills, all distinguished and great spiritual persons in the Church;
great in solidity, not by swollen inflation. By these it is that all
Scripture hath been dispensed unto us; they are the Prophets, they are
the Evangelists; they are sound Doctors: to these “I lift up mine eyes,
from whence shall come my help.” And lest you should think of mere human
help, he goes on to say, “My help cometh from the Lord, which made
heaven and earth. The just shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in
the Lord.”…

<span id="ii.XL-p30"></span>7. “Blessed is that man that maketh the name
of the Lord his trust, and hath not respected vanities or lying
madnesses” ([Psa. 40.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XL-p30.1"></span>). Behold the way by which thou wouldest fain
have gone. Behold the “multitude that fill the Broad way.” <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1109](#fn_1108) It is not without reason “that”
road leads to the amphitheatre. It is not without reason it leads to
Death. The “broad way” leads unto death, <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1110](#fn_1109) its breadth delights for time: its
end is straitness to all eternity. Aye; but the multitudes murmur; the
multitudes are rejoicing together; the multitudes are hastening along;
the multitudes are flocking together! Do not thou imitate them; do not
turn aside after them: they are “vanities, and lying madnesses.” Let the
Lord thy God be thy hope. Hope for nothing else from the Lord thy God;
but let the Lord thy God Himself be thine hope. For many persons hope to
obtain from God’s hands riches, and many perishable and transitory
honours; and, in short, anything else they hope to obtain at God’s
hands, except only God Himself. But do thou seek after thy God Himself:
nay, indeed, despising all things else, make thy way unto Him! Forget
other things, remember Him. Leave other things behind, and “press
forward” <span id="fr_1110"></span>[1111](#fn_1110) unto Him. Surely it
is He Himself, who set thee right, when turned away from the right path;
who, now that thou art set in the right path, guides thee aright, who
guides thee to thy destination. Let Him then be thy hope, who both
guides thee, and guides thee to thy destination. Whither does worldly
covetous<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_122"></span>ness lead thee? And to what point does it
conduct thee at the last? Thou didst at first desire a farm; then thou
wouldest possess an estate; thou wouldest shut out thy neighbours;
having shut them out, thou didst set thy heart on the possessions of
other neighbours; and didst extend thy covetous desires till thou hadst
reached the shore: arriving at the shore, thou covetest the islands:
having made the earth thine own, thou wouldest haply seize upon heaven.
Leave thou all thy loves. He who made heaven and earth is more beautiful
than all.

<span id="ii.XL-p34"></span>8. “Blessed is the man that maketh the name
of the Lord his hope, and who hath not regarded vanities and lying
madnesses.” For whence is it that “madness” is called “lying”? Insanity
is a lying thing, even as it is sanity that sees the Truth. For what
thou seest as good things, <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1112](#fn_1111)
thou art deceived; thou art not in thy sound senses: a violent fever has
driven thee to frenzy: that which thou art in love with is not a
reality. Thou applaudest the charioteer; thou cheerest the charioteer;
thou art madly in love with the charioteer. It is “vanity;” it is “a
lying madness.” “It is ‘not’” (he cries). “Nothing can be better;
nothing more delightful.” What can I do for one in a state of high
fever? Pray ye for such persons, if you have any feelings of compassion
in you. For the physician himself also in a desperate case generally
turns to those in the house, who stand around weeping; who are hanging
on his lips to hear his opinion of the patient who is sick and in
danger. The physician stands in a state of doubt: he sees not any good
to promise; he fears to pronounce evil, lest he should excite alarm. He
devises a thoroughly modest sentence: “The good God can do all things.
Pray ye for him.” Which then of these madmen shall I check? Which of
them will listen to me? Which of them would not call us miserable?
Because they suppose us to have lost great and various pleasures, of
which they are madly fond, in that we are not as madly in love with them
as they are: and they do not see that they are “lying” pleasures.…“And
hath not respected vanities, and lying madnesses.” “Such a one has won,”
he cries; “he harnessed such and such a horse,” he proclaims aloud. He
would fain be a kind of diviner; he aspires to the honours of divination
by abandoning the fountain of Divinity; and he frequently pronounces an
opinion, and is frequently mistaken. Why is this? Even because they are
“lying madnesses.” But why is it that what they say sometimes comes
true? That they may lead astray the foolish ones; that by loving the
semblance of truth there, they may fall into the snare of falsehood: let
them be left behind, let them be “given over,” let them be “cut off.” If
they were members of us, they must be mortified. “Mortify,” he says,
“your members which are upon the earth.” <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1113](#fn_1112) Let our God be our hope. He who
made all things, is better than all! He who made what is beautiful, is
more beautiful than all that is such. He who made whatever is mighty, is
Himself mightier. He who made whatever is great, is Himself greater. He
will be unto you everything that you love. Learn in the creature to love
the Creator; and in the work Him who made it. Let not that which has
been made by Him detain thine affections, so that thou shouldest lose
Him by whom thou thyself wert made also. “Blessed,” then, “is the man
that maketh the Name of the Lord his trust, and hath not respected
vanities and lying madnesses.”…

<span id="ii.XL-p37"></span>9. We will give him other sights in exchange
for such sights as these. And what sights shall we present to the
Christian, whom we would fain divert from those sights? I thank the Lord
our God; He in the following verse of the Psalm hath shown us what
sights we ought to present and offer to spectators who would fain have
sights to see? Let us now suppose him to be weaned from the circus, the
theatre, the amphitheatre; let him be looking after, let him by all
means be looking after, some sight to see; we do not leave him without a
spectacle. What then shall we give in exchange for those? Hear what
follows.

<span id="ii.XL-p38"></span>“Many, O Lord my God, are the wonderful
works which Thou hast made” ([Psa.
40.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005)<span id="ii.XL-p38.1"></span>).
He used to gaze at the “wonderful works” of man; let him now contemplate
the wonderful works of God. “Many are the wonderful works” that God “has
made.” Why are they become vile in his eyes? He praises the charioteer
guiding four horses; running all of them without fault and without
stumbling. Perhaps the Lord has not made such “wonderful works” in
things spiritual. Let him control lust, <span
id="fr_1113"></span>[1114](#fn_1113) let him control cowardice, <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) let him control injustice, let him
control imprudence, I mean, the passions which falling into excess
produce those vices; let him control these and bring them into
subjection, and let him hold the reins, and not suffer himself to be
carried away; let him guide them the way he himself would have them go;
let him not be forced away whither he would not. He used to applaud the
charioteer, he himself shall be applauded for his own charioteering; he
used to call out that the charioteer should be invested with a dress of
honour; he shall himself be clothed with immortality. These are the
spectacles, these the sights that God exhibits to us. He cries out of
heaven, “My eyes are upon you. <span id="page_123">p. 123</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_123"></span>Strive, and ‘I will’ assist you; triumph, and
I will crown you.”

<span id="ii.XL-p41"></span>“And in Thy thought there is none that is
like unto Thee.” Now then look at the actor! For the man hath by dint of
great pains learnt to walk upon a rope; and hanging there he holds thee
hanging in suspense. Turn to Him who exhibits spectacles far more
wonderful. This man hath learned to walk upon the rope; but hath he
caused another to walk on the sea? Forget now thy theatre; behold our
Peter; not a walker on the rope, but, so to speak, a walker on the sea.
 <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115) And do thou also walk on
other waters (though not on those on which Peter walked, to symbolize a
certain truth), for this world is a sea. It hath a deleterious
bitterness; it hath the waves of tribulations, the tempests of
temptations; it hath men in it who, like fish, delight in their own
ruin, and prey upon each other; walk thou here, set thou thy foot on
this. Thou wouldest see sights; be thyself a “spectacle.” That thy
spirit may not sink, look on Him who goes before thee, and says, “We
have been made a spectacle unto this world, and unto angels, and unto
men.” <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116) Tread thou on the
waters; suffer not thyself to be drowned in the sea. Thou wilt not go
there, thou wilt not “tread it under foot,” unless it be His bidding,
who was Himself the first to walk upon the sea. For it was thus that
Peter spoke. “If Thou art, bid me come unto Thee on the waters.” <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) And because “He was,” He heard him
when praying; He granted his wish to him when expressing his desire; He
raised him up when sinking. These are the “wonderful works” that the
“Lord hath made.” Look on them; let faith be the eye of him who would
behold them. And do thou also likewise; for although the winds alarm
thee, though the waves rage against thee, and though human frailty may
have inspired thee with some doubt of thy salvation, thou hast it in thy
power to “cry out,” thou mayest say “Lord, I perish.” <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1119](#fn_1118) He who bids thee walk there,
suffers thee not to perish. For in that thou now walkest “on the Rock,”
thou fearest not even on the sea! If thou art without “the Rock,” thou
must sink in the sea; for the Rock on which thou must walk is such an
one as is not sunk in the sea,

<span id="ii.XL-p46"></span>10. Observe then the “wonderful works” of
God. “I have declared, and have spoken; they are multiplied beyond
number.” There is “a number,” there are some over and above the number.
There is a fixed number that belongs to that heavenly Jerusalem. For
“the Lord knoweth them that are His;” <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[1120](#fn_1119) the Christians that fear Him, the
Christians that believe, the Christians that keep the commandments, that
walk in God’s ways, that keep themselves from sins; that if they fall
confess: they belong to “the number.” But are they the only ones? There
are also some “beyond the number.” For even if they be but a few (a few
in comparison of the numbers of the larger majority), with how great
numbers are our Churches filled, crowded up to the very walls; to what a
degree do they annoy each other by the pressure, and almost choke each
other by their overflowing numbers. Again, out of these very same
persons, when there is a public spectacle, <span
id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120) there are numbers flocking to the
amphitheatre; these are over and above “the number.” But it is for this
reason that we say this, that they may be in “the number.” Not being
present, they do not hear this from us; but when ye have gone from
hence, let them hear it from you. “I have declared,” he says, “and have
spoken.” It is Christ who speaks. “He hath declared it,” in His own
Person, as our Head. He hath Himself declared it by His members. He
Himself hath sent those who should “declare” it; He Himself hath sent
the Apostles. “Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words
unto the ends of the world.” <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121)
How great the number of believers that are gathered together; how great
the multitudes that flock together; many of them truly converted, many
but in appearance: and those who are truly converted are the minority;
those who are so but in appearance are the majority: because “they are
multiplied beyond the number.”

<span id="ii.XL-p50"></span>11. …These are the “wonderful works” of God;
these are the “thoughts” of God, to which “no man’s thoughts are like;”
that the lover of sight-seeing may be weaned from curiosity: <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1123](#fn_1122) and with us may seek after those
more excellent, those more profitable things, in which, when he shall
have attained unto them, he will rejoice.…

<span id="ii.XL-p52"></span>12. “Sacrifice and offering Thou didst not
desire” ([Psa. 40.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XL-p52.1"></span>), saith the Psalm to God. For the men of old
time, when as yet the true Sacrifice, which is known to the faithful,
was foreshown in figures, used to celebrate rites that were figures of
the reality that was to be hereafter; many of them understanding their
meaning; but more of them in ignorance of it. For the Prophets and the
holy Patriarchs understood what they were celebrating; but the rest of
the “stiff-necked people” were so carnal, that what was done by them was
but to symbolize the things that were to come afterwards; and it came to
pass, <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1124](#fn_1123) when that first
sacrifice was abolished; when the burnt-offerings of “rams, of <span
id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="ii.XL-Page_124"></span>goats, and
of calves,” and of other victims, had been abolished, “God did not
desire them.” Why did God not desire them? And why did He at the first
desire them? Because all those things were, as it were, the words of a
person making a promise; and the expressions conveying a promise, when
the thing that they promise is come, are no longer uttered.…Those
sacrifices then, as being but expressions of a promise, have been
abrogated. What is that which has been given as its fulfilment? That
“Body;” which ye know; which ye do not all of you know; which, of you
who do know it, I pray God all may not know it unto condemnation.
Observe the time when it was said; for the person is Christ our Lord,
speaking at one time for His members, at another in His own person.
“Sacrifice and offering,” said He, “Thou didst not desire.” What then?
Are we left at this present time without a sacrifice? God forbid!

<span id="ii.XL-p54"></span>“But a Body hast Thou perfected for
me.” <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1125](#fn_1124) It was for this reason
that Thou didst not desire the others; that Thou mightest “perfect”
this; before Thou “perfectedst” this, Thou didst desire the others. The
fulfilment of the promise has done away with the words that express the
promise. For if they still hold out a promise, that which was promised
is not yet fulfilled. This was promised by certain signs; the signs that
convey the promise are done away; because the Substance that was
promised is come. We are in this “Body.” We are partakers of this
“Body.” We know that which we ourselves receive; and ye who know it not
yet, will know it bye and bye; and when ye come to know it, I pray ye
may not receive it unto condemnation. <span
id="fr_1125"></span>[1126](#fn_1125) “For he that eateth and drinketh
unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation unto himself.” <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[1127](#fn_1126) “A Body” hath been “perfected” for
us; let us be made perfect in the Body.

<span id="ii.XL-p58"></span>13. “Burnt-offerings also for sin hast Thou
not required.” “Then said I, Lo, I come!” ([Psa.
40.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)<span id="ii.XL-p58.1"></span>).
It is time that what “was promised should come;” because the signs, by
means of which they were promised, have been put away. And indeed,
Brethren, observe these put away; those fulfilled. Let the Jewish nation
at this time show me their priest, if they can! Where are their
sacrifices? They are brought to an end;  <span
id="fr_1127"></span>[1128](#fn_1127) they are put away now. Should we at
that time have rejected them? <span id="fr_1128"></span>[1129](#fn_1128)
We do reject them now; because, if you chose to celebrate them now, it
were unseasonable; <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129) unfitting
at the time; incongruous. You are still making promises; I have already
received! There has remained to them a certain thing for them to
celebrate; that they might not remain altogether without a sign.…In such
a case then are they; like Cain with his mark. The sacrifices, however,
which used to be performed there, have been put away; and that which
remained unto them for a sign like that of Cain, hath by this time been
fulfilled; and they know it not. They slay the Lamb; they eat the
unleavened bread. “Christ has been sacrificed for us, as our
Passover.” <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130) Lo, in the
sacrifice of Christ, I recognise the Lamb that was slain! What of the
unleavened bread? “Therefore,” says he, “let us keep the feast; not with
old leaven, neither with the leaven of wickedness” (he shows what is
meant by “old;” it is “stale” flour; it is sour), “but in the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.” <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1132](#fn_1131) They have continued in the shade;
they cannot abide the Sun of Glory. We are already in the light of day.
We have “the Body” of Christ, we have the Blood of Christ. If we have a
new life, let us “sing a new song, even a hymn unto our God.” <span
id="fr_1132"></span>[1133](#fn_1132) “Burnt offerings for sin Thou didst
not desire. Then said I, Lo, I come!”

<span id="ii.XL-p65"></span>14. “In the head <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1134](#fn_1133) of the Book it is written of me,
that I should fulfil Thy will: O my God, I am willing, and Thy Law is
within my heart” ([Psa. 40.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XL-p66.1"></span>). Behold! He turns His regards to His members.
Behold! He hath Himself “fulfilled the will” of the Father. But in what
“beginning <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1135](#fn_1134) of a Book” is it
written of Him? Perhaps in the beginning of this Book of Psalms. For why
should we seek far for it, or examine into other books for it? Behold!
It is written in the beginning of this Book of Psalms! “His will is in
the Law of the Lord;” <span id="fr_1135"></span>[1136](#fn_1135) that
is, “‘O my God, I am willing,’ and ‘Thy Law is within my heart;’” that
is the same as, “And in His Law doth he meditate day and night.”

<span id="ii.XL-p69"></span>15. “I have well declared Thy righteousness
in the great congregation” ([Psa.
40.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#009)<span id="ii.XL-p69.1"></span>).
He now addresses His members. He is exhorting them to do what He has
already done. He has “declared;” let us declare also. He has suffered;
let us “suffer with Him.” He has been glorified; we shall be “glorified
with Him.” <span id="fr_1136"></span>[1137](#fn_1136) “I have declared
Thy righteousness in the great congregation.” How great an one is that?
In all the world. How great is it? Even among all nations. Why among all
nations? Because He is “the Seed of Abraham, in *whom* all nations shall
be blessed.” <span id="fr_1137"></span>[1138](#fn_1137) Why among all
nations? “Because their sound hath gone forth into all lands.” <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1139](#fn_1138) “Lo! I will not refrain my lips, O
Lord, and that Thou knowest.” My lips speak; I will not “refrain” them
from speaking. My lips indeed sound audibly in the ears of men; but
“Thou knowest” mine heart. “I will not re<span id="page_125">p.
125</span> <span id="ii.XL-Page_125"></span>frain my lips, O Lord; that
Thou knowest.” It is one thing that man heareth; another that God
“knoweth.” That the “declaring” of it should not be confined to the lips
alone, and that it might not be said of us, “Whatsoever things they say
unto you, do; but do not after their works;” <span
id="fr_1139"></span>[1140](#fn_1139) or lest it should be said to the
people, “praising God with their lips, but not with their heart,” “This
people honoureth Me with their lips, but their heart is far from
Me;” <span id="fr_1140"></span>[1141](#fn_1140) do thou make audible
confession with thy lips; draw nigh with thine heart also. <span
id="fr_1141"></span>[1142](#fn_1141) “For with the heart man believeth
unto righteousness; but with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation.” <span id="fr_1142"></span>[1143](#fn_1142) In case like unto
which that thief was found, who, hanging on the Cross with the Lord, did
on the Cross acknowledge the Lord. Others had refused to acknowledge Him
while working miracles; this man acknowledged Him when hanging on the
Cross. That thief had every other member pierced through; his hands were
fastened by the nails; his feet were pierced also; his whole body was
fastened to the tree; the body was not disengaged in its other members;
the heart and the tongue were disengaged; <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1144](#fn_1143) “with the heart” he “believed; with
the tongue” he made “confession.” “Remember me, O Lord,” he said, “when
Thou comest into Thy kingdom.” He hoped for the coming of his salvation
at a time far remote; he was content to receive it after a long delay;
his hope rested on an object far remote. The day, however, was not
postponed! The answer was, “This day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise.” <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1145](#fn_1144) Paradise hath
happy trees! This day hast thou been with Me on “the Tree” of the Cross.
This day shalt thou be with Me on “the Tree” of Salvation.…

<span id="ii.XL-p79"></span>16. “I have not hid my <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1146](#fn_1145) righteousness within my heart”
([Psa. 40.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XL-p80.1"></span>). What is meant by “my righteousness”? My
faith. For, “the just shall live by faith.” <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146) As suppose the persecutor under
threat of punishment, as they were once allowed to do, puts you to the
question, “What art thou? Pagan or Christian?” “A Christian.” That is
his “righteousness.” He believeth; he “lives by faith.” He doth not
“hide his righteousness within his heart.” He has not said in his heart,
“I do indeed believe in Christ; but I will not tell what I believe to
this persecutor, who is raging against me, and threatening me. My God
knoweth that inwardly, within my heart, I do believe. He knoweth that I
renounce Him not.” Lo! you say that you have this inwardly within your
heart! What have you upon your lips? “I am not a Christian.” Your lips
bear witness against your heart. “I have not hid my righteousness within
my heart.”…

<span id="ii.XL-p82"></span>17. “I have declared Thy Truth and Thy
Salvation.” I have declared Thy Christ. This is the meaning of, “I have
declared Thy Truth and Thy Salvation.” How is “Thy Truth” Christ? “I am
the Truth.” <span id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147) How is Christ
“His Salvation”? Simeon recognised the infant in His Mother’s hands in
the Temple, and said, “For mine eyes have seen Thy Salvation.” <span
id="fr_1148"></span>[1149](#fn_1148) The old man recognised the little
child; the old man having himself “become a little child” <span
id="fr_1149"></span>[1150](#fn_1149) in that infant, having been renewed
by faith. For he had received an oracle from God; and it said this, “The
Lord had said unto him, that he was not to depart out of this life,
until he had seen the “Salvation of God.” This “Salvation of God” it is
a good thing to have shown unto men; but let them cry, “Show us Thy
mercy, O Lord, and grant us Thy Salvation.”…

<span id="ii.XL-p86"></span>18. “I have not concealed Thy mercy and Thy
Truth from the great congregation.” Let us be there; let us also be
numbered among the members of this Body: let us not keep back “the
mercy” of the Lord, and “the Truth” of the Lord. Wouldest thou hear what
“the mercy of the Lord” is? Depart from thy sins; He will forgive thy
sins. Wouldest thou hear what “the truth” of the Lord is? Hold fast
righteousness. Thy righteousness shall receive a crown. For mercy is
announced to you now; “Truth” is to be shown unto thee hereafter. For
God is not merciful in such a way as not to be just, nor just in such a
way as not to be merciful. Does that mercy seem to thee an
inconsiderable one? He will not impute unto thee all thy former sins:
thou hast lived ill up to this present day; thou art still living; this
day live well; then thou wilt not “conceal” this “mercy.” If this is
meant by “mercy,” what is meant by “truth”?…

<span id="ii.XL-p87"></span>19. “Remove not Thou Thy mercies far from
me, O Lord” ([Psa. 40.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XL-p87.1"></span>). He is turning his attention to the wounded
members. Because I have not “concealed Thy mercy and Thy Truth from the
great congregation,” from the Unity of the Universal Church, look Thou
on Thy afflicted members, look on those who are guilty of sins of
omission, and on those who are guilty of sins of commission: and
withhold not Thou Thy mercies. “Thy mercy and Thy Truth have continually
preserved me.” I should not dare to turn from my evil way, were I not
assured of remission; <span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_126"></span>I could not endure so as to persevere, if I
were not assured of the fulfilment of Thy promise.…

<span id="ii.XL-p88"></span>“Innumerable evils have compassed me about”
([Psa. 40.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XL-p88.1"></span>). Who can number sins? Who can count his own
sins, and those of others? A burden under which he was groaning, who
said, “Cleanse Thou me from my secret faults; and from the faults of
others, spare Thou Thy servant, O Lord.” <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1151](#fn_1150) Our own are too little; those “of
others” are added to the burden. I fear for myself; I fear for a
virtuous brother, I have to bear with a wicked brother; and under such
burthen what shall we be, if God’s mercy were to fail? “But Thou, Lord,
remove not afar off.” Be Thou near unto us! To whom is the Lord near?
“Even” unto them that “are of a broken heart.” <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1152](#fn_1151) He is far from the proud: He is
near to the humble. “For though the Lord is high, yet hath He respect
unto the lowly.” <span id="fr_1152"></span>[1153](#fn_1152) But let not
those that are proud think themselves to be unobserved: for the things
that are high, He “beholdeth afar off.” He “beheld afar off” the
Pharisee, who boasted himself; He was near at hand to succour the
Publican, who made confession. <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1154](#fn_1153) The one extolled his own merits,
and concealed his wounds; the other boasted not of his merits, but laid
bare his wounds. He came to the Physician; he knew that he was sick, and
that he required to be made whole; he “dared not lift up his eyes to
Heaven: he smote upon his breast.” He spared not himself, that God might
spare him; he acknowledged himself guilty, that God might “ignore” the
charge against him. He punished himself, that God might free him from
punishment.…

<span id="ii.XL-p93"></span>20. “Mine iniquities have taken hold upon
me, so that I could not see.” There is a something for us “to see;” what
prevents us so that we see it not? Is it not iniquity? From beholding
this light <span id="fr_1154"></span>[1155](#fn_1154) your eye is
prevented perhaps by some humour penetrating into it; perhaps by smoke,
or dust, or by something else that has been thrown into it: and you have
not been able to raise your wounded eye to contemplate this light of
day. What then? Will you be able to lift up your wounded heart unto God?
Must it not be first healed, in order that thou mayest see? Do you not
show your pride, when you say, “First let me see, and then I will
believe”? Who is there who says this? For who that would fain see, says,
“Let me see, and then I will believe”? I am about to manifest the Light
unto thee; or rather the Light Itself would fain manifest Itself to
thee! To whom? It cannot manifest Itself to the blind. He does not see.
Whence is it that he seeth not? It is that the eye is clogged by the
multitude of sins.…

<span id="ii.XL-p95"></span>21. “They are more than the hairs of my
head.” He subjects the number of the “hairs of his head” to calculation.
Who is there can calculate the number of the hairs of his head? Much
less can he tell the number of his sins, which exceed the number of the
hairs of his head. They seem to be minute; but they are many in number.
You have guarded against great ones; you do not now commit adultery, or
murder; you do not plunder the property of others; you do not blaspheme;
and do not bear false witness; those are the weightier kind of sins. You
have guarded against great sins, what are you doing about your smaller
ones? You have cast off the weight; beware lest the sand overwhelm you.
“And my heart hath forsaken me.” What wonder if thine heart is forsaken
by thy God, when it is even “forsaken” by itself? What is meant by
“faileth me,” “forsaketh me”? Is not capable of knowing itself. He means
this: “My heart hath forsaken me.” I would fain see God with mine heart,
and cannot from the multitude of my sins: that is not enough; mine heart
does not even know itself. For no one thoroughly knows himself: let no
one presume upon his own state. Was Peter able to comprehend with his
own heart the state of his own heart, who said, “I will be with Thee
even unto death”? <span id="fr_1155"></span>[1156](#fn_1155) There was a
false presumption in the heart; there was lurking in that heart at the
same time a real fear: and the heart was not able to comprehend the
state of the heart. Its state was unknown to the sick heart itself: it
was manifest to the physician. That which was foretold of him was
fulfilled. God knew that in him which he knew not in himself: because
his heart had forsaken him, his heart was unknown to his heart.

<span id="ii.XL-p97"></span>22. “Be pleased, O Lord, to deliver me”
([Psa. 40.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XL-p97.1"></span>). As if he were saying, “‘If Thou wilt, Thou
canst make me clean.’ <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1157](#fn_1156) Be
pleased to deliver me. O Lord, look upon me to help me.” Look, <span
id="fr_1157"></span>[1158](#fn_1157) that is, on the penitent members,
members that lie in pain, members that are writhing under the
instruments of the surgeon; but still in hope.

<span id="ii.XL-p100"></span>23. “Let them be ashamed and confounded
together that seek after my soul to destroy it” ([Psa.
40.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#014)<span id="ii.XL-p100.1"></span>).
For in a certain passage he makes an accusation, and says, “I looked
upon my right hand, and beheld; and there was no man who sought after my
soul;” <span id="fr_1158"></span>[1159](#fn_1158) that is, there was no
man to imitate Mine example. Christ in His Passion is the Speaker. “I
looked on my right hand,” that is, not on the ungodly Jews, but on Mine
own right hand, the Apostles,—“and there was no man who sought after My
soul.” So thoroughly was there no man to “seek after <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> <span id="ii.XL-Page_127"></span>My soul,”
that he who had presumed on his own strength, “denied My soul.” But
because a man’s soul is sought after in two ways, either in order that
you may enjoy his society; or that you may persecute him; therefore he
here speaks of others, whom he would have “confounded and ashamed,” who
are “seeking after his soul.” But lest you should understand it in the
same way as when he complains of some who did not “seek after his soul,”
He adds, “to destroy it;” that is, they seek after my soul in order to
my death.…

<span id="ii.XL-p102"></span>24. “Let them be turned backward <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159) and put to shame that wish me
evil.” “Turned backwards.” Let us not take this in a bad sense. He
wishes them well; and it is His voice, who said from the Cross, “Father,
forgive them; for they know not what they do.” <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160) Wherefore then doth he say to them,
that they should return “backwards”? Because they who before were proud,
so that they fell, are now become humble, so that they may rise again.
For when they are before, they are wishing to take precedence of their
Lord; to be better than He; but if they go behind Him, they acknowledge
Him to be better than they; they acknowledge that He ought to go before;
that He should precede, <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) they
follow. Thence He thus rebukes Peter giving Him evil counsel. For the
Lord, when about to suffer for our salvation, also foretold what was to
happen concerning that Passion itself; and Peter says, “Be it far from
Thee,” <span id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) “God forbid it!” “This
shall not be!” He would fain have gone before his Lord; would have given
counsel to his Master! But the Lord, that He might make him not go
before Him, but follow after Him, says, “Get thee behind, Satan!” It is
for this reason He said “Satan,” because thou art seeking to go before
Him, whom thou oughtest to follow; but if thou art behind, if thou
follow Him, thou wilt henceforth not be “Satan.” What then? “Upon this
Rock I will build My Church.”  <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) …

<span id="ii.XL-p108"></span>25. “Let them speedily bear away their own
confusion, that say unto me, Well done! Well done!” <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) ([Psa.
40.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#015)<span id="ii.XL-p109.1"></span>).
They praise you without reason. “A great man! A good man! A man of
education and of learning; but why a Christian?” They praise those
things in you which you should wish not to be praised; they find fault
with that at which you rejoice. But if perhaps you say, “What is it you
praise in me, O man? That I am a virtuous man? A just man? If you think
this, Christ made me this; praise Him.” But the other says, “Be it far
from you. Do yourself no wrong! You yourself made yourself such.” “Let
them be confounded who say unto me, Well done! Well done!” And what
follows?

<span id="ii.XL-p110"></span>“Let all those that seek Thee, O Lord,
rejoice and be glad” ([Psa. 40.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#016)<span
id="ii.XL-p110.1"></span>). Those who “seek” not me, but “Thee;” who say
not to me, “Well done! Well done!” but see me “glory in Thee,” if I have
anything whereof to glory; for “he who glories, let him glory in the
Lord.” <span id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165) “Let all those who
seek Thee, Lord, rejoice and be glad.”

<span id="ii.XL-p112"></span>“And say continually, the Lord be
magnified.” For even if the sinner becometh righteous, thou shouldest
give the glory to “Him who justifieth the ungodly.” <span
id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166) Whether therefore it be a sinner,
let Him be praised who calls him to forgiveness; or one already walking
in the way of righteousness, let Him be praised who calls him to receive
the crown! Let the Name of the Lord be magnified continually by “such as
love Thy salvation.”

<span id="ii.XL-p114"></span>“But I” ([Psa.
40.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017)<span id="ii.XL-p114.1"></span>).
I for whom they were seeking evil, I whose “life they were seeking, that
they might take it away.” But turn thee to another description of
persons. But I to whom they said, “Well done! Well done!” “I am poor and
needy.” There is nothing in me that may be praised as mine own. Let Him
rend my sackcloth in sunder, and cover me with His robe. For, “Now I
live, not I myself; but Christ liveth in me.”  <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167) If it is Christ that “liveth in
thee,” and all that thou hast is Christ’s, and all that thou art to have
hereafter is Christ’s also; what art thou in thyself? “I am poor and
needy.” Now I am not rich, because I am not proud. He was rich who said,
“Lord, I thank Thee that I am not as other men are;” <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168) but the publican was poor, who
said, “Lord, be merciful to me a sinner!” The one was belching from his
fulness; the other from want was crying piteously, “I am poor and
needy!” And what wouldest thou do, O poor and needy man? Beg at God’s
door; “Knock, and it shall be opened unto thee.” <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169) —“As for me, I am poor and needy.
Yet the Lord careth for me.”—“Cast thy care upon the Lord, and He shall
bring it to pass.” <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1171](#fn_1170) What canst
thou effect for thyself by taking care what canst thou provide for
thyself? Let Him who made thee “care for thee.” He who cared for thee
before thou wert, how shall He fail to have a care of thee, now that
thou art what He would have thee be? For now thou art a believer, now
thou art walking in the “way of righteousness.” Shall not He have a care
for thee, who “maketh His sun rise on the good and on the evil, and
sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust”?  <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1172](#fn_1171) …

<span id="ii.XL-p120"></span><span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="ii.XL-Page_128"></span>“Thou art my Help, and my Deliverer; make no
tarrying, O my God” ([Psa. 40.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017)<span
id="ii.XL-p120.1"></span>). He is calling upon God, imploring Him,
fearing lest he should fall away: “Make no tarrying.” What is meant by
“make no tarrying”? We lately read concerning the days of tribulation:
“Unless those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved.” <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1173](#fn_1172) The members of
Christ—the Body of Christ extended everywhere—are asking of God, as one
single person, one single poor man, and beggar! For He too was poor, who
“though He was rich, yet became poor, that ye through His poverty might
be made rich.” <span id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173) It is He that
maketh rich those who are the true poor; <span
id="fr_1174"></span>[1175](#fn_1174) and maketh poor those who are
falsely rich. He crieth unto Him; “From the end of the earth I cried
unto Thee, when my heart was in heaviness.” There will come days of
tribulations, and of greater tribulations; they will come even as the
Scripture speaks: and as days advance, so are tribulations increased
also. Let no one promise himself what the Gospel doth not promise.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[119:1087](1080047.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="ii.XL-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p2"></span> Lat. XXXIX.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[119:1088](1080047.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="ii.XL-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p5"></span> *Al*. “very small.”

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[119:1089](1080047.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="ii.XL-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p6"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#015)<span id="ii.XL-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[119:1090](1080047.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="ii.XL-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p7"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016)<span id="ii.XL-p7.1"></span>. E.V.
“against.” Lat. Vulgate, *super*.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[119:1091](1080047.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="ii.XL-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p8"></span> *Attendebat te; sed non attendebat tibi*.

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[120:1092](1080047.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="ii.XL-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p10"></span> Or thus, “What horrible pit is that? It is
the depth of iniquity. From the lusts of the flesh, for this is meant by
the ‘miry clay.’”

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[120:1093](1080047.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="ii.XL-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p11"></span> [Ps. cxxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001)<span id="ii.XL-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[120:1094](1080047.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="ii.XL-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p12"></span> Eng. Vers. “When the wicked cometh, then
cometh also contempt.”

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[120:1095](1080047.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="ii.XL-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p13"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.XL-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[120:1096](1080047.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="ii.XL-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p14"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[120:1097](1080047.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="ii.XL-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p15"></span> [Phil.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="ii.XL-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[120:1098](1080047.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="ii.XL-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p16"></span> [1 Tim. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.XL-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[120:1099](1080047.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="ii.XL-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p17"></span> [Matt. x.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span id="ii.XL-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[120:1100](1080047.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="ii.XL-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p19"></span> [Ps. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.XL-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[120:1101](1080047.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="ii.XL-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p21"></span> [Eph. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#023)<span id="ii.XL-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[120:1102](1080047.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="ii.XL-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p22"></span> [Rom. viii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span id="ii.XL-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[121:1103](1080047.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="ii.XL-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p23"></span> [Matt. xxv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#035)<span id="ii.XL-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[121:1104](1080047.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="ii.XL-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p24"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[121:1105](1080047.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="ii.XL-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p26"></span> [Hab. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[121:1106](1080047.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="ii.XL-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p27"></span> *Civitatis Natalem*.

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[121:1107](1080047.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="ii.XL-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p28"></span> \[A clear exposition of the Catholic
(Nicene) doctrine concerning the merits of the saints.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[121:1108](1080047.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="ii.XL-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p29"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001)<span id="ii.XL-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[121:1109](1080047.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="ii.XL-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p31"></span> A street perhaps so named.

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[121:1110](1080047.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="ii.XL-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p32"></span> [Matt. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)<span id="ii.XL-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[121:1111](1080047.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="ii.XL-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p33"></span> [Phil. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014)<span id="ii.XL-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[122:1112](1080047.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="ii.XL-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p35"></span> <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XL-p35.1"></span>mss</span>. want *putas*; with it, the sense is,
“What you see, you think to be good things.”

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[122:1113](1080047.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="ii.XL-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p36"></span> [Col. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span id="ii.XL-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[122:1114](1080047.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="ii.XL-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p39"></span> *Luxuriam*.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[122:1115](1080047.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="ii.XL-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p40"></span> *Ignaviam*.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[123:1116](1080047.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="ii.XL-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p42"></span> *Mariambulum*.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[123:1117](1080047.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="ii.XL-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p43"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009)<span id="ii.XL-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[123:1118](1080047.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="ii.XL-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p44"></span> [Matt. xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#028)<span id="ii.XL-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[123:1119](1080047.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="ii.XL-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p45"></span> [Matt. xiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#030)<span id="ii.XL-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[123:1120](1080047.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="ii.XL-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p47"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span id="ii.XL-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[123:1121](1080047.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="ii.XL-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p48"></span> *Munus*.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[123:1122](1080047.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="ii.XL-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p49"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[123:1123](1080047.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="ii.XL-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p51"></span> *Al*. “may be drawn to curiosity.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[123:1124](1080047.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="ii.XL-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p53"></span> *Et venit*. Some <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XL-p53.1"></span> mss</span>. *en venit veritas*, “Lo, the Truth
came,” which makes easier sense.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[124:1125](1080047.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="ii.XL-p54.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p55"></span> *Corpus perfecisti*, Augustin; *aures
perfecisti*, Vulgate; *corpus aptasti*, [Heb. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005)<span id="ii.XL-p55.1"></span>,
Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[124:1126](1080047.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="ii.XL-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p56"></span> *Judicium*. So Vulgate.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[124:1127](1080047.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="ii.XL-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p57"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)<span id="ii.XL-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[124:1128](1080047.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="ii.XL-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p59"></span> *Perierunt*.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[124:1129](1080047.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="ii.XL-p59.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p60"></span> *Reprobaremus*.

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[124:1130](1080047.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="ii.XL-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p61"></span> *Intemporale*.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[124:1131](1080047.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="ii.XL-p61.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p62"></span> [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="ii.XL-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[124:1132](1080047.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="ii.XL-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p63"></span> [1 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#008)<span id="ii.XL-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[124:1133](1080047.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="ii.XL-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p64"></span> *Supra*, ver. 3.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[124:1134](1080047.htm#fr_1133) <span
id="ii.XL-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p66"></span> *Capite*.

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[124:1135](1080047.htm#fr_1134) <span
id="ii.XL-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p67"></span> *Capite*.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[124:1136](1080047.htm#fr_1135) <span
id="ii.XL-p67.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p68"></span> [Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="ii.XL-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[124:1137](1080047.htm#fr_1136) <span
id="ii.XL-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p70"></span> [Rom. viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)<span id="ii.XL-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[124:1138](1080047.htm#fr_1137) <span
id="ii.XL-p70.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p71"></span> [Gen. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="ii.XL-p71.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[124:1139](1080047.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="ii.XL-p71.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p72"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[125:1140](1080047.htm#fr_1139) <span
id="ii.XL-p72.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p73"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span id="ii.XL-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[125:1141](1080047.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="ii.XL-p73.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p74"></span> [Isa. xxix.
31](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#031)<span id="ii.XL-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[125:1142](1080047.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="ii.XL-p74.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p75"></span> *Sona labiis, propinqua corde*. \[Audible
confession, in the great congregation, was the primitive discipline. But
St. Chrysostom, who teaches the like discipline, urges to private
penitence before God as all-sufficient. Hom. xxxi. *In Hebr*. tom. xii.
p. 216, ed. Migne.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[125:1143](1080047.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="ii.XL-p75.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p76"></span> [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span id="ii.XL-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[125:1144](1080047.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="ii.XL-p76.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p77"></span> *Corpus illud non vacabat cæteris membris;
lingua vacabat et cor*.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[125:1145](1080047.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="ii.XL-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p78"></span> [Luke xxiii.
42](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#042)<span id="ii.XL-p78.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[125:1146](1080047.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="ii.XL-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p80"></span> E.V. “Thy.” So Vulgate also, *tuam*.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[125:1147](1080047.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="ii.XL-p80.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p81"></span> [Hab.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), [Rom.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="ii.XL-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[125:1148](1080047.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="ii.XL-p82.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p83"></span> [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="ii.XL-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[125:1149](1080047.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="ii.XL-p83.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p84"></span> [Luke ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#030)<span id="ii.XL-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[125:1150](1080047.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="ii.XL-p84.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p85"></span> *Factus in puero puer*. He alludes to
[Matt. xviii. 3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XL-p85.1"></span>, “Except ye be converted, and *become as little
children*.”

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[126:1151](1080047.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="ii.XL-p88.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p89"></span> [Ps. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#012)<span id="ii.XL-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[126:1152](1080047.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="ii.XL-p89.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p90"></span> [Ps.
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018), [Isa.
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)<span id="ii.XL-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[126:1153](1080047.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="ii.XL-p90.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p91"></span> [Ps. cxxxviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)<span id="ii.XL-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[126:1154](1080047.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="ii.XL-p91.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p92"></span> [Luke xviii.
9-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009)<span id="ii.XL-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[126:1155](1080047.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="ii.XL-p93.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p94"></span> Natural light.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[126:1156](1080047.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="ii.XL-p95.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p96"></span> [Luke xxii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#033)<span id="ii.XL-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[126:1157](1080047.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="ii.XL-p97.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p98"></span> [Matt. viii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002)<span id="ii.XL-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[126:1158](1080047.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="ii.XL-p98.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p99"></span> Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XL-p99.1"></span>mss</span>. repeat *respice*.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[126:1159](1080047.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="ii.XL-p100.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p101"></span> [Ps. cxlii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#004)<span id="ii.XL-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[127:1160](1080047.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="ii.XL-p102.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p103"></span> E.V. “driven backwards.” Text,
*convertantur*.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[127:1161](1080047.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="ii.XL-p103.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p104"></span> [Luke xxiii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034)<span id="ii.XL-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[127:1162](1080047.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="ii.XL-p104.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p105"></span> *Priorem*.

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[127:1163](1080047.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="ii.XL-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p106"></span> [Matt. xvi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#022)<span id="ii.XL-p106.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[127:1164](1080047.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="ii.XL-p106.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p107"></span> [Matt. xvi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ii.XL-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[127:1165](1080047.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="ii.XL-p108.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p109"></span> E.V. “Let them be desolate for a reward of
their shame, that say unto me, Aha! Aha!”

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[127:1166](1080047.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="ii.XL-p110.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p111"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="ii.XL-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[127:1167](1080047.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="ii.XL-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p113"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.XL-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[127:1168](1080047.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="ii.XL-p114.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p115"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="ii.XL-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[127:1169](1080047.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="ii.XL-p115.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p116"></span> [Luke xviii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011)<span id="ii.XL-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[127:1170](1080047.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="ii.XL-p116.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p117"></span> [Matt. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)<span id="ii.XL-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[127:1171](1080047.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="ii.XL-p117.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p118"></span> [Ps. lv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#022)<span id="ii.XL-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[127:1172](1080047.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="ii.XL-p118.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p119"></span> [Matt. v.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="ii.XL-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[128:1173](1080047.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="ii.XL-p120.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p121"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)<span id="ii.XL-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[128:1174](1080047.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="ii.XL-p121.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p122"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="ii.XL-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[128:1175](1080047.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="ii.XL-p122.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XL-p123"></span> Compare [Matt.
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003), [Luke
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)<span id="ii.XL-p123.1"></span>,
“Blessed be ye poor.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XLI](1080048)
