[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080159)  [Next](1080161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXVII"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXVII. <span
id="fr_5512"></span>[5513](#fn_5512) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p3"></span>1. Among all the Songs entitled the Song
of degrees, this Psalm hath a further addition in the title, that it is
“Solomon’s.” For thus it is entitled, “A Song of degrees of Solomon.” It
hath therefore aroused our attention, and caused us to enquire the
reason of this addition, “of Solomon.” For it is needless to repeat
explanations of the other words, Song of degrees.…Solomon was in his
time David’s son, a great man, through whom many holy precepts and
healthful admonitions and divine mysteries have been wrought by the Holy
Spirit in the Scriptures. Solomon himself was a lover of women, and was
rejected by God: and this lust was so great a snare unto him, that he
was induced by women even to sacrifice to idols, <span
id="fr_5513"></span>[5514](#fn_5513) as Scripture witnesseth concerning
him. But if, by his fall what was delivered through him were blotted
out, it would be judged that he had himself delivered these precepts,
and not that they were delivered through him. The mercy of God,
therefore, and His Spirit, excellently wrought that whatever of good was
declared through Solomon, might be attributed unto God; and the man’s
sin, unto the man. What marvel that Solomon fell among God’s people? Did
not Adam fall in Paradise? Did not an angel fall from heaven, and become
the devil? We are thereby taught, that no hope must be placed in any
among men.…The name of Solomon is interpreted to mean peacemaker: now
Christ is the True Peacemaker, of whom the Apostle saith, “He is our
Peace, who hath made both one.” <span
id="fr_5514"></span>[5515](#fn_5514) …Since, therefore, He is the true
Solomon; for that Solomon was the figure of this Peace maker, when he
built the temple; that thou mayest not think he who built the house unto
God was the true Solomon, Scripture showing unto thee another Solomon,
thus commences this Psalm: “Except the Lord build the house, their
labour is but lost that build it” ([Psa.
127.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p5.2"></span>). The Lord, therefore, buildeth the house,
the Lord Jesus Christ buildeth His own house. Many toil in building:
but, except He build, “their labour is but lost that build it.” Who are
they who toil in building it? All who preach the word of God in the
Church, the ministers of God’s mysteries. We are all running, we are all
toiling, we are all building now; and before us others have run, toiled,
and built: but “except the Lord build, their labour is but lost.” Thus
the Apostles seeing some fall bewailed these men, in that they had
laboured in vain for them. <span id="fr_5515"></span>[5516](#fn_5515)
We, therefore, speak without, He buildeth within. We can observe with
what attention ye hear us; He alone who knoweth your thoughts, knoweth
what ye think. He Himself buildeth, He Himself admonisheth, He Himself
openeth the understanding, He Himself kindleth your understanding unto
faith; nevertheless, we also toil like workmen; but, “except the Lord
build,” etc.

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p7"></span>2. But that which is the house of God is
also a city. For the house of God is the people of God; for the house of
God is the temple of God.…This is Jerusalem: she hath guards: as she
hath builders, labouring at her building up, so also hath she guards. To
this guardianship these words of the Apostle relate: “I fear, lest by
any means your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity which is in
Christ.” <span id="fr_5516"></span>[5517](#fn_5516) He was guarding the
Church. He kept watch, to the utmost of his power, over those over whom
he was set. The Bishops also do this. For a higher place was for this
reason given the Bishops, that they might be themselves the
superintendents and as it were the guardians of the people. For the
Greek word *Episcopus,* and the vernacular Superintendent, are the same;
for the Bishop superintends, in that he looks over. As a higher place is
assigned to the vinedresser in the charge of the vineyard, so also to
the Bishops a more exalted station is alloted. And a perilous account is
rendered of this high station, except we stand here with a heart that
causeth us to stand beneath your feet in humility, and pray for you,
that He who knoweth your minds may be Himself your keeper. Since we can
see you both coming in and going out; but we are so unable to see what
are the thoughts of your hearts, that we cannot even see what ye do in
your houses. <span id="page_607">p. 607</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVII-Page_607"></span>How then can we guard you? As men: as far
as we are able, as far as we have received power. And because we guard
you like men, and cannot guard you perfectly, shall ye therefore remain
without a keeper? Far be it! For where is He of whom it is said, “Except
the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vain?” ([Psa.
127.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p8.2"></span>). We are watchful on our guard, but vain in
our watchfulness, except He who seeth your thoughts guard you. He
keepeth guard while ye are awake, He keepeth guard also whilst ye are
asleep. For He hath once slept on the Cross, and hath risen again; He no
longer sleepeth. Be ye Israel: for “the Keeper of Israel neither
sleepeth nor slumbereth.” <span id="fr_5517"></span>[5518](#fn_5517)
Yea, brethren, if we wish to be kept beneath the shadow of God’s wings,
let us be Israel. For we guard you in our office of stewards; but we
wish to be guarded together with you. We are as it were shepherds unto
you; but beneath that Shepherd we are fellow-sheep with you. We are as
it were your teachers from this station; but beneath Him, the One
Master, we are schoolfellows with you in this school.

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p10"></span>3. If we wish to be guarded by Him who
was humbled for our sakes, and who was exalted to keep us, let us be
humble. Let no one assume anything unto himself. No man hath any good,
except he hath received it from Him who alone is good. But he who
chooseth to arrogate wisdom unto himself, is a fool. Let him be humble,
that wisdom may come, and may enlighten him. But if, before wisdom
cometh unto him, he imagine that he is wise; he riseth before light, and
walketh in darkness. What doth he hear in this Psalm? “It is but lost
labour that ye haste to rise up before dawn” ([Psa.
127.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p10.1"></span>). What meaneth this? If ye arise before
light ariseth, ye must needs lose your labour, because ye will be in the
dark. Our light, Christ, hath arisen; it is good for thee to rise after
Christ, not to rise before Christ. Who rise before Christ? They who
choose to prefer themselves to Christ. And who are they who wish to
prefer themselves to Christ? They who wish to be exalted here, where He
was humble. Let them, therefore, be humble here, if they wish to be
exalted there, where Christ is exalted.…The Lord recalled the sons of
Zebedee to humility, and said unto them, “Are ye able to drink of the
cup that I shall drink of?” <span id="fr_5518"></span>[5519](#fn_5518) I
came to be humble: and are ye wishing to be exalted before Me? The way I
go, do ye follow, He saith. For if ye choose to go this way where I do
not go, your labour is lost, in rising before dawn. Peter too had risen
before the light, when he wished to give the Lord advice, deterring Him
from suffering for us.…But what did our Lord do? He caused him to rise
after the Light: “Get thee behind Me, Satan.” <span
id="fr_5519"></span>[5520](#fn_5519) He was Satan, because he wished to
rise before Light. “Get thee behind Me:” that I may precede, thou mayest
follow: where I go, there thou mayest go; and mayest not wish to lead
Me, where thou wouldest go.…

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p13"></span>4. And as if thou shouldest say, When
shall we rise? we are ordered now to sit: when will be our rising? When
the Lord’s was. Look unto Him, who went before thee: for if thou heedest
not Him, “it is lost labour for thee to rise before dawn.” When was He
raised? When He had died. Hope therefore for thine uplifting after thy
death: have hope in the resurrection of the dead, because He rose again
and ascended. But where did He sleep? On the Cross. When He slept on the
Cross, He bore a sign, yea, He fulfilled what had been signified in
Adam: for when Adam was asleep, a rib was drawn from him and Eve was
created; <span id="fr_5520"></span>[5521](#fn_5520) so also while the
Lord slept on the Cross, His side was transfixed with a spear, and the
Sacraments flowed forth, <span id="fr_5521"></span>[5522](#fn_5521)
whence the Church was born. For the Church the Lord’s Bride was created
from His side, as Eve was created from the side of Adam. But as she was
made from his side no otherwise than while sleeping, so the Church was
created from His side no otherwise than while dying. If therefore He
rose not from the dead save when He had died, dost thou hope for
exaltation save after this life? But that this Psalm might teach thee,
in case thou shouldest ask, When shall I rise? perhaps before I have sat
down? he addeth, “When He hath given His beloved sleep” ([Psa.
127.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p15.2"></span>). God giveth this when His beloved have
fallen asleep; then His beloved, that is, Christ’s, shall rise. For all
indeed shall rise, but not as His beloved. There is a resurrection of
all the dead; but what saith the Apostle? “We shall all rise, but we
shall not all be changed.” <span id="fr_5522"></span>[5523](#fn_5522)
They rise unto punishment: we rise as our Lord rose, that we may follow
our Head, if we are members of Him.…Hope for such a resurrection; and
for the sake of this be a Christian, not for the sake of this world’s
happiness. For if thou wish to be a Christian for the sake of this
world’s happiness, since He thy Light sought not worldly happiness; thou
art wishing to rise before the light; thou must needs continue in
darkness. Be changed, follow thy Light; rise where  <span
id="fr_5523"></span>[5524](#fn_5523) He rose again: first sit down, and
thus rise, “when He giveth His beloved sleep.”

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p18"></span>5. As if thou shouldest ask again, who
are the beloved? “Lo, children, the reward of the fruit of the womb, are
an heritage of the Lord” <span id="fr_5524"></span>[5525](#fn_5524)
<span id="page_608">p. 608</span> <span
id="ii.CXXVII-Page_608"></span>([Psa.
127.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p19.1"></span>). Since he saith, “fruit of the womb,”
these children have been born in travail. There is a certain woman, in
whom what was said unto Eve, “in sorrow shalt thou bring forth
children,” is shown after a spiritual manner. The Church beareth
children, the Bride of Christ; and if she beareth them, she travaileth
of them. In figure of her, Eve was called also “the Mother of all
living.” <span id="fr_5525"></span>[5526](#fn_5525) He who said, “My
little children, of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
formed in you,” <span id="fr_5526"></span>[5527](#fn_5526) was amongst
the members of her who travaileth. But she travailed not in vain, nor
brought forth in vain: there will be a holy seed at the resurrection of
the dead: the righteous who are at present scattered over the whole
world shall abound. The Church groaneth for them, the Church travaileth
of them; but in that resurrection of the dead, the offspring of the
Church shall appear, pain and groaning shall pass away.…

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p22"></span>6. “Like as the arrows in the hand of
the mighty one, even so are the children of those that are shot out”
([Psa. 127.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p22.1"></span>). Whence hath sprung this heritage,
brethren? Whence hath sprung so numerous a heritage? Some have been shot
out from the Lord’s hand, as arrows, and have gone far, and have filled
the whole earth, whence the Saints spring. For this is the heritage
whereof it is said, “Desire of Me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession.” <span id="fr_5527"></span>[5528](#fn_5527) And how doth
this possession extend and increase unto the world’s uttermost parts?
Because, “like as the arrows in the hand of the mighty one,” etc. Arrows
are shot forth from the bow, and the stronger the arm which hath sent it
forth, the farther flieth the arrow. But what is stronger than the
darting of the Lord? From His bow He sendeth forth His Apostles: there
could not be a spot left where an arrow shot by so strong an arm would
not reach; it hath reached unto the uttermost parts of the earth. The
reason it went no farther was, that there were no more of the human race
beyond. For He hath such strength, that even if there were a spot
beyond, whither the arrow could fly, He would dart the arrow thither.
Such are the children of those who are shot forth as they that are shot
forth. <span id="fr_5528"></span>[5529](#fn_5528) …

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p25"></span>7. Perhaps the Apostles themselves are
styled the sons of those who have been shaken out, the sons of the
Prophets. For the Prophets comprised closed and covered mysteries: they
were shaken, that they might come forth thence manifestly.…Except the
prophecy involved were sifted with diligence, would the concealed
meanings come forth unto us? All these meanings were therefore closed
before the Lord’s advent. The Lord came, and shook out these hidden
meanings, and they were made manifest; the Prophets were shaken out, and
the Apostles were born. Since then they were born of the Prophets who
had been shaken out, the Apostles are sons of those that were shaken
out. They, placed as the arrows in the hand of the giant, have reached
the uttermost parts of the earth.…The Apostles the sons of the Prophets
have been like as the arrows in the hand of a mighty one. If He is
mighty, He hath shaken them out with a mighty hand; if He hath shaken
them out with a mighty hand, they whom He hath shaken forth have arrived
even at the uttermost parts of the earth.

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p26"></span>8. “Blessed is the man who hath filled
his desire from them” ([Psa.
127.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXVII-p26.1"></span>). Well, my brethren, who filleth his desire
from them? Who loveth not the world. He who is filled with the desire of
the world, hath no room for that to enter which they have preached. Pour
forth what thou carriest, and become fit for that which thou hast not.
That is, thou desirest riches: thou canst not fill thy desire from them:
thou desirest honours upon earth, thou desirest those things which God
hath given even unto beasts of burden, that is, temporal pleasure,
bodily health, and the like; thou wilt not fulfil thy desire from
them.…“He shall not be ashamed, when he speaketh with his enemies in the
gate.” Brethren, let us speak in the gate, that is, let all know what we
speak. For he who chooseth not to speak in the gate, wisheth what he
speaketh to be hidden, and perhaps wisheth it to be hidden for this
reason, that it is evil. If he be confident, let him speak in the gate;
as it is said of Wisdom, “She crieth at the gates, at the entry of the
city.” <span id="fr_5529"></span>[5530](#fn_5529) As long as they hold
unto righteousness in innocency, they shall not be ashamed: this is to
preach at the gate. And who is he who preacheth at the gate? He who
preacheth in Christ; because Christ is the gate whereby we enter into
that city. <span id="fr_5530"></span>[5531](#fn_5530) …They, therefore,
who speak against Christ, are without the gate; because they seek their
own honours, not those of Christ. But he who preacheth in the gate,
seeketh Christ’s honour, not his own: and, therefore, he who preacheth
in the gate, saith, Trust not in me; for ye will not enter through me,
but through the gate. While they who wish men to trust in themselves,
wish them not to enter through the gate: it is no marvel if the gate be
closed against them, and if they vainly knock for it to be opened. <span
id="fr_5531"></span>[5532](#fn_5531)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5512"></span>[606:5513](1080160.htm#fr_5512) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p2"></span> Lat. CXXVI. A sermon to the common
people.

<span id="fn_5513"></span>[606:5514](1080160.htm#fr_5513) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p4"></span> [1 Kings
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5514"></span>[606:5515](1080160.htm#fr_5514) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p5"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5515"></span>[606:5516](1080160.htm#fr_5515) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p6"></span> [Gal.
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5516"></span>[606:5517](1080160.htm#fr_5516) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p8"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5517"></span>[607:5518](1080160.htm#fr_5517) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p8.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p9"></span> [Ps. cxxi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5518"></span>[607:5519](1080160.htm#fr_5518) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p11"></span> [Matt.
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5519"></span>[607:5520](1080160.htm#fr_5519) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p12"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5520"></span>[607:5521](1080160.htm#fr_5520) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p14"></span> [Gen.
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#022)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5521"></span>[607:5522](1080160.htm#fr_5521) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p15"></span> [John xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5522"></span>[607:5523](1080160.htm#fr_5522) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p16"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5523"></span>[607:5524](1080160.htm#fr_5523) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p17"></span> So Oxf. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.CXXVII-p17.1"></span>mss</span>. *qua resurrexit*. Ben. *quare
surrexit*.

<span id="fn_5524"></span>[607:5525](1080160.htm#fr_5524) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p19"></span> Perhaps he intends to read it, “Lo,
children, the heritage of the Lord, is the reward of the fruit of the
womb;” making *filii* vocative.

<span id="fn_5525"></span>[608:5526](1080160.htm#fr_5525) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p20"></span> [Gen.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5526"></span>[608:5527](1080160.htm#fr_5526) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p21"></span> [Gal. iv.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5527"></span>[608:5528](1080160.htm#fr_5527) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p23"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5528"></span>[608:5529](1080160.htm#fr_5528) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p24"></span> \[*Al*. “shaken forth.”—C.\]

<span id="fn_5529"></span>[608:5530](1080160.htm#fr_5529) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p27"></span> [Prov. viii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5530"></span>[608:5531](1080160.htm#fr_5530) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p28"></span> [John x.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5531"></span>[608:5532](1080160.htm#fr_5531) <span
id="ii.CXXVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXVII-p29"></span> \[He concludes by asking their prayers,
and promising to preach the next day on “the Gospel of the Dove.” Tract.
iv. on St. [John 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)<span id="ii.CXXVII-p29.1"></span>,
§ 16, vol. vii. p. 31, this series; and compare Tractates v. and vi.
This reference is from ed. Oxford.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXVIII](1080161)
