[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080121)  [Next](1080123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXI"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p1"></span> <span id="page_545">p. 545</span> <span
id="ii.CXI-Page_545"></span>[Psalm
CXI](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXI-p1.2"></span>. <span
id="fr_4981"></span>[4982](#fn_4981) </span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p3"></span>1. The days have come for us to sing
Allelujah. <span id="fr_4982"></span>[4983](#fn_4982) …Now these days
come only to pass away, and pass away to come, again, and typify the day
which does not come and pass away, because it is neither preceded by
yesterday to cause it to come, nor pressed upon by the morrow to cause
it to pass.…For as these days succeed in regular season, with a joyful
cheerfulness, the past days of Lent, whereby the misery of this life
before the Resurrection of the Lord’s body is signified; so that day
which after the Resurrection shall be given to the full body of the
Lord, that is, to the holy Church, when all the troubles and sorrows of
this life have been shut out, shall succeed with perpetual bliss. But
this life demandeth from us self-restraint, that although groaning and
weighed down with our toil and struggles, and desiring to be clothed
upon with our house which is from heaven, <span
id="fr_4983"></span>[4984](#fn_4983) we may refrain from secular
pleasures: and this is signified by the number of forty, which was the
period of the fasts of Moses, and Elias, <span
id="fr_4984"></span>[4985](#fn_4984) and our Lord Himself.…But by the
number fifty after our Lord’s resurrection, during which season we sing
Allelujah, not the term and passing away of a certain season is
signified, but that blessed eternity; because the *denary* <span
id="fr_4985"></span>[4986](#fn_4985) added to forty signifieth the
reward paid to the faithful who toil in this life, which our Father hath
prepared an equal share of for the first and for the last. Let us
therefore hear the heart of the people of God full of divine praises. He
representeth in this Psalm some one exulting in happy joyfulness, he
prefigureth the people whose hearts are overflowing with the love of
God, that is, the body of Christ, freed from all evil.

<span id="ii.CXI-p8"></span>2. “I will make confession unto Thee, O
Lord,” he saith, “with my whole heart” ([Psa.
111.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXI-p8.1"></span>).
Confession is not always confession of sins, but the praise of God is
poured forth in the devotion of confession. The former mourneth, the
latter rejoiceth: the former showeth the wound to the physician, the
latter giveth thanks for health. The latter confession signifieth some
one, not merely freed from every evil, but even separate from all the
ill-disposed. And for this reason let us consider the place where he
confesseth unto the Lord with all his heart. “In the counsel,” he saith,
“of the upright, and in the congregation:” I suppose, of those who shall
“sit upon the twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel.” <span id="fr_4986"></span>[4987](#fn_4986) For there will be no
longer an unjust man among them, the thefts of no Judas are allowed, no
Simon Magus is baptized, wishing to buy the Spirit, whilst he designeth
to sell it; <span id="fr_4987"></span>[4988](#fn_4987) no coppersmith
like Alexander doth many evil deeds, <span
id="fr_4988"></span>[4989](#fn_4988) no man covered with sheep’s
clothing creepeth in with feigned fraternity; such as those among whom
the Church must now groan, and such as she must then shut out, when all
the righteous shall be gathered together.

<span id="ii.CXI-p12"></span>“These are the great works of the Lord,
sought out unto all His wills” ([Psa.
111.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXI-p12.1"></span>):
through which mercy forsaketh none who confesseth, no man’s wickedness
is unpunished. <span id="fr_4989"></span>[4990](#fn_4989) …Let man
choose for himself what he listeth: the works of the Lord are not so
constituted, that the creature, having free discretion allowed him,
should transcend the will of the Creator, even though he act contrary to
His will. God willeth not that thou shouldest sin; for He forbiddeth it:
yet if thou hast sinned, imagine not that the man hath done what he
willed, and that hath happened to God which He willed not. For as He
would that man would not sin, so would He spare the sinner, that he may
return and live; He so willeth finally to punish him who persisteth in
his sin, that the rebellious cannot escape the power of justice. Thus
whatever choice thou hast made, the Almighty will not be at a loss to
fulfil His will concerning thee.

<span id="ii.CXI-p14"></span>3. “Confession and glorious deeds are His
work” ([Psa. 111.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXI-p14.1"></span>). What is a more glorious deed than to justify
the ungodly? But perhaps the work of man preventeth that glorious work
of God, so that when he hath confessed his sins, he deserveth to be
justified.…This is the glorious work of the Lord: for he loveth most, to
whom most is forgiven. <span id="fr_4990"></span>[4991](#fn_4990) This
is the glorious work of the Lord: for “where sin abounded, there did
grace much more abound.” <span id="fr_4991"></span>[4992](#fn_4991) But
perhaps a man would deserve justification from works. “Not,” saith he,
“of works, lest any man boast. For we are His workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works.” <span
id="fr_4992"></span>[4993](#fn_4992) For a man worketh not righteousness
save he be justified: but by “believing on Him that justifieth the
ungodly,” <span id="fr_4993"></span>[4994](#fn_4993) he beginneth with
faith; that good may not by preceding show what he hath deserved, but by
following what he hath received.…

<span id="ii.CXI-p19"></span>4. “He hath made His wonderful works to be
remembered” ([Psa. 111.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#004)<span
id="ii.CXI-p19.1"></span>): by abasing this man, exalting that.
Reserving unusual miracles for a fit season, that thus human weakness,
intent upon novelty, may remember them, although His daily miracles be
greater. He created so many trees throughout the whole earth, and no one
wondereth: He dried up one with a word, and the hearts of mortals were
thunderstruck. <span id="fr_4994"></span>[4995](#fn_4994) For that
miracle, which hath not through its frequency <span id="page_546">p.
546</span> <span id="ii.CXI-Page_546"></span>become common, will cling
most firmly to the heart. But of what use were the miracles, save that
He might be feared? What too would fear profit, unless “the gracious and
merciful Lord” gave “meat unto them that fear Him”? ([Psa.
111.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXI-p20.2"></span>);
meat that doth not spoil, “bread that cometh down from heaven,” <span
id="fr_4995"></span>[4996](#fn_4995) which He gave to no deservings of
ours. For “Christ died for the ungodly.” <span
id="fr_4996"></span>[4997](#fn_4996) No one then would give such food,
save a gracious and merciful Lord. But if He gave so much to this life,
if the sinner who was to be justified received the Word made flesh; what
shall he receive when glorified in a future world? For, “He shall ever
be mindful of His covenant.” Nor hath He who hath given a pledge, given
the whole.

<span id="ii.CXI-p23"></span>5. “He shall show His people the power of
His works” ([Psa. 111.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#006)<span
id="ii.CXI-p23.1"></span>). Let not the holy Israelites, who have left
all their possessions and have followed Him, be saddened; let them not
be sorrowful and say, “Who then can be saved?” For “it is easier for a
camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter
into the kingdom of God.” For “with men these things are impossible, but
with God all things are possible.” <span
id="fr_4997"></span>[4998](#fn_4997) “That He may give them the heritage
of the heathen.” For they went to the heathen, and enjoined the rich of
this world “not to be high-minded, nor to trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God,” <span id="fr_4998"></span>[4999](#fn_4998) to whom
that is easy which is difficult for men. For thus many were called, thus
the heritage of the heathen has been occupied, thus it hath happened,
that even many who have not abandoned all their possessions in this life
in order to follow Him, have despised even life itself for the sake of
confessing His Name; and like camels humbling themselves to bear the
burden of troubles, have entered as it were through a needle’s eye,
through the piercing straits of suffering. He hath wrought these
effects, unto whom all things are possible.

<span id="ii.CXI-p26"></span>6. “The works of His hands are verity and
judgment” ([Psa. 111.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXI-p26.1"></span>). Let verity be held by those who are judged
here. Martyrs are here sentenced, and brought to the judgment-seat, that
they may judge not only those by whom they have been judged, but even
give judgment on angels, <span id="fr_4999"></span>[5000](#fn_4999)
against whom was their struggle here, even when they seemed to be judged
by men. Let not tribulation, distress, famine, nakedness, the sword,
separate from Christ. For “all His commandments are true;” <span
id="fr_5000"></span>[5001](#fn_5000) He deceiveth not, He giveth us what
He promised. Yet we should not expect here what He promised; we should
not hope for it: but “they stand fast for ever and ever, and are done in
truth and equity” ([Psa. 111.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXI-p28.2"></span>). It is equitable and just that we should
labour here and repose there; since “He sent redemption unto His people”
([Psa. 111.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#009)<span
id="ii.CXI-p28.3"></span>). But from what are they redeemed, save from
the captivity of this pilgrimage? Let not therefore rest be sought, save
in the heavenly country. God indeed gave the carnal Israelites an
earthly Jerusalem, “which is in bondage with her children:” but this is
the Old Covenant, pertaining unto the old man. But they who there
understood the figure, even then were heirs of the New Covenant; for
“Jerusalem which is above is free, which is our everlasting mother in
heaven.” <span id="fr_5001"></span>[5002](#fn_5001) But that transitory
promises were given in that Old Testament is proved by the fact itself:
however, “He hath commended His covenant for ever.” But what, but the
New? Whosoever dost wish to be heir of this, deceive not thyself, and
think not of a land flowing with milk and honey, nor of pleasant farms,
nor of gardens abounding in fruits and shade: desire not how to gain
anything of this sort, such as the eye of covetousness is wont to lust
for. For since “covetousness is the root of all evils,” <span
id="fr_5002"></span>[5003](#fn_5002) it must be cut off, that it may be
consumed here; not be put off, that it may be satisfied there. First
escape punishments, avoid hell; before thou longest for a God who
promiseth, beware of one who threateneth. For “holy and reverend is His
Name.”

<span id="ii.CXI-p31"></span>7. …“The fear of the Lord,” therefore, “is
the beginning of wisdom.” “Understanding is good” ([Psa.
111.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXI-p31.1"></span>). Who gainsayeth? But to understand, and not
to do, is dangerous. It is “good,” therefore, “to those that do
thereafter.” Nor let it lift up the mind unto pride; for, “the praise of
Him,” the fear of whom is the beginning of wisdom, “endureth for ever:”
and this will be the reward, this the end, this the everlasting station
and abode. There are found the true commandments, made fast for ever and
ever; here is the very heritage of the New Covenant commanded for ever.
“One thing,” he saith, “I have desired of the Lord, which I will
require: even that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life.” <span id="fr_5003"></span>[5004](#fn_5003) For, “blessed are
they that dwell in the house” of the Lord: “they will be alway
praising” <span id="fr_5004"></span>[5005](#fn_5004) Him; for “His
praise endureth for ever.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4981"></span>[545:4982](1080122.htm#fr_4981) <span
id="ii.CXI-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p2"></span> Lat. CX. A sermon to the people at the
Paschal festival.

<span id="fn_4982"></span>[545:4983](1080122.htm#fr_4982) <span
id="ii.CXI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p4"></span> \[See [Ps.
cvii.](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#000)<span id="ii.CXI-p4.1"></span> p.
532, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4983"></span>[545:4984](1080122.htm#fr_4983) <span
id="ii.CXI-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p5"></span> [2 Cor. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXI-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4984"></span>[545:4985](1080122.htm#fr_4984) <span
id="ii.CXI-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p6"></span> [Exod.
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028), [1 Kings
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4985"></span>[545:4986](1080122.htm#fr_4985) <span
id="ii.CXI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p7"></span> [Matt. xx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4986"></span>[545:4987](1080122.htm#fr_4986) <span
id="ii.CXI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p9"></span> [Matt. xix.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028)<span id="ii.CXI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4987"></span>[545:4988](1080122.htm#fr_4987) <span
id="ii.CXI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p10"></span> [Acts
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#013),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#019)<span id="ii.CXI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4988"></span>[545:4989](1080122.htm#fr_4988) <span
id="ii.CXI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p11"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4989"></span>[545:4990](1080122.htm#fr_4989) <span
id="ii.CXI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p13"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4990"></span>[545:4991](1080122.htm#fr_4990) <span
id="ii.CXI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p15"></span> [Luke vii.
42-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#042)<span id="ii.CXI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4991"></span>[545:4992](1080122.htm#fr_4991) <span
id="ii.CXI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p16"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="ii.CXI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4992"></span>[545:4993](1080122.htm#fr_4992) <span
id="ii.CXI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p17"></span> [Eph.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4993"></span>[545:4994](1080122.htm#fr_4993) <span
id="ii.CXI-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p18"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4994"></span>[545:4995](1080122.htm#fr_4994) <span
id="ii.CXI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p20"></span> [Matt.
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#020)<span id="ii.CXI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4995"></span>[546:4996](1080122.htm#fr_4995) <span
id="ii.CXI-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p21"></span> [John
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051)<span id="ii.CXI-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4996"></span>[546:4997](1080122.htm#fr_4996) <span
id="ii.CXI-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p22"></span> [Rom. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4997"></span>[546:4998](1080122.htm#fr_4997) <span
id="ii.CXI-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p24"></span> [Matt. xix.
24-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024)<span id="ii.CXI-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4998"></span>[546:4999](1080122.htm#fr_4998) <span
id="ii.CXI-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p25"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017)<span id="ii.CXI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4999"></span>[546:5000](1080122.htm#fr_4999) <span
id="ii.CXI-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p27"></span> [1 Cor. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXI-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5000"></span>[546:5001](1080122.htm#fr_5000) <span
id="ii.CXI-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p28"></span> [Rom. viii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#035)<span id="ii.CXI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5001"></span>[546:5002](1080122.htm#fr_5001) <span
id="ii.CXI-p28.4"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p29"></span> [Gal.
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXI-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5002"></span>[546:5003](1080122.htm#fr_5002) <span
id="ii.CXI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p30"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="ii.CXI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5003"></span>[546:5004](1080122.htm#fr_5003) <span
id="ii.CXI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p32"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXI-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5004"></span>[546:5005](1080122.htm#fr_5004) <span
id="ii.CXI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXI-p33"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXI-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXII](1080123)
