[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080125)  [Next](1080127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXV"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXV-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXV-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXV. <span
id="fr_5056"></span>[5057](#fn_5056) </span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p3"></span>1. “Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto Thy Name give the praise” ([Psa.
115.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXV-p3.1"></span>).
For that grace of the water that gushed from the rock (“now that rock
was Christ” <span id="fr_5057"></span>[5058](#fn_5057) ), was not given
on the score of works that had gone before, but of His mercy “that
justifieth the ungodly.” <span id="fr_5058"></span>[5059](#fn_5058) For
“Christ died for sinners,” <span id="fr_5059"></span>[5060](#fn_5059)
that men might not seek any glory of their own, but in the Lord’s Name.

<span id="ii.CXV-p7"></span>2. “For Thy loving mercy, and for Thy
truth’s sake” ([Psa. 115.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#002)<span
id="ii.CXV-p7.1"></span>). Observe how often these two qualities, loving
mercy and truth, are joined together in the holy Scriptures. For in His
loving mercy He called sinners, and in His truth He judgeth those who
when called refused to come. “That the heathen may not say, Where is now
their God?” For at the last, His loving mercy and truth will shine
forth, when “the sign of the Son of man shall appear <span
id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span id="ii.CXV-Page_552"></span>in heaven,
and then shall all tribes of the earth cry woe;”  <span
id="fr_5060"></span>[5061](#fn_5060) nor shall they then say, “Where is
their God?” when He is no longer preached unto them to be believed in,
but displayed before them to be trembled at.

<span id="ii.CXV-p9"></span>3. “As for our God, He is in heaven above”
([Psa. 115.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXV-p9.1"></span>). Not in heaven, where they see the sun and
moon, works of God which they adore, but “in heaven above,” which
overpasseth all heavenly and earthly bodies. Nor is our God in heaven in
such a sense, as to dread a fall that should deprive Him of His throne,
if heaven were withdrawn from under Him. “In heaven and earth He hath
made whatsoever pleased Him.” Nor doth He stand in need of His own
works, as if He had place in them where He might abide; but endureth in
His own eternity, wherein He abideth and hath done whatsoever pleased
Him, both in heaven and earth; for they did not support Him, as a
condition of their being created by Him: since, unless they had been
created, they could not have supported Him. Therefore, in whatsoever He
Himself dwelleth, He, so to speak, containeth this as in need of
Himself, He is not contained by this as if He needed it. Or it may be
thus understood: “In heaven and in earth He hath done whatsoever pleased
Him,” whether among the higher or the lower orders of His people, He
hath made His grace His free gift, that no man may boast in the merits
of his own works.…

<span id="ii.CXV-p10"></span>4. “Their idols,” he saith, “are silver and
gold, even the work of men’s hands” ([Psa.
115.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXV-p10.1"></span>).
That is, although we cannot display our God to your carnal eyes, whom ye
ought to recognise through his works; yet be not seduced by your vain
pretences, because ye can point with the finger to, the objects of your
worship. For it were much worthier for you not to have what to point to,
than that your hearts’ blindness should be displayed in what is
exhibited to these eyes by you: for what do ye exhibit, save gold and
silver? They have indeed both bronze, and wood, and earthenware idols,
and of different materials of this description; but the Holy Spirit
preferred mentioning the more precious material, because when every man
hath blushed for that which he sets more by, he is much more easily
turned away from the worship of meaner objects. For it is said in
another passage of Scripture concerning the worshippers of images,
“Saying to a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast
brought me forth.” <span id="fr_5061"></span>[5062](#fn_5061) But lest
that man who speaketh thus not to a stone or stock, but to gold and
silver, seem wiser to himself; let him look this way, let him turn
hitherwards the ear of his heart: “The idols of the Gentiles are gold
and silver.” Nothing mean and contemptible is here mentioned: and indeed
to that mind which is not earth, both gold and silver is earth, but more
beautiful and brilliant, more solid and firm. Employ not then the hands
of men, to create a false Deity out of that metal which a true God hath
created; nay, a false man, whom thou mayest worship for a true God.…

<span id="ii.CXV-p12"></span>5. “For they have mouths, and speak not:
eyes have they, and see not” ([Psa.
115.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXV-p12.1"></span>).
“They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, and smell not” ([Psa.
115.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXV-p12.2"></span>).
“They have hands, and handle not; feet have they, and walk not; neither
cry they through their throat” ([Psa.
115.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#007)<span id="ii.CXV-p12.3"></span>).
Even their artist therefore surpasseth them, since he had the faculty of
moulding them by the motion and functions of his limbs: though thou
wouldest be ashamed to worship that artist. Even thou surpassest them,
though thou hast not made these things, since thou doest what they
cannot do. Even a beast doth excel them; for unto this it is added,
“neither cry they through their throat.” For after he had said above,
“they have mouths, and speak not;” what need was there, after he had
enumerated the limbs from head to feet, to repeat what he had said of
their crying through their throat; unless, I suppose, because we
perceive that what he mentioned of the other members, was common to men
and beasts? For they see, and hear, and smell, and walk, and some, apes
for instance, handle with hands. But what he had said of the mouth, is
peculiar to men: since beasts do not speak. But that no one might refer
what hath been said to the works of human members alone, and prefer men
only to the gods of the heathen; after all this he added these words,
“neither cry they through their throat:” which again is common to men
and cattle.…How much better then do mice and serpents, and other animals
of like sort, judge of the idols of the heathen, so to speak, for they
regard not the human figure in them when they see not the human life.
For this reason they usually build nests in them, and unless they are
deterred by human movements, they seek for themselves no safer
habitations. A man then moveth himself, that he may frighten away a
living beast from his own god; and yet worshippeth that god who cannot
move himself, as if he were powerful, from whom he drove away one better
than the object of his worship.…Even the dead surpasseth a deity who
neither liveth nor hath lived.…

<span id="ii.CXV-p13"></span>6. But they seem to themselves to have a
purer religion, who say, I neither worship an idol, nor a devil; but in
the bodily image I behold an emblem <span
id="fr_5062"></span>[5063](#fn_5062) of that which I am bound to <span
id="page_553">p. 553</span> <span
id="ii.CXV-Page_553"></span>worship.…They presume to reply, that they
worship not the bodies themselves, but the deities which preside over
the government of them. One sentence of the Apostle, therefore,
testifieth to their punishment and condemnation; “Who,” he saith, “have
changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever.” <span
id="fr_5063"></span>[5064](#fn_5063) For in the former part of this
sentence he condemned idols; in the latter, the account they give of
their idols: for by designating images wrought by an artificer by the
names of the works of God’s creation, they change the truth of God into
a lie; while, by considering these works themselves as deities, and
worshipping them as such, they serve the creature more than the Creator,
who is blessed for ever.…

<span id="ii.CXV-p16"></span>7. But, it will be said, we also have very
many instruments and vessels made of materials or metal of this
description for the purpose of celebrating the Sacraments, which being
consecrated by these ministrations are called holy, in honour of Him who
is thus worshipped for our salvation: and what indeed are these very
instruments or vessels, but the work of men’s hands? But have they
mouth, and yet speak not? have they eyes, and see not? do we pray unto
them, because through them we pray to God? This is the chief cause of
this insane profanity, that the figure resembling the living person,
which induces men to worship it, hath more influence in the minds of
these miserable persons, than the evident fact that it is not living, so
that it ought to be despised by the living. <span
id="fr_5064"></span>[5065](#fn_5064)

<span id="ii.CXV-p18"></span>8. The result that ensueth is that
described in the next verse: “They that make them are like unto them,
and so are all such as put their trust in them” ([Psa.
115.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#008)<span id="ii.CXV-p18.1"></span>).
Let them therefore see with open eyes, and worship with shut and dead
understandings, idols that neither see nor live. “But the house of
Israel hath hoped in the Lord” ([Psa.
115.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXV-p18.2"></span>).
“For hope that is seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why doth he
yet hope for? But if we hope for that we see not, then do we with
patience wait for it.” <span id="fr_5065"></span>[5066](#fn_5065) But
that this patience may endure to the end, “He is their helper and
defender.” Do perhaps spiritual persons (by whom carnal minds are built
up in “the spirit of meekness,” <span
id="fr_5066"></span>[5067](#fn_5066) because they pray as higher for
lower minds) already see, and is that already to them reality which to
the lower is hope? It is not so. For even “the house of Aaron hath hope
in the Lord” ([Psa. 115.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#010)<span
id="ii.CXV-p20.2"></span>). Therefore, that they also may stretch
forward perseveringly towards those things which are before them, and
may run perseveringly, until they may apprehend that for which they are
apprehended,  <span id="fr_5067"></span>[5068](#fn_5067) and may know
even as they are known, <span id="fr_5068"></span>[5069](#fn_5068) “He
is their helper and defender.” For both “fear the Lord, and have hoped
in the Lord: He is their helper and defender” ([Psa.
115.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#011)<span
id="ii.CXV-p22.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.CXV-p23"></span>9. For we do not by our deservings prevent
the mercy of God; but, “The Lord hath been mindful of us, and hath
blessed us. He hath blessed the house of Israel, He hath blessed the
house of Aaron” ([Psa. 115.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#012)<span
id="ii.CXV-p23.1"></span>). But in blessing both of these, “He hath
blessed all that fear the Lord” ([Psa.
115.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CXV-p23.2"></span>). Dost thou ask, who are meant by both of
these? He answereth, “both small and great.” That is, the house of
Israel with the house of Aaron, those who among that nation believed in
Jesus the Saviour.…For in the character of those who out of that nation
believed, it is said, “Except the Lord of Sabaoth had left us a seed, we
had been as Sodoma, and been made like unto Gomorrha.” <span
id="fr_5069"></span>[5070](#fn_5069) Seed, because when it has been
scattered over the earth, it multiplied.

<span id="ii.CXV-p25"></span>10. For the great ones, of the house of
Aaron, have said, “May the Lord increase you more and more, you and your
children” ([Psa. 115.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#014)<span
id="ii.CXV-p25.1"></span>). And thus it hath happened. For children that
have been raised even from the stones have flocked unto Abraham: <span
id="fr_5070"></span>[5071](#fn_5070) sheep which were not of this fold,
have flocked unto him, that there might be one flock, and one
shepherd; <span id="fr_5071"></span>[5072](#fn_5071) the faith of all
nations was added, and the number grew, not only of wise priests, but of
obedient peoples; the Lord increasing not only their fathers more and
more, who in Christ might show the way to the rest who should imitate
them, but also their children, who should follow their fathers’ pious
footsteps.

<span id="ii.CXV-p28"></span>11. Therefore the Prophet saith unto these
great and small, the mountains and the little hills, the rams and the
young sheep, what followeth: “Ye are the blessed of the Lord, who made
heaven and earth” ([Psa. 115.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#015)<span
id="ii.CXV-p28.1"></span>). As if he should say, Ye are the blessed of
the Lord, who made the heaven in the great, earth in the small: not this
visible heaven, studded with luminaries which are objects to these eyes.
For “The heaven of heavens is the Lord’s” ([Psa.
115.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#016)<span
id="ii.CXV-p28.2"></span>); who hath elevated the minds of some saints
to such a height, that they became teachable by no man, but by God
Himself; in comparison of which heaven, whatever is discerned with
carnal eyes is to be called earth; which “He hath given to the children
of men;” that when it is contemplated, whether in that region which
illumineth above, as that which is called heaven, or in that which is
illumined beneath, which is properly called earth (since in comparison
with that which is called heaven of heaven, the whole, <span
id="page_554">p. 554</span> <span id="ii.CXV-Page_554"></span>as we have
said, is earth;) the whole therefore of this earth He hath given to the
children of men, that by the consideration of it, as far as they can,
they may conceive of the Creator, whom with their yet weak hearts they
cannot see without that aid to their conception.

<span id="ii.CXV-p29"></span>12. …But nevertheless since they derive the
truth and richness of wisdom, not from man nor through man, but through
God Himself, they have received little ones who shall be heaven, that
they may know that they are heaven of heaven; as yet however earth, unto
which they say, “I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the
increase.” <span id="fr_5072"></span>[5073](#fn_5072) For to those very
sons of men whom He made heaven, He who knoweth how to provide for the
earth through heaven, hath given earth upon which they work. May they
therefore abide, heaven and earth, in their God, who made them, and let
them live from Him, confessing unto Him, and praising Him; for if they
choose to live from themselves, they shall die, as it is written, “From
the dead, as though he were not, confession ceaseth.” <span
id="fr_5073"></span>[5074](#fn_5073) But, “The dead praise not Thee, O
Lord, neither all they that go down into silence” ([Psa.
115.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#017)<span
id="ii.CXV-p31.2"></span>). For the Scripture in another passage
proclaimeth, “The sinner, when he cometh into the abyss of wickednesses,
scorneth.” <span id="fr_5074"></span>[5075](#fn_5074) “But we, who live,
will praise the Lord, from this time forth for evermore” ([Psa.
115.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#018)<span
id="ii.CXV-p32.2"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5056"></span>[551:5057](1080126.htm#fr_5056) <span
id="ii.CXV-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p2"></span> Lat. CXIII.

<span id="fn_5057"></span>[551:5058](1080126.htm#fr_5057) <span
id="ii.CXV-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p4"></span> [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5058"></span>[551:5059](1080126.htm#fr_5058) <span
id="ii.CXV-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p5"></span> [Rom. iv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5059"></span>[551:5060](1080126.htm#fr_5059) <span
id="ii.CXV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p6"></span> [Rom. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXV-p6.1"></span>. \[In
Sept. and Vulg. this Psalm is joined with [Ps.
cxiv.](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#000)<span
id="ii.CXV-p6.2"></span>—C.\]

<span id="fn_5060"></span>[552:5061](1080126.htm#fr_5060) <span
id="ii.CXV-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p8"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)<span id="ii.CXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5061"></span>[552:5062](1080126.htm#fr_5061) <span
id="ii.CXV-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p11"></span> [Jer. ii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)<span id="ii.CXV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5062"></span>[552:5063](1080126.htm#fr_5062) <span
id="ii.CXV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p14"></span> \[The pretext of all image-worship.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5063"></span>[553:5064](1080126.htm#fr_5063) <span
id="ii.CXV-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p15"></span> [Rom. i.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5064"></span>[553:5065](1080126.htm#fr_5064) <span
id="ii.CXV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p17"></span> \[Compare the gross misstatements and bad
reasoning of the Trent Catechism. A.N.F. vol. iii. p. 76.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5065"></span>[553:5066](1080126.htm#fr_5065) <span
id="ii.CXV-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p19"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5066"></span>[553:5067](1080126.htm#fr_5066) <span
id="ii.CXV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p20"></span> [Gal. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXV-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5067"></span>[553:5068](1080126.htm#fr_5067) <span
id="ii.CXV-p20.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p21"></span> [Philip. iii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5068"></span>[553:5069](1080126.htm#fr_5068) <span
id="ii.CXV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p22"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5069"></span>[553:5070](1080126.htm#fr_5069) <span
id="ii.CXV-p23.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p24"></span> [Rom. ix.
29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5070"></span>[553:5071](1080126.htm#fr_5070) <span
id="ii.CXV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p26"></span> [Matt. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)<span id="ii.CXV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5071"></span>[553:5072](1080126.htm#fr_5071) <span
id="ii.CXV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p27"></span> [John
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5072"></span>[554:5073](1080126.htm#fr_5072) <span
id="ii.CXV-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p30"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5073"></span>[554:5074](1080126.htm#fr_5073) <span
id="ii.CXV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p31"></span> [Ecclesiasticus
17.26](../../../bib/apo/sir017.htm#026)<span id="ii.CXV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5074"></span>[554:5075](1080126.htm#fr_5074) <span
id="ii.CXV-p31.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXV-p32"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXV-p32.1"></span>, LXX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXVI](1080127)
