[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080065)  [Next](1080067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.LVII"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.LVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.LVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm LVII. <span
id="fr_2122"></span>[2123](#fn_2122) </span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p3"></span>1. We have heard in the Gospel just now,
brethren, how loveth us our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, God with the
Father, Man with us, out of our own selves, now at <span
id="fr_2123"></span>[2124](#fn_2123) the right hand of the Father; ye
have heard how much He loveth us.…

<span id="ii.LVII-p5"></span>2. Because then this Psalm is singing of
the Passion of the Lord, see what is the title that it hath: “at the
end.” The end is Christ. <span id="fr_2124"></span>[2125](#fn_2124) Why
hath He been called end? Not as one that consumeth, but one that
consummateth.…

<span id="ii.LVII-p7"></span>3. “At the end, corrupt not, for David
himself, for the inscription of the title; when he fled from the face of
Saul into a cavern.” We referring to holy Scripture, do find indeed how
holy David, that king of Israel, from whom too the Psalter of David hath
received the name thereof, had suffered for persecutor Saul the king of
his own people, as many of you know that have either read or have heard
the Scriptures. King David had then for persecutor Saul: and whereas the
one was most gentle, the other most ferocious: the one mild, the other
envious; the one patient, the other cruel; the one beneficent, the other
ungrateful: he endured him with so much mildness, that when he had
gotten him into his hands him he touched not, hurt not. <span
id="fr_2125"></span>[2126](#fn_2125) …What reference hath this to
Christ? If all things which then were being done, were figures of things
future, we find there Christ, and by far in the greatest degree. For
this, “corrupt not for the inscription of the title,” I see not how it
belongeth to that David. For not any “title” was inscribed over David
himself which Saul would “corrupt.” But we see in the Passion of the
Lord that there had been written a title, “King of the Jews:”  <span
id="fr_2126"></span>[2127](#fn_2126) in order that this title might put
to the blush these very men, seeing that from their King they withheld
not their hands. For in them Saul was, in Christ David was. For Christ,
as saith the Apostolic Gospel, is, as we know, as we confess, of the
seed of David after the flesh; <span
id="fr_2127"></span>[2128](#fn_2127) for after the Godhead He is above
David, above all men, above heaven and earth, above angels, above all
things visible and invisible.…And because already it had been sung
through the Holy Spirit, “Unto the end, corrupt not, for the inscription
of the title:” Pilate answered them, “What I have written, I have
written:” <span id="fr_2128"></span>[2129](#fn_2128) why do ye suggest
to me falsehood? I corrupt not truth.

<span id="ii.LVII-p12"></span>4. What therefore is, “When he fled from
the face of Saul into a cavern”? Which thing indeed the former David
also did: but because in him we find not the inscription of the title,
in the latter let us find the flight into the cavern. <span
id="fr_2129"></span>[2130](#fn_2129) For that cavern wherein David hid
himself did figure somewhat. But wherefore hid he himself? It was in
order that he might be concealed and not be found. What is to be hidden
in a cavern? To be hidden in earth. For he that fleeth into a cavern,
with earth is covered so that he may not be seen. But Jesus did carry
earth, flesh which He had received from earth: and in it He concealed
Himself, in order that by Jews He might not be discovered as God. “For
if they had known, never the Lord of glory would they have
crucified.” <span id="fr_2130"></span>[2131](#fn_2130) Why therefore the
Lord of glory found they not? Because in a cavern He had hidden Himself,
that is, the flesh’s weakness to their eyes He presented, but the
Majesty of the Godhead in the body’s clothing, as though in a
hiding-place of the earth, He hid.…But wherefore even unto death willed
He to be patient? It was in order that He might flee from the face of
Saul into a cavern. For a cavern may be understood as a lower part of
the earth. And certainly, as is manifest and certain to all, His Body in
a Tomb was laid, which was cut in a Rock. This Tomb therefore was the
Cavern; thither He fled from the face of Saul. <span id="page_226">p.
226</span> <span id="ii.LVII-Page_226"></span>For so long the Jews did
persecute Him, even until He was laid in a cavern. Whence prove we that
so long they persecuted Him, until therein He was laid? Even when dead,
and, on the Cross hanging, with lance they wounded Him. <span
id="fr_2131"></span>[2132](#fn_2131) But when shrouded, the funeral
celebrated, He was laid in a cavern, no longer had they anything which
to the Flesh they might do. Rose therefore the Lord again out of that
cavern unhurt, uncorrupt, from that place whither He had fled from the
face of Saul: concealing Himself from ungodly men, whom Saul prefigured,
but showing Himself to His members. For the members of Him rising again
by His members were handled: for the members of Him, the Apostles,
touched Him rising again and believed; <span
id="fr_2132"></span>[2133](#fn_2132) and behold nothing profited the
persecution of Saul. Hear we therefore now the Psalm; because concerning
the title thereof enough we have spoken, as far as the Lord hath deigned
to give.

<span id="ii.LVII-p17"></span>5. “Have pity on me, O God, have pity on
me, for in Thee hath trusted my Soul” ([Psa.
57.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVII-p17.1"></span>).
Christ in the Passion saith, “Have pity on Me, O God.” To God, God
saith, “Have pity on Me!” He that with the Father hath pity on thee, in
thee crieth, “Have pity on Me.” For that part of Him which is crying,
“Have pity on Me,” is thine: from thee this He received, for the sake of
thee, that thou shouldest be delivered, with Flesh He was clothed. The
flesh itself crieth: “Have pity on Me, O God, have pity on me:” Man
himself, soul and flesh. For whole Man did the Word take upon Him, and
whole Man the Word became. Let it not therefore be thought that there
Soul was not, because the Evangelist thus saith: “The Word was made
flesh, and dwelled in us.” <span id="fr_2133"></span>[2134](#fn_2133)
For man is called flesh, as in another place saith the Scripture, “And
all flesh shall see the salvation of God.” <span
id="fr_2134"></span>[2135](#fn_2134) Shall anywise flesh alone see, and
shall Soul not be there?…Thou hearest the Master praying, learn thou to
pray. For to this end He prayed, in order that He might teach how to
pray: because to this end He suffered, in order that He might teach how
to suffer; to this end He rose again, in order that He might teach how
to hope for rising again. “And in the shadow of Thy wings I will hope,
until iniquity pass over.” This now evidently whole Christ doth say:
here is also our voice. For not yet hath passed over, still rife is
iniquity. And in the end our Lord Himself said there should be an
abounding of iniquity: “And since iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold; but he that shall have persevered unto the end, the
same shall be saved.” <span id="fr_2135"></span>[2136](#fn_2135) But who
shall persevere even unto the end, even until iniquity pass over? He
that shall have been in the Body of Christ, he that shall have been in
the members of Christ, and from the Head shall have learned the patience
of persevering. Thou passest away, and behold passed are thy
temptations; and thou goest into another life whither have gone holy
men, if holy thou hast been. Into another life have gone Martyrs; if
Martyr thou shalt have been, thou also goest into another life. Because
“thou” hast passed away hence, hath by any means iniquity therefore
passed away? There are born other unrighteous men, as there die some
unrighteous men. In like manner therefore as some unrighteous men die
and others are born: so some just men go, and others are born. Even unto
the end of the world neither iniquity will be wanting to oppress, nor
righteousness to suffer.…

<span id="ii.LVII-p21"></span>6. “I will cry to God most high” ([Psa.
57.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002)<span id="ii.LVII-p21.1"></span>).
If most high He is, how heareth He thee crying? Confidence hath been
engendered by experience: “to God,” he saith, “who had done good to me.”
If before that I was seeking Him, He did good to me, when I cry shall He
not hearken to me? For good to us the Lord God hath done in sending to
us our Saviour Jesus Christ, that He might die for our offences, and
rise again for our justification. <span
id="fr_2136"></span>[2137](#fn_2136) For what sort of men hath He willed
His Son to die? For ungodly men. But ungodly men were not seeking God,
and have been sought of God. For He is Most High in such sort, as that
not far from Him is our misery and our groaning: because “near is the
Lord to them that have bruised the heart.” <span
id="fr_2137"></span>[2138](#fn_2137) “God that hath done good to me.”

<span id="ii.LVII-p24"></span>7. “He hath sent from heaven and hath
saved me” ([Psa. 57.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003)<span
id="ii.LVII-p24.1"></span>). Now the Man Himself, now the Flesh Itself,
now the Son of God after His partaking of ourselves, of Him it is
manifest, how He was saved, and hath sent from heaven the Father and
hath saved Him, hath sent from heaven, and hath raised Him again: but in
order that ye may know, that also the Lord Himself hath raised again
Himself; both truths are written in Scripture, both that the Father hath
raised Him again, and that Himself Himself hath raised again. Hear ye
how the Father hath raised Him again: the Apostle saith, “He hath been
made,” he saith, “obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross:
wherefore God also hath exalted Him, and hath given Him a name which is
above every name.” <span id="fr_2138"></span>[2139](#fn_2138) Ye have
heard of the Father raising again and exalting the Son; hear ye how that
He too Himself His flesh hath raised again. Under the figure of a temple
He saith to the Jews, “Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will
raise it up.” <span id="fr_2139"></span>[2140](#fn_2139) But the
Evangelist hath explained to us what it <span id="page_227">p.
227</span> <span id="ii.LVII-Page_227"></span>was that He said: “But
this,” he saith, “He spake of the Temple of His Body.” Now therefore out
of the person of one praying, out of the person of a man, out of the
person of the flesh, He saith, “He hath saved me. He hath given unto
reproach those that trampled on me.” Them that have trampled on Him,
that over Him dead have insulted, that Him as though man have crucified,
because God they perceived not, them He hath given unto reproach. See ye
whether it has not been so done. The thing we do not believe as yet to
come, but fulfilled we acknowledge it. The Jews raged against Christ,
they were overbearing against Christ. Where? In the city of Jerusalem.
For where they reigned, there they were puffed up, there their necks
they lifted up. After the Passion of the Lord thence they were rooted
out; and they lost the kingdom, wherein Christ for King they would not
acknowledge. In what manner they have been given unto reproach, see ye:
dispersed they have been throughout all nations, nowhere having a
settlement, nowhere a sure abode. But for this reason still Jews they
are, in order that our books they may carry to their confusion. For
whenever we wish to show Christ prophesied of, we produce to the heathen
these writings. And lest perchance men hard of belief should say that we
Christians have composed these books, so that together with the Gospel
which we have preached we have forged the Prophet, through whom there
might seem to be foretold that which we preach: by this we convince
them; namely, that all the very writings wherein Christ hath been
prophesied are with the Jews, all these very writings the Jews have. We
produce documents from enemies, to confound other enemies. In what sort
of reproach therefore are the Jews? A document the Jew carrieth,
wherefrom a Christian may believe. Our librarians they have become, just
as slaves are wont behind their masters to carry documents, in such sort
that these faint in carrying, those profit by reading. <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140) Unto such a reproach have been
given the Jews: and there hath been fulfilled that which so long before
hath been foretold, “He hath given unto reproach those that trampled on
me.” But how great a reproach it is, brethren, that this verse they
should read, and themselves being blind should look upon their mirror!
For in the same manner the Jews appear in the holy Scripture which they
carry, as appeareth the face of a blind man in a mirror: by other men it
is seen, by himself not seen.

<span id="ii.LVII-p28"></span>8. Thou wast inquiring perhaps when he
said, “He hath sent from heaven and hath saved me.” What hath He sent
from heaven? Whom hath He sent from heaven? An Angel hath He sent, to
save Christ, and through a servant is the Lord saved? For all Angels are
creatures <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141) serving Christ. For
obedience there might have been sent Angels, for service they might have
been sent, not for succour: as is written, “Angels ministered unto
Him,” <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142) not like men merciful
to one indigent, but like subjects to One Omnipotent. What therefore
“hath He sent from heaven, and hath saved me”? Now we hear in another
verse what from heaven He hath sent. “He hath sent from heaven His mercy
and His truth.” <span id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143) For what
purpose? “And hath drawn out my soul from the midst of the lions’
whelps.” <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144) “Hath sent,” he
saith, “from heaven His mercy and His truth:” and Christ Himself saith,
“I am Truth.” There was sent therefore Truth, that it should draw out my
soul hence from the midst of the lions’ whelps: there was sent mercy.
Christ Himself we find to be both mercy and truth; mercy in suffering
with us, and truth in requiting us.…Who are the lions’ whelps? That
lesser <span id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145) people, unto evil
deceived, unto evil led away by the chiefs of the Jews: so that these
are lions, those lions’ whelps. All roared, all slew. For we are to hear
even here the slaying of these very men, presently in the following
verses of this Psalm.

<span id="ii.LVII-p34"></span>9. “And hath drawn out,” he saith, “my
soul from the midst of the lions’ whelps” ([Psa.
57.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVII-p34.1"></span>).
Why sayest thou, “And hath drawn out my soul”? For what hadst thou
suffered, that thy soul should be drawn out? “I have slept troubled.”
Christ hath intimated His death.…

<span id="ii.LVII-p35"></span>10. Whence “troubled”? Who troubling? Let
us see in what manner he brandeth an evil conscience upon the Jews,
wishing to excuse themselves of the slaying of the Lord. For to this
end, as the Gospel speaketh, to the judge they delivered Him, that they
might not themselves seem to have killed Him.…Let us question Him, and
say, since Thou hast slept troubled, who have persecuted Thee? who have
slain Thee? was it perchance Pilate, who to soldiers gave Thee, on the
Tree to be hanged, with nails to be pierced? Hear who they were, “Sons
of men” ([Psa. 57.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#005)<span
id="ii.LVII-p35.1"></span>). Of them He speaketh, whom for persecutors
He suffered. But how did they slay, that steel bare not? They that sword
drew not, that made no assault upon Him to slay; whence slew they?
“Their teeth are arms and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.” Do
not consider the unarmed hands, but the mouth armed: from thence the
sword proceeded, wherewith Christ was to be slain: in like manner also
as from the mouth of Christ, that wherewith the Jews were to be slain.
For He hath a sword twice whetted: <span
id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146) and rising again He hath smit<span
id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span id="ii.LVII-Page_228"></span>ten them,
and hath severed from them those whom He would make His faithful people.
They an evil sword, He a good sword: they evil arrows, He good arrows.
For He hath Himself also arrows good, words good, whence He pierceth the
faithful heart, in order that He may be loved. Therefore of one kind are
their arrows, and of another kind their sword. “Sons of men, their teeth
are arms and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sabre.” Tongue of sons of
men is a sharp sabre, and their teeth arms and arrows. When therefore
did they smite, save when they clamoured, “Crucify, crucify”? <span
id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147)

<span id="ii.LVII-p38"></span>11. And what have they done to Thee, O
Lord? Let the Prophet here exult! For above, all those verses the Lord
was speaking: a Prophet indeed, but in the person of the Lord, because
in the Prophet is the Lord.…“Be exalted,” he saith, “above the Heavens,
O God.” Man on the Cross, and above the Heavens, God. Let them continue
on the earth raging, Thou in Heaven be judging. Where are they that were
raging? where are their teeth, the arms and arrows? Have not “the
stripes of them been made the arrows of infants”? For in another place a
Psalm <span id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148) this saith, desiring to
prove them vainly to have raged, and vainly unto frenzies to have been
driven headlong: for nothing they were able to do to Christ when for the
time crucified, and afterwards when He was rising again, and in Heaven
was sitting. How do infants make to themselves arrows? Of reeds? <span
id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149) But what arrows? or what powers? or
what bows? or what wound? “Be Thou exalted above the Heavens, O God, and
above all the earth Thy glory” ([Psa.
57.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVII-p40.1"></span>).
Wherefore exalted above the Heavens, O God? Brethren, God exalted above
the Heavens we see not, but we believe: but above all the earth His
glory to be not only we believe, but also see. But what kind of madness
heretics are afflicted with, I pray you observe. They being cut off from
the bond of the Church of Christ, and to a part holding, the whole
losing, will not communicate with the whole earth, where is spread
abroad the glory of Christ. <span id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150)
But we Catholics are in all the earth, because with all the world we
communicate, wherever the Glory of Christ is spread abroad. <span
id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151) For we see that which then was
sung, now fulfilled. There hath been exalted above the Heavens our God,
and above all the earth the Glory of the Same. O heretical insanity!
That which thou seest not thou believest with me, that which thou seest
thou deniest: thou believest with me in Christ exalted above the
Heavens, a thing which we see not; and deniest His Glory over all the
earth, a thing which we see.

<span id="ii.LVII-p43"></span>12. …Let your Love see the Lord speaking
to us, and exhorting us by His example: “A trap <span
id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) they have prepared for My feet, and
have bowed down My Soul” ([Psa.
57.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVII-p44.1"></span>).
They wished to bring It down as if from Heaven, and to the lower places
to weigh It down: “They have bowed My Soul: they have digged before My
face a pit and themselves have fallen into it.” Me have they hurt, or
themselves? Behold He hath been exalted above the Heavens, God, and
behold above all the earth the Glory of the Same: the kingdom of Christ
we see, where is the kingdom of the Jews? Since therefore they did that
which to have done they ought not, there hath been done in their case
that which to have suffered they ought: themselves have dug a ditch, and
themselves have fallen into it. For their persecuting Christ, to Christ
did no hurt, but to themselves did hurt. And do not suppose, brethren,
that themselves alone hath this befallen. Every one that prepareth a pit
for his brother, it must needs be that himself fall into it.…

<span id="ii.LVII-p45"></span>13. But the patience of good men with
preparation of heart accepteth the will of God: and glorieth in
tribulations, saying that which followeth: “Prepared is my heart, O God,
I will sing and play” ([Psa. 57.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#008)<span
id="ii.LVII-p45.1"></span>). What hath he done to me? He hath prepared a
pit, my heart is prepared. He hath prepared pit to deceive, shall I not
prepare heart to suffer? He hath prepared pit to oppress, shall I not
prepare heart to endure? Therefore he shall fall into it, but I will
sing and play. Hear the heart prepared in an Apostle, because he hath
imitated his Lord: “We glory,” he saith, “in tribulations: because
tribulation worketh patience: patience probation, probation hope, but
hope maketh not ashamed: because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts through the Holy Spirit, which hath been given to us.” <span
id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153) He was in oppressions, in chains,
in prisons, in stripes, in hunger and thirst, in cold and
nakedness, <span id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154) in every wasting
of toils and pains, and he was saying, “We glory in tribulations.”
Whence, but that prepared was his heart? Therefore he was singing and
playing.

<span id="ii.LVII-p48"></span>14. “Rise up, my glory” ([Psa.
57.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVII-p48.1"></span>).
He that had fled from the face of Saul into a cavern, saith, “Rise up,
my glory:” glorified be Jesus after His Passion. “Rise up, psaltery and
harp.” He calleth upon what to rise? Two organs I see: but Body of
Christ one I see, one flesh hath risen again, and two organs have risen.
The one organ then is the psaltery, the other the harp. Organs  <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155) is the word used for <span
id="page_229">p. 229</span> <span id="ii.LVII-Page_229"></span>all
instruments of musicians. Not only is that called an organ, which is
great, and blown into with bellows; <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156) but whatsoever is adapted to
playing and is corporeal, whereof for an instrument the player maketh
use, is said to be an organ. But distinguished from one another are
these organs. <span id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157) …What therefore
do these two organs figure to us? For Christ the Lord our God is waking
up His psaltery and His harp; and He saith, “I will rise up at the
dawn.” I suppose that here ye now perceive the Lord rising. We have read
thereof in the Gospel: <span id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158) see
the hour of the Resurrection. How long through shadows was Christ being
sought? He hath shone, be He acknowledged; “at the dawn” He rose again.
But what is psaltery? what is harp? Through His flesh two kinds of deeds
the Lord hath wrought, miracles and sufferings: miracles from above have
been, sufferings from below have been. But those miracles which He did
were divine; but through Body He did them, through flesh He did them.
The flesh therefore working things divine, is the psaltery: the flesh
suffering things human is the harp. Let the psaltery sound, let the
blind be enlightened, let the deaf hear, let the paralytics be braced to
strength, the lame walk, the sick rise up, the dead rise again; this is
the sound of the Psaltery. Let there sound also the harp, let Him
hunger, thirst, sleep, be held, scourged, derided, crucified, buried.
When therefore thou seest in that Flesh certain things to have sounded
from above, certain things from the lower part, one flesh hath risen
again, and in one flesh we acknowledge both psaltery and harp. And these
two kinds of things done have fulfilled the Gospel, and it is preached
in the nations: for both the miracles and the sufferings of the Lord are
preached.

<span id="ii.LVII-p53"></span>15. Therefore there hath risen psaltery
and harp in the dawn, and he confesseth to the Lord; and saith what? “I
will confess to Thee among the peoples, O Lord, and will play to Thee
among the nations: for magnified even unto the Heavens hath been Thy
mercy, and even unto the clouds Thy truth” ([Psa.
58.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)<span
id="ii.LVII-p53.1"></span>). Heavens above clouds, and clouds below
heavens: and nevertheless to this nearest heaven belong clouds. But
sometimes clouds rest upon the mountains, even so far in the nearest air
are they rolled. But a Heaven above there is, the habitations of Angels,
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers. This therefore may perchance
seem to be what should have been said: “Unto the Heavens Thy truth, and
even unto the clouds Thy mercy.” For in Heaven Angels praise God, seeing
the very form of truth, without any darkness of vision, without any
admixture of unreality: they see, love, praise, are not wearied. There
is truth: but here in our own misery surely there is mercy. For to a
miserable one must be rendered mercy. For there is no need of mercy
above, where is no miserable one. I have said this because that it
seemeth as though it might have been more fittingly said, “Magnified
even unto the Heavens hath been Thy truth, and even unto the clouds Thy
mercy.” For “clouds” we understand to be preachers of truth, men bearing
that flesh in a manner dark, whence God both gleameth in miracles, and
thundereth in precepts. <span id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159)
…Glory to our Lord, and to the Mercy of the Same, and to the Truth of
the Same, because neither hath He forsaken by mercy to make us blessed
through His Grace, nor defrauded us of truth: because first Truth veiled
in flesh came to us and healed through His flesh the interior eye of our
heart, in order that hereafter face to face we may be able to see
It. <span id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) Giving therefore to Him
thanks, let us say with the same Psalm the last verses, which sometime
since too I have said, “Be Thou exalted above the Heavens, O God, and
above all the earth Thy glory” ([Psa.
58.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)<span
id="ii.LVII-p55.2"></span>). For this to Him the Prophet said so many
years before; this now we see; this therefore let us also say.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2122"></span>[225:2123](1080066.htm#fr_2122) <span
id="ii.LVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p2"></span> Lat. LVI. Sermon to the Commonalty.

<span id="fn_2123"></span>[225:2124](1080066.htm#fr_2123) <span
id="ii.LVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p4"></span> *Circa*.

<span id="fn_2124"></span>[225:2125](1080066.htm#fr_2124) <span
id="ii.LVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p6"></span> [Rom. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2125"></span>[225:2126](1080066.htm#fr_2125) <span
id="ii.LVII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p8"></span> [1 Sam.
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007)<span id="ii.LVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2126"></span>[225:2127](1080066.htm#fr_2126) <span
id="ii.LVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p9"></span> [Matt.
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037), [John
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)<span id="ii.LVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2127"></span>[225:2128](1080066.htm#fr_2127) <span
id="ii.LVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p10"></span> [Rom.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003), [Matt.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)<span id="ii.LVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2128"></span>[225:2129](1080066.htm#fr_2128) <span
id="ii.LVII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p11"></span> [John xix.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#022)<span id="ii.LVII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2129"></span>[225:2130](1080066.htm#fr_2129) <span
id="ii.LVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p13"></span> [1 Sam. xxiv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2130"></span>[225:2131](1080066.htm#fr_2130) <span
id="ii.LVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p14"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="ii.LVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2131"></span>[226:2132](1080066.htm#fr_2131) <span
id="ii.LVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p15"></span> [John xix.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)<span id="ii.LVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2132"></span>[226:2133](1080066.htm#fr_2132) <span
id="ii.LVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p16"></span> [Luke xxiv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039)<span id="ii.LVII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2133"></span>[226:2134](1080066.htm#fr_2133) <span
id="ii.LVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p18"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.LVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2134"></span>[226:2135](1080066.htm#fr_2134) <span
id="ii.LVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p19"></span> [Isa.
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005), [Isa.
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010), [Luke
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2135"></span>[226:2136](1080066.htm#fr_2135) <span
id="ii.LVII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p20"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2136"></span>[226:2137](1080066.htm#fr_2136) <span
id="ii.LVII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p22"></span> [Rom. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025)<span id="ii.LVII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2137"></span>[226:2138](1080066.htm#fr_2137) <span
id="ii.LVII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p23"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018)<span id="ii.LVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2138"></span>[226:2139](1080066.htm#fr_2138) <span
id="ii.LVII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p25"></span> [Phil.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="ii.LVII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2139"></span>[226:2140](1080066.htm#fr_2139) <span
id="ii.LVII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p26"></span> [John ii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019)<span id="ii.LVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[227:2141](1080066.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="ii.LVII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p27"></span> \[See p. 132, note 3, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[227:2142](1080066.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="ii.LVII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p29"></span> Lat. “a creature.”

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[227:2143](1080066.htm#fr_2142) <span
id="ii.LVII-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p30"></span> [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span id="ii.LVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[227:2144](1080066.htm#fr_2143) <span
id="ii.LVII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p31"></span> [Ps. lvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[227:2145](1080066.htm#fr_2144) <span
id="ii.LVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p32"></span> [Ps. lvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004)<span id="ii.LVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[227:2146](1080066.htm#fr_2145) <span
id="ii.LVII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p33"></span> *Minutus*.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[227:2147](1080066.htm#fr_2146) <span
id="ii.LVII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p36"></span> [Rev. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)<span id="ii.LVII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[228:2148](1080066.htm#fr_2147) <span
id="ii.LVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p37"></span> [Matt.
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022), [John
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)<span id="ii.LVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[228:2149](1080066.htm#fr_2148) <span
id="ii.LVII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p39"></span> \[Vulgate and Septuagint, [Ps. lxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007)<span
id="ii.LVII-p39.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[228:2150](1080066.htm#fr_2149) <span
id="ii.LVII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p40"></span> *Cannæ*.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[228:2151](1080066.htm#fr_2150) <span
id="ii.LVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p41"></span> Against the Donatists.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[228:2152](1080066.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="ii.LVII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p42"></span> \[This comes home with terrible import to
that portion of the Church which has made itself the whole Church with a
novel creed, and broken communion with the Easterns.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[228:2153](1080066.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="ii.LVII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p44"></span> *Muscipulam*.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[228:2154](1080066.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="ii.LVII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p46"></span> [Rom. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="ii.LVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[228:2155](1080066.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="ii.LVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p47"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#027)<span id="ii.LVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[228:2156](1080066.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="ii.LVII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p49"></span> *Organa*.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[229:2157](1080066.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="ii.LVII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p50"></span> \[Of which see a primitive example in
Parker’s *Glossary of Architecture* (vol. i. p. 264), Oxford, 1845. The
use of organs in churches is very modern. The Greeks exclude them still.
St. Thomas Aquinas testifies their non-use in the Latin churches in the
thirteenth century.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[229:2158](1080066.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="ii.LVII-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p51"></span> \[See p. 139, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[229:2159](1080066.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="ii.LVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p52"></span> [Mark xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#002)<span id="ii.LVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[229:2160](1080066.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="ii.LVII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p54"></span> \[[Psa.
xxxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#000)<span id="ii.LVII-p54.1"></span>
p. 88, § 7, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[229:2161](1080066.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="ii.LVII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.LVII-p55"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#012)<span id="ii.LVII-p55.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm LVIII](1080067)
