[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080009)  [Next](1080011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.VI"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p1"></span> <span id="ii.VI-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.VI-p1.2"></span>Psalm VI.</span>

<span id="ii.VI-p2"></span>*To the end, in the hymns of the
eighth,* <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) *a psalm to
David.* <span id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="ii.VI-p5"></span>1. “Of the eighth,” seems here obscure. For
the rest of this title is more clear. Now it has seemed to some to
intimate the day of judgment, that is, the time of the coming of our
Lord, when He will come to judge the quick and dead. Which coming, it is
believed, is to be, after reckoning the years from Adam, seven thousand
years: so as that seven thousand years should pass as seven days, and
afterwards that time arrive as it were the eighth day. But since it has
been said by the Lord, “It is not yours to know the times, which the
Father hath put in His own power:” <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) and, “But of the day and that hour
knoweth no man, no, neither angel, nor Power, neither the Son, but the
Father alone:” <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) and again, that
which is written, “that the day of the Lord cometh as a thief,” <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) shows clearly enough that no man
should arrogate to himself the knowledge of that time, by any
computation of years. For if that day is to come after seven thousand
years, every man could learn its advent by reckoning the years. What
comes then of the Son’s even not knowing this? Which of course is said
with this meaning, that men do not learn this by the Son, not that He by
Himself doth not know it: according to that form of speech, “the Lord
your God trieth you that He may know;” <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) that is, that He may make you know:
and, “arise, O Lord;” <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) that is,
make us arise. When therefore the Son is thus said not to know this day;
not because He knoweth it not, but because He causeth those to know it
not, for whom it is not expedient to know it, that is, He doth not show
it to them; what does that strange presumption mean, which, by a
reckoning up of years, expects the day of the Lord as most certain after
seven thousand years? <span id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162)

<span id="ii.VI-p12"></span>2. Be we then willingly ignorant of that
which the Lord would not have us know: and let us <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="ii.VI-Page_16"></span>inquire what this title, “of
the eighth,” means. The day of judgment may indeed, even without any
rash computation of years, be understood by the eighth, for that
immediately after the end of this world, life eternal being attained,
the souls of the righteous will not then be subject unto times: and,
since all times have their revolution in a repetition of those seven
days, that peradventure is called the eighth day, which will not have
this variety. There is another reason, which may be here not
unreasonably accepted, why the judgment should be called the eighth,
because it will take place after two generations, one relating to the
body, the other to the soul. For from Adam unto Moses the human race
lived of the body, that is, according to the flesh: which is called the
outward and the old man, <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) and to
which the Old Testament was given, that it might prefigure the spiritual
things to come by operations, albeit religious, yet carnal. Through this
entire season, when men lived according to the body, “death reigned,” as
the Apostle saith, “even over those that had not sinned.” Now it reigned
“after the similitude of Adam’s transgression,” <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) as the same Apostle saith; for it must
be taken of the period up to Moses, up to which time the works of the
law, that is, those sacraments of carnal observance, held even those
bound, for the sake of a certain mystery, who were subject to the One
God. But from the coming of the Lord, from whom there was a transition
from the circumcision of the flesh to the circumcision of the heart, the
call was made, that man should live according to the soul, that is,
according to the inner man, who is also called the “new man” <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) by reason of the new birth and the
renewing of spiritual conversation. Now it is plain that the number four
has relation to the body, from the four well known elements of which it
consists, and the four qualities of dry, humid, warm, cold. Hence too it
is administered by four seasons, spring, summer, autumn, winter. All
this is very well known. For of the number four relating to the body we
have treated elsewhere somewhat subtilly, but obscurely: which must be
avoided in this discourse, which we would have accommodated to the
unlearned. But that the number three has relation to the mind may be
understood from this, that we are commanded to love God after a
threefold manner, <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) with the whole
heart, with the whole soul, with the whole mind: <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) of each of which severally we must
treat, not in the Psalms, but in the Gospels: for the present, for proof
of the relation of the number three to the mind, I think what has been
said enough. Those numbers then of the body which have relation to the
old man and the Old Testament, being past and gone, the numbers too of
the soul, which have relation to the new man and the New Testament,
being past and gone, a septenary so to say being passed; because
everything is done in time, four having been distributed to the body,
three to the mind; the eighth will come, the day of judgment: which
assigning to deserts their due, will transfer at once the saint, not to
temporal works, but to eternal life; but will condemn the ungodly to
eternal punishment.

<span id="ii.VI-p18"></span>3. In fear of which condemnation the Church
prays in this Psalm, and says, “Reprove me not, O Lord, in Thine anger”
([Psa. 6.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001)<span
id="ii.VI-p18.1"></span>). The Apostle too mentions the anger of the
judgment; “Thou treasurest up unto thyself,” he says, “anger against the
day of the anger of the just judgment of God.” <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) In which he would not be reproved,
whosoever longs to be healed in this life. “Nor in Thy rage chasten me.”
“Chasten,” seems rather too mild a word; for it availeth toward
amendment. For for him who is reproved, that is, accused, it is to be
feared lest his end be condemnation. But since “rage” seems to be more
than “anger,” it may be a difficulty, why that which is milder, namely,
chastening, is joined to that which is more severe, namely, rage. But I
suppose that one and the same thing is signified by the two words. For
in the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.VI-p19.2"></span>θυμὸς</span>, which is in the first verse, means
the same as <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.VI-p19.3"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.VI-p19.4"></span>ργὴ</span>, which is in the second verse. <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) But when the Latins themselves too
wished to use two distinct words, they looked out for what was akin to
“anger,” and “rage” <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) was used.
Hence copies vary. For in some “anger” is found first, and then “rage:”
in others, for “rage,” “indignation” or “choler” is used. But whatever
the reading, it is an emotion of the soul urging to the infliction of
punishment. Yet this emotion must not be attributed to God, as if to a
soul, of whom it is said, “but Thou, O Lord of power, judgest with
tranquillity.” <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) Now that which is
tranquil, is not disturbed. Disturbance then does not attach to God as
judge: but what is done by His ministers, in that it is done by His
laws, is called His anger. In which anger, the soul, which now prays,
would not only not be reproved, but not even chastened, that is, amended
or instructed. For in the Greek it is, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.VI-p22.2"></span> παιδεύσῃς</span>, that is, instruct. Now in the
day of judgment all are “reproved” that hold not the foundation, which
is Christ. But they are amended, that is, purged, who “upon this
foundation build wood, hay, stubble. For they shall suffer loss, but
shall be saved, as by fire.” <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172)
<span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span id="ii.VI-Page_17"></span>What
then does he pray, who would not be either reproved or amended in the
anger of the Lord? what else but that he may be healed? For where sound
health is, neither death is to be dreaded, nor the physician’s hand with
caustics or the knife.

<span id="ii.VI-p24"></span>4. He proceeds accordingly to say, “Pity me,
O Lord, for I am weak: heal me, O Lord, for my bones are troubled”
([Psa. 6.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002)<span
id="ii.VI-p24.1"></span>), that is, the support of my soul, or strength:
for this is the meaning of “bones.” The soul therefore says, that her
strength is troubled, when she speaks of bones. For it is not to be
supposed, that the soul has bones, such as we see in the body.
Wherefore, what follows tends to explain it, “and my soul is troubled
exceedingly” ([Psa. 6.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003)<span
id="ii.VI-p24.2"></span>), lest because he mentioned bones, they should
be understood as of the body. “And Thou, O Lord, how long?” Who does not
see represented here a soul struggling with her diseases; but long kept
back by the physician, that she may be convinced what evils she has
plunged herself into through sin? For what is easily healed, is not much
avoided: but from the difficulty of the healing, there will be the more
careful keeping of recovered health. God then, to whom it is said, “And
Thou, O Lord, how long?” must not be deemed as if cruel: but as a kind
convincer of the soul, what evil she hath procured for herself. For this
soul does not yet pray so perfectly, as that it can be said to her,
“Whilst thou art yet speaking I will say, Behold, here I am.” <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) That she may at the same time also
come to know, if they who do turn meet with so great difficulty, how
great punishment is prepared for the ungodly, who will not turn to God:
as it is written in another place, “If the righteous scarcely be saved,
where shall the sinner and ungodly appear?” <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="ii.VI-p27"></span>5. “Turn, O Lord, and deliver my soul”
([Psa. 6.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#004)<span
id="ii.VI-p27.1"></span>). Turning herself she prays that God too would
turn to her: as it is said, “Turn ye unto Me, and I will turn unto you,
saith the Lord.” <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) Or is it to be
understood according to that way of speaking, “Turn, O Lord,” that is
make me turn, since the soul in this her turning feels difficulty and
toil? For our perfected turning findeth God ready, as says the Prophet,
“We shall find Him ready as the dawn.” <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) Since it was not His absence who is
everywhere present, but our turning away that made us lose Him; “He was
in this world,” it is said, “and the world was made by Him, and the
world knew Him not.” <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) If, then,
He was in this world, and the world knew Him not, our impurity doth not
endure the sight of Him. But whilst we are turning ourselves, that is,
by changing our old life are fashioning our spirit; we feel it hard and
toilsome to be wrested back from the darkness of earthly lusts, to the
serene and quiet and tranquillity of the divine light. And in such
difficulty we say, “Turn, O Lord,” that is, help us, that that turning
may be perfected in us, which findeth Thee ready, and offering Thyself
for the fruition of them that love Thee. And hence after he said, “Turn,
O Lord,” he added, “and deliver my soul:” cleaving as it were to the
entanglements of this world, and suffering, in the very act of turning,
from the thorns, as it were, of rending and tearing desires. “Make me
whole,” he says, “for Thy pity’s sake.” He knows that it is not of his
own merits that he is healed: for to him sinning, and transgressing a
given command, was just condemnation due. Heal me therefore, he says,
not for my merit’s sake, but for Thy pity’s sake.

<span id="ii.VI-p31"></span>6. “For in death there is no one that is
mindful of Thee” ([Psa. 6.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)<span
id="ii.VI-p31.1"></span>). He knows too that now is the time for turning
unto God: for when this life shall have passed away, there remaineth but
a retribution of our deserts. <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178)
“But in hell who shall confess to Thee?” <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) That rich man, of whom the Lord
speaks, who saw Lazarus in rest, but bewailed himself in torments,
confessed in hell, yea so as to wish even to have his brethren warned,
that they might keep themselves from sin, because of the punishment
which is not believed to be in hell. Although therefore to no purpose,
yet he confessed that those torments had deservedly lighted upon him;
since he even wished his brethren to be instructed, lest they should
fall into the same. What then is, “But in hell who will confess to
Thee?” Is hell to be understood as that place, whither the ungodly will
be cast down after the judgment, when by reason of that deeper darkness
they will no more see any light of God, to whom they may confess aught?
For as yet that rich man by raising his eyes, although a vast gulf lay
between, could still see Lazarus established in rest: by comparing
himself with whom, he was driven to a confession of his own deserts. It
may be understood also, as if the Psalmist calls sin, that is committed
in contempt of God’s law, death: so as that we should give the name of
death to the sting of death, because it procures death. “For the sting
of death is sin.” <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) In which death
this is to be unmindful of God, to despise His law and commandments: so
that by hell the Psalmist would mean that blindness of soul which
overtakes and enwraps the sinner, that is, the dying. “As they did not
think good,” the Apostle says, <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="ii.VI-Page_18"></span>“to retain God in” their “knowledge, God gave
them over to a reprobate mind.” <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181)
From this death, and this hell, the soul earnestly prays that she may be
kept safe, whilst she strives to turn to God, and feels her
difficulties.

<span id="ii.VI-p36"></span>7. Wherefore he goes on to say, “I have
laboured in my groaning.” And as if this availed but little, he adds, “I
will wash each night my couch” ([Psa.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)<span id="ii.VI-p36.1"></span>).
That is here called a couch, where the sick and weak soul rests, that
is, in bodily gratification and in every worldly pleasure. Which
pleasure, whoso endeavours to withdraw himself from it, washes with
tears. For he sees that he already condemns carnal lusts; and yet his
weakness is held by the pleasure, and willingly lies down therein, from
whence none but the soul that is made whole can rise. As for what he
says, “each night,” he would perhaps have it taken thus: that he who,
ready in spirit, perceives some light of truth, and yet, through
weakness of the flesh, rests sometime in the pleasure of this world, is
compelled to suffer as it were days and nights in an alternation of
feeling: as when he says, “With the mind I serve the law of God,” he
feels as it were day; again when he says, “but with the flesh the law of
sin,” <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) he declines into night:
until all night passeth away, and that one day comes, of which it is
said, “In the morning I will stand by Thee, and will see.” <span
id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) For then he will stand, but now he
lies down, when he is on his couch; which he will wash each night, that
with so great abundance of tears he may obtain the most assured remedy
from the mercy of God. “I will drench my bed with tears.” It is a
repetition. <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184) For when he says,
“with tears,” he shows with what meaning he said above, “I will wash.”
For we take “bed” here to be the same as “couch” above. Although, “I
will drench,” is something more than, “I will wash:” since anything may
be washed superficially, but drenching penetrates to the more inward
parts; which here signifies weeping to the very bottom of the heart. Now
the variety of tenses which he uses; the past, when he said, “I have
laboured in my groaning;” and the future, when he said, “I will wash
each night my couch;” the future again, “I will drench my bed with
tears;” this shows what every man ought to say to himself, when he
labours in groaning to no purpose. As if he should say, It hath not
profited when I have done this, therefore I will do the other.

<span id="ii.VI-p40"></span>8. “Mine eye is disordered by anger” ([Psa.
6.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007)<span id="ii.VI-p40.1"></span>): is
it by his own, or God’s anger, in which he maketh petition that he might
not be reproved, or chastened? But if anger in that place intimate the
day of judgment, how can it be understood now? Is it a beginning of it,
that men here suffer pains and torments, and above all the loss of the
understanding of the truth; as I have already quoted that which is said,
“God gave them over to a reprobate mind”? <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) For such is the blindness of the mind.
Whosoever is given over thereunto, is shut out from the interior light
of God: but not wholly as yet, whilst he is in this life. For there is
“outer darkness,” <span id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) which is
understood to belong rather to the day of judgment; that he should
rather be wholly without God, whosoever whilst there is time refuses
correction. Now to be wholly without God, what else is it, but to be in
extreme blindness? If indeed God “dwell in inaccessible light,” <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) whereinto they enter, to whom it is
said, “Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.” <span
id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188) It is then the beginning of this
anger, which in this life every sinner suffers. In fear therefore of the
day of judgment, he is in trial and grief; lest he be brought to that,
the disastrous commencement of which he experiences now. And therefore
he did not say, mine eye is extinguished, but, “mine eye is disordered
by anger.” But if he mean that his eye is disordered by his own anger,
there is no wonder either in this. For hence perhaps it is said, “Let
not the sun go down upon your wrath;” <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) because the mind, which, from her own
disorder, is not permitted to see God, supposes that the inner sun, that
is, the wisdom of God, suffers as it were a setting in her.

<span id="ii.VI-p46"></span>9. “I have grown old in all mine enemies.”
He had only spoken of anger (if it were yet of his own anger that he
spoke): but thinking on his other vices, he found that he was entrenched
by them all. Which vices, as they belong to the old life and the old
man, which we must put off, that we may put on the new man, <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) it is well said, “I have grown old.”
But “in all mine enemies,” he means, either amidst these vices, or
amidst men who will not be converted to God. For these, even if they
know them not, even if they bear with them, even if they use the same
tables and houses and cities, with no strife arising between them, and
in frequent converse together with seeming concord: notwithstanding, by
the contrariety of their aims, they are enemies to those who turn unto
God. For seeing that the one love and desire this world, the others wish
to be freed from this world, who sees not that the first are enemies to
the last? For if they can, they draw the others into punishment with
them. And it is a great grace, to be conversant daily with their words,
and not to depart from the way of God’s commandments. For often the mind
which is striving to go on to God-ward, <span id="page_19">p. 19</span>
<span id="ii.VI-Page_19"></span>being rudely handled in the very road,
is alarmed; and generally fulfils not its good intent, lest it should
offend those with whom it lives, who love and follow after other
perishable and transient goods. From such every one that is whole is
separated, not in space, but in soul. For the body is contained in
space, but the soul’s space is her affection.

<span id="ii.VI-p48"></span>10. Wherefore after the labour, and
groaning, and very frequent showers of tears, since that cannot be
ineffectual, which is asked so earnestly of Him, who is the Fountain of
all mercies, and it is most truly said, “the Lord is nigh unto them that
are of a broken heart:” <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) after
difficulties so great, the pious soul, by which we may also understand
the Church, intimating that she has been heard, see what she adds:
“Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the
voice of my weeping” ([Psa. 6.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)<span
id="ii.VI-p49.2"></span>). It is either spoken prophetically, since they
will depart, that is, the ungodly will be separated from the righteous,
when the day of judgment arrives, or, for this time present. For
although both are equally found in the same assemblies, yet on the open
floor the wheat is already separated from the chaff, though it be hid
among the chaff. They can therefore be associated together, but cannot
be carried away by the wind together.

<span id="ii.VI-p50"></span>11. “For the Lord hath heard the voice of my
weeping; The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord hath received my
prayer” ([Psa. 6.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#009)<span
id="ii.VI-p50.1"></span>). The frequent repetition of the same
sentiments shows not, so to say, the necessities of the narrator, but
the warm feeling of his joy. For they that rejoice are wont so to speak,
as that it is not enough for them to declare once for all the object of
their joy. This is the fruit of that groaning in which there is labour,
and those tears with which the couch is washed, and bed drenched: for,
“he that sows in tears, shall reap in joy:”  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) and, “blessed are they that mourn, for
they shall be comforted.”

<span id="ii.VI-p52"></span>12. “Let all mine enemies be ashamed and
vexed” ([Psa. 6.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#010)<span
id="ii.VI-p52.1"></span>). He said above, “depart from me all ye:” which
can take place, as it has been explained, even in this life: but as to
what he says, “let them be ashamed and vexed,” I do not see how it can
happen, save on that day when the rewards of the righteous and the
punishments of the sinners shall be made manifest. For at present so far
are the ungodly from being ashamed, that they do not cease to insult us.
And for the most part their mockings are of such avail, that they make
the weak to be ashamed of the name of Christ. Hence it is said,
“Whosoever shall be ashamed of Me before men, of him will I be ashamed
before My Father.” <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) But now
whosoever would fulfil those sublime commands, to disperse, to give to
the poor, that his righteousness may endure for ever; <span
id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194) and selling all his earthly goods, and
spending them on the needy, would follow Christ, saying, “We brought
nothing into this world, and truly we can carry nothing out; having food
and raiment, let us be therewith content;” <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195) incurs the profane raillery of those
men, and by those who will not be made whole, is called mad; and often
to avoid being so called by desperate men, he fears to do, and puts off
that, which the most faithful and powerful of all physicians hath
ordered. It is not then at present that these can be ashamed, by whom we
have to wish that we be not made ashamed, and so be either called back
from our proposed journey, or hindered, or delayed. But the time will
come when they shall be ashamed, saying as it is written, “These are
they whom we had sometimes in derision, and a parable of reproach: we
fools counted their life madness, and their end to be without honour:
how are they numbered among the children of God, and their lot is among
the saints? Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light
of righteousness hath not shined into us, nor the sun risen upon us: we
have been filled with the way of wickedness and destruction, and have
walked through rugged deserts, but the way of the Lord we have not
known. What hath pride profited us, or what hath the vaunting of riches
brought us? All those things are passed away like a shadow.” <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196)

<span id="ii.VI-p57"></span>13. But as to what he says, “Let them be
turned and confounded,” who would not judge it to be a most righteous
punishment, that they should have a turning unto confusion, who would
not have one unto salvation? After this he added, “exceeding quickly.”
For when the day of judgment shall have begun to be no longer looked
for, when they shall have said, “Peace, then shall sudden destruction
come upon them.” <span id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) Now whensoever
it come, that comes very quickly, of whose coming we give up all
expectation; and nothing makes the length of this life be felt but the
hope of living. For nothing seems more quick, than all that has already
passed in it. When then the day of judgment shall come, then will
sinners feel how that all the life which passeth away is not long. Nor
will that any way possibly seem to them to have come tardily, which
shall have come without their desiring, or rather without their
believing. Although it can too be taken in this place thus, that
inasmuch as God has heard, so to say, her groans, and her long and
frequent tears, she may be understood to be freed from her sins, and to
have tamed every disordered impulse of carnal affection: <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="ii.VI-Page_20"></span>as she saith,
“Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity, for the Lord hath heard the
voice of my weeping:” and when she has had this happy issue, it is no
marvel if she be already so perfect as to pray for her enemies. The
words then, “Let all mine enemies be ashamed, and vexed,” may have this
meaning; that they should repent of their sins, which cannot be effected
without confusion and vexation. There is then nothing to hinder us from
taking what follows too in this sense, “let them be turned and ashamed,”
that is, let them be turned to God, and be ashamed that they sometime
gloried in the former darkness of their sins; as the Apostle says, “For
what glory had ye sometime in those things of which ye are now
ashamed?” <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) But as to what he
added, “exceeding quickly,” it must be referred either to the warm
affection of her wish, or to the power of Christ; who converteth to the
faith of the Gospel in such quick time the nations, which in their
idols’ cause did persecute the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[15:156](1080010.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p3"></span> LXX, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.VI-p3.1"></span>ὑπšρ τῆς ὀγδόης</span>. \[See Hippolytus, A.N.F.
vol. v. p. 200.—C.\]

<span id="fn_156"></span>[15:157](1080010.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.VI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p4"></span> \[The first of the Seven Penitential Psalms,
which are <span id="ii.VI-p4.1"></span>Psalms vi., xxxii., xxxviii.,
li., cii., cxxx., cxliii.—C.\]

<span id="fn_157"></span>[15:158](1080010.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.VI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p6"></span> [Acts i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007)<span id="ii.VI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[15:159](1080010.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.VI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p7"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032)<span id="ii.VI-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[15:160](1080010.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.VI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p8"></span> [1 Thess. v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002)<span id="ii.VI-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[15:161](1080010.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.VI-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p9"></span> [Deut. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[15:162](1080010.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.VI-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p10"></span> [Ps. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007)<span id="ii.VI-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[15:163](1080010.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ii.VI-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p11"></span> \[See *City of God*, this series, vol. ii.
p. 426 *et seqq*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_163"></span>[16:164](1080010.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ii.VI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p13"></span> [Rom.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006), [Eph.
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#022)<span id="ii.VI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[16:165](1080010.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.VI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p14"></span> [Rom. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)<span id="ii.VI-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[16:166](1080010.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.VI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p15"></span> [Col. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="ii.VI-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[16:167](1080010.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ii.VI-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p16"></span> \[On the tripartite nature of man, see
Tertull. A.N.F. vol. iii. pp. 463, 474.—C.\]

<span id="fn_167"></span>[16:168](1080010.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.VI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p17"></span> [Deut.
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005), [Matt.
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)<span id="ii.VI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[16:169](1080010.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.VI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p19"></span> [Rom. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="ii.VI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[16:170](1080010.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.VI-p19.5"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p20"></span> \[Compare Trench on *Synonyms of the New
Testament*, p. 178, ed. New York, 1854.—C.\]

<span id="fn_170"></span>[16:171](1080010.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.VI-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p21"></span> *Furor*.

<span id="fn_171"></span>[16:172](1080010.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.VI-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p22"></span> [Wisd. xii.
18](../../../bib/apo/wis012.htm#018)<span id="ii.VI-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[16:173](1080010.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.VI-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#015)<span id="ii.VI-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[17:174](1080010.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.VI-p24.3"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p25"></span> [Isa. lxv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)<span id="ii.VI-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[17:175](1080010.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.VI-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p26"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#018)<span id="ii.VI-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[17:176](1080010.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.VI-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p28"></span> [Zech. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[17:177](1080010.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.VI-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p29"></span> [Hos. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p29.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[17:178](1080010.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.VI-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p30"></span> [John i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010)<span id="ii.VI-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[17:179](1080010.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.VI-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p32"></span> \[St. Augustin, whatever he may have
imagined of the fire that is to purify at the last day ([1 Cor. iii.
13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#013)<span id="ii.VI-p32.1"></span>),
knew nothing of an intermediate purgatory. Compare A.N.F. vol. viii. pp.
239, 390, for apocryphal opinions and a misleading note. Consult (same
series) vol. iii. p. 428, and v. p. 222, notes 1 and 7, with p. 223,
note 1.—C.\]

<span id="fn_179"></span>[17:180](1080010.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.VI-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p33"></span> [Luke
xvi](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#000)<span id="ii.VI-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[17:181](1080010.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.VI-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p34"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
56](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#056)<span id="ii.VI-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[18:182](1080010.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ii.VI-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p35"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.VI-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[18:183](1080010.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ii.VI-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p37"></span> [Rom. vii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#025)<span id="ii.VI-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[18:184](1080010.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ii.VI-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p38"></span> [Ps. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[18:185](1080010.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ii.VI-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p39"></span> \[St. Augustin was the inventor of what is
now called “The Silent Comforter,” for the invalid. This Psalm, with the
six other Penitential Psalms, he caused to be set up before his dying
eyes. See *Vita S. Aug. auctore Possidio*, ed. Migne, vol. i. p.
63.—C.\]

<span id="fn_185"></span>[18:186](1080010.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ii.VI-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p41"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.VI-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[18:187](1080010.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ii.VI-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p42"></span> [Matt. xxv.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#030)<span id="ii.VI-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[18:188](1080010.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ii.VI-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p43"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span id="ii.VI-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[18:189](1080010.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ii.VI-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p44"></span> [Matt.
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#021),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span id="ii.VI-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[18:190](1080010.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ii.VI-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p45"></span> [Eph. iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span id="ii.VI-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[18:191](1080010.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ii.VI-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p47"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010)<span id="ii.VI-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[19:192](1080010.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ii.VI-p48.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p49"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018)<span id="ii.VI-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[19:193](1080010.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.VI-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p51"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="ii.VI-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[19:194](1080010.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.VI-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p53"></span> [Matt.
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033), [Luke
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026)<span id="ii.VI-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[19:195](1080010.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ii.VI-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p54"></span> [Ps. cxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#009)<span id="ii.VI-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[19:196](1080010.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ii.VI-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p55"></span> [1 Tim.
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008)<span id="ii.VI-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[19:197](1080010.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ii.VI-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p56"></span> [Wisd. v.
3-9](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[19:198](1080010.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ii.VI-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p58"></span> [1 Thess. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)<span id="ii.VI-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[20:199](1080010.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ii.VI-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.VI-p59"></span> [Rom. vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021)<span id="ii.VI-p59.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm VII](1080011)
