[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080162)  [Next](1080164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXXX"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXXX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXXX-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXXX. <span
id="fr_5565"></span>[5566](#fn_5565) </span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p3"></span>1. “Out of the deep have I called unto
Thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my voice” ([Psa.
130.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXXX-p3.1"></span>).
Jonas cried from the deep; from the whale’s belly. <span
id="fr_5566"></span>[5567](#fn_5566) He was not only beneath the waves,
but also in the entrails of the beast; nevertheless, those waves and
that body prevented not his prayer from reaching God, and the beast’s
belly could not contain the voice of his prayer. It penetrated all
things, it burst through all things, it reached the ears of God: if
indeed we ought to say that, bursting through all things, it reached the
ears of God, since the ears of God were in the heart of him who prayed.
For where hath not he God present, whose voice is faithful?
Nevertheless, we also ought to understand from what deep we cry unto the
Lord. For this mortal life is our deep. Whoever hath understood himself
to be in the deep, crieth out, groaneth, sigheth, until he be delivered
from the deep, and come unto Him who sitteth above all the deeps.…For
they are very deep in the deep, who do not even cry from the deep. The
Scripture saith, “When the wicked hath reached the depth of evils, he
despiseth.”  <span id="fr_5567"></span>[5568](#fn_5567) Now consider,
brethren, what sort of deep that is, where God is despised. When each
man seeth himself overwhelmed with daily sins, pressed down by heaps and
weights, so to speak, of iniquities: if it be said unto him, Pray unto
God, he laughs. In what manner? He first saith, If crimes were
displeasing unto God, should I live? If God regarded human affairs,
considering the great crimes which I have committed, should I not only
live, but be prosperous? For this is wont to happen to those who are far
in the deep, and are prosperous in their iniquities: and they are the
more plunged in the deep, in proportion as they seem to be more happy;
for a deceitful happiness is itself a greater unhappiness.…

<span id="ii.CXXX-p6"></span>2. “Lord, hear my voice. O let Thine ears
consider well the voice of my complaint” ([Psa.
130.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXX-p6.1"></span>).
Whence doth he cry? From the deep. Who is it then who crieth? A sinner.
And with what hope doth he cry? Because He who came to absolve from
sins, gave hope even to the sinner down in the deep. What therefore
followeth after these words: “If Thou, Lord, wilt be extreme to mark
what is amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?” ([Psa.
130.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXX-p6.2"></span>).
So, he hath disclosed from what deep he cried out. For he crieth beneath
the weights and billows of his iniquities.…He said not, I may not abide
it: but, “who may abide it?” For he saw that nigh the whole of human
life on every side was ever bayed at by its sins, that all consciences
were accused by their thoughts, that a clean heart trusting in its own
righteousness could not be found.

<span id="ii.CXXX-p7"></span>3. But wherefore is there hope? “For there
is propitiation with Thee” ([Psa.
130.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXXX-p7.1"></span>).
And what is this propitiation, except sacrifice? And what is sacrifice,
save that which hath been offered for us? The pouring forth of innocent
blood blotted out all the sins of the guilty: so great a price paid down
redeemed all captives from the hand of the enemy who captured them.
“With Thee,” then, “there is propitiation.” For if there were not mercy
with Thee, if Thou chosest to be Judge only, and didst refuse to be
merciful, Thou wouldest mark all our iniquities, and search after them.
Who could abide this? Who could stand before Thee, and say, I am
innocent? Who could stand in Thy judgment? There is therefore one hope:
“for the sake of Thy law have I borne Thee, O Lord.” What law? That
which made men guilty. For a “law, holy, just, and good,”  <span
id="fr_5568"></span>[5569](#fn_5568) was given to the Jews; but its
effect was to make them guilty. A law was not given that could give
life, <span id="fr_5569"></span>[5570](#fn_5569) but which might show
his sins to the sinner. For the sinner had forgotten himself, and saw
not himself; the law was given him, that he might see himself. The law
made him guilty, the Lawgiver freed him: for the Lawgiver is the Supreme
Power. <span id="fr_5570"></span>[5571](#fn_5570) …There is therefore a
law of the mercy of God, a law of the propitiation of God. <span
id="fr_5571"></span>[5572](#fn_5571) The one was a law of fear, the
other is a law of love. The law of love giveth forgiveness to sins,
blotteth out the past, warneth concerning the future; forsaketh not its
companion by the way, becometh a companion to him whom it leadeth on the
way. But it is needful to agree with the adversary, whilst thou art with
him in the way. <span id="fr_5572"></span>[5573](#fn_5572) For the Word
of God is thine adversary, as long as thou dost not agree with it. But
thou agreest, when it has begun to be thy delight to do what God’s Word
commandeth. Then he who was thine adversary becometh thy friend: so,
when the way is finished, there will be none to deliver thee to the
Judge. Therefore, “For the sake of Thy law I have waited for Thee, O
Lord,” because thou hast condescended to bring in a law of mercy, to
forgive me all my sins, to give me for the future warnings that I may
not offend.…“For the <span id="page_614">p. 614</span> <span
id="ii.CXXX-Page_614"></span>sake,” therefore, “of” this “law I have
waited for Thee, O Lord.” I have waited until Thou mayest come and free
me from all need, for in my very need Thou hast not forsaken the law of
mercy.…“My soul hath waited for Thy word.”…

<span id="ii.CXXX-p13"></span>4. We therefore trust without fear on the
word of Him who cannot deceive. “My soul hath trusted in the Lord, from
the morning watch even unto night” ([Psa.
130.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXXX-p13.1"></span>). This morning watch is the end of night. We
must therefore understand it so that we may not suppose we are to trust
in the Lord for one day only. What do you conceive to be the sense,
then, brethren? The words mean this: that the Lord, through whom our
sins have been remitted, arose from the dead at the morning watch, so
that we may hope that what went before in the Lord will take place in
us. For our sins have been already forgiven: but we have not yet risen
again: if we have not risen again, not as yet hath that taken place in
us which went before in our Head. What went before in our Head? Because
the flesh of that Head rose again; did the Spirit of that Head die? What
had died in Him, rose again. Now He arose on the third day; and the Lord
as it were thus speaketh to us: What ye have seen in Me, hope for in
yourselves; that is, because I have risen from the dead, ye also shall
rise again.

<span id="ii.CXXX-p14"></span>5. But there are who say, Behold, the Lord
hath risen again; but must I hope on that account that I also may rise
again? Certainly, on that account: for the Lord rose again in that which
He assumed from thee. For He would not rise again, save He had died; and
He could not have died, except He bore the flesh. What did the Lord
assume from thee? The flesh. What was He that came Himself? The Word of
God, who was before all things, through whom all things were made. But
that He might receive something from thee, “The Word became flesh, and
dwelt among us.” <span id="fr_5573"></span>[5574](#fn_5573) He received
from thee, what He might offer for thee; as the priest receiveth from
thee, what he may offer for thee, when thou wishest to appease God for
thy sins. It hath already been done, it hath been done thus. Our Priest
received from us what He might offer for us: for He received flesh from
us, in the flesh itself He was made a victim, He was made a holocaust,
He was made a sacrifice. In the Passion He was made a sacrifice; in the
Resurrection He renewed that which was slain, and offered it as His
first-fruits unto God, and saith unto thee, All that is thine is now
consecrated: since such first-fruits have been offered unto God from
thee; hope therefore that that will take place in thyself which went
before in thy first-fruits.

<span id="ii.CXXX-p16"></span>6. Since He then rose with the morning
watch, our soul began to hope from hence: and how far? “Even unto
night;” until we die; for all our carnal death is as it were sleep.…

<span id="ii.CXXX-p17"></span>7. And he returns to this, “From the
morning watch let Israel hope in the Lord.” Not only “let Israel hope,”
but “from the morning watch let Israel hope.” Do I then blame the hope
of the world, when it is placed in the Lord? No; but there is another
hope belonging to Israel. Let not Israel hope for riches as his highest
good, not for health of body, not for abundance of earthly things: he
will indeed have to suffer tribulation here, if it should be his lot to
suffer any troubles for the sake of the truth.…

<span id="ii.CXXX-p18"></span>8. “For with the Lord there is mercy, and
with Him is plenteous redemption” ([Psa.
130.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXXX-p18.1"></span>). Admirable! This could not have been better
said in its own place, on account of the words, “From the morning
watch.” Wherefore? Because the Lord rose again from the morning watch;
and the body ought to hope for that which went before in the Head. But,
lest this thought should be suggested: The Head might rise again,
because It was not weighed down with sins, there was no sin in Him; what
shall we do? Shall we hope for such a resurrection, as went before in
the Lord, whilst we are weighed down by our sins? But see what
followeth: “And He shall redeem Israel from all his sins” ([Psa.
130.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#008)<span
id="ii.CXXX-p18.2"></span>). Though therefore he was weighed down with
his sins, the mercy of God is present to him. For this reason, He went
before without sin, that He may blot out the sins of those that follow
Him. Trust not in yourselves, but trust from the morning watch.…

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5565"></span>[613:5566](1080163.htm#fr_5565) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p2"></span> Lat. CXXIX. A song of degrees. A sermon to
the people.

<span id="fn_5566"></span>[613:5567](1080163.htm#fr_5566) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p4"></span> [Jonah ii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXXX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5567"></span>[613:5568](1080163.htm#fr_5567) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p5"></span> [Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.CXXX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5568"></span>[613:5569](1080163.htm#fr_5568) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p8"></span> [Rom. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXXX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5569"></span>[613:5570](1080163.htm#fr_5569) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p9"></span> [Gal. iii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021)<span id="ii.CXXX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5570"></span>[613:5571](1080163.htm#fr_5570) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p10"></span> *Imperator*.

<span id="fn_5571"></span>[613:5572](1080163.htm#fr_5571) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p11"></span> \[Note (*Greek*) [Luke xviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)<span
id="ii.CXXX-p11.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5572"></span>[613:5573](1080163.htm#fr_5572) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p12"></span> [Matt. v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)<span id="ii.CXXX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5573"></span>[614:5574](1080163.htm#fr_5573) <span
id="ii.CXXX-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXXX-p15"></span> [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXXX-p15.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXXI](1080164)
