[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080102)  [Next](1080104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XCII"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XCII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XCII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XCII. <span
id="fr_4326"></span>[4327](#fn_4326) </span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p3"></span>1. …We are not Christians, except on
account of a future life: let no one hope for present blessings, let no
one promise himself the happiness of the world, because he is a
Christian: but let him use the happiness he hath, as he may, in what
manner he may, when he may, as far as he may. When it is present, let
him give thanks for the consolation of God: when it is wanting, let him
give thanks to the Divine justice. Let him always be grateful, never
ungrateful: let him be grateful to his Father, who soothes and caresses
him: and grateful to his Father when He chasteneth him with the scourge,
and teacheth him: for He ever loveth, whether He caress or threaten: and
let him say <span id="page_453">p. 453</span> <span
id="ii.XCII-Page_453"></span>what ye have heard in the Psalm: “It is a
good thing to give thanks unto the Lord; and to sing praises unto Thy
Name, Thou Most Highest” ([Psa.
92.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001)<span id="ii.XCII-p3.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.XCII-p4"></span>2. This Psalm is entitled, a Psalm to be
sung on the Sabbath day. Lo, this day is the Sabbath, which the Jews at
this period observe by a kind of bodily rest, languid and luxurious.
They abstain from labours, and give themselves up to trifles; and though
God ordained the Sabbath, they spend it in actions which God forbids.
Our rest is from evil works, theirs from good; for it is better to
plough than to dance. They abstain from good, but not from trifling,
works. God proclaims to us a Sabbath. What sort of Sabbath? First
consider, where it is. It is in the heart, within us; for many are idle
with their limbs, while they are disturbed in conscience.…That very joy
in the tranquillity of our hope, is our Sabbath. This is the subject of
praise and of song in this Psalm, how a Christian man is in the Sabbath
of his own heart, that is, in the quiet, tranquillity, and serenity of
his conscience, undisturbed; hence he tells us here, whence men are wont
to be disturbed, and he teaches thee to keep Sabbath in thine own heart.

<span id="ii.XCII-p5"></span>3. …Accuse thyself, and thou receivest
indulgence. Besides, many do not accuse Satan but their fate. My fate
led me, saith one when you ask him, why did you do it? why did you sin?
he replies, by my evil fate. Lest he should say, I did it; he points to
God as the source of his sin: with his tongue he blasphemes. He saith
not this indeed openly as yet, but listen, and see that he saith this.
You ask of him, what is fate: and he replies, evil stars. You ask, who
made, who appointed the stars; he can only answer, God. It follows,
then, that whether he doth so directly or indirectly, <span
id="fr_4327"></span>[4328](#fn_4327) still he accuseth God, and when God
punisheth sins, he maketh God the author of his own sins. It cannot be
that God punishes what He hath wrought: He punisheth what thou doest,
that He may set free what He hath wrought. But sometimes, setting aside
everything else, they attack God directly: and when they sin, they say,
God willed this; if God had not willed it, I should not have sinned.
Does He warn thee for this, that not only He may not be listened to, to
keep thee from sin, but even be accused because thou dost sin? What then
doth this Psalm teach us? “It is a good thing to confess <span
id="fr_4328"></span>[4329](#fn_4328) unto the Lord.” What is to confess
unto the Lord? In both cases: both in thy sins, because thou hast done
them; and in thy good works, confess unto the Lord, because He hath done
them. Then shalt thou “sing unto the Name of God, the Most Highest:”
seeking the glory of God, not thine own; His Name, not thine. For if
thou seekest the Name of God, He also seeketh thy name; but if thou hast
neglected the Name of God, He also doth blot out thine.…

<span id="ii.XCII-p8"></span>4. “To tell of Thy mercy early in the
morning, and of Thy truth in the night season” ([Psa.
92.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#002)<span id="ii.XCII-p8.1"></span>).
What is the meaning of this; that the mercy of God is to be told us in
the morning, and in the night the truth of God? The morning is, when it
is well with us; the night, the sadness of tribulation. What then did he
say in brief? When thou art prosperous, rejoice in God, for it is His
mercy. Now, perhaps thou wouldest say, If I rejoice in God, when I am
prosperous, because it is His mercy; what am I to do when I am in
sorrow, in tribulation? It is His mercy, when I am prosperous; is it
then His cruelty, when I am in adversity? If I praise His mercy when it
is well with me, am I then to exclaim against His cruelty when it is
ill? No. But when it is well, praise His mercy: when ill, praise His
truth: because He scourgeth sins, He is not unjust.…During the night
Daniel confessed the truth of God: he said in his prayer, “We have
sinned, and committed iniquity, and have done wickedly. O Lord,
righteousness belongeth unto Thee: but unto us confusion of face.” <span
id="fr_4329"></span>[4330](#fn_4329) He told of the truth of God during
the night-season. What is it to tell of the truth of God in the
night-season? Not to accuse God, because thou sufferest aught of evil:
but to attribute it to thy sins, His correction: to tell of His
loving-kindness early in the morning, and of His truth in the
night-season. When thou *doest this*, thou dost always praise God,
always confess to God, and sing unto His Name.

<span id="ii.XCII-p10"></span>5. “Upon a psaltery of ten strings, with a
song, and upon the harp” ([Psa.
92.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#003)<span id="ii.XCII-p10.1"></span>).
Ye have not heard of the psaltery of ten strings for the first time: it
signifies the ten commandments of the Law. But we must sing upon that
psaltery, and not carry it only. For even the Jews have the Law: but
they carry it: they sing not.…“And upon the harp.” This means, in word
and deed; “with a song,” in word; “upon the harp,” in work. If thou
speakest words alone, thou hast, as it were, the song only, and not the
harp: if thou workest, and speakest not, thou hast the harp only. On
this account both speak well and do well, if thou wouldest have the song
together with the harp.

<span id="ii.XCII-p11"></span>6. “For Thou, Lord, hast made me glad
through Thy works; and I will rejoice in giving praise for the
operations of Thy hands” ([Psa.
92.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCII-p11.1"></span>).
<span id="page_454">p. 454</span> <span id="ii.XCII-Page_454"></span>Ye
see what he saith. Thou hast made me living well, Thou hast formed me:
if by chance I do aught of good, I will rejoice in the work of Thy
hands: as the Apostle saith, “For we are His workmanship, created unto
good works.” <span id="fr_4330"></span>[4331](#fn_4330) For unless He
formed thee to good works, thou wouldest not know any works but
evil.…Because thou canst not have truth from thy own self, it remains
that thou drink it thence, whence it floweth: as if thou hast gone back
from the light, thou art in darkness: as a stone glows not with its own
heat, but either from the sun or fire, and if thou withdraw it from the
heat, it cools: there it appears, that the heat was not its own; for it
became heated either by the sun or by fire: thus thou also, if thou
withdraw from God, wilt become cold; if thou approach God, thou wilt
warm: as the Apostle saith “fervent in spirit.” <span
id="fr_4331"></span>[4332](#fn_4331) Also what saith he of the light? If
thou approach Him, thou wilt be in light; therefore saith the Psalm,
“Look upon Him, and be lightened; and your faces shall not be
ashamed.” <span id="fr_4332"></span>[4333](#fn_4332) Because therefore
thou canst do no good, unless lightened by the light of God, and warmed
by the spirit of God; when thou shalt see thyself working well, confess
unto God, and say what the Apostle saith; say unto thyself, that thou be
not puffed up, “For what hast thou that thou didst not receive?” <span
id="fr_4333"></span>[4334](#fn_4333) …

<span id="ii.XCII-p16"></span>7. That wretched man who doeth good, and
suffereth evils, seeth him, becometh disturbed, and saith, O God, the
wicked, I imagine, please Thee, and Thou hatest the good, and lovest
those who work iniquity.…The Sabbath being now lost in the inner man,
and the tranquillity of his heart being shut out, and good thoughts
repelled, he now beginneth to imitate him whom he seeth flourishing amid
his evil deeds; and turneth himself also to evil works. But God is
long-suffering, because He is eternal, <span
id="fr_4334"></span>[4335](#fn_4334) and he knoweth the day of His own
judgment, where He weigheth all things.

<span id="ii.XCII-p18"></span>8. Teaching us this, what saith he? “O
Lord, how glorious are Thy works: Thy thoughts are made very deep”
([Psa. 92.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XCII-p18.1"></span>). Verily, my brethren, there is no sea so
deep as these thoughts of God, who maketh the wicked flourish, and the
good suffer: nothing so profound, nothing so deep: therein every
unbelieving soul is wrecked, in that depth, in that profundity. Dost
thou wish to cross this depth? Remove not from the wood of Christ’s
Cross: thou shalt not sink: hold thyself fast to Christ. What do I mean
by this, hold fast to Christ? It was for this reason that He chose to
suffer on earth Himself. Ye have heard, while the prophet was being
read, how He “did not turn away His back from the smiters, and His face
from the spittings of men,” how “He turned not His cheek from their
hands;” <span id="fr_4335"></span>[4336](#fn_4335) wherefore chose He to
suffer all these things, but that He might console the suffering? He
could have raised His flesh at the last day: but then thou wouldest not
have had thy ground of hope, since thou hadst not seen Him. He deferred
not His resurrection, that thou mightest not still be in doubt. Suffer
then tribulation in the world with the same end as that which thou hast
observed in Christ: and let not those who do evil, and flourish in this
life, move thee. “Thy thoughts are very deep.” Where is the thought of
God? Rejoice not as the fish who is exulting in his bait: the fisherman
hath not drawn his hook: the fish hath as yet the hook in his jaws. And
what seemeth to thee long, is short; all these things pass over quickly.
What is the long life of man to the eternity of God? Dost thou wish to
be of long-suffering? Consider the eternity of God. For thou regardest
thy few days, and in thy few days thou dost wish all things to be
fulfilled. What things? The condemnation of all the wicked: and the
crowning of all the good: dost thou wish these things to be fulfilled in
thy days? God fulfilleth them in His own time. Why dost thou suffer
weariness? He is eternal: He waiteth: He is of long-suffering: but thou
sayest, I am not of long-suffering, because I am mortal. But thou hast
it in thy power to become so: join thy heart to the eternity of God, and
with Him thou shalt be eternal.…

<span id="ii.XCII-p20"></span>9. For this reason, after saying, “Thy
thoughts are very deep,” he at once subjoins: “An unwise man doth not
well consider this, and a fool doth not understand it” ([Psa.
92.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCII-p20.1"></span>).
What are the things which an unwise man doth not well consider, and
which a fool doth not understand? “When the ungodly are green as the
grass.” What is, “as the grass”? They flourish when it is winter, but
they will wither in the summer. Thou observest the flower of the grass?
What more quickly passeth by? What is brighter? What is greener? Let not
its verdure delight thee, but fear its withering. Thou hast heard of the
ungodly being green as the grass: hear also of the righteous: “For lo.”
In the mean while, consider the ungodly; they flourish as the grass; but
who are they who understand it not? The foolish and unwise. “When the
ungodly are green as the grass, and all men look upon the workers of
iniquity” ([Psa. 92.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XCII-p20.2"></span>). All who in their heart think not aright of
God, look upon the ungodly when they are as green as grass, that <span
id="page_455">p. 455</span> <span id="ii.XCII-Page_455"></span>is, when
they flourish for a time. Why do they look upon them? “That they may be
destroyed for ever.” For they regard their momentary bloom, they imitate
them, and wishing to flourish with them for a time, perish for evermore:
this is, “That they may be destroyed for ever.”

<span id="ii.XCII-p21"></span>10. “But Thou, Lord, art the Most Highest
for evermore” ([Psa. 92.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XCII-p21.1"></span>). Waiting above in Thy eternity until the
season of the wicked be past, and that of the just come. “For lo.”
Listen, brethren. Already he who speaketh (for he speaketh in our
person, in the person of Christ’s body, for Christ speaketh in His own
body, that is, in His Church), hath joined himself unto the eternity of
God: as I a little before was saying unto you, God is long-suffering and
patient, and alloweth all those evil deeds which He seeth to be done by
wicked men. Wherefore? because He is eternal, and seeth what He keepeth
for them. Dost thou also wish to be long-suffering and patient? Join
thyself to the eternity of God: together with Him wait for those things
which are beneath thee: for when thy heart shall have cleaved unto the
Most Highest, all mortal things will be beneath thee: say then what
follows, “For lo, thine enemies shall perish.” Those who now flourish,
shall afterwards perish. Who are the enemies of God? Brethren, perhaps
ye think those only enemies of God who blaspheme? They indeed are so,
and those wicked men who neither in tongue nor in thought cease to
injure God. And what do they do to the eternal, most high God? If thou
strike with thy fist upon a pillar, thou art hurt: and thinkest thou
that where thou strikest God with thy blasphemy, thou art not thyself
broken? for thou doest nothing to God. But the enemies of God are openly
blasphemers, and daily they are found hidden. Beware of such enmities of
God. For the Scripture revealeth some such secret enemies of God: that
because thou knowest them not in thy heart, thou mayest know in God’s
Scriptures, and beware of being found with them. James saith openly in
his Epistle, “Know ye not that the friendship of the world is enmity
with God?” <span id="fr_4336"></span>[4337](#fn_4336) Thou hast heard.
Dost thou wish not to be an enemy of God? Be not a friend of this world:
for if thou art a friend of this world, thou wilt be an enemy of God.
For as a wife cannot be an adulteress, unless she be an enemy to her own
husband: so a soul which is an adulteress through its love of worldly
things, cannot but be an enemy to God. It feareth, but loveth not: it
feareth punishment but is not delighted with righteousness. All lovers
of the world, therefore, are enemies of God, all the curious after
trifles, all consulters of diviners astrologers, and evil spirits. Let
them enter, or not enter, Churches: they are enemies of God. They may
flourish for a season like grass, but they will perish, when He
beginneth to visit them, and pronounce His sentence upon all flesh. Join
thyself to the Scripture of God, and say with this Psalm, “For lo, thine
enemies shall perish” ([Psa. 92.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XCII-p22.2"></span>). Be not found there, where they shall
perish. “And all the workers of iniquity shall be destroyed.”

<span id="ii.XCII-p23"></span>11. …“But mine horn shall be exalted like
the horn of an unicorn” ([Psa.
92.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XCII-p23.1"></span>). Why did He say, “like the horn of an
unicorn”? Sometimes an unicorn signifies pride, sometimes it means the
lifting up of unity; because unity is lifted up, all heresies shall
perish with the enemies of God. And “mine horn shall be exalted like an
unicorn.” When will it be so? “And mine old age shall be in the fatness
of mercy.” <span id="fr_4337"></span>[4338](#fn_4337) Why did he say,
“my old age”? He means, my last days; as our old age is the last season
in our lives, so the whole of what the body of Christ at present
suffereth in labours, in cares, in watchings, in hunger, in thirst, in
stumbling-blocks, in wickednesses, in tribulations, is its youth: its
old age, that is, its last days, will be in joy. And beware, beloved,
that ye think not death meant also, in that he hath spoken of old age:
for man groweth old in the flesh for this reason, that he may die. The
old age of the Church will be white with good works, but it shall not
decay through death. What the head of the old man is, that our works
will be. Ye see how the head groweth old, and whiteneth, as fast as old
age approacheth. Thou sometimes dost seek in the head of one who groweth
old duly in his own course a black hair, yet thou findest it not: thus
when our life shall have been such, that the blackness of sins may be
sought, and none found, that old age is youthful, is green, and ever
will be green. Ye have heard of the grass of sinners, hear ye of the old
age of the righteous: “My old age shall be in the fathers of mercy.”

<span id="ii.XCII-p25"></span>12. “And Mine eye hath beheld on mine
enemies” ([Psa. 92.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XCII-p25.1"></span>). Whom doth he call his enemies? All the
workers of iniquity. Do not observe whether thy friend be wicked: let an
occasion come, and then thou provest him. Thou beginnest to go contrary
to his iniquity, and then thou shalt see that when he was flattering
thee, he was thy enemy; but thou hadst not yet knocked, not to raise in
his heart what was not there, but that what was there might break out.
“Mine eye also hath looked upon mine enemies: and mine ear shall hear
his desire of the wicked that rise up against me.” When? In my old age.
What is, in old age? In the last times. And what shall our ear hear?
Standing on the right hand, we shall hear what shall be said to them
that are on the left. <span id="fr_4338"></span>[4339](#fn_4338)

<span id="ii.XCII-p27"></span><span id="page_456">p. 456</span> <span
id="ii.XCII-Page_456"></span>13. The grass withereth, the flower of
sinners dieth away: what of the righteous? “The righteous shall flourish
like a palm tree” ([Psa. 92.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XCII-p27.1"></span>). The ungodly are green as grass; “The
righteous shall flourish like a palm tree.” By the palm tree he
signifieth height. Possibly he had also this meaning in the palm, that
in its extremities it is beautiful: so that thou mayest trace its
beginning from the earth, its end in its topmost branches, wherein its
whole beauty dwelleth. The rough root appeareth in the earth, the
beautiful foliage toward the sky. Thy beauty too, then, shall be in the
end. Thy root is fixed fast: but our root is upward. For our root is
Christ, who hath ascended into heaven. Humbled, he shall be exalted; “he
shall spread abroad like a cedar in Libanus.” See what trees he spoke
of: the righteous shall flourish like a palm-tree: and shall spread
abroad like a cedar in Libanus. When the sun hath gone forth, doth the
palm-tree wither? Doth the cedar die? But when the sun hath been glowing
for some hours, the grass drieth up. The judgment, therefore, shall
come, that sinners may wither, and the faithful flourish.

<span id="ii.XCII-p28"></span>14. “Such as are planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of the house of our God” ([Psa.
92.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XCII-p28.1"></span>). “They shall be yet more increased in
fruitful old age, and shall be quiet, that they may show it forth”
([Psa. 92.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XCII-p28.2"></span>). Such is the Sabbath, which but a little
while ago I commended unto you, whence the Psalm hath its title. “They
shall be quiet, that they may show it forth.” Wherefore are they quiet
that show it forth? The grass of sinners moveth them not: the cedar and
palm-tree not even in tempests are bent. They are therefore quiet, that
they may show it forth: and with reason, since at present they must show
it forth even unto men who mock at it. O wretched men, who are lovers of
the world! Those who are planted in the house of the Lord, show it to
you: those who praise the Lord with song and lute, in word and deed,
show it forth to you, and tell you. Be not seduced by the prosperity of
the wicked, admire not the flower of grass: admire not those who are
happy only for a season, but miserable unto eternity.…If ye wish to
flourish like a palm-tree, and to spread abroad like a cedar in Libanus,
and not to wither like grass when the sun is hot; as those who appear to
flourish when the sun is absent. If then ye wish not to be as grass, but
as the palm-tree and the cedar, what will ye show forth? “How true the
Lord my strength is: and that there is no unrighteousness in Him.” How
is it there is no unrighteousness? A man committeth so great crimes; he
is well, he hath sons, a plentiful house, he is full of pride, is
exalted by his honours, is revenged on his enemies, and doeth every evil
deed; another man, innocent, attending to his own affairs, not robbing
another’s goods, doing nothing against any one, suffereth in chains, in
prison, tosseth and sigheth in poverty. How is it that there is no
unrighteousness in Him? Be quiet, and thou shalt know: for thou art
disturbed, and in thy chamber thou dost darken thy light. The eternal
God doth wish to shine upon thee: do not then make thee cloudy weather
from thy own disturbed mind. Be quiet within thyself, and see what I say
unto thee. Because God is eternal, because for the present He spareth
the bad, bringing them to repentance: He scourgeth the good, instructing
them in the way unto the kingdom of heaven: “There is no unrighteousness
in Him:” fear not.…What, if He leaveth this man unpunished now, because
he is doomed to hear, “Depart into everlasting fire.” But when? when
thou shalt be placed at the right hand, then shall it be said to those
placed on the left, “Depart into the everlasting fire, which is prepared
for the devil and his angels.” Let not therefore those things move thee:
Be quiet, keep Sabbath, and show “how true the Lord my strength is: and
that there is no unrighteousness in Him.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4326"></span>[452:4327](1080103.htm#fr_4326) <span
id="ii.XCII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p2"></span> Lat. XCI. A sermon to the people, preached
on Saturday.

<span id="fn_4327"></span>[453:4328](1080103.htm#fr_4327) <span
id="ii.XCII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p6"></span> *Sive per transennam sive per cannam
longam, sive per proximum*.

<span id="fn_4328"></span>[453:4329](1080103.htm#fr_4328) <span
id="ii.XCII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p7"></span> *Confiteri*.

<span id="fn_4329"></span>[453:4330](1080103.htm#fr_4329) <span
id="ii.XCII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p9"></span> [Dan.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#005),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4330"></span>[454:4331](1080103.htm#fr_4330) <span
id="ii.XCII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p12"></span> [Eph. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="ii.XCII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4331"></span>[454:4332](1080103.htm#fr_4331) <span
id="ii.XCII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p13"></span> [Rom. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011)<span id="ii.XCII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4332"></span>[454:4333](1080103.htm#fr_4332) <span
id="ii.XCII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p14"></span> [Ps. xxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="ii.XCII-p14.1"></span>,
Bible Version.

<span id="fn_4333"></span>[454:4334](1080103.htm#fr_4333) <span
id="ii.XCII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p15"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="ii.XCII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4334"></span>[454:4335](1080103.htm#fr_4334) <span
id="ii.XCII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p17"></span> \[*Deus autem patiens est quia æternus
est*. One of those felicitous maxims in which our author abounds.—C.\]

<span id="fn_4335"></span>[454:4336](1080103.htm#fr_4335) <span
id="ii.XCII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p19"></span> [Isa. l.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)<span id="ii.XCII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4336"></span>[455:4337](1080103.htm#fr_4336) <span
id="ii.XCII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p22"></span> [Jas. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#004)<span id="ii.XCII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4337"></span>[455:4338](1080103.htm#fr_4337) <span
id="ii.XCII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p24"></span> So LXX.

<span id="fn_4338"></span>[455:4339](1080103.htm#fr_4338) <span
id="ii.XCII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XCII-p26"></span> \[The words “my desire” are not in the
Hebrew: what the Hebrew implies is the patient expectation of a just
judgment, by which truth shall at last be vindicated. See [Rev. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XCII-p26.1"></span>.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XCIII](1080104)
