[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080053)  [Next](1080055) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XLVII"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XLVII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XLVII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XLVII. <span
id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511) </span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p3"></span>1. The title of the Psalm goeth thus. “To
the end: for the sons of Korah: a Psalm of David himself.” These sons of
Korah have the title also of some other Psalms, and indicate a sweet
mystery, insinuate a great Sacrament: wherein let us willingly
understand ourselves, and let us acknowledge in the title us who hear,
and read, and as in a glass set before us behold who we are. The sons of
Korah, who are they? <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512) …Haply
the sons of the Bridegroom. For the Bridegroom was crucified in the
place of Calvary. Recollect the Gospel, <span
id="fr_1513"></span>[1514](#fn_1513) where they crucified the Lord, and
ye will find Him crucified in the place of Calvary. Furthermore, they
who deride His Cross, by devils, as by beasts, are devoured. For this
also a certain Scripture signified. When God’s Prophet Elisha was going
up, children called after him mocking, “Go up thou bald head, Go up thou
bald head:” but he, not so much in cruelty as in mystery, made those
children to be devoured by bears out of the wood.  <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514) If those children had not been
devoured, would they have lived even till now? Or could they not, being
born mortal, have been taken off by a fever? But so in them had no
mystery been shown, whereby posterity might be put in fear. Let none
then mock the Cross of Christ. The Jews were possessed by devils, and
devoured; for in the place of Calvary, crucifying Christ, and lifting on
the Cross, they said as it were with childish sense, not understanding
what they said, “Go up, thou bald head.” For what is, “Go up”? “Crucify
Him, Crucify Him.” <span id="fr_1515"></span>[1516](#fn_1515) For
childhood is set before us to imitate humility, and childhood is set
before us to beware of foolishness. To imitate humility, childhood was
set before us by the Lord, when He called children to Him, <span
id="fr_1516"></span>[1517](#fn_1516) and because they were kept from
Him, He said, “Suffer them to come unto Me, for of such is the Kingdom
of Heaven.” <span id="fr_1517"></span>[1518](#fn_1517) The <span
id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="ii.XLVII-Page_161"></span>example
of childhood is set before us to beware of foolishness by the Apostle,
“Brethren, be not children in understanding:” and again he proposeth it
to imitate, “Howbeit in malice be ye children, that in understanding ye
may be men.” <span id="fr_1518"></span>[1519](#fn_1518) “For the sons of
Korah” the Psalm is sung; for Christians then is it sung. Let us hear it
as sons of the Bridegroom, whom senseless children crucified in the
place of Calvary. For they earned to be devoured by beasts; we to be
crowned by Angels. For we acknowledge the humility of our Lord, and of
it are not ashamed. We are not ashamed of Him called in mystery “the
bald” (*Calvus*), from the place of Calvary. For on the very Cross
whereon He was insulted, He permitted not our forehead to be bald; for
with His own Cross He marked it. Finally, that ye may know that these
things are said to us, see what is said.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p11"></span>2. “O clap your hands, all ye nations”
([Psa. 47.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p11.1"></span>). Were the people of the Jews all the
nations? No, but blindness in part is happened to Israel, that senseless
children might cry, “Calve,” “Calve;” and so the Lord might be crucified
in the place of Calvary, that by His Blood shed He might redeem the
Gentiles, and that might be fulfilled which saith the Apostle,
“Blindness in part is happened unto Israel, until the fulness of the
Gentiles be come in.” <span id="fr_1519"></span>[1520](#fn_1519) Let
them insult, then, the vain, and foolish, and senseless, and say,
“Calve,” “Calve;” but ye redeemed by His Blood which was shed in the
place of Calvary, say, “O clap your hands, all ye nations;” because to
you hath come down the Grace of God. “O clap your hands.” What is “O
clap”? Rejoice. But wherefore with the hands? Because with good works.
Do not rejoice with the mouth while idle with the hands. If ye rejoice,
“clap your hands.” The hands of the nations let Him see, who joys hath
deigned to give them. What is, the hands of the nations? The acts of
them doing good works. “O clap your hands, all ye nations: shout unto
God with the voice of triumph.” Both with voice and with hands. If with
the voice only it is not well, because the hands are slow; if only with
the hands it is not well, because the tongue is mute. Agree together
must the hands and tongue. Let this confess, these work. “Shout unto God
with the voice of triumph.”

<span id="ii.XLVII-p13"></span>3. “For the Lord Most High is terrible”
([Psa. 47.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p13.1"></span>). The Most High in descending made like one
ludicrous, by ascending into Heaven is made terrible. “A great King over
all the earth.” Not only over the Jews; for over them also He is King.
For of them also the Apostles believed and of them many thousands of men
sold their goods, and laid the price at the Apostles’ feet, <span
id="fr_1520"></span>[1521](#fn_1520) and in them was fulfilled what in
the title of the Cross was written, “The King of the Jews.” <span
id="fr_1521"></span>[1522](#fn_1521) For He is King also of the Jews.
But “of the Jews” is little. <span id="fr_1522"></span>[1523](#fn_1522)
“O clap your hands, all ye nations: for God is the King of all the
earth.” For it sufficeth not Him to have under Him one nation: therefore
such great price gave He out of His side, as to buy the whole world.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p17"></span>4. “He hath subdued the people under us,
and the nations under our feet” ([Psa.
47.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p17.1"></span>). Which subdued, and to whom? Who are they
that speak? Haply Jews? Surely, if Apostles; surely, if Saints. For
under these God hath subdued the people and the nations, that to-day are
they honoured among the nations, who by their own citizens earned to be
slain: as their Lord was slain by His citizens, and is honoured among
the nations; was crucified by His own, is adored by aliens, but those by
a price made His own. For therefore bought He us, that aliens from Him
we might not be. Thinkest thou then these are the words of Apostles, “He
hath subdued the people under us, and the nations under our feet”? I
know not. Strange that Apostles should speak so proudly, as to rejoice
that the nations were put under their feet, that is, Christians under
the feet of Apostles. For they rejoice that we are with them under the
feet of Him who died for us. For under Paul’s feet ran they, who would
be of Paul, to whom He said, “Was Paul crucified for you?” <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) What then here, what are we to
understand? “He hath subdued the people under us, and the nations under
our feet.” All pertaining to Christ’s inheritance are among “all the
nations,” and all not pertaining to Christ’s inheritance are among “all
the nations:” and ye see so exalted in Christ’s Name is Christ’s Church,
that all not yet believing in Christ lie under the feet of Christians.
For what numbers now run to the Church; not yet being Christians, they
ask aid of the Church; <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) to be
succoured by us temporally they are willing, though eternally to reign
with us as yet they are unwilling. When all seek aid of the Church, even
they who are not yet in the Church, hath He not “subdued the people
under us, and the nations under our feet”?

<span id="ii.XLVII-p20"></span>5. “He hath chosen an inheritance for us,
the excellency <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) of Jacob, whom
He loved” ([Psa. 47.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p21.1"></span>). A certain beauty of Jacob He hath chosen
for our inheritance. Esau and Jacob were two brothers; in their mother’s
womb both struggled, and by this struggle their mother’s bowels were
shaken; and while they two were yet therein, the younger was elected and
preferred to the <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="ii.XLVII-Page_162"></span>elder, and it was said, “Two peoples are
in thy womb, and the elder shall serve the younger.”  <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526) Among all nations is the elder,
among all nations the younger; but the younger is in good Christians,
elect, godly, faithful; the elder in the proud, unworthy, sinful,
stubborn, defending rather than confessing their sins: as was also the
very people of the Jews, “being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness.” <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) But for that it is said, “The elder
shall serve the younger;” it is manifest that under the godly are
subdued the ungodly, under the humble are subdued the proud. Esau was
born first, and Jacob was born last; but he who was last born, was
preferred to the first-born, who through gluttony lost his birthright.
So thou hast it written, <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) He
longed for the pottage, and his brother said to him, If thou wilt that I
give it thee, give me thy birthright. He loved more that which carnally
he desired, than that which spiritually by being born first he had
earned: <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) and he laid aside his
birthright, that he might eat lentils. But lentils we find to be the
food of the Egyptians, for there it abounds in Egypt. Whence is so
magnified the lentil of Alexandria, that it comes even to our country,
as if here grew no lentil. Therefore by desiring Egyptian food he lost
his birthright. So also the people of the Jews, of whom it is said, “in
their hearts they turned back again into Egypt.” <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) They desired in a manner the
lentil, and lost their birthright.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p27"></span>6. “God is gone up with jubilation”
([Psa. 47.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p27.1"></span>). Even He our God, the Lord Christ, is gone
up with jubilation; “the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.” “Is gone
up:” whither, save where we know? Whither the Jews followed Him not,
even with their eyes. For exalted on the Cross they mocked Him,
ascending into Heaven they did not see Him. “God hath gone up with
jubilation.” What is jubilation, but admiration of joy which cannot be
expressed in words? As the disciples in joy admired, seeing Him go into
Heaven, whom they had mourned dead; truly for the joy, words sufficed
not: remained to jubilate what none could express. There was also the
voice of the trumpet, the voice of Angels. For it is said, “Lift up thy
voice like a trumpet.” Angels preached the ascension of the Lord: they
saw the Disciples, their Lord ascending, tarrying, admiring, confounded,
nothing speaking, but in heart jubilant: and now was the sound of the
trumpet in the clear voice of the Angels, “Ye men of Galilee, why stand
ye gazing up into Heaven? this is Jesus.” <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) As if they knew not that it was the
same Jesus. Had they not just before seen Him before them? Had they not
heard Him speaking with them? Nay, they not only saw the figure of Him
present, but handled also His limbs. Of themselves then knew they not,
that it was the same Jesus? But they being by very admiration, from joy
of jubilation, as it were transported in mind, the Angels said, “that
same is Jesus.” As though they said, If ye believe Him, this is that
same Jesus, whom crucified, your feet stumbled, whom dead and buried, ye
thought your hope lost. Lo, this is the same Jesus. He hath gone up
before you, “He shall so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into
Heaven.” His Body is removed indeed from your eyes, but God is not
separated from your hearts: see Him going up, believe on Him absent,
hope for Him coming; but yet through His secret Mercy, feel Him present.
For He who ascended into Heaven that He might be removed from your eyes,
promised unto you, saying, “Lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the world.” <span id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) Justly then
the Apostle so addressed us, “The Lord is at hand; be careful for
nothing.” <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) Christ sitteth
above the Heavens; the Heavens are far off, He who there sitteth is
near.…

<span id="ii.XLVII-p31"></span>7. “Sing praises to our God, sing
praises” ([Psa. 47.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p31.1"></span>). Whom as Man mocked they, who from God were
alienated. “Sing praises to our God.” For He is not Man only, but God.
Man of the seed of David, <span id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) God
the Lord of David, of the Jews having flesh. “Whose” (saith the Apostle)
“are the fathers, of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came.” <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) Of the Jews then is Christ, but
according to the flesh. But who is this Christ who is of the Jews
according to the flesh? “Who is over all, God blessed for ever.” God
before the flesh, God in the flesh, God with the flesh. Nor only God
before the flesh, but God before the earth whence flesh was made; nor
only God before the earth whereof flesh was made, but even God before
the Heaven which was first made; God before the day which was first
made; God before Angels; the same Christ is God: for “In the beginning
was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.” <span
id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536)

<span id="ii.XLVII-p35"></span>8. “For God is the King of all the earth”
([Psa. 47.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p35.1"></span>). What? And before was He not God of all the
earth? Is He not God of both heaven and earth, since by Him surely were
all things made? Who can say that He is not his God? But not all men
acknowledged Him their God; and where He was acknowledged, there only,
so to say, He was God. “In Judah is God known.” <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) Not yet was it said to the sons of
Korah, “O clap your hands, all ye nations.” For that God known in Judah,
is King of all the earth: now by all He is acknowledged, for that is
fulfilled which Isaiah saith, “He is thy God who hath <span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="ii.XLVII-Page_163"></span>delivered thee, the God of the whole earth
shall He be called.” <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538) “Sing ye
praises with understanding.” He teacheth us and warneth us to sing
praises with understanding, not to seek the sound of the ear, but the
light of the heart. The Gentiles, whence ye were called that ye might be
Christians, adored gods made with hands, and sang praises to them, but
not with understanding. If they had sung with understanding, they had
not adored stones. When a man sensible sang to a stone insensible, did
he sing with understanding? But now, brethren, we see not with our eyes
Whom we adore, and yet correctly <span
id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) we adore. <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) Much more is God commended to us,
that with our eyes we see Him not. If with our eyes we saw Him, haply we
might despise. For even Christ seen, the Jews despised; unseen, the
Gentiles adored.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p40"></span>9. “God shall reign over all nations”
([Psa. 47.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p40.1"></span>). Who reigned over one nation, “shall reign”
(saith He) “over all nations.” When this was said, God reigned over one
nation. It was a prophecy, the thing was not yet shown. Thanks be to
God, we now see fulfilled what before was prophesied. A written promise
God sent unto us before the time, the time fulfilled He hath repaid us.
“God shall reign over all nations,” is a promise. “God sitteth upon His
Holy Seat.” What then was promised to come, now being fulfilled, is
acknowledged and held. “God sitteth upon His Holy Seat.” What is His
Holy Seat? Haply saith one, The Heavens, and he understandeth well. For
Christ hath gone up, <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541) as we
know, with the Body, wherein He was crucified, and sitteth at the right
hand of the Father; thence we expect Him to come to judge the quick and
the dead. <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) “God sitteth upon
His Holy Seat.” The Heavens are His Holy Seat. Wilt thou also be His
Seat? think not that thou canst not be; prepare for Him a place in thy
heart. He cometh, and willingly sitteth. The same Christ is surely “the
Power of God, and the Wisdom of God:” <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) and what saith the Scripture of
Wisdom Herself? The soul of the righteous is the seat of Wisdom. <span
id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544) If then the soul of the righteous
is the seat of Wisdom, be thy soul righteous, and thou shalt be a royal
seat of Wisdom. And truly, brethren, all men who live well, who act
well, converse in godly charity, doth not God sit in them, and Himself
command? Thy soul obeyeth God sitting in it, and itself commandeth the
members. For thy soul commandeth thy members, that so may move the foot,
the hand, the eye, the ear, and itself commandeth the members as its
servants, but yet itself serveth its Lord sitting within. It cannot well
rule its inferior, unless its superior it have not disdained to serve.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p45"></span>10. “The princes of the peoples are
gathered together unto the God of Abraham” ([Psa.
47.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p45.1"></span>). The God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob. <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) True it
is, God said this, and thereupon the Jews prided themselves, and said,
“We are Abraham’s children;” <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546)
priding themselves in their father’s name, carrying his flesh, not
holding his faith; by seed cleaving to Him, in manners degenerating. But
the Lord, what said He to them so priding themselves? “If ye are
Abraham’s children, do the works of Abraham.” <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) Again…“The princes of the peoples:”
the princes of the nations: not the princes of one people, but the
princes of all people have “gathered together unto the God of Abraham.”
Of these princes was that Centurion too, of whom but now when the Gospel
was read ye heard. For he was a Centurion having honour and power among
men, he was a prince among the princes of the peoples. Christ coming to
him, he sent his friends to meet Him, nay unto Christ truly passing over
to him he sent his friends, and asked that He would heal his servant who
was dangerously sick. And when the Lord would come, he sent to Him this
message: “I am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my roof, but
say in a word only, and my servant shall be healed.” “For I also am a
man set under authority, having under me soldiers.” <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) See how he kept his rank! first he
mentioned that he was under another, and afterwards that another was
under him. I am under authority, and I am in authority; both under some
I am, and over some I am.…As though he said, If I being set under
authority command those who are under me, Thou who art set under no
man’s authority, canst not Thou command Thy creature, since all things
were made by Thee, and without Thee was nothing made. “Say,” then, said
he, “in a word, and my servant shall be healed. For I am not worthy that
Thou shouldest enter under my roof.”…Admiring at his faith, Jesus
reprobates the Jews’ misbelief. For sound to themselves they seemed,
whereas they were dangerously sick, when their Physician not knowing
they slew. Therefore when He reprobated, and repudiated their pride what
said he? “I say unto you, that many shall come from the east and west,”
not belonging to the kindred of Israel: many shall come to whom He said,
“O clap your hands, all ye nations;” “and shall sit down with Abraham,
and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of heaven.” Abraham begat them not
of his own flesh; yet shall they come and <span id="page_164">p.
164</span> <span id="ii.XLVII-Page_164"></span>sit down with him in the
kingdom of heaven, and be his sons. Whereby his sons? Not as born of his
flesh, but by following his faith. “But the children of the kingdom,”
that is, the Jews, “shall be cast into outer darkness, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth.” <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) They shall be condemned to outer
darkness who are born of the flesh of Abraham, and they shall sit down
with him in the kingdom of heaven, who have imitated Abraham’s faith.

<span id="ii.XLVII-p51"></span>11. And what they who belonged to the God
of Abraham? “For the mighty gods of the earth are greatly lifted up.”
They who were gods, the people of God, the vineyard of God, whereof it
is said, “Judge betwixt Me and My vineyard,” <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) shall go into outer darkness, shall
not sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, are not gathered unto
the God of Abraham. Wherefore? “For the mighty gods of the earth;” they
who were mighty gods of the earth, presuming upon earth. What earth?
Themselves; for every man is earth. For to man was it said, “Dust thou
art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551) But man ought to presume upon God,
and thence to hope for help, not from himself. For the earth raineth not
upon itself, nor shineth for itself; but as the earth from heaven
expecteth rain and light, so man from God ought to expect mercy and
truth. They then, “the mighty gods of the earth, were greatly lifted
up,” that is, greatly prided themselves: they thought no physician
necessary for themselves, and therefore remained in their sickness, and
by their sickness were brought down even to death. The natural branches
were broken off that the humble wild olive tree might be grafted
in. <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552) Hold we fast then,
brethren, humility, charity, godliness: since we are called, on their
proving reprobate, even by their example let us fear to pride ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[160:1512](1080054.htm#fr_1511) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p2"></span> Lat. XLVI.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[160:1513](1080054.htm#fr_1512) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p4"></span> [Numb. xvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVII-p4.1"></span>.
\[See p. 155, note 8, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1513"></span>[160:1514](1080054.htm#fr_1513) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p5"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033)<span id="ii.XLVII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[160:1515](1080054.htm#fr_1514) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p6"></span> [2 Kings
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024)<span id="ii.XLVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1515"></span>[160:1516](1080054.htm#fr_1515) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p7"></span> [Luke xxiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#021)<span id="ii.XLVII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1516"></span>[160:1517](1080054.htm#fr_1516) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p8"></span> [Matt. xviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002)<span id="ii.XLVII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1517"></span>[160:1518](1080054.htm#fr_1517) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p9"></span> [Matt. xix.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014)<span id="ii.XLVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1518"></span>[161:1519](1080054.htm#fr_1518) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p10"></span> [1 Cor. xiv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1519"></span>[161:1520](1080054.htm#fr_1519) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p12"></span> [Rom. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span id="ii.XLVII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1520"></span>[161:1521](1080054.htm#fr_1520) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p14"></span> [Acts iv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034)<span id="ii.XLVII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1521"></span>[161:1522](1080054.htm#fr_1521) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p15"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037)<span id="ii.XLVII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1522"></span>[161:1523](1080054.htm#fr_1522) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p16"></span> \[[Isa. xlix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p16.1"></span>.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[161:1524](1080054.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p18"></span> [1 Cor. i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)<span id="ii.XLVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[161:1525](1080054.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p19"></span> \[See (A.N.F. vol. v. p. 563) the noble
charities of early Christians.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[161:1526](1080054.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p21"></span> *Speciem*.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[162:1527](1080054.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p22"></span> [Gen. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)<span id="ii.XLVII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[162:1528](1080054.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p23"></span> [Rom. x.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span id="ii.XLVII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[162:1529](1080054.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p24"></span> [Gen. xxv.
30-34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030)<span
id="ii.XLVII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[162:1530](1080054.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p25"></span> *Meruerat*.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[162:1531](1080054.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p26"></span> [Acts vii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039)<span id="ii.XLVII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[162:1532](1080054.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p28"></span> [Acts i.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011)<span id="ii.XLVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[162:1533](1080054.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p29"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[162:1534](1080054.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p30"></span> [Phil.
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[162:1535](1080054.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p32"></span> [Rom. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003)<span id="ii.XLVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[162:1536](1080054.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p33"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[162:1537](1080054.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p34"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[162:1538](1080054.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p36"></span> [Ps. lxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[163:1539](1080054.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p37"></span> [Isa. liv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[163:1540](1080054.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p38"></span> *Correcti*. <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVII-p38.1"></span> ms</span>. Vat. ap. Ben. *corde recti*,
“right in heart.”

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[163:1541](1080054.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p39"></span> \[The adoration of the Host was unknown
to the ancient Church.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[163:1542](1080054.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p41"></span> [Acts i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#002)<span id="ii.XLVII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[163:1543](1080054.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p42"></span> [2 Tim. iv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[163:1544](1080054.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p43"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="ii.XLVII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[163:1545](1080054.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p44"></span> [Wisd. vii.
27](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#027)<span id="ii.XLVII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[163:1546](1080054.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p46"></span> [Exod. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[163:1547](1080054.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p47"></span> [John viii.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033)<span id="ii.XLVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[163:1548](1080054.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p48"></span> [John viii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)<span id="ii.XLVII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[163:1549](1080054.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p49"></span> [Luke
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#007)<span id="ii.XLVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[164:1550](1080054.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p50"></span> [Matt. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span id="ii.XLVII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[164:1551](1080054.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p52"></span> [Isa. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#003)<span id="ii.XLVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[164:1552](1080054.htm#fr_1551) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p53"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span id="ii.XLVII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[164:1553](1080054.htm#fr_1552) <span
id="ii.XLVII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVII-p54"></span> [Rom. xi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017)<span id="ii.XLVII-p54.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XLVIII](1080055)
