[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080054)  [Next](1080056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.XLVIII"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p1"></span> <span id="ii.XLVIII-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.XLVIII-p1.2"></span>Psalm XLVIII. <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553) </span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p3"></span>1. The title of this Psalm is, “A song of
praise, to the sons of Korah, on the second day of the week.” Concerning
this what the Lord deigneth to grant receive ye like sons of the
firmament. For on the second day of the week, that is, the day after the
first which we call the Lord’s day, which also is called the second
week-day, was made the firmament of Heaven. <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554) …The second day of the week then we
ought not to understand but of the Church of Christ: but the Church of
Christ in the Saints, the Church of Christ in those who are written in
Heaven, the Church of Christ in those who to this world’s temptations
yield not. For they are worthy of the name of “firmament.” The Church of
Christ, then, in those who are strong, of whom saith the Apostle, “We
that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak,”  <span
id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555) is called the firmament. Of this it
is sung in this Psalm. Let us hear, acknowledge, associate, glory,
reign. For Her called firmament, hear also in the Apostolic Epistles,
“the pillar and firmament <span id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556) of
the truth.” <span id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557) …

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p8"></span>2. “Great is the Lord, and greatly to be
praised” ([Psa. 48.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p8.1"></span>).…That is, “in the city of our God, in His
holy mountain.” This is the city set upon an hill, which cannot be hid:
this is the candle which is not hidden under a bushel, <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558) to all known, to all proclaimed.
Yet are not all men citizens thereof, but they in whom “great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised.” What then is that city: let us see
whether perhaps, since it is said, “In the city of our God, in His holy
mountain,” we ought not to enquire for this mountain where also we may
be heard.…What then is that mountain, brethren? One is it with great
care to be enquired for, with great solicitude investigated, with labour
also to be occupied and ascended. But if in any part of the earth it is,
what shall we do? Shall we go abroad out of our own country, that to
that mountain we may arrive? Nay, then we are abroad, when in it we are
not. For that is our city, if we are members of the King, who is the
head of the same city.…For there was a certain corner-stone
contemptible, whereat the Jews stumbled, <span
id="fr_1559"></span>[1560](#fn_1559) cut out of a certain mountain
without hands, that is, coming of the kingdom of the Jews without hands,
because human operation went not with Mary of whom was born
Christ. <span id="fr_1560"></span>[1561](#fn_1560) But if that stone,
when the Jews stumbled thereat, had remained there, thou hadst not had
whither to ascend. But what was done? What saith the prophecy of Daniel?
What but that the stone grew, and became a great mountain? How great? So
that it filled the whole face of the earth. <span
id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561) By growing, then, and by filling
the whole face of the earth, that mountain came to us. Why then seek we
the mountain as though absent, and not as being present ascend to it;
that in us the Lord may be “great, and greatly to be praised”?

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p13"></span>3. Further,…when he had said, “in the
city of our God, in His holy mountain,” what added he? “Spreading abroad
the joys of the whole earth, the mountains of Sion” ([Psa.
48.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p13.1"></span>). Sion is one mountain, why then
“mountains”? Is it that to Sion belonged also those which came from the
other side, so as to meet together on the Corner Stone, and become two
walls, as it were two mountains, one of the circumcision, the other of
the uncircumcision; one of the <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="ii.XLVIII-Page_165"></span>Jews, the other of the Gentiles: no
longer adverse, although diverse, because from different sides, now in
the corner not even diverse. “For He is our peace, who hath made both
one.” <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562) The same Corner Stone
“which the builders rejected, is become the Head Stone of the
corner.” <span id="fr_1563"></span>[1564](#fn_1563) The mountain hath
joined in itself two mountains; one house there is, and two houses; two,
because coming from different sides; one, because of the Corner Stone,
wherein both are joined together. Hear also this, “the mountains of
Sion: the sides of the North are the city of the great King.”…See the
Gentiles; “the sides of the North:” the sides of the North are joined to
the city of the great King. The North is wont to be contrary to Sion:
Sion forsooth is in the South, the North over against the South. Who is
the North, but He who said, “I will sit in the sides of the North, I
will be like the Most High”? <span id="fr_1564"></span>[1565](#fn_1564)
The devil had held dominion over the ungodly, and possessed the nations
serving images, adoring demons; and all whatsoever there was of human
kind anywhere throughout the world, by cleaving to Him, had become
North. But since He who binds the strong man, taketh away his
goods, <span id="fr_1565"></span>[1566](#fn_1565) and maketh them His
own goods; men delivered from infidelity and superstition of devils,
believing in Christ, are fitted on to that city, have met in the corner
that wall that cometh from the circumcision, and that was made the city
of the great King, which had been the sides of the North. Therefore also
in another Scripture is it said, “Out of the North come clouds of golden
colour: great is the glory and honour of the Almighty.” <span
id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566) For great is the glory of the
physician, when from being despaired of the sick recovers. “Out of the
North come clouds,” and not black clouds, not dark clouds, not lowering,
but “of golden colour.” Whence but by grace illumined through Christ?
See, “the sides of the North are the city of the great King.”…

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p19"></span>4. Let the Psalm then follow, and say,
“God shall be known in her houses.” Now in her “houses,” because of the
mountains, because of the two walls, because of the two sons. “God shall
be known in her houses,” but he commendeth grace, therefore he added,
“when He shall take her up.” For what would that city have been, unless
He had taken her up? Would it not immediately have fallen, unless it had
such foundation? For “other foundation can no man lay than that is laid,
which is Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) Let
none then glory in his own merits; but “he that glorieth, let him glory
in the Lord.” <span id="fr_1568"></span>[1569](#fn_1568) …The Lord then
hath taken up this city, and is known therein, that is, His grace is
known in that city: for whatever that city hath, which glorieth in the
Lord, it hath not of itself. For because of this it is said, “What hast
thou that thou didst not receive?” <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569)

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p23"></span>5. “For, lo, the kings of the earth are
gathered together” ([Psa. 48.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p23.1"></span>). Behold now those sides of the North, see
how they come, see how they say, “Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord: and He will teach us His way, and we will walk in
it.” <span id="fr_1570"></span>[1571](#fn_1570) “And have come together
in one.” In what one, but that “corner-stone”? <span
id="fr_1571"></span>[1572](#fn_1571) “They saw it, and so they
marvelled” ([Psa. 48.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p25.2"></span>). After their marvelling at the miracles
and glory of Christ, what followed? “They were troubled, they were
moved” ([Psa. 48.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p25.3"></span>), “trembling took hold upon them.” Whence
took trembling hold upon them, but from the consciousness of sins? Let
them run then, king after a king; kings, let them acknowledge the King.
Therefore saith He elsewhere, “Yet have I been set by Him a King upon
His holy hill of Sion.” <span id="fr_1572"></span>[1573](#fn_1572) …A
King then was heard of, set up in Sion, to Him were delivered
possessions even to the uttermost parts of the earth. Kings behoved to
fear lest they should lose the kingdom, lest the kingdom be taken from
them. As wretched Herod feared, and for the Child slew the
children. <span id="fr_1573"></span>[1574](#fn_1573) But fearing to lose
his kingdom, he deserved not to know the King. Would that he too had
adored the King with the Magi: not by ill-seeking the kingdom, slain the
Innocents, and perished guilty. For as concerning him, he destroyed the
Innocents: but as for Christ, even a Child, the children dying for Him
did He crown. Therefore behoved kings to fear when it was said, “Yet
have I been set a King by Him upon His holy hill of Sion,” and
inheritance to the uttermost parts of the earth shall He give Him, who
set Him up King.…Thence also this is said to them, “Understand now
therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice unto Him with trembling.” <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[1575](#fn_1574) And what did they? “There pains as
of a woman in travail.” What are the pains “as of a woman in travail,”
but the pangs of a penitent? See the same conception of pain and
travail: “Of Thy fear” (saith Isaiah) “we have conceived, we have
travailed of the Spirit of salvation.” <span
id="fr_1575"></span>[1576](#fn_1575) So then the kings conceived from
the fear of Christ, that by travailing they brought forth salvation by
believing on Him whom they had feared. “There pains as of a woman in
travail:” when of travail thou hearest, expect a birth. The old man
travaileth, but the new man is born.

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p30"></span><span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="ii.XLVIII-Page_166"></span>6. “With a strong wind Thou shalt break
the ships of Tarshish” ([Psa.
48.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p30.1"></span>). Briefly understood, this is, Thou shalt
overthrow the pride of the nations. But where in this history is
mentioned the overthrowing of the pride of the nations? Because of “the
ships of Tarshish.” Learned men have enquired for Tarshish a city, that
is, what city was signified by this name: and to some it has seemed that
Cilicia is called Tarshish, because its metropolis is called Tarsus. Of
which city was the Apostle Paul, being born in Tarsus of Cilicia. <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[1577](#fn_1576) But some have understood by it
Carthage, being haply sometimes so named, or in some language so
signified. For in the Prophet Isaiah it is thus found: “Howl, ye ships
of Carthage.” <span id="fr_1577"></span>[1578](#fn_1577) But in
Ezekiel <span id="fr_1578"></span>[1579](#fn_1578) by some interpreters
the word is translated Carthage, by some Tarshish: and from this
diversity it can be understood that the same which was called Carthage,
is called Tharsus. But it is manifest, that in the beginning of its
reign Carthage flourished with ships, and so flourished, that among
other nations they excelled in trafficking and navigation. For when
Dido, flying from her brother, escaped to the parts of Africa, where she
built Carthage, the ships which had been prepared for commerce in his
country she had taken with her for her flight, the princes of the
country consenting to it; and the same ships also when Carthage was
built failed not in traffic. And hence that city became too proud, so
that justly by its ships may be understood the pride of the nations,
presuming on things uncertain, as on the breath of the winds. Now let
none presume on full sails, and on the seeming fair state of this life,
as of the sea. Be our foundation in Sion: there ought we to be
stablished, not to be “carried about with every wind of doctrine.” <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[1580](#fn_1579) Whoso then by the uncertain things
of this life had been puffed up, let them be overthrown, and be all the
pride of the nations subjected to Christ, who shall “with a strong wind
break all the ships of Tarshish:” not of any city, but of “Tarshish.”
How “with a strong wind”? With very strong fear. For so all pride feared
Him that shall judge, as on Him humble to believe, lest Him exalted it
should fear.

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p35"></span>7. “As we have heard, so have we seen”
([Psa. 48.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p35.1"></span>). Blessed Church! at one time thou hast
heard, at another time thou hast seen. She heard in promises, seeth in
performance: heard in Prophecy, seeth in the Gospel. For all things
which are now fulfilled were before prophesied. Lift up thine eyes then,
and stretch them over the world; see now His “inheritance even to the
uttermost parts of the earth:”  <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580) see now is fulfilled what was said,
“All kings shall fall down before Him: all nations shall serve
Him:” <span id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) see fulfilled what was
said, “Be Thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and Thy glory above
all the earth.” <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1583](#fn_1582) See Him whose
feet and hands were pierced with nails, whose bones hanging on the tree
were counted, upon whose vesture lots were cast: <span
id="fr_1583"></span>[1584](#fn_1583) see reigning whom they saw hanging;
see sitting in Heaven <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1585](#fn_1584) whom
they despised walking on earth: see thus fulfilled, “All the ends of the
earth shall remember, and turn to the Lord, and all the kindreds of the
nations shall worship before Him.” Seeing all this, exclaim with joy,
“As we have heard, so have we seen.” Justly the Church herself is so
called out of the Gentiles.…They to whom the Prophets were not sent,
first heard and understood the Prophets: they who first heard not,
afterwards hearing marvelled. They remained behind to whom they were
sent, carrying the books, understanding not the truth: having the tables
of the Testament, and not holding the inheritance. But we,…“As we have
heard, so have we seen.” And where hearest thou? where seest thou? “In
the city of the Lord of Hosts, in the city of our God. God hath founded
it for ever.” Let not heretics insult, divided into parties, let them
not exalt themselves who say, “Lo, here is Christ, or lo, there.”  <span
id="fr_1585"></span>[1586](#fn_1585) Whoso saith, “Lo, here is Christ,
or lo, there,” inviteth to parties. Unity God promised. The kings are
gathered together in one, not dissipated through schisms. But haply that
city which hath held the world, shall sometime be overthrown? Far be the
thought! “God hath founded it for ever.” If then God hath founded it for
ever, why fearest thou lest the firmament should fall?

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p42"></span>8. “We have received Thy mercy, O God,
in the midst of Thy people” ([Psa.
48.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p42.1"></span>). Who have received, and where received?
Hath not the same Thy people received Thy mercy. If Thy people hath
received Thy mercy, how then, “in the midst of Thy people”? As if they
who received were one party, they in the midst of whom they received
another. A great mystery, but yet well known. When hence also, that is,
out of these verses, hath been extracted and brought forth what ye know;
it will be not ruder, but sweeter. Now forsooth all are reckoned the
people of God, who carry His Sacraments, but not all belong to His
Mercy. All forsooth receiving the Sacrament of the Baptism of Christ,
are called Christians, but not all live worthily of that Sacrament.
There are some of whom saith the Apostle, “Having a form of godliness,
but denying the power thereof.” <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[1587](#fn_1586) Yet on account of <span
id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span id="ii.XLVIII-Page_167"></span>this
form of godliness they are named among God’s people. As to the floor,
until the corn is threshed, belongs not the wheat only, but the chaff.
But will it also belong to the garner? In the midst then of an evil
people is a good people, which hath received the Mercy of God. He liveth
worthily of the Mercy of God who heareth, and holdeth, and doeth what
the Apostle saith, “We beseech you that ye receive not the Grace of God
in vain.” <span id="fr_1587"></span>[1588](#fn_1587) Whoso then
receiveth not the Grace of God in vain, the same receiveth not only the
Sacrament, but also the Mercy of God as well.…So those who have the
Sacraments, and have not good manners, are both said to be of God, and
not of God; are both said to be His, and to be strangers: His because of
His own Sacraments, strangers because of their own vice. So also strange
daughters: <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1589](#fn_1588) daughters, because
of the form of godliness; strange, because of their loss of virtue. Be
the lily there; let it receive the Mercy of God: hold fast the root of a
good flower, be not ungrateful for soft rain coming from heaven. Be
thorns ungrateful, let them grow by the showers: for the fire they grow,
not for the garner. In the midst of Thy people not receiving Thy mercy,
we have received Thy mercy. For “He came unto His own, and His own
received Him not,” yet, in the midst of them, “as many as received Him,
to them gave He power to become the sons of God.” <span
id="fr_1589"></span>[1590](#fn_1589) …

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p47"></span>9. For when he had said, “We have
received Thy mercy in the midst of Thy people,” he signified that there
is a people not receiving the mercy of God, in the midst of whom some do
receive the mercy of God: and then lest it should occur to men that
there are so few, as to be nearly none, how did He console them in the
words following? “According to Thy Name, O God, so is Thy praise unto
the ends of the earth” ([Psa.
48.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p47.1"></span>). What is this? …That is, as Thou art known
through all the earth, so Thou art also praised through all the earth,
nor are there wanting who now praise Thee through all the earth. But
they praise Thee who live well. For, “According to Thy Name, O God, so
is Thy praise,” not in a part, but “unto the ends of the earth.” “Thy
right hand is full of righteousness.” That is, many are they also who
shall stand at Thy right hand. Not only shall they be many who shall
stand at Thy left hand, but there also shall be a full heap set at Thy
right hand.

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p48"></span>10. “Let mount Zion rejoice, and the
daughters of Judah be glad, because of Thy judgments, O Lord” ([Psa.
48.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p48.1"></span>). O mount Zion, O daughters of Judah, ye
labour now among tares, among chaff, among thorns ye labour: yet be glad
because of God’s judgments. God erreth not in judgment. Live ye
separate, though separate ye were not born; not vainly hath a voice gone
forth from your mouth and heart, “Destroy not my soul with sinners, nor
my life with bloody men.” <span id="fr_1590"></span>[1591](#fn_1590) He
shall winnow with such art, carrying in His hand a fan, that not one
grain of wheat shall fall into the heap of chaff prepared to be burned,
nor one beard of chaff pass to the heap to be laid up in the
garner. <span id="fr_1591"></span>[1592](#fn_1591) Be glad, O ye
daughters of Judæa, because of the judgments of God that erreth not, and
do not yet judge rashly. To you let it belong to collect, to Him let it
belong to separate. But think not that the “daughters of Judah” are
Jews. Judah is confession; all the sons of confession are all the sons
of Judah. For “salvation is of the Jews,” <span
id="fr_1592"></span>[1593](#fn_1592) is nothing else than that Christ is
of the Jews. This saith also the Apostle, “He is not a Jew which is one
outwardly; neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh:
but he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men,
but of God.” <span id="fr_1593"></span>[1594](#fn_1593) Be such a Jew;
glory in the circumcision of the heart, though thou hast not the
circumcision of the flesh. Let the daughters of Judah be glad, because
of Thy judgments, O Lord.

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p53"></span>11. “Walk about Zion, and embrace her”
([Psa. 48.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p53.1"></span>). Be it said to them who live ill, in the
midst of whom is the people, which hath received the mercy of God. In
the midst of you is a people living well, “Walk about Zion.” But how?
“embrace her.” Not with scandals, but with love go round about her: that
so those who live well in the midst of you ye may imitate, and by
imitation of them, be incorporate with Christ, whose members they are.
“Walk about Zion, go round about her: speak in the towers thereof.” In
the height of her bulwarks, set forth the praises thereof.

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p54"></span>12. “Set your hearts upon her might”
([Psa. 48.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p54.1"></span>). Not that ye may have the form of
godliness, deny the power thereof, <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594) but, “upon her might set your
hearts. Speak ye in her towers.” What is the might of this city? Whoso
would understand the might of this city, let him understand the force of
love. That is a virtue which none conquereth. Love’s flame no waves of
the world, no streams of temptation, extinguish. Of this it is said,
“Love is strong as death.” <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595)
For as when death cometh, it cannot be resisted; by whatever arts,
whatever medicines, you meet it; the violence of death can none avoid
who is born mortal; so against the violence of love can the world do
nothing. For from the contrary the similitude is made of <span
id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span id="ii.XLVIII-Page_168"></span>death;
for as death is most violent to take away, so love is most violent to
save. Through love many have died to the world, to live to God; by this
love inflamed, the martyrs, not pretenders, not puffed up by vain-glory,
not such as they of whom it is written, “Though I give my body to be
burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing,” <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596) but men whom truly a love of Christ
and of the truth led on to this passion; what to them were the
temptations of the tormentors? Greater violence had the eyes of their
weeping friends, than the persecutions of enemies. For how many were
held by their children, that they might not suffer? to how many did
their wives fall upon their knees, that they might not be left widows?
How many have their parents forbidden to die; as we know and read in the
Passion of the Blessed Perpetua! <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597) All this was done; but tears,
however great, and with whatever force flowing, when did they extinguish
the ardour of love? This is the might of Sion, to whom elsewhere it is
said, “Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy
palaces.” <span id="fr_1598"></span>[1599](#fn_1598)

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p60"></span>13. What here understand we, “Set your
hearts upon her might, and distribute her houses”? That is, distinguish
house from house. Do not confound. For there is a house having the form
of godliness, and not having godliness; but there is a house having both
form and godliness. Distribute, confound not. But then ye distribute and
confound not, when ye “set your hearts upon her might;” that is, when
through love ye are made spiritual. Then ye will not judge rashly, then
ye will see that the evil harms not the good as long as we are in this
floor. “Distribute her houses.” There can be also another understanding.
The two houses, one coming of the circumcision, one of the
uncircumcision, it is commanded the Apostles to distribute. For when
Saul was called, and made the Apostle Paul, agreeing in unity with his
fellow Apostles, he so with thorn determined, that they should go to the
circumcision, he to the uncircumcision. By that dispensation of their
Apostleship, they distributed the houses of the city of the great King;
and meeting in the corner, divided the Gospel in dispensation, in love
united it. And truly this is rather to be understood; for it followeth
and showeth that it is here said to the preachers, “distribute her
houses: that ye may tell it to the generation following:” that is, that
even to us, who were to come after them, their dispensation of the
Gospel should reach: For not for those only they laboured, with whom
they lived in the earth; nor the Lord for those Apostles only to whom He
deigned to show Himself alive after His Resurrection, but for us also.
For to them He spake, and signified us when He spake, “Lo, I am with you
alway, even to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[1600](#fn_1599) Were they then to be here alway,
even to the end of the world? Also He said, “Neither pray I for these
alone, but for them also which shall believe on Me through their
word.” <span id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600) Therefore He
considereth us, because He suffered on account of us. Justly then it is
said, “That ye may tell it to the generation following.”

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p63"></span>14. Tell what? “For this is God, even
our God” ([Psa. 48.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013)<span
id="ii.XLVIII-p63.1"></span>). The earth was seen, the earth’s Creator
was not seen; the flesh was held, God in the flesh was not acknowledged.
For the flesh was held by those from whom had been taken the same flesh,
for of the seed of Abraham was the Virgin Mary. At the flesh they
stayed, the Divinity they did not understand. O Apostles, O mighty city,
preach thou on the towers, and say, “This is God, even our God.” So,
even so as He was despised, as He lay a stone before the feet of the
stumbling, that He might humble the hearts of the confessing; even so,
“This is God, even our God.” Certainly He was seen, as was said,
“Afterward did He show Himself upon earth, and conversed with
men.” <span id="fr_1601"></span>[1602](#fn_1601) “This is God, even our
God.” He is also Man, and who is there will know Him? “This is God, even
our God.” But haply for a time as the false gods. For because they can
be called gods, but cannot be so, for a time they are even called so.
For what saith the Prophet, or what warneth He to be said to them? This
shall ye say to them, “The gods that have not made the heavens and the
earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from those that are
under the heavens.”  <span id="fr_1602"></span>[1603](#fn_1602) He is
not such a god: for our God is above all gods. Above all what gods? “For
all the gods of the nations are idols, but the Lord made the
heavens.” <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603) The same then is
our God. “This is God, even our God.” For how long? “For ever and ever:
He shall rule us for ever.” If He is our God, He is also our King. He
protecteth us, being our God, lest we die; He ruleth us, being our King,
lest we fall. But by ruling us He doth not break us; for whom He ruleth
not, He breaketh. “Thou shalt rule them,” saith He, “with a rod of iron,
and dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.”  <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) But there are whom He ruleth not;
these He spareth not, as a potter’s vessel dashing them in pieces. By
Him then let us wish to be ruled and delivered, “for He is our God for
ever and ever, and He shall rule us for ever.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[164:1554](1080055.htm#fr_1553) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p2"></span> Lat. XLVII.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[164:1555](1080055.htm#fr_1554) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p4"></span> [Gen. i.
6-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[164:1556](1080055.htm#fr_1555) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p5"></span> [Rom. xv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[164:1557](1080055.htm#fr_1556) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p6"></span> E.V. “ground.”

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[164:1558](1080055.htm#fr_1557) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p7"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[164:1559](1080055.htm#fr_1558) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p9"></span> [Matt.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1559"></span>[164:1560](1080055.htm#fr_1559) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p10"></span> [Rom. ix.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1560"></span>[164:1561](1080055.htm#fr_1560) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p11"></span> [Matt. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[164:1562](1080055.htm#fr_1561) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p12"></span> [Dan. ii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[165:1563](1080055.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p14"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1563"></span>[165:1564](1080055.htm#fr_1563) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p15"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#022)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[165:1565](1080055.htm#fr_1564) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p16"></span> [Isa.
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1565"></span>[165:1566](1080055.htm#fr_1565) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p17"></span> [Matt. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[165:1567](1080055.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p18"></span> [Job xxxvii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#022)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[165:1568](1080055.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p20"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[165:1569](1080055.htm#fr_1568) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p21"></span> [1 Cor. i.
31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[165:1570](1080055.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p22"></span> [1 Cor. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[165:1571](1080055.htm#fr_1570) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p24"></span> [Isa. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[165:1572](1080055.htm#fr_1571) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p25"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[165:1573](1080055.htm#fr_1572) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p25.4"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p26"></span> [Ps. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[165:1574](1080055.htm#fr_1573) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p27"></span> [Matt. ii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[165:1575](1080055.htm#fr_1574) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p28"></span> [Ps.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[165:1576](1080055.htm#fr_1575) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p29"></span> [Isa.
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#018)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[166:1577](1080055.htm#fr_1576) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p31"></span> [Acts xxi.
39](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#039)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[166:1578](1080055.htm#fr_1577) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p32"></span> So LXX.; Heb. *Tarshish*. [Isa. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[166:1579](1080055.htm#fr_1578) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p33"></span> [Ezek. xxxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p33.1"></span>.
\[Note the author’s interest in all that bears upon his own field of
labour.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[166:1580](1080055.htm#fr_1579) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p34"></span> [Eph. iv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[166:1581](1080055.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p36"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[166:1582](1080055.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p37"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[166:1583](1080055.htm#fr_1582) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p38"></span> [Ps. cviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[166:1584](1080055.htm#fr_1583) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p39"></span> [Matt. xxvii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[166:1585](1080055.htm#fr_1584) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p40"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[166:1586](1080055.htm#fr_1585) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p41"></span> [Matt. xxiv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[166:1587](1080055.htm#fr_1586) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p43"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[167:1588](1080055.htm#fr_1587) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p44"></span> [2 Cor. vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#001)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[167:1589](1080055.htm#fr_1588) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p45"></span> [Song of Sol.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[167:1590](1080055.htm#fr_1589) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p46"></span> [John
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[167:1591](1080055.htm#fr_1590) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p49"></span> [Ps. xxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[167:1592](1080055.htm#fr_1591) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p50"></span> [Matt. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[167:1593](1080055.htm#fr_1592) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p51"></span> [John iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[167:1594](1080055.htm#fr_1593) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p52"></span> [Rom.
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[167:1595](1080055.htm#fr_1594) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p55"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[167:1596](1080055.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p56"></span> [Song of Sol.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[168:1597](1080055.htm#fr_1596) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p56.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p57"></span> [1 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[168:1598](1080055.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p58"></span> *Ruinart. Acta Martyrum*, p. 86, which
supports the reading adopted from the Oxford <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.XLVIII-p58.1"></span>mss</span>. Ben. has, “How many parents did
their sons forbid.” \[See A.N.F. vol. iii., p. 700.—C.\]

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[168:1599](1080055.htm#fr_1598) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p59"></span> [Ps. cxxii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[168:1600](1080055.htm#fr_1599) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p60.1"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p61"></span> [Matt. xxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[168:1601](1080055.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p62"></span> [John xvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#020)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[168:1602](1080055.htm#fr_1601) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p64"></span> [Baruch iii.
37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[168:1603](1080055.htm#fr_1602) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p65"></span> [Jer. x.
11](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#011)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[168:1604](1080055.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p66"></span> [Ps. xcvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[168:1605](1080055.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="ii.XLVIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.XLVIII-p67"></span> [Ps. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009)<span id="ii.XLVIII-p67.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm XLIX](1080056)
