[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080152)  [Next](1080154) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.CXX"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.CXX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.CXX-p1.2"></span>Psalm CXX. <span
id="fr_5392"></span>[5393](#fn_5392) </span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p3"></span>1. The Psalm which we have just heard
chanted, and have responded to with our voices, is short, and very
profitable. Ye will not long toil in hearing, nor will ye toil
fruitlessly in working. For it is, according to the title prefixed to
it, “A song of degrees.” <span id="fr_5393"></span>[5394](#fn_5393)
Degrees are either of ascent or of descent. But degrees, as they are
used in this Psalm, are of ascending…There are therefore both those who
ascend and those who descend on that ladder. <span
id="fr_5394"></span>[5395](#fn_5394) Who are they that ascend? They who
progress towards the understanding of things spiritual. Who are they
that descend? They who, although, as far as men may, they enjoy the
comprehension of things spiritual: nevertheless, descend unto the
infants, to say to them such things as they can receive, so that, after
being nourished with milk, they may become fitted and strong enough to
take spiritual meat…

<span id="ii.CXX-p6"></span>2. When therefore a man hath commenced thus
to order his ascent; to speak more plainly, when a Christian hath begun
to think of spiritual amendment, he beginneth to suffer the tongues of
adversaries. Whoever hath not yet suffered from them, hath not yet made
progress; whoever suffereth them not, doth not even endeavour to
improve. Doth he wish to know what we mean? Let him at the same time
experience what is reported of us. Let him begin to improve, let him
begin to wish to ascend, to wish to despise earthly, fragile, temporal
objects, to hold worldly happiness for nothing, to think of God alone,
not to rejoice in gain, not to pine at losses, to wish even to sell all
his substance, and distribute it among the poor, and to follow Christ;
let us see how he suffereth the tongues of detractors and of constant
opponents, and—a still greater peril—of pretended counsellors, who lead
him astray from salvation…He then, who will ascend, first of all prayeth
God against these very tongues: for he saith, “When I was in trouble, I
called on the Lord; and He heard me” ([Psa.
120.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001)<span id="ii.CXX-p6.1"></span>).
Why did He hear him? That He might now place him at the steps of ascent.

<span id="ii.CXX-p7"></span>3. “Deliver my soul, O Lord, from
unrighteous lips, and from a deceitful tongue” ([Psa.
120.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXX-p7.1"></span>).
What is a deceitful tongue? A treacherous tongue, one that hath the
semblance of counsel, and the bane of real mischief. Such are those who
say, And wilt thou do this, that nobody doth? Wilt thou be the only
Christian?…Some deter by dissuasion, others discourage yet more by their
praise. For since such is the life that hath for some time been diffused
over the world, so great is the authority of Christ, that not even a
pagan ventureth to blame Christ. <span
id="fr_5395"></span>[5396](#fn_5395) He who cannot be censured is read.
They cannot contradict Christ, they cannot contradict the Gospel, Christ
cannot be censured; the deceitful tongue turneth itself to praise as an
hindrance. If thou praisest, exhort. Why dost thou discourage with thy
praise?…Thou turnest thyself to another mode of dissuasion, that by
false praise thou mayest turn me away from true praise; <span
id="fr_5396"></span>[5397](#fn_5396) nay, that by praising Christ thou
mayest keep me away from Christ, saying, What is this? Behold these men
have done this: thou, perhaps, wilt not be able: thou beginnest to
ascend, thou fallest. It seemeth to warn thee: it is the serpent, it is
the deceitful tongue, it hath poison. Pray against it, if thou wishest
to ascend.

<span id="ii.CXX-p10"></span>4. And thy Lord saith unto thee, “What
shall be given thee, or what shall be set before thee, against the
deceitful tongue?” ([Psa. 120.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003)<span
id="ii.CXX-p10.1"></span>). What shall be given thee, that is, as a
weapon to oppose to the deceitful tongue, to guard thyself against the
deceitful tongue? “Or what shall be set before thee?” He asketh to try
thee: for He will answer His own question. For He answers following up
his own inquiry, “even sharp arrows of the Mighty One, with coals that
desolate, or that lay waste” ([Psa.
120.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004)<span id="ii.CXX-p10.2"></span>).
They that desolate, or that lay waste (for it is variously written in
different copies), are the same, because by laying waste, as ye may
observe, they easily lead unto desolation. What are these coals? First,
beloved brethren, understand what are arrows. The “sharp arrows of the
Mighty One,” are the words of God…What then are the “coals that lay
waste?” It is not enough to plead with words against a deceitful tongue
and unrighteous lips: it is not enough to plead with words; we must
plead with examples also…The word coals, then, is used to express the
examples of many sinners converted to the Lord. Thou <span
id="page_590">p. 590</span> <span id="ii.CXX-Page_590"></span>hearest
men wonder, and say, I knew that man, how addicted he was to drinking,
what a villain, what a lover of the circus, or of the amphitheatre, what
a cheat: now how he serveth God, how innocent he hath become! Wonder
not; he is a live coal. Thou rejoicest that he is alive, whom thou wast
mourning as dead. But when thou praisest the living, if thou knowest how
to praise, apply him to the dead, that he may be inflamed; whosoever is
still slow to follow God, apply to him the coal which was extinguished,
and have the arrow of God’s word, and the coal that layeth waste, that
thou mayest meet the deceitful tongue and the lying lips.

<span id="ii.CXX-p11"></span>5. “Alas, that my sojourning is become far
off!” ([Psa. 120.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005)<span
id="ii.CXX-p11.1"></span>). It hath departed far from Thee: my
pilgrimage hath become a far one. I have not yet reached that country,
where I shall live with no wicked person; I have not yet reached that
company of Angels, where I shall not fear offences. But why am I not as
yet there? Because sojourning is pilgrimage. He is called a sojourner
who dwells in a foreign land, not in his own country. And when is it far
off? Sometimes, my brethren, when a man goeth abroad, he liveth among
better persons, than he would perhaps live with in his own country: but
it is not thus, when we go afar from that heavenly Jerusalem. For a man
changeth his country, and this foreign sojourn is sometimes good for
him; in travelling he findeth faithful friends, whom he could not find
in his own country. He had enemies, so that he was driven from his
country; and when he travelled, he found what he had not in his country.
Such is not that country Jerusalem, where all are good: whoever
travelleth away from thence, is among the evil; nor can he depart from
the wicked, save when he shall return to the company of Angels, so as to
be where he was before he travelled. There all are righteous and holy,
who enjoy the word of God without reading, without letters: for what is
written to us through pages, <span id="fr_5397"></span>[5398](#fn_5397)
they perceive there through the Face of God. What a country! A great
country indeed, and wretched are the wanderers from that country.

<span id="ii.CXX-p13"></span>6. But what he saith, “My pilgrimage hath
been made distant,” are the words of those, that is, of the Church
herself, who toileth on this earth. It is her voice, which crieth out
from the ends of the earth in another Psalm, saying, “From the ends of
the earth have I cried unto Thee. <span
id="fr_5398"></span>[5399](#fn_5398) …Where then doth he groan, and
among whom doth he dwell? “I have had my habitation among the tents of
Kedar.” Since this is a Hebrew word, beyond doubt ye have not understood
it. What meaneth, “I have had my habitation among the tents of Kedar”?
“Kedar,” as far as we remember of the interpretation of Hebrew words,
signifieth darkness. “Kedar” rendered into Latin is called *tenebræ*.
Now ye know that Abraham had two sons, whom indeed the Apostle
mentioneth,  <span id="fr_5399"></span>[5400](#fn_5399) and declareth
them to have been types of the two covenants…Ishmael therefore was in
darkness, Isaac in light. Whoever here also seek earthly felicity in the
Church, from God, shall belong to Ishmael. These are the very persons
who gainsay the spiritual ones who are progressing, and detract from
them, and have deceitful tongues and unrighteous lips. Against these the
Psalmist, when ascending, prayed, and hot coals that lay waste, and
swift and sharp arrows of the Mighty One, were given him for his
defence. For among these he still liveth, until the whole floor be
winnowed: he therefore said, “I have dwelt among the tents of Kedar.”
The tents of Ishmael are called those of Kedar. Thus the book of Genesis
hath it: thus it hath, that Kedar belongeth unto Ishmael. <span
id="fr_5400"></span>[5401](#fn_5400) Isaac therefore is with Ishmael:
that is, they who belong unto Isaac, live among those who belong unto
Ishmael. <span id="fr_5401"></span>[5402](#fn_5401) These wish to rise
above, those wish to press them downwards: these wish to fly unto God,
those endeavour to pluck their wings…

<span id="ii.CXX-p18"></span>7. “My soul hath wandered much” ([Psa.
120.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006)<span id="ii.CXX-p18.1"></span>).
Lest thou shouldest understand bodily wandering, he hath said that the
soul wandered. The body wandereth in places, the soul wandereth in its
affections. If thou love the earth, thou wanderest from God: if thou
lovest God, thou risest unto God. Let us be exercised in the love of
God, and of our neighbour, that we may return unto charity. If we fall
towards the earth, we wither and decay. But one descended unto this one
who had fallen, in order that he might arise. Speaking of the time of
his wandering, he said that he wandered in the tents of Kedar.
Wherefore? Because “my soul hath wandered much.” He wandereth there
where he ascendeth. He wandereth not in the body, he riseth not in the
body. But wherein doth he ascend? “The ascent,” he saith, “is in the
heart.” <span id="fr_5402"></span>[5403](#fn_5402)

<span id="ii.CXX-p20"></span>8. “With them that hated peace, I was
peaceful” ([Psa. 120.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007)<span
id="ii.CXX-p20.1"></span>). But howsoever ye may hear, most beloved
brethren, ye will not be able to prove how truly ye sing, unless ye have
begun to do that which ye sing. How much soever I say this, in
whatsoever ways I may expound it, in whatsoever words I may turn it, it
entereth not into the heart of him in whom its operation is not. Begin
to act, and see what we speak. Then tears flow forth at each word, then
the Psalm is sung, and the heart doeth what is sung in the Psalm…<span
id="page_591">p. 591</span> <span id="ii.CXX-Page_591"></span>Who are
they who hate peace? They who tear asunder unity. For had they not hated
peace, they would have abode in unity. But they separated themselves,
forsooth on this account, that they might be righteous, that they might
not have the ungodly mixed with them. These words are either ours or
theirs: decide whose. The Catholic Church saith, Unity must not be lost,
the Church of God must not be cut off. <span
id="fr_5403"></span>[5404](#fn_5403) God will judge afterwards of the
wicked and the good…This we also say: Love ye peace, love ye Christ. For
if they love peace, they love Christ. When therefore we say, Love ye
peace, we say this, Love ye Christ. Wherefore? For the Apostle saith of
Christ, “He is our peace, who hath made both one.” <span
id="fr_5404"></span>[5405](#fn_5404) If Christ is therefore peace,
because He hath made both one: why have ye made two of one? How then are
ye peace-makers, if, when Christ maketh one of two, ye make two of one?
But since we say these things, we are peace-makers with them that hate
peace; and yet they who hate peace, when we spake to them, made war on
us for nought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5392"></span>[589:5393](1080153.htm#fr_5392) <span
id="ii.CXX-p1.3"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p2"></span> Lat. CXIX.

<span id="fn_5393"></span>[589:5394](1080153.htm#fr_5393) <span
id="ii.CXX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p4"></span> In Greek it is written ‡<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.CXX-p4.1"></span>ναβαθμῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_5394"></span>[589:5395](1080153.htm#fr_5394) <span
id="ii.CXX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p5"></span> [Gen. xxviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012)<span id="ii.CXX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5395"></span>[589:5396](1080153.htm#fr_5395) <span
id="ii.CXX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p8"></span> \[Noteworthy.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5396"></span>[589:5397](1080153.htm#fr_5396) <span
id="ii.CXX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p9"></span> \[The stratagem of those who glorify Jesus
as a man, to deny His true character as Christ.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5397"></span>[590:5398](1080153.htm#fr_5397) <span
id="ii.CXX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p12"></span> \[See p. 512, note 4, *supra*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5398"></span>[590:5399](1080153.htm#fr_5398) <span
id="ii.CXX-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p14"></span> [Ps. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span id="ii.CXX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5399"></span>[590:5400](1080153.htm#fr_5399) <span
id="ii.CXX-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p15"></span> [Gal. iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#022)<span id="ii.CXX-p15.1"></span>,
etc.

<span id="fn_5400"></span>[590:5401](1080153.htm#fr_5400) <span
id="ii.CXX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p16"></span> [Gen. xxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)<span id="ii.CXX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5401"></span>[590:5402](1080153.htm#fr_5401) <span
id="ii.CXX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p17"></span> [Gal. iv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)<span id="ii.CXX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5402"></span>[590:5403](1080153.htm#fr_5402) <span
id="ii.CXX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p19"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005)<span id="ii.CXX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5403"></span>[591:5404](1080153.htm#fr_5403) <span
id="ii.CXX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p21"></span> \[Unity on Nicene Constitutions, not those
of the Decretals. Augustin himself, to maintain unity, refused communion
with the See of Rome, and died in that position.—C.\]

<span id="fn_5404"></span>[591:5405](1080153.htm#fr_5404) <span
id="ii.CXX-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.CXX-p22"></span> [Eph. ii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="ii.CXX-p22.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm CXXI](1080154)
