[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1080012)  [Next](1080014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.IX"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p1"></span> <span id="ii.IX-p1.1"></span><span
class="c20"><span id="ii.IX-p1.2"></span>Psalm IX.</span>

<span id="ii.IX-p2"></span>1. The inscription of this Psalm is, “To the
end for the hidden things of the Son, a Psalm of David himself.” <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) As to the hidden things of the Son
there may be a question: but since he has not added whose, the very
only-begotten Son of God should be understood. For where a Psalm has
been inscribed of the son of David, <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) “When,” he says, “he fled from the
face of Absalom his son;” although his name even was mentioned, and
therefore there could be no obscurity as to whom it was spoken of: yet
it is not merely said, from the face of son Absalom; but “his” is added.
But here both because “his” is not added, and much is said of the
Gentiles, it cannot properly be taken of Absalom. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327) For the war which that abandoned one
waged with his father, no way relates to the Gentiles, since there the
people of Israel only were divided against themselves. This Psalm is
then sung for the hidden things of the only-begotten Son of God. <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328) For the Lord Himself too, when,
without addition, He uses the word Son, would have Himself, the
Only-begotten to be understood; as where He says, “If the Son shall make
you free, then shall ye be free indeed.” <span
id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329) For He said not, the Son of God; but
in saying merely, Son, He gives us to understand whose Son it is. Which
form of expression nothing admits of, save His excellency of whom we so
speak, that, though we name Him not, He can be understood. For so we
say, it rains, clears up, thunders, and such like expressions; and we do
not add who does it all; for that the excellency of the doer
spontaneously presents itself to all men’s minds, and does not want
words. What then are the hidden things of the Son? By which expression
we must first understand that there are some things of the Son manifest,
from which those are distinguished which are called hidden. Wherefore
since we believe two advents of the Lord, one past, which the Jews
understood not: the other future, which we both hope for; and since the
one which the Jews understood not, profited the Gentiles; “For the
hidden things of the Son” is not unsuitably understood to be spoken of
this advent, in which “blindness in part is happened to Israel, that the
fulness of the Gentiles might come in.” <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330)

<span id="ii.IX-p9"></span>For notice of two judgments is conveyed to us
throughout the Scriptures, if any one will give heed to them, one
hidden, the other manifest. The hidden one is passing now, of which the
Apostle Peter says, “The time is come that judgment should begin from
the house of the Lord.” <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331) The
hidden judgment accordingly is the pain, by which now each man is either
exercised to purification, or warned to conversion, or if he despise the
calling and discipline <span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="ii.IX-Page_33"></span>of God, is blinded unto damnation. But the
manifest judgment is that in which the Lord, at His coming, will judge
the quick and the dead, all men confessing that it is He by whom both
rewards shall be assigned to the good, and punishments to the evil. But
then that confession will avail, not to the remedy of evils, but to the
accumulation of damnation. Of these two judgments, the one hidden, the
other manifest, the Lord seems to me to have spoken, where He says,
“Whoso believeth on Me hath passed from death unto life, and shall not
come into judgment;” <span id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) into the
manifest judgment, that is. For that which passes from death unto life
by means of some affliction, whereby “He scourgeth every son whom He
receiveth,” <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) is the hidden
judgment. “But whoso believeth not,” saith He, “hath been judged
already:” <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) that is, by this
hidden judgment hath been already prepared for that manifest one. These
two judgments we read of also in Wisdom, whence it is written,
“Therefore unto them, as to children without the use of reason, Thou
didst give a judgment to mock them; But they that have not been
corrected by this judgment have felt a judgment worthy of God.” <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) Whoso then are not corrected by this
hidden judgment of God, shall most worthily be punished by that manifest
one.…

<span id="ii.IX-p15"></span>2. “I will confess unto Thee, O Lord, with
my whole heart” ([Psa. 9.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001)<span
id="ii.IX-p15.1"></span>). He doth not, with a whole heart, confess unto
God, who doubteth of His Providence in any particular: but he who sees
already the hidden things of the wisdom of God, how great is His
invisible reward, who saith, “We rejoice in tribulations;” <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) and how all torments, which are
inflicted on the body, are either for the exercising of those that are
converted to God, or for warning that they be converted, or for just
preparation of the obdurate unto their last damnation: and so now all
things are referred to the governance of Divine Providence, which fools
think done as it were by chance and at random, and without any Divine
ordering. “I will tell all Thy marvels.” He tells all God’s marvels, who
sees them performed not only openly on the body, but invisibly indeed
too in the soul, but far more sublimely and excellently. For men
earthly, and led wholly by the eye, marvel more that the dead Lazarus
rose again in the body, than that Paul the persecutor rose again in
soul. <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) But since the visible
miracle calleth the soul to the light, but the invisible enlighteneth
the soul that comes when called, he tells all God’s marvels, who, by
believing the visible, passes on to the understanding of the invisible.

<span id="ii.IX-p18"></span>3. “I will be glad and exult in Thee” ([Psa.
9.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#002)<span id="ii.IX-p18.1"></span>).
Not any more in this world, not in pleasure of bodily dalliance, not in
relish of palate and tongue, not in sweetness of perfumes, not in
joyousness of passing sounds, not in the variously coloured forms of
figure, not in vanities of men’s praise, not in wedlock and perishable
offspring, not in superfluity of temporal wealth, not in this world’s
getting, whether it extend over place and space, or be prolonged in
time’s succession: but, “I will be glad and exult in Thee,” namely, in
the hidden things of the Son, where “the light of Thy countenance hath
been stamped on us, O Lord:” <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)
for, “Thou wilt hide them,” saith he, “in the hiding place of Thy
countenance.” <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) He then will be
glad and exult in Thee, who tells all Thy marvels. And He will tell all
Thy marvels (since it is now spoken of prophetically), “who came not to
do His own will, but the will of Him who sent Him.” <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340)

<span id="ii.IX-p22"></span>4. For now the Person of the Lord begins to
appear speaking in this Psalm. For it follows, “I will sing to Thy Name,
O Most High, in turning mine enemy behind.” His enemy then, where was he
turned back? Was it when it was said to him, “Get thee behind,
Satan”? <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) For then he who by
tempting desired to put himself before, was turned behind, by failing in
deceiving Him who was tempted, and by availing nothing against Him. For
earthly men are behind: but the heavenly man is preferred before,
although he came after. For “the first man is of the earth, earthy: the
second Man is from heaven, heavenly.” <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) But from this stock he came by whom it
was said, “He who cometh after me is preferred before me.” <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) And the Apostle forgets “those things
that are behind, and reaches forth unto those things that are
before.” <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) The enemy, therefore,
was turned behind, after that he could not deceive the heavenly Man
being tempted; and he turned himself to earthy men, where he can have
dominion.…For in truth the devil is turned behind, even in the
persecution of the righteous, and he, much more to their advantage, is a
persecutor, than if he went before as a leader and a prince. We must
sing then to the Name of the Most High in turning the enemy behind:
since we ought to choose rather to fly from him as a persecutor, than to
follow him as a leader. For we have whither we may fly and hide
ourselves in the hidden things of the Son; seeing that “the Lord hath
been made a refuge for us.” <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)

<span id="ii.IX-p28"></span>5. “They will be weakened, and perish from
Thy face” ([Psa. 9.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#003)<span
id="ii.IX-p28.1"></span>). Who will be weakened and perish, but the
unrighteous and ungodly? “They will be weakened,” while they shall avail
<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="ii.IX-Page_34"></span>nothing;
“and they shall perish,” because the ungodly will not be; “from the
face” of God, that is, from the knowledge of God, as he perished who
said, “But now I live not, but Christ liveth in me.” <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) But why will the ungodly “be weakened
and perish from thy face?” “Because,” he saith, “Thou hast made my
judgment, and my cause:” that is, the judgment in which I seemed to be
judged, Thou hast made mine; and the cause in which men condemned me
just and innocent, Thou hast made mine. For such things served <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) Him for our deliverance: as sailors
too call the wind theirs, which they take advantage of for prosperous
sailing.

<span id="ii.IX-p31"></span>6. “Thou satest on the throne Who judgest
equity” ([Psa. 9.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004)<span
id="ii.IX-p31.1"></span>). Whether the Son say this to the Father, who
said also, “Thou couldest have no power against Me, except it were given
thee from above,” <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) referring this
very thing, that the Judge of men was judged for men’s advantage, to the
Father’s equity and His own hidden things: or whether man say to God,
“Thou satest on the throne Who judgest equity,” giving the name of God’s
throne to his soul, so that his body may peradventure be the earth,
which is called God’s “footstool:” <span
id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) for “God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto Himself:” <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) or
whether the soul of the Church, perfect now and without spot and
wrinkle, <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) worthy, that is, of the
hidden things of the Son, in that “the King hath brought her into His
chamber,” <span id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) say to her spouse,
“Thou satest upon the throne Who judgest equity,” in that Thou hast
risen from the dead, and ascended up into heaven, and sittest at the
right hand of the Father: whichsoever, I say, of those opinions,
whereunto this verse may be referred, is preferred, it transgresses not
the rule of faith.

<span id="ii.IX-p37"></span>7. “Thou hast rebuked the heathen, and the
ungodly hath perished” ([Psa. 9.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005)<span
id="ii.IX-p37.1"></span>). We take this to be more suitably said to the
Lord Jesus Christ, than said by Him. For who else hath rebuked the
heathen, and the ungodly perished, save He, who after that He ascended
up into heaven, sent the Holy Ghost, that, filled by Him, the Apostles
should preach the word of God with boldness, and freely reprove men’s
sins? At which rebuke the ungodly perished; because the ungodly was
justified and was made godly. “Thou hast effaced their name for the
world, <span id="fr_353"></span>[354](#fn_353) and for the world’s
world. The name of the ungodly hath been effaced. For they are not
called ungodly who believe in the true God. Now their name is effaced
“for the world,” that is, as long as the course of the temporal world
endures. “And for the world’s world.” What is “the world’s world,” but
that whose image and shadow, as it were, this world possesses? For the
change of seasons succeeding one another, whilst the moon is on the
wane, and again on the increase, whilst the sun each year returns to his
quarter, whilst spring, or summer, or autumn, or winter passes away only
to return, is in some sort an imitation of eternity. But this world’s
world is that which abides in immutable eternity. As a verse in the
mind, and a verse in the voice, the former is understood, the latter
heard; and the former fashions the latter; and hence the former works in
art and abides, the latter sounds in the air and passes away. So the
fashion of this changeable world is defined by that world unchangeable
which is called the world’s world. And hence the one abides in the art,
that is, in the Wisdom and Power of God: but the other is made to pass
in the governance of creation. If after all it be not a repetition, so
that after it was said “for the world,” lest it should be understood of
this world that passeth away, it were added “for the world’s world.” For
in the Greek copies it is thus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.IX-p38.1"></span>εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα</span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.IX-p38.2"></span>καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰῶνα τοῦ αἰῶνος</span> Which the
Latins have for the most rendered, not, “for the world, and for the
world’s world;” <span id="fr_354"></span>[355](#fn_354) but, “for ever,
and for the world’s world,” <span id="fr_355"></span>[356](#fn_355) that
in the words “for the world’s world,” the, words “for ever,” should be
explained. “The name,” then, “of the ungodly Thou hast effaced for
ever,” for from henceforth the ungodly shall never be. And if their name
be not prolonged unto this world, much less unto the world’s
world. <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356)

<span id="ii.IX-p42"></span>8. “The swords of the enemy have failed at
the end” ([Psa. 9.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006)<span
id="ii.IX-p42.1"></span>). Not enemies in the plural, but this enemy in
the singular. Now what enemy’s swords have failed but the devil’s? Now
these are understood to be divers erroneous opinions, whereby as with
swords he destroys souls. In overcoming these swords, and in bringing
them to failure, that sword is employed, of which it is said in the
seventh Psalm, “If ye be not converted, He will brandish His
sword.” <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) And peradventure this is
the end, against which the swords of the enemy fail; since up to it they
are of some avail. Now it worketh secretly, but in the last judgment it
will be brandished openly. By it the cities are destroyed. For so it
follows, “The swords of the enemy have failed at the end: and Thou hast
destroyed the cities.” Cities indeed wherein the devil rules, where
crafty and deceitful counsels hold, as it were, the place of a court, on
which supremacy attend as officers and ministers the services of all the
members, <span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span
id="ii.IX-Page_35"></span>the eyes for curiosity, the ears for
lasciviousness, or for whatsoever else is gladly listened to that bears
on evil, the hands for rapine or any other violence or pollution soever,
and all the other members after this manner serving the tyrannical
supremacy, that is, perverse counsels. Of this city the commonalty, as
it were, are all soft affections and disturbing emotions of the mind,
stirring up daily seditions in a man. So then where a king, where a
court, where ministers, where commonalty are found, there is a city. Now
again would such things be in bad cities, unless they were first in
individual men, who are, as it were, the elements and seeds of cities.
These cities He destroys, when on the prince being shut out thence, of
whom it was said, “The prince of this world” has been “cast out,” <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) these kingdoms are wasted by the word
of truth, evil counsels are laid to sleep, vile affections tamed, the
ministries of the members and senses taken captive, and transferred to
the service of righteousness and good works: that as the Apostle says,
“Sin should no more reign in” our “mortal body,” <span
id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359) and so forth. Then is the soul at
peace, and the man is disposed to receive rest and blessedness. “Their
memorial has perished with uproar:” with the uproar, that is, of the
ungodly. But it is said, “with uproar,” either because when ungodliness
is overturned, there is uproar made: for none passeth to the highest
place, where there is the deepest silence, but he who with much uproar
shall first have warred with his own vices: or “with uproar,” is said,
that the memory of the ungodly should perish in the perishing even of
the very uproar, in which ungodliness riots.

<span id="ii.IX-p46"></span>9. “And the Lord abideth for ever” ([Psa.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007)<span id="ii.IX-p46.1"></span>).
“Wherefore” then “have the heathen raged, and the people imagined vain
things against the Lord, and against His anointed:” <span
id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360) for “the Lord abideth for ever. He
hath prepared His seat in judgment, and He shall judge the world in
equity.” He prepared His seat when He was judged. For by that patience
Man purchased heaven, and God in Man profited believers. And this is the
Son’s hidden judgment. But seeing He is also to come openly and in the
sight of all to judge the quick and the dead, He hath prepared His seat
in the hidden judgment: and He shall also openly “judge the world in
equity:” that is, He shall distribute gifts proportioned to desert,
setting the sheep on His right hand, and the goats on His left. <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) “He shall judge the people with
justice”([Psa. 9.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)<span
id="ii.IX-p48.2"></span>). This is the same as was said above, “He shall
judge the world in equity.” Not as men judge who see not the heart, by
whom very often worse men are acquitted than are condemned: but “in
equity” and “with justice” shall the Lord judge, “conscience bearing
witness, and thoughts accusing, or else excusing.” <span
id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362)

<span id="ii.IX-p50"></span>10. “And the Lord hath become a refuge to
the poor” ([Psa. 9.9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009)<span
id="ii.IX-p50.1"></span>). Whatsoever be the persecutions of that enemy,
who hath been turned behind, what harm shall he do to them whose refuge
the Lord hath become? But this will be, if in this world, in which that
one has an office of power, they shall choose to be poor, by loving
nothing which either here leaves a man while he lives and loves, or is
left by him when he dies. For to such a poor man hath the Lord become a
refuge, “an Helper in due season, in tribulation.” Lo, He maketh poor,
for “He scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.” <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) For what “an Helper in due season” is,
he explained by adding “in tribulation.” For the soul is not turned to
God, save when it is turned away from this world: nor is it more
seasonably turned away from this world, except toils and pains be
mingled with its trifling and hurtful and destructive pleasures.

<span id="ii.IX-p52"></span>11. “And let them who know Thy Name, hope in
Thee” ([Psa. 9.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)<span
id="ii.IX-p52.1"></span>), when they shall have ceased hoping in wealth,
and in the other enticements of this world. For the soul indeed that
seeketh where to fix her hope, when she is torn away from this world,
the knowledge of God’s Name seasonably receives. For the mere Name of
God hath now been published everywhere: but the knowledge of the name
is, when He is known whose name it is. For the name is not a name for
its own sake, but for that which it signifies. Now it has been said,
“The Lord is His Name.” <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364)
Wherefore whoso willingly submits himself to God as His servant, hath
known this name. “And let them who know Thy Name hope in Thee” ([Psa.
9.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)<span id="ii.IX-p53.2"></span>).
Again, the Lord saith to Moses, “I am That I am; and Thou shalt say to
the children of Israel, <span class="c21"><span
id="ii.IX-p53.3"></span>I Am</span>, hath sent me.” <span
id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365) “Let them” then “who know Thy Name,
hope in Thee;” that they may not hope in those things which flow by in
time’s quick revolution, having nothing but “will be” and “has been.”
For what in them is future, when it arrives, straightway becomes the
past; it is awaited with eagerness, it is lost with pain. But in the
nature of God nothing will be, as if it were not yet; or hath been, as
if it were no longer: but there is only that which is, and this is
eternity. Let them cease then to hope in and love things temporal, and
let them apply themselves to hope eternal, who know His name who said,
“I am That I am;” and of whom it was said, “<span class="c21"><span
id="ii.IX-p54.2"></span>I Am</span> hath sent me.” <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) “For Thou hast not forsaken them that
seek Thee, O Lord.” Whoso seek Him, seek no more things transient <span
id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="ii.IX-Page_36"></span>and
perishable; “For no man can serve two masters.” <span
id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367)

<span id="ii.IX-p57"></span>12. “Sing to the Lord, who dwelleth in Sion”
([Psa. 9.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011)<span
id="ii.IX-p57.1"></span>), is said to them, whom the Lord forsakes not
as they seek Him. He dwelleth in Sion, which is interpreted watching,
and which beareth the likeness of the Church that now is; as Jerusalem
beareth the likeness of the Church that is to come, that is, the city of
Saints already enjoying life angelical; for Jerusalem is by
interpretation the vision of peace.  <span
id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368) Now watching goes before vision, as
this Church goes before that one which is promised, the city immortal
and eternal. But in time it goes before, not in dignity: because more
honourable is that whither we are striving to arrive, than what we
practise, that we may attain to arrive; now we practise watching, that
we may arrive at vision. But again this same Church which now is, unless
the Lord inhabit her, the most earnest watching might run into any sort
of error. And to this Church it was said, “For the temple of God is
holy, which temple ye are:” <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369)
again, “that Christ may dwell in the inner man in your hearts by
faith.” <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370) It is enjoined us then,
that we sing to the Lord who dwelleth in Sion, that with one accord we
praise the Lord, the Inhabitant of the Church. “Show forth His wonders
among the heathen.” It has both been done, and will not cease to be
done.

<span id="ii.IX-p61"></span>13. “For requiring their blood He hath
remembered” ([Psa. 9.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012)<span
id="ii.IX-p61.1"></span>). As if they, who were sent to preach the
Gospel, should make answer to that injunction which has been mentioned,
“Show forth His wonders among the heathen,” and should say, “O Lord, who
hath believed our report?” <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) and
again, “For Thy sake we are killed all the day long;” <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) the Psalmist suitably goes on to say,
That Christians not without great reward of eternity will die in
persecution, “for requiring their blood He hath remembered.” But why did
he choose to say, “their blood”? Was it, as if one of imperfect
knowledge and less faith should ask, How will they “show them forth,”
seeing that the infidelity of the heathen will rage against them; and he
should be answered, “For requiring their blood He hath remembered,” that
is, the last judgment will come, in which both the glory of the slain
and the punishment of the slayers shall be made manifest? But let no one
suppose “He hath remembered” to be so used, as though forgetfulness can
attach to God; but since the judgment will be after a long interval, it
is used in accordance with the feeling of weak men, who think God hath
forgotten, because He doth not act so speedily as they wish. To such is
said what follows also, “He hath not forgotten the cry of the poor:”
that is, He hath not, as you suppose, forgotten. As if they should on
hearing, “He hath remembered,” say, Then He had forgotten; No, “He hath
not forgotten,” says the Psalmist, “the cry of the poor.”

<span id="ii.IX-p64"></span>14. But I ask, what is that cry of the poor,
which God forgetteth not? Is it that cry, the words whereof are these,
“Pity me, O Lord, see my humiliation at the hands of my enemies”? ([Psa.
9.13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)<span id="ii.IX-p64.1"></span>).
Why then did he not say, Pity “us” O Lord, see our humiliation at the
hands of “our” enemies, as if many poor were crying; but as if one, Pity
“me,” O Lord? Is it because One intercedeth for the Saints, “who” first
“for our sakes became poor, though He was rich;” <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) and it is He who saith, “Who exaltest
me from the gates of death ([Psa.
9.14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014)<span id="ii.IX-p65.2"></span>),
that I may declare all Thy praises in the gates of the daughter of
Sion”? For man is exalted in Him, not that Man only which He beareth,
which is the Head of the Church; but whichsoever one of us also is among
the other members, and is exalted from all depraved desires; which are
the gates of death, for that through them is the road to death. But the
joy in the fruition is at once death itself, when one gains what he hath
in abandoned wilfulness coveted: for “coveting is the root of all
evil:” <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) and therefore is the gate
of death, for “the widow that liveth in pleasures is dead.” <span
id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) At which pleasures we arrive through
desires as it were through the gates of death. But all highest purposes
are the gates of the daughter of Sion, through which we come to the
vision of peace in the Holy Church.…Or haply are the gates of death the
bodily senses and eyes, which were opened when the man tasted of the
forbidden tree, <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) … and are the
gates of the daughter of Sion the sacraments and beginnings of faith,
which are opened to them that knock, that they may arrive at the hidden
things of the Son?…

<span id="ii.IX-p69"></span>15. Then follows, “I will exult for Thy
salvation:” that is, with blessedness shall I be holden by Thy
salvation, which is our Lord Jesus Christ, the Power and Wisdom of God.
Therefore says the Church, which is here in affliction and is saved by
hope, as long as the hidden judgment of the Son is, in hope she says, “I
will exult for Thy salvation:” for now she is worn down either by the
roar of violence around her, or by the errors of the heathen. “The
heathen are fixed in the corruption, which they made” ([Psa.
9.15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)<span id="ii.IX-p69.1"></span>).
Consider ye how punishment is reserved for the sinner, out of his own
works; and how they that have wished to persecute the Church, have been
fixed in that corruption, which they thought to inflict. For they were
desiring to <span id="page_37">p. 37</span> <span
id="ii.IX-Page_37"></span>kill the body, whilst they themselves were
dying in soul. “In that snare which they hid, has their foot been
taken.” The hidden snare is crafty devising. The foot of the soul is
well understood to be its love: which, when depraved, is called coveting
or lust; but when upright, love or charity.…And the Apostle says, “That
being rooted and grounded in love, ye may be able to take in.” <span
id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) The foot then of sinners, that is,
their love, is taken in the snare, which they hide: for when delight
shall have followed on to deceitful dealing, when God shall have
delivered them over to the lust of their heart; that delight at once
binds them, that they dare not tear away their love thence and apply it
to profitable objects; for when they shall make the attempt, they will
be pained in heart, as if desiring to free their foot from a fetter: and
giving way under this pain they refuse to withdraw from pernicious
delights. “In the snare” then “which they have hid,” that is, in
deceitful counsel, “their foot hath been taken,” that is, their love,
which through deceit attains to that vain joy whereby pain is purchased.

<span id="ii.IX-p71"></span>16. “The Lord is known executing judgments”
([Psa. 9.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016)<span
id="ii.IX-p71.1"></span>). These are God’s judgments. Not from that
tranquillity of His blessedness, nor from the secret places of wisdom,
wherein blessed souls are received, is the sword, or fire, or wild
beast, or any such thing brought forth, whereby sinners may be
tormented: but how are they tormented, and how does the Lord do
judgment? “In the works,” he says, “of his own hands hath the sinner
been caught.”

<span id="ii.IX-p72"></span>17. Here is interposed, “The song of the
diapsalma” ([Psa. 9.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016)<span
id="ii.IX-p72.1"></span>): as it were the hidden joy, as far as we can
imagine, of the separation which is now made, not in place, but in the
affections of the heart, between sinners and the righteous, as of the
corn from the chaff, as yet on the floor. And then follows, “Let the
sinners be turned into hell” ([Psa.
9.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017)<span id="ii.IX-p72.2"></span>):
that is, let them be given into their own hands, when they are spared,
and let them be ensnared in deadly delight. “All the nations that forget
God.” Because “when they did not think good to retain God in their
knowledge, God gave them over to a reprobate mind.” <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378)

<span id="ii.IX-p74"></span>18. “For there shall not be forgetfulness of
the poor man to the end” ([Psa.
9.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span id="ii.IX-p74.1"></span>);
who now seems to be in forgetfulness, when sinners are thought to
flourish in this world’s happiness, and the righteous to be in travail:
but “the patience,” saith He, “of the poor shall not perish for ever.”
Wherefore there is need of patience now to bear with the evil, who are
already separated in will, till they be also separated at the last
judgment.

<span id="ii.IX-p75"></span>19. “Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail”
([Psa. 9.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019)<span
id="ii.IX-p75.1"></span>). The future judgment is prayed for: but before
it come, “Let the heathen,” saith he, “be judged in Thy sight:” that is,
in secret; which is called in God’s sight, with the knowledge of a few
holy and righteous ones. “Place a lawgiver over them, O Lord.” ([Psa.
9.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)<span id="ii.IX-p75.2"></span>).
He seems to me to point out Antichrist: of whom the Apostle says, “When
the man of sin shall be revealed.” <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) “Let the heathen know that they are
men.” That they who will be set free by the Son of God, and belong to
the Son of Man, and be sons of men, that is, new men, may serve man,
that is, the old man the sinner, “for that they are men.”

<span id="ii.IX-p77"></span>20. And because it is believed that he is to
arrive at so great a pitch of empty glory, and he will be permitted to
do so great things, both against all men and against the Saints of God,
that then some weak ones shall indeed think that God cares not for human
affairs, the Psalmist interposing a diapsalma, adds as it were the voice
of men groaning and asking why judgment is deferred. <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_325"></span>[32:326](1080013.htm#fr_325) <span
id="ii.IX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p3"></span> \[This title is only conjecturally
elucidated by expositors. Here arises the confusion of numbering the
Psalms; the Septuagint and Vulgate making the following Psalm all one
with this.—C.\]

<span id="fn_326"></span>[32:327](1080013.htm#fr_326) <span
id="ii.IX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p4"></span> [Ps.
iii](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#000)<span id="ii.IX-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[32:328](1080013.htm#fr_327) <span
id="ii.IX-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p5"></span> [2 Sam.
xv](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#000)<span id="ii.IX-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[32:329](1080013.htm#fr_328) <span
id="ii.IX-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p6"></span> \[It is the first of the alphabetical
Psalms, which are: <span id="ii.IX-p6.1"></span>Ps. ix., x., xxv.,
xxxiv., cxi., cxii., cxix., cxlv. Of these, only four are ascribed to
David; viz., ix., xxv., xxxiv., and cxlv.—C.\]

<span id="fn_329"></span>[32:330](1080013.htm#fr_329) <span
id="ii.IX-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p7"></span> [John viii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="ii.IX-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[32:331](1080013.htm#fr_330) <span
id="ii.IX-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p8"></span> [Rom. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)<span id="ii.IX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[32:332](1080013.htm#fr_331) <span
id="ii.IX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p10"></span> [1 Pet. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017)<span id="ii.IX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[33:333](1080013.htm#fr_332) <span
id="ii.IX-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p11"></span> [John v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024)<span id="ii.IX-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[33:334](1080013.htm#fr_333) <span
id="ii.IX-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p12"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.IX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[33:335](1080013.htm#fr_334) <span
id="ii.IX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p13"></span> [John iii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#018)<span id="ii.IX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[33:336](1080013.htm#fr_335) <span
id="ii.IX-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p14"></span> [Wis.
12:25](../../../bib/apo/wis012.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/apo/wis012.htm#026)<span id="ii.IX-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[33:337](1080013.htm#fr_336) <span
id="ii.IX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p16"></span> [Rom. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#003)<span id="ii.IX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[33:338](1080013.htm#fr_337) <span
id="ii.IX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p17"></span> [John
11:0](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#000), [Acts
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#000)<span id="ii.IX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[33:339](1080013.htm#fr_338) <span
id="ii.IX-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p19"></span> [Ps. iv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)<span id="ii.IX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[33:340](1080013.htm#fr_339) <span
id="ii.IX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p20"></span> [Ps. xxxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)<span id="ii.IX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[33:341](1080013.htm#fr_340) <span
id="ii.IX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p21"></span> [John vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span id="ii.IX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[33:342](1080013.htm#fr_341) <span
id="ii.IX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p23"></span> [Matt. xvi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#023)<span id="ii.IX-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[33:343](1080013.htm#fr_342) <span
id="ii.IX-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p24"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span id="ii.IX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[33:344](1080013.htm#fr_343) <span
id="ii.IX-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p25"></span> [John i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)<span id="ii.IX-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[33:345](1080013.htm#fr_344) <span
id="ii.IX-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p26"></span> [Phil. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013)<span id="ii.IX-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[33:346](1080013.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ii.IX-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p27"></span> [Ps. xc.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#001)<span id="ii.IX-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[34:347](1080013.htm#fr_346) <span
id="ii.IX-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p29"></span> [Gal. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span id="ii.IX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[34:348](1080013.htm#fr_347) <span
id="ii.IX-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p30"></span> *Militaverunt*.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[34:349](1080013.htm#fr_348) <span
id="ii.IX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p32"></span> [John xix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)<span id="ii.IX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[34:350](1080013.htm#fr_349) <span
id="ii.IX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p33"></span> [Isa. lxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001)<span id="ii.IX-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[34:351](1080013.htm#fr_350) <span
id="ii.IX-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p34"></span> [2 Cor. v.
19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span id="ii.IX-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[34:352](1080013.htm#fr_351) <span
id="ii.IX-p34.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p35"></span> [Eph. v.
27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span id="ii.IX-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[34:353](1080013.htm#fr_352) <span
id="ii.IX-p35.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p36"></span> [Song of Sol. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)<span id="ii.IX-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[34:354](1080013.htm#fr_353) <span
id="ii.IX-p37.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p38"></span> Or “unto the age,” *sæculum*. The meaning
of “age,” as in our expression “world without end,” is the primary one
in Latin.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[34:355](1080013.htm#fr_354) <span
id="ii.IX-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p39"></span> *In sæculum et in sæculum sæculi*.
\[African Psalter, probably.—C.\]

<span id="fn_355"></span>[34:356](1080013.htm#fr_355) <span
id="ii.IX-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p40"></span> *In æternum et in sæculum sæculi*. \[So the
Vulgate.—C.\]

<span id="fn_356"></span>[34:357](1080013.htm#fr_356) <span
id="ii.IX-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p41"></span> \[Jerome reads: *In sempiternum et
jugiter*.—C.\]

<span id="fn_357"></span>[34:358](1080013.htm#fr_357) <span
id="ii.IX-p42.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p43"></span> [Ps. vii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012)<span id="ii.IX-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[35:359](1080013.htm#fr_358) <span
id="ii.IX-p43.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p44"></span> [John xii.
31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)<span id="ii.IX-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[35:360](1080013.htm#fr_359) <span
id="ii.IX-p44.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p45"></span> [Rom. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#012)<span id="ii.IX-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[35:361](1080013.htm#fr_360) <span
id="ii.IX-p46.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p47"></span> [Ps. 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span id="ii.IX-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[35:362](1080013.htm#fr_361) <span
id="ii.IX-p47.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p48"></span> [Matt. xxv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#033)<span id="ii.IX-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[35:363](1080013.htm#fr_362) <span
id="ii.IX-p48.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p49"></span> [Rom. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015)<span id="ii.IX-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[35:364](1080013.htm#fr_363) <span
id="ii.IX-p50.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p51"></span> [Heb. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006)<span id="ii.IX-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_364"></span>[35:365](1080013.htm#fr_364) <span
id="ii.IX-p52.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p53"></span> [Jer. xxxiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#002)<span id="ii.IX-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[35:366](1080013.htm#fr_365) <span
id="ii.IX-p53.4"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p54"></span> [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="ii.IX-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[35:367](1080013.htm#fr_366) <span
id="ii.IX-p54.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p55"></span> [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span id="ii.IX-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[36:368](1080013.htm#fr_367) <span
id="ii.IX-p55.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p56"></span> [Matt. vi.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024)<span id="ii.IX-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[36:369](1080013.htm#fr_368) <span
id="ii.IX-p57.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p58"></span> See more fully on [Ps. li.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)<span id="ii.IX-p58.1"></span> (Lat.
l. 20).

<span id="fn_369"></span>[36:370](1080013.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.IX-p58.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p59"></span> [1 Cor. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#017)<span id="ii.IX-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_370"></span>[36:371](1080013.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.IX-p59.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p60"></span> [Eph. iii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)<span id="ii.IX-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[36:372](1080013.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ii.IX-p61.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p62"></span> [Isa. liii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001)<span id="ii.IX-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[36:373](1080013.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ii.IX-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p63"></span> [Ps. xliv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022)<span id="ii.IX-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[36:374](1080013.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.IX-p64.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p65"></span> [2 Cor. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009)<span id="ii.IX-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[36:375](1080013.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ii.IX-p65.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p66"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#010)<span id="ii.IX-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[36:376](1080013.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ii.IX-p66.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p67"></span> [1 Tim. v.
6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#006)<span id="ii.IX-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[36:377](1080013.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ii.IX-p67.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p68"></span> [Gen. iii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#007)<span id="ii.IX-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_377"></span>[37:378](1080013.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ii.IX-p69.2"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p70"></span> [Eph.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)<span id="ii.IX-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[37:379](1080013.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ii.IX-p72.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p73"></span> [Rom. i.
28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028)<span id="ii.IX-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[37:380](1080013.htm#fr_379) <span
id="ii.IX-p75.3"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p76"></span> [2 Thess. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span id="ii.IX-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[37:381](1080013.htm#fr_380) <span
id="ii.IX-p77.1"></span>

<span id="ii.IX-p78"></span> \[For light on this interpretation, see
Neale, *Commentary*, p. 160.—C.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm X](1080014)
