[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39072)  [Next](sbe39074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 66.

66\. 1. That whereby the rivers and seas are able to receive the homage
and tribute of all the valley streams, is their skill in being lower
than they;--it is thus that they are the kings of them all. So it is
that the sage (ruler), wishing to be above men, puts himself by his
words below them, and, wishing to be before them, places his person
behind them.

2\. In this way though he has his place above them, men do not feel his
weight, nor though he has his place before them, do they feel it an
injury to them.

3\. Therefore all in the world delight to exalt him and do not weary of
him. Because he does not strive, no one finds it possible to strive with
him.

<span id="img_10901"></span> ![](img/10901.jpg), 'Putting one's self
Last.' The subject is the power of the Tâo, by its display of humility
in attracting men. The subject and the way in which it is illustrated
are frequent themes in the King. See chapters 8, 22, 39, 42, 61, et al.

The last sentence of par. 3 is found also in ch. 22. There seem to be no
quotations from the chapter in Han Fei or Hwâi-nan; but Wû Khäng quotes
passages from Tung Kung-shû

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

(of the second century B. C.), and Yang Hsiung (B. C. 53-A. D. 18),
which seem to show that the phraseology of it was familiar to them. The
former says:--'When one places himself in his qualities below others,
his person is above them; when he places them behind those of others,
his person is before them;' the other, 'Men exalt him who humbles
himself below them; and give the precedence to him who puts himself
behind them.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 67](sbe39074)
