[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39093)  [Next](sbe39095) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VI. TÂ ZUNG SHIH.

So I translate the title of this Book, taking Zung as a verb, and Zung
Shih as = 'The Master who is Honoured.' Some critics take Zung in the
sense of 'Originator,' in which it is employed in the Tâo Teh King, lxx,
2. Whichever rendering be adopted, there is no doubt that the title is
intended to be a designation of the Tâo; and no one of our author's
Books is more important for the understanding of his system of thought.

The key to it is found in the first of its fifteen paragraphs. There are
in man two elements;-the Heavenly or Tâoistic, and the human. The
disciple of the Tâo, recognising them both, cultivates what he knows as
a man

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

so as to become entirely conformed to the action of the Tâo, and
submissive in all the most painful experiences in his lot, which is
entirely ordered by it. A seal will be set on the wisdom of this course
hereafter, when he has completed the period of his existence on earth,
and returns to the state of non-existence, from which the Tâo called him
to be born as a man. In the meantime he may attain to be the True man
possessing the True knowledge.

Our author then proceeds to give his readers in five paragraphs his idea
of the True Man. Mr. Balfour says that this name is to be understood 'in
the esoteric sense, the partaking of the essence of divinity,' and he
translates it by 'the Divine Man.' But we have no right to introduce
here the terms 'divine' and 'divinity.' Nan-hwâi (VII, 5b) gives a short
definition of the name which is more to the point:--'What we call "the
True Man" is one whose nature is in agreement with the Tâo (<span
id="img_13500"></span> ![](img/13500.jpg)) and the commentator adds in a
note, 'Such men as Fû-hsî, Hwang-Tî, and Lâo Tan.' The Khang-hsî
dictionary commences its account of the character <span
id="img_13501"></span> ![](img/13501.jpg) or 'True' by a definition of
the True Man taken from the Shwo Wän as a <span id="img_13502"></span>
![](img/13502.jpg), 'a recluse of the mountain, whose bodily form has
been changed, and who ascends to heaven;' but when that earliest
dictionary was made, Tâoism had entered into a new phase, different from
what it had in the time of our author. The most prominent characteristic
of the True Man is that he is free from all exercise of thought and
purpose, a being entirely passive in the hands of the Tâo. In par. 3
seven men are mentioned, good and worthy men, but inferior to the True.

Having said what he had to say of the True Man, Kwang-dze comes in the
seventh paragraph to speak directly of the Tâo itself, and describes it
with many wonderful predicates which exalt it above our idea of God;--a
concept and not a personality. He concludes by mentioning a number of
ancient personages who had got the Tâo, and by it wrought wonders,
beginning with a Shih-wei, who preceded Fû-hsî, and ending with Fû Yüeh,
the minister of

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

Wû-ting, in the fourteenth century B. C., and who finally became a star
in the eastern portion of the zodiac. Phäng Zû is also mentioned as
living, through his possession of the Tâo, from the twenty-third century
13. C. to the seventh or later. The sun and moon and the constellation
of the Great Bear are also mentioned as its possessors, and the fabulous
Being called the Mother of the Western King. The whole passage is
perplexing to the reader to the last degree.

The remaining paragraphs are mostly occupied with instances of learning
the Tâo, and of its effects in making men superior to the infirmities of
age and the most terrible deformities of person and calamities of
penury; as 'Tranquillity' under all that might seem most calculated to
disturb it. Very strange is the attempt at the conclusion of par. 8
apparently to trace the genesis of the knowledge of the Tâo. Confucius
is introduced repeatedly as the expounder of Tâoism, and made to praise
it as the ne plus ultra of human attainment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII. Ying Tî Wang](sbe39095)
