[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39016)  [Next](sbe39018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10.

10\. 1. When the intelligent and animal souls are held together in one
embrace, they can be kept from separating. When one gives undivided
attention to the (vital) breath, and brings it to the utmost degree of
pliancy, he can become as a (tender)

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

babe. When he has cleansed away the most mysterious sights (of his
imagination), he can become without a flaw.

2\. In loving the people and ruling the state, cannot he proceed without
any (purpose of) action? In the opening and shutting of his gates of
heaven, cannot he do so as a female bird? While his intelligence reaches
in every direction, cannot he (appear to) be without knowledge?

3\. (The Tâo) produces (all things) and nourishes them; it produces them
and does not claim them as its own; it does all, and yet does not boast
of it; it presides over all, and yet does not control them. This is what
is called 'The mysterious Quality' (of the Tâo).

<span id="img_05400"></span> ![](img/05400.jpg), 'Possibilities.' This
chapter is one of the most difficult to understand and translate in the
whole work. Even Kû Hsî was not able to explain the first member
satisfactorily. The text of that member seems well supported; but I am
persuaded the first clause of it is somehow corrupt.

The whole seems to tell what can be accomplished by one who is possessed
of the Tâo. In par. 3 he appears free from all self-consciousness in
what he does, and of all self-satisfaction in the results of his doing.
The other two paragraphs seem to speak of what he can do under the
guidance of the Tâo for himself and for others. He can by his management
of his vital breath bring his body to the state of Tâoistic perfection,
and keep his intelligent and animal souls from being separated, and he
can rule men without purpose and effort. 'The gates of heaven' in par. 2
is a Tâoistic phrase for the nostrils as the organ of the breath;-see
the commentary of Ho-shang Kung.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](sbe39018)
