[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39105)  [Next](sbe39107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XVIII. KIH LO.

The title of this Book, Kih Lo, or 'Perfect Enjoyment,' may also be
received as describing the subject-matter of it. But the author does not
tell us distinctly what he means by 'Perfect Enjoyment.' It seems to
involve two elements, freedom from trouble and distress, and freedom
from the fear of death. What men seek for as their chief good would only
be to him burdens. He does not indeed altogether condemn them, but his
own quest is the better and more excellent way. His own enjoyment is to
be obtained by means of doing nothing; that is, by the Tâo; of which
passionless and purposeless action is a chief characteristic; and is at
the same time the most effective action, as is illustrated in the
operation of heaven and earth.

Such is the substance of the first paragraph. The second is interesting
as showing how his principle controlled Kwang-dze on the death of his
wife. Paragraph 3 shows us two professors of Tâoism delivered by it from
the fear of their own death. Paragraph 4 brings our author before us
talking to a skull, and then the skull's appearance to him in a dream
and telling him of the happiness of the state after death. Paragraph 5
is occupied with Confucius and his favourite disciple Yen Hui. It stands
by itself, unconnected with the rest of the Book, and its

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

genuineness is denied by some Commentators. The last paragraph, found in
an enlarged form in the Books ascribed to Lieh-dze, has as little to do
as the fifth with the general theme of the Book, and is a strange
anticipation in China of the transrotation or transformation system of
Buddhism.

Indeed, after reading this. Book, we cease to wonder that Tâoism and
Buddhism should in many practices come so near each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIX. Tâ Shäng](sbe39107)
