[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39106)  [Next](sbe39108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XIX. TÂ SHÄNG.

I have been inclined to translate the title of this Book by 'The Fuller
Understanding of Life,' with reference to what is said in the second
Book on 'The Nourishment of the Lord of Life.' There the Life before the
mind of the writer is that of the Body; here he extends his view also to
the Life of the Spirit. The one subject is not kept, however, with
sufficient distinctness apart from the other, and the profusion of
illustrations, taken, most of them, from the works of Lieh-dze, is
perplexing.

To use the words of Lû Shû-khî:--'This Book shows how he who would
skilfully nourish his life, must maintain his spirit complete, and
become one with Heaven. These two ideas preside in it throughout. In
par. 2, the words of the Warden Yin show that the spirit kept complete
is beyond the reach of harm. In 3, the illustration of the hunchback
shows how the will must be maintained free from all confusion. In 4,
that of the ferryman shows that to the completeness of the spirit there
is required the disregard of life or death. In 5 and 6, the words of
Thien Khâi-kih convey a warning against injuring the life by the
indulgence of sensual desires. In 7, the sight of a sprite by duke Hwan
unsettles his spirit. In 8, the gamecock is trained so as to preserve
the spirit unagitated. In 9, we see the man in the water of the cataract
resting calmly in his appointed lot. In 10, we have the maker of the
bell-stand completing his work as he did in accordance with the mind of
Heaven. All these instances show how the

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

spirit is nourished. The reckless charioteering of Tung Yê in par. 11,
not stopping when the strength of his horses was exhausted, and the
false pretext of Sun Hsiû, clear as at noon-day, are instances of a
different kind; while in the skilful Shui, hardly needing the
application of his mind, and fully enjoying himself in all things, his
movements testify of his harmony with Heaven, and his spiritual
completeness.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XX. Shan Mû](sbe39108)
