[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39089)  [Next](sbe39091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK II. KHÎ WÛ LUN.

Mr. Balfour has translated this title by 'Essay on the Uniformity of All
Things;' and, the subject of the Book being thus misconceived, his
translation of it could not fail to be very incorrect. The Chinese
critics, I may say without exception, construe the title as I have done.
The second and third characters, Wû Lun, are taken together, and mean
'Discussions about Things,' equivalent to our 'Controversies.' They are
under the government of the first character Khî, used as a verb, with
the signification of 'Harmonising,' or 'Adjusting.' Let me illustrate
this by condensing a passage from the 'Supplementary Commentary of a Mr.
Kang, a sub-secretary of the Imperial Chancery,' of the Ming dynasty
(<span id="img_12800"></span> ![](img/12800.jpg)). He says, 'What
Kwang-dze calls "Discussions about Things" has reference to the various
branches of the numerous schools, each of which has its own views,
conflicting with

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

the views of the others.' He goes on to show that if they would only
adopt the method pointed out by Kwang-dze, 'their controversies would be
adjusted (<span id="img_12900"></span> ![](img/12900.jpg)) using the
first Khî in the passive voice.

This then was the theme of our author in this Book. It must be left for
the reader to discover from the translation how he pursues it. I pointed
out a peculiarity in the former Book, that though the idea of the Tâo
underlies it all, the term itself is never allowed to appear. Not only
does the same idea underlie this Book, but the name is frequently
employed. The Tâo is the panacea for the evils of controversy, the
solvent through the use of which the different views of men may be made
to disappear.

That the Tâo is not a Personal name in the conception of Kwang-dze is
seen in several passages. We have not to go beyond the phenomena of
nature to discover the reason of their being what they are; nor have we
to go beyond the bigoted egoism and vaingloriousness of
controversialists to find the explanation of their discussions, various
as these are, and confounding like the sounds of the wind among the
trees of a forest. To man, neither in nature nor in the sphere of
knowledge, is there any other 'Heaven' but what belongs to his own mind.
That is his only 'True Ruler.' If there be any other, we do not see His
form, nor any traces of His acting. Things come about in their proper
course. We cannot advance any proof of Creation. Whether we assume that
there was something 'in the beginning' or nothing, we are equally landed
in contradiction and absurdity. Let us stop at the limit of what we
know, and not try to advance a step beyond it.

Towards the end of the Book our author's agnosticism seems to reach its
farthest point. All human experience is spoken of as a dream or as
'illusion.' He who calls another a dreamer does not know that he is not
dreaming himself. One and another commentator discover in such
utterances something very like the Buddhist doctrine that all life is
but so much illusion (<span id="img_12901"></span> ![](img/12901.jpg)).
This notion has its consummation in the story with which the Book
concludes.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Kwang-dze had dreamt that he was a butterfly.
When he awoke, and was himself again, he did not know whether he, Kwang
Kâu, had been dreaming that he was a butterfly, or was now a butterfly
dreaming that it was Kwang Kâu. And yet he adds that there must be a
difference between Kâu and a butterfly, but he does not say what that
difference is. But had he ever dreamt that he was a butterfly, so as to
lose the consciousness of his personal identity as Kwang Kâu? I do not
think so. One may, perhaps, lose that consciousness in the state of
insanity; but the language of Young is not sufficiently guarded when he
writes of

'Dreams, where thought, in fancy's maze, runs mad.'

When dreaming, our thoughts are not conditioned by the categories of
time and space; but the conviction of our identity is never lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III. Yang Shang Kû](sbe39091)
