[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39094)  [Next](sbe39096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VII. YING TÎ WANG.

The first of the three characters in this title renders the translation
of it somewhat perplexing. Ying has different meanings according as it
is read in the first tone or in the third. In the first tone it is the
symbol of what is right, or should be; in the third tone of answering or
responding to. 1 prefer to take it here in the first tone. As Kwo,
Hsiang says, 'One who is free from mind or purpose of his own, and loves
men to become transformed of themselves, is fit to be a Ruler or a
King,' and as Zhui Kwan, another early commentator, says, 'He whose
teaching is that which is without words, and makes men in the world act
as if they were oxen or horses, is fit to be a Ruler or a King.' This
then is the object of the Book--to describe that government which
exhibits the Tâo equally in the rulers and the ruled, the world of men
all happy and good without purpose or effort.

It consists of seven paragraphs. The first shows us the model ruler in
him of the line of Thâi, whom I have not

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

succeeded in identifying. The second shows us men under such a rule,
uncontrolled and safe like the bird that flies high beyond the reach of
the archer, and the mouse secure in its deep hole from its pursuers. The
teacher in this portion is Khieh-yü, known in the Confucian school as
'the madman of Khû,' and he delivers his lesson in opposition to the
heresy of a Zäh-kung Shih, or 'Noon Beginning.' In the third paragraph
the speakers are 'a nameless man,' and a Thien Kän, or 'Heaven Root.' In
the fourth paragraph Lâo-dze himself appears upon the stage, and
lectures a Yang Dze-kü, the Yang Kû of Mencius. He concludes by saying
that 'where the intelligent kings took their stand could not be
fathomed, and they found their enjoyment in (the realm of) nonentity.'

The fifth paragraph is longer, and tells us of the defeat of a wizard, a
physiognomist in Käng, by Hû-dze, the master of the philosopher
Lieh-dze, who is thereby delivered from the glamour which the cheat was
throwing round him. I confess to not being able to understand the
various processes by which Hû-dze foils the wizard and makes him run
away. The whole story is told, and at greater length, in the second book
of the collection ascribed to Lieh-dze, and the curious student may like
to look at the translation of that work by Mr. Ernst Faber (Der
Naturalismus bei den alten Chinesen sowohl nach der Seite des
Pantheismus als des Sensualismus, oder die Sämmtlichen Werke des
Philosophen Licius, 1877). The effect of the wizard's defeat on Lieh-dze
was great. He returned in great humility to his house, and did not go
out of it for three years. He did the cooking for his wife, and fed the
pigs as if he were feeding men. He returned to pure simplicity, and
therein continued to the end of his life. But I do not see the connexion
between this narrative and the government of the Rulers and Kings.

The sixth paragraph is a homily by our author himself on 'non-action.'
It contains a good simile, comparing the mind of the perfect man to a
mirror, which reflects faithfully what comes before it, but does not
retain any image of it, when the mind is gone.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

The last paragraph is an ingenious and interesting allegory relating how
the gods of the southern and northern seas brought Chaos to an end by
boring holes in him. Thereby they destroyed the primal simplicity, and
according to Tâoism did Chaos an injury! On the whole I do not think
that this Book, with which the more finished essays of Kwang-dze come to
an end, is so successful as those that precede it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VIII. Phien Mâu](sbe39096)
