[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39131)  [Next](sbe39133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

## BOOK XI.

### PART II. SECTION IV.

### Zâi Yû, or 'Letting Be, and Exercising Forbearance <span id="fr_429"></span>[1](#fn_389).'

1\. I have heard of letting the world be, and exercising forbearance; I
have not heard of governing the world. Letting be is from the fear that
men, (when interfered with), will carry their nature beyond its normal
condition; exercising forbearance is from the fear that men, (when not
so dealt with), will alter the characteristics of their nature. When all
men do not carry their nature beyond its normal condition, nor alter its
characteristics, the good government of the world is secured.

Formerly, Yâo's government of the world made men look joyful; but when
they have this joy in their nature, there is a want of its (proper)
placidity. The government of the world by Kieh, (on the contrary), made
men look distressed; but when their nature shows the symptoms of
distress, there is a want of its (proper) contentment. The want of
placidity and the want of contentment are contrary to the character (of
the nature); and where this obtains, it is impossible that any man or
state should anywhere abide long. Are men exceedingly joyful?--the Yang
or element of expansion in them is too much developed. Are they
exceedingly

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

irritated?--the Yin or opposite element is too much developed. When
those elements thus predominate in men, (it is as if <span
id="fr_430"></span>[1](#fn_390)) the four seasons were not to come (at
their proper times), and the harmony of cold and heat were not to be
maintained;--would there not result injury to the bodies of men? Men's
joy and dissatisfaction are made to arise where they ought not to do so;
their movements are all uncertain; they lose the mastery of their
thoughts; they stop short midway, and do not finish what they have
begun. In this state of things the world begins to have lofty aims, and
jealous dislikes, ambitious courses, and fierce animosities, and then we
have actions like those of the robber Kih, or of Zäng (Shän) and Shih
(Zhiû) <span id="fr_431"></span>[2](#fn_391). If now the whole world
were taken to reward the good it would not suffice, nor would it be
possible with it to punish the bad. Thus the world, great as it is, not
sufficing for rewards and punishments, from the time of the three
dynasties downwards, there has been nothing but bustle and excitement.
Always occupied with rewards and punishments, what leisure have men had
to rest in the instincts of the nature with which they are endowed?

2\. Moreover, delight in the power of vision leads

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

to excess in the pursuit of (ornamental) colours; delight in the power
of hearing, to excess in seeking (the pleasures of) sound; delight in
benevolence tends to disorder that virtue (as proper to the nature);
delight in righteousness sets the man in opposition to what is right in
reason; delight in (the practice of) ceremonies is helpful to artful
forms; delight in music leads to voluptuous airs; delight in sageness is
helpful to ingenious contrivances; delight in knowledge contributes to
fault-finding. If all men were to rest in the instincts of their nature,
to keep or to extinguish these eight delights might be a matter of
indifference; but if they will not rest in those instincts, then those
eight delights begin to be imperfectly and unevenly developed or
violently suppressed, and the world is thrown into disorder. But when
men begin to honour them, and to long for them, how great is the
deception practised on the world! And not only, when (a performance of
them) is once over, do they not have done with them, but they prepare
themselves (as) with fasting to describe them, they seem to kneel
reverentially when they bring them forward, and they go through them
with the excitements of music and singing; and then what can be done (to
remedy the evil of them)? Therefore the superior man, who feels himself
constrained to engage in the administration of the world will find it
his best way to do nothing <span id="fr_432"></span>[1](#fn_392). In
(that policy of) doing nothing, he can rest in the instincts of the
nature with which he is endowed. Hence he who will administer (the
government of) the world

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

honouring it as he honours his own person, may have that government
committed to him, and he who will administer it loving it as he loves
his own person, may have it entrusted to him <span
id="fr_433"></span>[1](#fn_393). Therefore, if the superior man will
keep (the faculties lodged in) his five viscera unemployed, and not
display his powers of seeing and hearing, while he is motionless as a
representative of the dead, his dragon-like presence will be seen; while
he is profoundly silent, the thunder (of his words) will resound, while
his movements are (unseen) like those of a spirit, all heavenly
influences will follow them; while he is (thus) unconcerned and does
nothing, his genial influence will attract and gather all things round
him:--what leisure has he to do anything more for the government of the
world?

3\. Zhui Khü <span id="fr_434"></span>[2](#fn_394) asked Lâo Tan,
saying, 'If you do not govern the world, how can you make men's minds
good?' The reply was, 'Take care how you meddle with and disturb men's
minds. The mind, if pushed about, gets depressed; if helped forward, it
gets exalted. Now exalted, now depressed, here it appears as a prisoner,
and there as a wrathful fury. (At one time) it becomes pliable and soft,
yielding to what is hard and strong; (at another), it is sharp as the
sharpest corner, fit to carve or chisel (stone or jade). Now it is hot
as a scorching fire, and anon it is cold as ice. It is so swift that
while one is bending down and lifting up his head, it shall twice

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

have put forth a soothing hand beyond the four seas. Resting, it is
still as a deep abyss; moving, it is like one of the bodies in the sky;
in its resolute haughtiness, it refuses to be bound;-such is the mind of
man <span id="fr_435"></span>[1](#fn_395)!'

Anciently, Hwang-Tî was the first to meddle with and disturb the mind of
man with his benevolence and righteousness <span
id="fr_436"></span>[2](#fn_396). After him, Yâo and Shun wore their
thighs bare and the hair off the calves of their legs, in their labours
to nourish the bodies of the people. They toiled painfully with all the
powers in their five viscera at the practice of their benevolence and
righteousness; they tasked their blood and breath to make out a code of
laws;--and after all they were unsuccessful. On this Yâo sent away Hwan
Tâu to Khung hill, and (the Chiefs of) the Three Miâo to San-wei, and
banished the Minister of Works to the Dark Capital; so unequal had they
been to cope with the world <span id="fr_437"></span>[3](#fn_397). Then
we are carried on to the kings of the Three (dynasties), when the world
was in a state of great distraction. Of the lowest type of character
there were Kieh and Kih; of a higher type there were Zäng (Shän) and
Shih (Zhiû). At the same time there arose the classes of

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

the Literati and the Mohists. Hereupon, complacency in, and hatred of,
one another produced mutual suspicions; the stupid and the wise imposed
on one another; the good and the bad condemned one another; the boastful
and the sincere interchanged their recriminations;--and the world fell
into decay. Views as to what was greatly virtuous did not agree, and the
nature with its endowments became as if shrivelled by fire or carried
away by a flood. All were eager for knowledge, and the people were
exhausted with their searchings (after what was good). On this the axe
and the saw were brought into play; guilt was determined as by the
plumb-line and death inflicted; the hammer and gouge did their work. The
world fell into great disorder, and presented the appearance of a jagged
mountain ridge. The crime to which all was due was the meddling with and
disturbing men's minds. The effect was that men of ability and worth lay
concealed at the foot of the crags of mount Thâi, and princes of ten
thousand chariots were anxious and terrified in their ancestral temples.
In the present age those Who have been put to death in various ways lie
thick as if pillowed on each other; those who are wearing the cangue
press on each other (on the roads); those who are suffering the
bastinado can see each other (all over the land). And now the Literati
and the Mohists begin to stand, on tiptoe and with bare arms, among the
fettered and manacled crowd! Ah! extreme is their shamelessness, and
their failure to see the disgrace! Strange that we should be slow to
recognise their sageness and wisdom in the bars of the cangue, and their
benevolence and righteousness in the rivets of the fetters and
handcuffs! How do we know that

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

Zäng and Shih are not the whizzing arrows of Kieh and Kih <span
id="fr_438"></span>[1](#fn_398)? Therefore it is said, 'Abolish sageness
and cast away knowledge, and the world will be brought to a state of
great order <span id="fr_439"></span>[2](#fn_399).'

4\. Hwang-Tî had been on the throne for nineteen years <span
id="fr_440"></span>[3](#fn_400), and his ordinances were in operation
all through the kingdom, when he heard that Kwang Khäng-dze <span
id="fr_441"></span>[4](#fn_401) was living on the summit of
Khung-thung <span id="fr_442"></span>[5](#fn_402), and went to see him.
'I have heard,' he said, 'that you, Sir, are well acquainted with the
perfect Tâo. I venture to ask you what is the essential thing in it. I
wish to take the subtlest influences of heaven and earth, and assist
with them the (growth of the) five cereals for the (better) nourishment
of the people. I also wish to direct the (operation of the) Yin and
Yang, so as to secure the comfort of all living beings. How shall I
proceed to accomplish those objects?' Kwang Khäng-dze replied, 'What you
wish to ask about is the original substance of all things <span
id="fr_443"></span>[6](#fn_403); what you

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

wish to have the direction of is that substance as it was shattered and
divided <span id="fr_444"></span>[1](#fn_404). According to your
government of the world, the vapours of the clouds, before they were
collected, would descend in rain; the herbs and trees would shed their
leaves before they became yellow; and the light of the sun and moon
would hasten to extinction. Your mind is that of a flatterer with his
plausible words;--it is not fit that I should tell you the perfect Tâo.'

Hwang-Tî withdrew, gave up (his government of) the kingdom, built
himself a solitary apartment, spread in it a mat of the white mâo grass,
dwelt in it unoccupied for three months, and then went again to seek an
interview with (the recluse). Kwang Khäng-dze was then lying down with
his head to the south. Hwang-Tî, with an air of deferential submission,
went forward on his knees, twice bowed low with his face to the ground,
and asked him, saying, 'I have heard that you, Sir, are well acquainted
with the perfect Tâo;--I venture to ask how I should rule my body, in
order that it may continue for a long time.' Kwang Khäng-dze hastily
rose, and said, 'A good question! Come and I will tell you the perfect
Tâo. Its essence is (surrounded with) the deepest obscurity; its highest
reach is in darkness and silence. There is nothing to be seen; nothing
to be heard. When it holds the spirit in its arms in stillness, then the
bodily form of itself will become correct. You must be still; you must
be pure; not subjecting your body to toil, not agitating your vital
force;--then you may live for long. When

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

your eyes see nothing, your ears hear nothing, and your mind knows
nothing, your spirit will keep your body, and the body will live long.
Watch over what is within you, shut up the avenues that connect you with
what is external;--much knowledge is pernicious. I (will) proceed with
you to the summit of the Grand Brilliance, where we come to the source
of the bright and expanding (element); I will enter with you the gate of
the Deepest Obscurity, where we come to the source of the dark and
repressing (element). There heaven and earth have their controllers;
there the Yin and Yang have their Repositories. Watch over and keep your
body, and all things will of themselves give it vigour. I maintain the
(original) unity (of these elements), and dwell in the harmony of them.
In this way 1 have cultivated myself for one thousand and two hundred
years, and my bodily form has undergone no decay <span
id="fr_445"></span>[1](#fn_405).'

Hwang-Tî twice bowed low with his head to the ground, and said, 'In
Kwang Khäng-dze we have an example of what is called Heaven <span
id="fr_446"></span>[2](#fn_406).' The other said, 'Come, and I will tell
you:--(The perfect Tâo) is something inexhaustible, and yet men all
think it has an end; it is something unfathomable, and yet men all think
its extreme limit can be reached. He who attains to my Tâo, if he be in
a high position, will be one of the August ones, and in a low position,
will be a king. He who fails in attaining it, in his highest attainment
will see the light, but will

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

descend and be of the Earth. At present all things are produced from the
Earth and return to the Earth. Therefore I will leave you, and enter the
gate of the Unending, to enjoy myself in the fields of the Illimitable.
I will blend my light with that of the sun and moon, and will endure
while heaven and earth endure. If men agree with my views, I will be
unconscious of it; if they keep far apart from them, I will be
unconscious of it; they may all die, and I will abide alone <span
id="fr_447"></span>[1](#fn_407)!'

5\. Yün Kiang <span id="fr_448"></span>[2](#fn_408), rambling to the
east, having been borne along on a gentle breeze <span
id="fr_449"></span>[3](#fn_409), suddenly encountered Hung Mung <span
id="fr_450"></span>[2](#fn_408), who was rambling about, slapping his
buttocks <span id="fr_451"></span>[4](#fn_410) and hopping like a bird.
Amazed at the sight, Yün Kiang stood reverentially, and said to the
other, 'Venerable Sir, who are you? and why are you doing this?' Hung
Mung went on slapping his buttocks and hopping like a bird, but replied,
'I am enjoying myself.' Yün Kiang said, 'I

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

wish to ask you a question.' Hung Mung lifted up his head, looked at the
stranger, and said, 'Pooh!' Yün Kiang, however, continued, 'The breath
of heaven is out of harmony; the breath of earth is bound up; the six
elemental influences <span id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_411) do not act in
concord; the four seasons do not observe their proper times. Now I wish
to blend together the essential qualities of those six influences in
order to nourish all living things;-how shall I go about it?' Hung Mung
slapped his buttocks, hopped about, and shook his head, saying, 'I do
not know; I do not know!'

Yün Kiang could not pursue his question; but three years afterwards,
when (again) rambling in the east, as he was passing by the wild of
Sung, he happened to meet Hung Mung. Delighted with the rencontre, he
hastened to him, and said, 'Have you forgotten me, O Heaven? Have you
forgotten me, O Heaven <span id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_412)?' At the
same time, he bowed twice with his head to the ground, wishing to
receive his instructions. Hung Mung said, 'Wandering listlessly about, I
know not what I seek; carried on by a wild impulse, I know not where I
am going. I wander about in the strange manner (which you have seen),
and see that nothing proceeds without method and order <span
id="fr_454"></span>[3](#fn_413);--what more should I know?' Yün Kiang
replied, 'I also seem carried on by an aimless influence, and yet the
people follow me wherever I go. I cannot help their doing so. But now as
they thus

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

imitate me, I wish to hear a word from you (in the case).' The other
said, 'What disturbs the regular method of Heaven, comes into collision
with the nature of things, prevents the accomplishment of the mysterious
(operation of) Heaven, scatters the herds of animals, makes the birds
all sing at night, is calamitous to vegetation, and disastrous to all
insects;-all this is owing, I conceive, to the error of governing men.'
'What then,' said Yün Kiang, 'shall I do?' 'Ah,' said the other, 'you
will only injure them! I will leave you in my dancing way, and return to
my place.' Yün Kiang rejoined, 'It has been a difficult thing to get
this meeting with you, O Heaven! I should like to hear from you a word
(more).' Hung Mung said, 'Ah! your mind (needs to be) nourished. Do you
only take the position of doing nothing, and things will of themselves
become transformed. Neglect your body; cast out from you your power of
hearing and sight; forget what you have in common with things; cultivate
a grand similarity with the chaos of the plastic ether; unloose your
mind; set your spirit free; be still as if you had no soul. Of all the
multitude of things every one returns to its root. Every one returns to
its root, and does not know (that it is doing so). They all are as in
the state of chaos, and during all their existence they do not leave
it <span id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_414). If

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

they knew (that they were returning to their root), they would be
(consciously) leaving it. They do not ask its name; they do not seek to
spy out their nature; and thus it is that things come to life of
themselves.'

Yün Kiang said, 'Heaven, you have conferred on me (the knowledge of)
your operation, and revealed to me the mystery of it. All my life I had
been seeking for it, and now I have obtained it.' He then bowed twice,
with his head to the ground, arose, took his leave, and walked away.

6\. The ordinary men of the world <span id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_415)
all rejoice in men's agreeing with themselves, and dislike men's being
different from themselves. This rejoicing and this dislike arise from
their being bent on making themselves distinguished above all others.
But have they who have this object at heart so risen out above all
others? They depend on them to rest quietly (in the position which they
desire), and their knowledge is not equal to the multitude of the arts
of all those others <span id="fr_457"></span>[2](#fn_416)! When they
wish again to administer a state for its ruler, they proceed to employ
all the methods which the kings of the three dynasties considered
profitable without seeing the evils of such a course. This is to make
the state depend on the peradventure of their luck. But how seldom it is
that that peradventure does not issue in the ruin of the state! Not once
in ten thousand instances will such men preserve a state. Not once will
they succeed, and in more than ten thousand cases will they

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

ruin it. Alas that the possessors of territory,--(the rulers of
states),--should not know the danger (of employing such men)! Now the
possessors of territory possess the greatest of (all) things. Possessing
the greatest of all things,--(possessing, that is, men),--they should
not try to deal with them as (simply) things. And it is he who is not a
thing (himself) that is therefore able to deal with (all) things as they
severally require. When (a ruler) clearly understands that he who should
so deal with all things is not a thing himself, will he only rule the
kingdom? He will go out and in throughout the universe (at his
pleasure); he will roam over the nine regions <span
id="fr_458"></span>[1](#fn_417), alone in going, alone in coming. Him we
call the sole possessor (of this ability); and the sole possessor (of
this ability) is what is called the noblest of all.

The teaching of (this) great man goes forth as the shadow from the
substance, as the echo responds to the sound. When questioned, he
responds, exhausting (from his own stores) all that is in the
(enquirer's) mind, as if front to front with all under heaven. His
resting-place gives forth no sound; his sphere of activity has no
restriction of place. He conducts every one to his proper goal,
proceeding to it and bringing him back to it as by his own movement. His
movements have no trace; his going forth and his re-enterings have no
deviation; his course is like that of the sun without beginning (or
ending).

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

If you would praise or discourse about his personality, he is united
with the great community of existences. He belongs to that great
community, and has no individual self. Having no individual self, how
should he have anything that can be called his? If you look at those who
have what they call their own, they are the superior men of former
times; if you look at him who has nothing of the kind, he is the friend
of heaven and earth.

7\. Mean, and yet demanding to be allowed their free course;--such are
Things. Low, and yet requiring to be relied on;--such are the People.
Hidden (as to their issues), and yet requiring to be done;--such are
Affairs. Coarse, and yet necessary to be set forth;--such are Laws.
Remote, and yet necessary to have dwelling (in one's self);--such is
Righteousness. Near, and yet necessary to be widely extended;--such is
Benevolence. Restrictive, and yet necessary to be multiplied;--such are
Ceremonies. Lodged in the centre, and yet requiring to be exalted;--such
is Virtue. Always One, and yet requiring to be modified;--such is the
Tâo. Spirit-like, and yet requiring to be exercised;--such is
Heaven <span id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_418).

Therefore the sages contemplated Heaven, but did not assist It. They
tried to perfect their virtue, but did not allow it to embarrass them.
They proceeded according to the Tâo, but did not lay any plans. They
associated benevolence (with all their doings), but did not rely on it.
They pursued righteousness

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

extensively, but did not try to accumulate it. They responded to
ceremonies, but did not conceal (their opinion as to the troublesomeness
of them). They engaged in affairs as they occurred, and did not decline
them. They strove to render their laws uniform, but (feared that
confusion) might arise from them. They relied upon the people, and did
not set light by them. They depended on things as their instruments, and
did not discard them <span id="fr_460"></span>[1](#fn_419).

They did not think things equal to what they employed them for, but yet
they did not see that they could do without employing them. Those who do
not understand Heaven are not pure in their virtue. Those who do not
comprehend the Tâo have no course which they can pursue successfully.
Alas for them who do not clearly understand the Tâo!

What is it that we call the Tâo <span id="fr_461"></span>[2](#fn_420)?
There is the Tâo, or Way of Heaven; and there is the Tâo, or Way of Man.
Doing nothing and yet attracting all honour is the Way of Heaven; Doing
and being embarrassed thereby is the Way of Man. It is the Way of Heaven
that plays the part of the Lord; it is the Way of Man that plays the
part of the Servant. The Way of Heaven and the Way of Man are far apart.
They should be clearly distinguished from each other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_389"></span>[291:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_429) See pp.
[142](sbe39098.htm#page_142), [143](sbe39099.htm#page_143).

<span id="fn_390"></span>[292:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_430) I supply the 'it
is as if,' after the example of the critic Lû Shû-kih, who here
introduces a <span id="img_29200"></span> ![](img/29200.jpg) in his
commentary (<span id="img_29201"></span> ![](img/29201.jpg)). What the
text seems to state as a fact is only an illustration. Compare the
concluding paragraphs in all the Sections and Parts of the fourth Book
of the Lî Kî.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[292:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_431) Our moral
instincts protest against Tâoism which thus places in the same category
such sovereigns as Yâo and Kieh, and such men as the brigand Kih and
Zäng and Shih.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[293:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_432) Here is the
Tâoistic meaning of the title of this Book.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[294:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_433) A quotation, but
without any indication that it is so, from the Tâo Teh King, ch. 13.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[294:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_434) Probably an
imaginary personage.

<span id="fn_395"></span>[295:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_435) I must suppose
that the words of Lâo-dze stop here, and that what follows is from
Kwang-dze himself, down to the end of the paragraph. We cannot have
Lâo-dze referring to men later than himself, and quoting from his own
Book.

<span id="fn_396"></span>[295:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_436) Hitherto Yâo and
Shun have appeared as the first disturbers of the rule of the Tâo by
their benevolence and righteousness. Here that innovation is carried
further back to Hwang-Tî.

<span id="fn_397"></span>[295:3](sbe39132.htm#fr_437) See these parties,
and the way they were dealt with, in the Shû King, Part II, Book I, 3.
The punishment of them is there ascribed to Shun; but Yâo was still
alive, and Shun was acting as his viceroy.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[297:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_438) Compare this
picture of the times after Yâo and Shun with that given by Mencius in
III, ii, ch. 9 et al. But the conclusions arrived at as to the causes
and cure of their evils by him and our author are very different.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[297:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_439) A quotation, with
the regular formula, from the Tâo Teh King, ch. 19, with some variation
of the text.

<span id="fn_400"></span>[297:3](sbe39132.htm#fr_440) ? in B.C. 2678.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[297:4](sbe39132.htm#fr_441) Another imaginary
personage; apparently, a personification of the Tâo. Some say he was
Lâo-dze,--in one of his early states of existence; others that he was 'a
True Man,' the teacher of Hwang-Tî. See Ko Hung's 'Immortals,' I, i.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[297:5](sbe39132.htm#fr_442) Equally imaginary
is the mountain Khung-thung. Some critics find a place for it in the
province of Ho-nan; the majority say it is the highest point in the
constellation of the Great Bear.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[297:6](sbe39132.htm#fr_443) The original
ether, undivided, out of which all things were formed.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[298:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_444) The same ether,
now in motion, now at rest, divided into the Yin and Yang.

<span id="fn_405"></span>[299:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_445) It seems very
clear here that the earliest Taoism taught that the cultivation of the
Tâo tended to prolong and preserve the bodily life.

<span id="fn_406"></span>[299:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_446) A remarkable, but
not a singular, instance of Kwang-dze's application of the name
'Heaven.'

<span id="fn_407"></span>[300:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_447) A very difficult
sentence, in interpreting which there are great differences among the
critics.

<span id="fn_408"></span>[300:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_450) I have preferred
to retain Yün Kiang and Hung Mung as if they were the surnames and names
of two personages here introduced. Mr. Balfour renders them by 'The
Spirit of the Clouds,' and 'Mists of Chaos.' The Spirits of heaven or
the sky have still their place in the Sacrificial Canon of China, as
'the Cloud-Master, the Rain-Master, the Baron of the Winds, and the
Thunder Master.' Hung Mung, again, is a name for 'the Great Ether,' or,
as Dr. Medhurst calls it, 'the Primitive Chaos.'

<span id="fn_409"></span>[300:3](sbe39132.htm#fr_449) Literally,
'passing by a branch of Fû-yâo;' but we find fû-yâo in Book I, meaning
'a whirlwind.' The term 'branch' has made some critics explain it here
as 'the name of a tree,' which is inadmissible. I have translated
according to the view of Lû Shû-kih.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[300:4](sbe39132.htm#fr_451) Or
'stomach,'--according to another reading.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[301:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_452) Probably, the yin,
the yang, wind, rain, darkness, and light; see Mayers, p. 323.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[301:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_453) See introduction,
pp. [17](sbe39005.htm#page_17), [18](sbe39005.htm#page_18).

<span id="fn_413"></span>[301:3](sbe39132.htm#fr_454) Compare in Book
XXIII, par. x.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[302:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_455) They never show
any will of their own.--On the names Yün Kiang and Hung Mung, Lû Shû-kih
makes the following remarks:--'These were not men, and yet they are
introduced here as questioning and answering each other; showing us that
our author frames and employs his surnames and names to serve his own
purpose. Those names and the speeches made by the parties are all from
him. We must believe that he introduces Confucius, Yâo, and Shun just in
the same way.'

<span id="fn_415"></span>[303:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_456) Meaning eccentric
thinkers not Tâoists, like Hui-dze, Kung-sun Lung, and others.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[303:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_457) The construing and
connexion of this sentence are puzzling.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[304:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_458) The nine regions'
generally means the nine provinces into which the Great Yü divided the
kingdom. As our author is here describing the grand Taoist ruler after
his fashion in his relation to the universe, we must give the phrase a
wider meaning; but I have not met with any attempt to define it.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[305:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_459) All these
sentences are understood to show that even in the non-action of the
Master of the Tâo there are still things he must do.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[306:1](sbe39132.htm#fr_460) Antithetic to the
previous sentences, and showing that what such a Master does does not
interfere with his non-action.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[306:2](sbe39132.htm#fr_461) This question and
what follows shows clearly enough that, even with Kwang-dze, the
character Tâo (<span id="img_tao"></span> ![](img/tao.jpg)) retained its
proper meaning of the Way or Course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XII: Thien Tî, or 'Heaven and Earth'](sbe39133)
