[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39099)  [Next](sbe39101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK XII. THIEN TÎ.

The first two characters of the Book are adopted as its name;--Thien Tî,
'Heaven and Earth.' These are employed, not so much as the two greatest
material forms in the universe, but as the Great Powers whose influences
extend to all below and upon them. Silently and effectively, with entire
spontaneity, their influence goes forth, and a rule and pattern is thus
given to those on whom the business of the government of the world
devolves. The one character 'Heaven' is employed throughout the Book as
the denomination of this purposeless spontaneity which yet is so
powerful.

Lû Shû-kih says:--'This Book also sets forth clearly how the rulers of
the world ought simply to act in accordance with the spontaneity of the
virtue of Heaven; abjuring sageness and putting away knowledge; and
doing nothing:--in this way the Tâo or proper Method of Government will
be attained to. As to the coercive methods of Mo Tî

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

and Hui-dze, they only serve to distress those who follow them.'

This object of the Book appears, more or less distinctly, in most of the
illustrative paragraphs; though, as has been pointed out in the notes
upon it, several of them must be considered to be spurious. Paragraphs
6, 7, and 11 are thus called in question, and, as most readers will
feel, with reason. From 13 to the end, the paragraphs are held to be one
long paragraph where Kwang-dze introduces his own reflections in an
unusual style; but the genuineness of the whole, so far as I have
observed, has not been called in question.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIII. Thien Tâo](sbe39101)
