[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39095)  [Next](sbe39097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BOOK VIII. PHIEN MÂU.

This Book brings us to the Second Part of the writings of our author,
embracing in all fifteen Books. Of the most important difference between
the Books of the First and the other Parts some account has been given
in the Introductory Chapter. We have here to do only with the different
character of their titles, Those of the seven preceding Books are so
many theses, and are believed to have been prefixed to them by Kwang-dze
himself; those of this Book and the others that follow are believed to
have been prefixed by Kwo Hsiang, and consist of two or three characters
taken from the beginning, or near the beginning of the several Books,
after the fashion of the names of the Books in the Confucian Analects,
in the works of Mencius, and in our Hebrew Scriptures. Books VIII to
XIII are considered to be supplementary to VII by Aû-yang Hsiû.

The title of this eighth Book, Phien Mâu, has been rendered by Mr.
Balfour, after Dr. Williams, 'Double Thumbs.' But the Mâu, which may
mean either the Thumb or the Great Toe, must be taken in the latter
sense, being distinguished in this paragraph and elsewhere from Kih, 'a
finger,' and expressly specified also as belonging to the foot. The
character phien, as used here, is defined in the Khang-hsî dictionary as
'anything additional growing out as an appendage or excrescence, a
growing out at the side.' This would seem to justify the translation of
it by 'double.' But in paragraph 3, while the extra finger increases the
number of the fingers, this growth on the foot is represented as
diminishing the number of the toes. I must consider

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

the phien therefore as descriptive of an appendage by which the great
toe was united to one or all of the other toes, and can think of no
better rendering of the title than what I have given. It is told in the
Zo Kwan (twenty-third year of duke Hsî) that the famous duke Wän of Zin
had phien hsieh, that is, that his ribs presented the appearance of
forming one bone. So much for the title.

The subject-matter of the Book seems strange to us; that, according to
the Tâo, benevolence and righteousness are not natural growths of
humanity, but excrescences on it, like the extra finger on the hand, and
the membranous web of the toes. The weakness of the Tâoistic system
begins to appear. Kwang-dze's arguments in support of his position must
be pronounced very feeble. The ancient Shun is introduced as the first
who called in the two great virtues to distort and vex the world,
keeping society for more than a thousand years in a state of uneasy
excitement. Of course he assumes that prior to Shun, he does not say for
how long a time (and in other places he makes decay to have begun
earlier), the world had been in a state of paradisiacal innocence and
simplicity, under the guidance of the Tâo, untroubled by any
consideration of what was right and what was wrong, men passively
allowing their nature to have its quiet development, and happy in that
condition. All culture of art or music is wrong, and so it is wrong and
injurious to be striving to manifest benevolence and to maintain
righteousness.

He especially singles out two men, one of the twelfth century B. C., the
famous Po-î, who died of hunger rather than acknowledge the dynasty of
Kâu; and one of a more recent age, the robber Shih, a great leader of
brigands, who brought himself by his deeds to an untimely end; and he
sees nothing to choose between them. We must give our judgment for the
teaching of Confucianism in preference to that of Tâoism, if our author
can be regarded as a fair expositor of the latter. He is ingenious in
his statements and illustrations, but he was, like his master Lâo-dze,
only a dreamer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IX: Mâ Thî](sbe39097)
