[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Taoism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe39020)  [Next](sbe39022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 14.

14\. 1. We look at it, and we do not see it, and we name it 'the
Equable.' We listen to it, and we do not hear it, and we name it 'the
Inaudible.' We try to grasp it, and do not get hold of it, and we name
it 'the Subtle.' With these three qualities, it cannot be made the
subject of description; and hence we blend them together and obtain The
One.

2\. Its upper part is not bright, and its lower part is not obscure.
Ceaseless in its action, it yet cannot be named, and then it again
returns and becomes nothing. This is called the Form of the Formless,
and the Semblance of the Invisible; this is called the Fleeting and
Indeterminable.

3\. We meet it and do not see its Front; we follow it, and do not see
its Back. When we can lay hold of the Tâo of old to direct the things of
the present day, and are able to know it as it was of old in the
beginning, this is called (unwinding) the clue of Tâo.

<span id="img_05700"></span> ![](img/05700.jpg), 'The Manifestation of
the Mystery.' The subject of par. 1 is the Tâo, but the Tâo in its
operation, and not the primal conception of it, as entirely distinct
from things, which rises before the mind in the second paragraph. The
Chinese characters which I have translated 'the Equable,' 'the
Inaudible,' and 'the Subtle,' are now pronounced Î, Hî, and Wei, and in
1823 Rémusat fancied that they were

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

intended to give the Hebrew tetragrammaton יהוה, which he thought had
come to Lâo-dze somehow from the West, or been found by him there. It
was a mere fancy or dream; and still more so is the recent attempt to
revive the notion by Victor von Strauss in 1870, and Dr. Edkins in 1884.
The idea of the latter is specially strange, maintaining, as he does,
that we should read the characters according to their old sounds.
Lâo-dze has not in the chapter a personal Being before his mind, but the
procedure of his mysterious Tâo, the course according to which the
visible phenomena take place, incognisable by human sense and capable of
only approximate description by terms appropriate to what is within the
domain of sense. See the Introduction, pp. [14](sbe39005.htm#page_14),
[15](sbe39005.htm#page_15).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15](sbe39022)
