[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_11)  [Next](bh3_13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:13

*Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:*

The Prophet and his companions assumed Ihram for Hajj and none except
the Prophet and Talha had the Hadi with them. 'Ali had come from Yemen
and he had the Hadi with him. He ('Ali) said, "I have assumed Ihram with
an intention like that of Allah's Apostle has assumed it." The Prophet
ordered his companions to intend the Ihram with which they had come for
'Umra, to perform the Tawaf of the Ka'ba (and between Safa and Marwa),
to get their hair cut short and then to finish their Ihram with the
exception of those who had the Hadi with them. They asked, "Shall we go
to Mina and the private organs of some of us are dribbling (if we finish
Ihram and have sexual relations with our wives)?" The Prophet heard that
and said, "Had I known what I know now, I would not have brought the
Hadi. If I did not have the Hadi with me I would have finished my
Ihram." 'Aisha got her menses and performed all the ceremonies (of Hajj)
except the Tawaf . So when she became clean from her menses, and she had
performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba, she said, "O Allah's Apostle! You
(people) are returning with both Hajj and 'Umra and I am returning only
with Hajj!" So, he ordered 'Abdur Rahman bin Abu Bakr to go with her to
At-Tan'im. Thus she performed 'Umra after the Hajj in the month of
Dhi-l-Hijja. Suraqa bin Malik bin Ju'sham met the Prophet at Al-'Aqaba
(Jamrat-ul 'Aqaba) while the latter was stoning it and said, "O Allah's
Apostle! Is this permissible only for you?" The Prophet replied, "No, it
is for ever (i.e. it is permissible for all Muslims to perform 'Umra
before Hajj."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:14: 'Aisha: We set out with Allah's Apostle shortly before the
appearance of the ...](bh3_13.md)
