[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_501.md) 
[Next](bh3_503.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:504

*Narrated Jabir bin 'Abdullah:*

I was accompanying the Prophet on a journey and was riding a slow camel
that was lagging behind the others. The Prophet passed by me and asked,
"Who is this?" I replied, "Jabir bin 'Abdullah." He asked, "What is the
matter, (why are you late)?" I replied, "I am riding a slow camel." He
asked, "Do you have a stick?" I replied in the affirmative. He said,
"Give it to me." When I gave it to him, he beat the camel and rebuked
it. Then that camel surpassed the others thenceforth. The Prophet said,
"Sell it to me." I replied, "It is (a gift) for you, O Allah's Apostle."
He said, "Sell it to me. I have bought it for four Dinars (gold pieces)
and you can keep on riding it till Medina." When we approached Medina, I
started going (towards my house). The Prophet said, "Where are you
going?" I Sad, "I have married a widow." He said, "Why have you not
married a virgin to fondle with each other?" I said, "My father died and
left daughters, so I decided to marry a widow (an experienced woman) (to
look after them)." He said, "Well done." When we reached Medina, Allah's
Apostle said, "O Bilal, pay him (the price of the camel) and give him
extra money." Bilal gave me four Dinars and one Qirat extra. (A
sub-narrator said): Jabir added, "The extra Qirat of Allah's Apostle
never parted from me." The Qirat was always in Jabir bin 'Abdullah's
purse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:505: Sahl bin Sad: A woman came to Allah's Apostle and said, O
Allah's Apostle! I want ...](bh3_503.md)
