[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_46)  [Next](bh3_48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:48

*Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:*

That his father said "We proceeded with the Prophet in the year of
Al-Hudaibiya and his companions assumed Ihram but I did not. We were
informed that some enemies were at Ghaiqa and so we went on towards
them. My companions saw an onager and some of them started laughing
among themselves. I looked and saw it. I chased it with my horse and
stabbed and caught it. I wanted some help from my companions but they
refused. (I slaughtered it all alone). We all ate from it (i.e. its
meat). Then I followed Allah's Apostle lest we should be left behind. At
times I urged my horse to run at a galloping speed and at other times at
an ordinary slow speed. On the way I met a man from the tribe of Bani
Ghifar at midnight. I asked him where he had left Allah's Apostle . The
man replied that he had left the Prophet at a place called Ta'hun and he
had the intention of having the midday rest at As-Suqya. So, I followed
Allah's Apostle till I reached him and said, "O Allah's Apostle! I have
been sent by my companions who send you their greetings and compliments
and ask for Allah's Mercy and Blessings upon you. They were afraid lest
the enemy might intervene between you and them; so please wait for
them." So he did. Then I said, "O Allah's Apostle! We have hunted an
onager and have some of it (i.e. its meat) left over." Allah's Apostle
told his companions to eat the meat although all of them were in a state
of Ihram."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:49: Abu Qatada: We were in the company of the Prophet at a
place called Al-Qaha (which...](bh3_48.md)
