[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_735) 
[Next](bh3_737) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:737

*Narrated Aisha:*

Buraira came (to 'Aisha) and said, "I have made a contract of
emancipation with my masters for nine Uqiyas (of gold) to be paid in
yearly installments. Therefore, I seek your help." 'Aisha said, "If your
masters agree, I will pay them the sum at once and free you on condition
that your Wala' will be for me." Buraira went to her masters but they
refused that offer. She (came back) and said, "I presented to them the
offer but they refused, unless the Wala' was for them." Allah's Apostle
heard of that and asked me about it, and I told him about it. On that he
said, "Buy and manumit her and stipulate that the Wala' should be for
you, as Wala' is for the liberator." 'Aisha added, "Allah's Apostle then
got up amongst the people, Glorified and Praised Allah, and said, 'Then
after: What about some people who impose conditions which are not
present in Allah's Laws? So, any condition which is not present in
Allah's Laws is invalid even if they were one-hundred conditions.
Allah's ordinance is the truth, and Allah's condition is stronger and
more solid. Why do some men from you say, O so-and-so! manumit the slave
but the Wala will be for me? Verily, the Wala is for the liberator."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:738: Amra bint 'AbdurRahman: Buraira went to Aisha, the mother
of the faithful believers to seek ...](bh3_737)
