[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_861.md) 
[Next](bh3_863.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:863

*Narrated Al-Bara:*

When the Prophet intended to perform 'Umra in the month of Dhul-Qada,
the people of Mecca did not let him enter Mecca till he settled the
matter with them by promising to stay in it for three days only. When
the document of treaty was written, the following was mentioned: 'These
are the terms on which Muhammad, Allah's Apostle agreed (to make
peace).' They said, "We will not agree to this, for if we believed that
you are Allah's Apostle we would not prevent you, but you are Muhammad
bin 'Abdullah." The Prophet said, "I am Allah's Apostle and also
Muhammad bin 'Abdullah." Then he said to 'Ali, "Rub off (the words)
'Allah's Apostle' ", but 'Ali said, "No, by Allah, I will never rub off
your name." So, Allah's Apostle took the document and wrote, 'This is
what Muhammad bin 'Abdullah has agreed upon: No arms will be brought
into Mecca except in their cases, and nobody from the people of Mecca
will be allowed to go with him (i.e. the Prophet ) even if he wished to
follow him and he (the Prophet ) will not prevent any of his companions
from staying in Mecca if the latter wants to stay.' When the Prophet
entered Mecca and the time limit passed, the Meccans went to 'Ali and
said, "Tell your Friend (i.e. the Prophet ) to go out, as the period
(agreed to) has passed." So, the Prophet went out of Mecca. The daughter
of Hamza ran after them (i.e. the Prophet and his companions), calling,
"O Uncle! O Uncle!" 'Ali received her and led her by the hand and said
to Fatima, "Take your uncle's daughter." Zaid and Ja'far quarrel ed
about her. 'Ali said, "I have more right to her as she is my uncle's
daughter." Ja'far said, "She is my uncle's daughter, and her aunt is my
wife." Zaid said, "She is my brother's daughter." The Prophet judged
that she should be given to her aunt, and said that the aunt was like
the mother. He then said to 'All, "You are from me and I am from you",
and said to Ja'far, "You resemble me both in character and appearance",
and said to Zaid, "You are our brother (in faith) and our freed slave."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:864: Ibn 'Umar: Allah's Apostle set out for the 'Umra but the
pagans of Quraish ...](bh3_863.md)
