[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_681.md) 
[Next](bh3_683.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:683

*Narrated Ibn 'Abbas:*

The Prophet (along with his companions) reached Mecca in the morning of
the fourth of Dhul-Hijja assuming Ihram for Hajj only. So when we
arrived at Mecca, the Prophet ordered us to change our intentions of the
Ihram for'Umra and that we could finish our Ihram after performing the
'Umra and could go to our wives (for sexual intercourse). The people
began talking about that. Jabir said surprisingly, "Shall we go to Mina
while semen is dribbling from our male organs?" Jabir moved his hand
while saying so. When this news reached the Prophet he delivered a
sermon and said, "I have been informed that some peoples were saying so
and so; By Allah I fear Allah more than you do, and am more obedient to
Him than you. If I had known what I know now, I would not have brought
the Hadi (sacrifice) with me and had the Hadi not been with me, I would
have finished the Ihram." At that Suraqa bin Malik stood up and asked "O
Allah's Apostle! Is this permission for us only or is it forever?" The
Prophet replied, "It is forever." In the meantime 'Ali bin Abu Talib
came from Yemen and was saying Labbaik for what the Prophet has
intended. (According to another man, 'Ali was saying Labbaik for Hajj
similar to Allah's Apostle's). The Prophet told him to keep on the Ihram
and let him share the Hadi with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:684: Abaya bin Rifaa: My grandfather, Rafi bin Khadij said, We
were in the valley of ...](bh3_683.md)
