[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_515) 
[Next](bh3_517) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:517

*Narrated Abu Huraira:*

The Prophet said, "While a man was riding a cow, it turned towards him
and said, 'I have not been created for this purpose (i.e. carrying), I
have been created for sloughing." The Prophet added, "I, Abu Bakr and
'Umar believe in the story." The Prophet went on, "A wolf caught a
sheep, and when the shepherd chased it, the wolf said, 'Who will be its
guard on the day of wild beasts, when there will be no shepherd for it
except me?' "After narrating it, the Prophet said, "I, Abu Bakr and
'Umar too believe it." Abu Salama (a sub-narrator) said, "Abu Bakr and
'Umar were not present then." (It has been written that a wolf also
spoke to one of the companions of the Prophet near Medina as narrated in
Fatah-al-Bari:

Suddenly a wolf caught a sheep and I shouted at it. The wolf sat on its
tail and addressed me, saying, 'Who will look after it (i.e. the sheep)
when you will be busy and not able to look after it? Do you forbid me
the provision which Allah has provided me?' " Ahban added, "I clapped my
hands and said, 'By Allah, I have never seen anything more curious and
wonderful than this!' On that the wolf said, 'There is something (more
curious) and wonderful than this; that is, Allah's Apostle in those palm
trees, inviting people to Allah (i.e. Islam).' "Unais bin 'Amr further
said, "Then Ahban went to Allah's Apostle and informed him what happened
and embraced Islam.)" palm trees or other trees and share the fruits
with me."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:518: Abu Huraira: The Ansar said to the Prophet Distribute the
date palm trees between ...](bh3_517)
