[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_231) 
[Next](bh3_233) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:235

*Narrated Abu Said Al-Khudri:*

Allah's Apostle used to practice Itikaf (in the mosque) in the middle
third of Ramadan and after passing the twenty nights he used to go back
to his house on the 21st, and the people who were in Itikaf with him
also used to go back to their houses. Once in Ramadan, in which he
practiced Itikaf, he established the night prayers at the night in which
he used to return home, and then he addressed the people and ordered
them whatever Allah wished him to order and said, "I used to practice
Itikaf for these ten days (i.e. the middle 113rd but now I intend to
stay in Itikaf for the last ten days (of the month); so whoever was in
Itikaf with me should stay at his place of seclusion. I have verily been
shown (the date of) this Night (of Qadr) but I have forgotten it. So
search for it in the odd nights of the last ten days (of this month). I
also saw myself (in the dream) prostrating in mud and water." On the
night of the 21st, the sky was covered with clouds and it rained, and
the rain-water started leaking through the roof of the mosque at the
praying place of the Prophet . I saw with my own eyes the Prophet at the
completion of the morning prayer leaving with his face covered with mud
and water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:236: 'Aisha: The Prophet said, Look for (the Night of Qadr).
...](bh3_233)
