[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_14)  [Next](bh3_16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:16

*Narrated 'Aisha:*

We set out assuming the Ihram for Hajj in the months of Hajj towards the
sacred precincts of Hajj. We dismounted at Sarif and the Prophet said to
his companions, "Whoever has not got the Hadi with him and likes to make
it as 'Umra, he should do it, but he who has got the Hadi with him
should not do it." The Prophet and some of his wealthy companions had
the Hadi with them, so they did not finish Ihram after performing the
'Umra. The Prophet came to me while I was weeping. He asked me the
reason for it. I replied, "I have heard of what you have said to your
companions and I cannot do the 'Umra." He asked me, "What is the matter
with you?" I replied, "I am not praying." He said, "There is no harm in
it as you are one of the daughters of Adam and the same is written for
you as for others. So, you should perform Hajj and I hope that Allah
will enable you to perform the 'Umra as well." So, I carried on till we
departed from Mina and halted at Al-Mahassab. The Prophet called
'Abdur-Rahman and said, "Go out of the sanctuary with your sister and
let her assume Ihram for 'Umra, and after both of you have finished the
Tawaf I will be waiting for you at this place." We came back at
mid-night and the Prophet asked us, "Have you finished?" I replied in
the affirmative. He announced the departure and the people set out for
the journey and some of them had performed the Tawaf of the Ka'ba before
the morning prayer, and after that the Prophet set out for Medina.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:17: Safwan bin Ya'la bin Umaiya from his father who said: A man
came to the Prophet while he was at Ji'rana. The man was ...](bh3_16.md)
