[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_587.md) 
[Next](bh3_589.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:589

*Narrated Jabir:*

When 'Abdullah (my father) died, he left behind children and debts. I
asked the lenders to put down some of his debt, but they refused, so I
went to the Prophet to intercede with them, yet they refused. The
Prophet said (to me), "Classify your dates into their different kinds:
'Adhq bin Zaid, Lean and 'Ajwa, each kind alone and call all the
creditors and wait till I come to you." I did so and the Prophet came
and sat beside the dates and started measuring to each his due till he
paid them fully, and the amount of dates remained as it was before, as
if he had not touched them.

(On another occasion) I took part in one of Ghazawat among with the
Prophet and I was riding one of our camels. The camel got tired and was
lagging behind the others. The Prophet hit it on its back. He said,
"Sell it to me, and you have the right to ride it till Medina.'' When we
approached Medina, I took the permission from the Prophet to go to my
house, saying, "O Allah's Apostle! I have newly married." The Prophet
asked, "Have you married a virgin or a matron (a widow or divorcee)?" I
said, "I have married a matron, as 'Abdullah (my father) died and left
behind daughters small in their ages, so I married a matron who may
teach them and bring them up with good manners." The Prophet then said
(to me), "Go to your family." When I went there and told my maternal
uncle about the selling of the camel, he admonished me for it. On that I
told him about its slowness and exhaustion and about what the Prophet
had done to the camel and his hitting it. When the Prophet arrived, I
went to him with the camel in the morning and he gave me its price, the
camel itself, and my share from the war booty as he gave the other
people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:590: Ibn 'Umar: A man came to the Prophet and said, I am often
betrayed in ...](bh3_589.md)
