[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Islam](../../index.md) 
[Bukhari](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bh3_45)  [Next](bh3_47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Hadith 3:47

*Narrated 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada:*

My father set out (for Mecca) in the year of Al-Hudaibiya, and his
companions assumed Ihram, but he did not. At that time the Prophet was
informed that an enemy wanted to attack him, so the Prophet proceeded
onwards. While my father was among his companions, some of them laughed
among themselves. (My father said), "I looked up and saw an onager. I
attacked, stabbed and caught it. I then sought my companions' help but
they refused to help me. (Later) we all ate its meat. We were afraid
that we might be left behind (separated) from the Prophet so I went in
search of the Prophet and made my horse to run at a galloping speed at
times and let it go slow at an ordinary speed at other times till I met
a man from the tribe of Bani Ghifar at midnight. I asked him, "Where did
you leave the Prophet ?" He replied, "I left him at Ta'hun and he had
the intention of having the midday rest at As-Suqya. I followed the
trace and joined the Prophet and said, 'O Allah's Apostle! Your people
(companions) send you their compliments, and (ask for) Allah's Blessings
upon you. They are afraid lest they may be left behind; so please wait
for them.' I added, 'O Allah's Apostle! I hunted an onager and some of
its meat is with me. The Prophet told the people to eat it though all of
them were in the state of Ihram."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3:48: 'Abdullah bin Abu Qatada: That his father said We proceeded
with the Prophet in the year of ...](bh3_47.md)
