[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1019)  [Next](bim1021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE FIRST INVENTORS OF LETTERS.--IMPROVERS OF THE ALPHABET.--INVENTION OF THE ROLL AND PLAGAWD.--OBLIGATION OF A BARD TO HOLD A CHAIR AND GORSEDD.

Who was the first that made letters?

Einigan the Giant, <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_55) or, as he is also
called, Einiget the Giant; that is, he took the three rays of light,
which were used as a symbol by Menw, son of the Three Shouts, and
employed them as the agents and instruments of speech, namely the three
instruments B. G. D. and what are embosomed in them, the three being
respectively invested with three agencies. Of the divisions and
subdivisions he made four signs of place and voice, that the instruments
might have room to utter their powers, and to exhibit their agencies.
Hence were obtained thirteen letters, which were cut in form on wood and
stone. <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_56) After that, Einigan the Giant
saw reason for other and different organs of voice and speech, and
subjected the rays to other combinations, from which were made the signs
L. and R. and S., whence there were sixteen signs. After that, wise men
were appointed to commit them to memory and knowledge, according to the
art which he made; and those men were called Gwyddoniaid, and were men
endued with awen from God. They

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span> <span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

had no privilege and license warranted by the law and protection of
country and nation, but only by the courtesy and pleasure of the giver.
The Gwyddoniaid are called the principal sages of the nation of the
Cymry. When the Cymry came to the Isle of Britain, and seisin of land
and soil was appointed for every innate Cymro, and each had his dwelling
and position, and when sovereignty was arranged, and was to be conferred
upon him who should be found to be the bravest and wisest and most
powerful, being an innate Cymro, they resorted to Gorsedd by their heads
of kindred, and conferred the sovereignty upon Prydain, son of Aedd the
Great, for he was found to be the bravest, most powerful, wisest, and
the brightest of wit. And Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, assembled the
heads of kindred, sages, and men of knowledge of the nation of the Cymry
in a conventional Gorsedd. Then were Bards appointed, namely, of three
degrees, that is to say, primitive Bards, to uphold the memorial of
national voice and vocal song, and Ovates, to uphold the memorial of
symbols, whence they were called herald-bards, and Druids, whose duty it
was to impart instruction and sciences to the nation of the Cymry,
namely divine sciences, and sciences of wisdom, according to what was
known by means of the memorial of the voice of Gorsedd and vocal song,
in right of the primitive Bard, and the memorial of symbol and letter by
herald-Bards. And when the offices incumbent upon the three degrees were
appointed, license and privileges in respect of protection and reward
were assigned to them. And raiment was given to each of the three
degrees, namely blue to the primitive Bards, green to the Ovate-Bards,
and white to the Druid-Bards. Thus every one was to bear his badge and
honour by authority, that every Cymro might know his privilege,
protection, and reward; and security was given them that none besides
should bear those vestment badges.

When was the augmentation of symbols as far as twenty-four brought into
knowledge and use?

Rhuvawn the Golden-tongued, <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_57)
introduced two symbols.

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

namely W and Ff, whereupon eighteen letters were used, and thus they
continued until the time of Talhaiarn of Caerleon-upon-Usk, who
introduced six letters different to what had been before him, which were
Ch. F. C. T. P. Ll., whence they became twenty-four letters. After that,
others were invented as ancillaries to the signs which required them,
for the sake of confirming the vocalization of word and sign, until
those which now exist were arranged, namely, thirty-eight signs, as the
signs of wood and stone; and they are in use by the herald-bards of the
Isle of Britain under the privilege of the sciences of the nation of the
Cymry.

When were the sciences of the writing of Roll and Plagawd <span
id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_58) obtained?

By Bran, son of Llyr the Blessed, it is said; but others relate that it
was by Gwydion, son of Don <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_59) the
Irishman, of Arvon, who brought them from Ireland. That, however, is not
true in reference to the nation of the Cymry, for certain is it that
Bran the Blessed first brought them into the Isle of Britain from Rome,
where he learned the art, and the mode of manufacturing plagawd with the
skins of lambs and calves and kids. It was Gwydion that first introduced
them into Ireland, after the Irish of Mona and Arvon had obtained the
faith in Christ; hence the knowledge of letters and the writing of Roll
and Plagawd.

Why should a Bard, in virtue of his oath, hold a Chair and Gorsedd?

Because there can be no country and nation without good sciences under
the protection of God and His peace, and there can be no prepared <span
id="fr_61"></span>[3](#fn_60) sciences without teachers, and there can
be no teachers without the ordering of privilege and usage, and there
ought to be no privilege without actual usage; wherefore nothing can
become actual without

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

prudent order, and established practice, and obligatory office on the
part of those who are entitled <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_61) to
privileges and immunities. The three functions of Chair and Gorsedd are
to teach sciences from God and goodness, in respect of what is found to
be wisdom,--to preserve the memory of the privileges, usages, and
praiseworthy actions of the country and nation of the Cymry,--and to
uphold order and known dates in respect of the learning of masters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[33:1](bim1020.htm#fr_56) In one version of Rhys
Goch's "Cywydd Cyfrinach" mention is made of this personage as one whose
learning was the source of the *Awen*--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

O ddysg *Einigan* a ddoeth.

It came from the learning of Einigan.

</div>

<span id="fn_56"></span>[33:2](bim1020.htm#fr_57) Reference is made to
the usage of engraving on stone by Huw Cae Llwyd, A.D. 145--1480;--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Darllen *main* bychain yn bet,  
Dull Hywel dealt llawer. <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

He sweetly read little *stones*,  
After the manner of Howel, he understood many things.

</div>

<span id="fn_57"></span>[35:1](bim1020.htm#fr_58) <span id="page_34">p.
34</span> This doubtless is none other than the "Rhufin," whose name
occurs in a poem by Edmund Prys (1541-1624) in conjunction with the
names of "Plennydd," "Goron," "Meugant," "Melchin," "Mefin," "Madog,"
and "Cadog."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Mae un *Rhufin* min rhyfedd.

There is one Rhuvin of wonderful lips.

</div>

<span id="fn_58"></span>[37:1](bim1020.htm#fr_59) <span id="page_36">p.
36</span> We retain the original term *plagawd*, (Lat. plagula, plaga;
Gr. πληγη, Dorice πλαγη,) because in the documents before us it is
described as meaning not only parchment, but also a kind of plant or
sedge grown in the East.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[37:2](bim1020.htm#fr_60) Thus Taliesin,--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Gwydion ap Don  
A rithwys gorwyddawd y ar *plagawd*. <span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

Gwydion son of Don--  
Fashioned wood-knowledge upon *plagawd*.  
                            Kadeir Keridwen.

</div>

<span id="fn_60"></span>[37:3](bim1020.htm#fr_61) Pardion--parodion.
Another reading has *parorion*, continued, permanent.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[39:1](bim1020.htm#fr_62) <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> Al. "invested with."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origin of Letters](bim1021)
