[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1105)  [Next](bim1107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE CREATION.--WORSHIP.--VOCAL SONG.--GWYDDONIAID.

Disciple. From what did God make the world and living beings?

Master. From the particles, which He collected out of the infinite
expanse in the circle of Ceugant, and collocated

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

in order and just arrangement in the circle of Gwynvyd, as worlds, and
lives, and natures, without number, weight, or measure, which any mind
or intellect, but Himself, could possibly foresee or devise, even if it
possessed the endless ages of the circle of Ceugant.

D. By what instrumentality or agency did God make these things?

M. By the voice of His mighty energy, that is, by its melodious
sweetness, which was scarcely heard, when, lo! the dead gleamed into
life, and the nonentity, which had neither place or existence, flashed
like lightning into elementation, and rejoiced into life, and the
congealed, motionless shiver warmed into living existence;--the
destitute nothing rejoiced into being a thousand times more quickly than
the lightning reaches its home.

D. Did any living being hear that melodious voice?

M. Yes; and co-instantaneously with the voice were seen all sciences and
all things cognitive, in the imperishable and endless stability of their
existence and life. For the first that existed, and the first that
lived, the first that obtained knowledge, and the first that knew it,
was the first that practised it. And the first sage was Huon, the son of
Nudd, <span id="fr_264"></span>[1](#fn_262.md) who is called Gwynn, the son
of Nudd, and Enniged the Giant; it was he who first made demonstration
visible and inceptive to the inferences of men.

D. Who was the first that instituted the worship and adoration of God?

M. Seth, the son of Adam; that is, he first made a retreat for worship
in the woods of the Vale of Hebron, having first searched and
investigated the trees, until he found a large oak, being the king of
trees, branching, wide-spreading, thick-topped, and shady, under which
he formed a choir and a place of worship. This was called Gorsedd, and
hence originated the name Gorsedd, which was given to

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

every place of worship; and it was in that choir that Enos, the son of
Seth, composed vocal song to God.

D. Who was the first that made a vocal song?

M. Enos, <span id="fr_265"></span>[1](#fn_263.md) the son of Seth, the son
of Adam, was the first that made a vocal song, and praised God first in
just poetry, and it was in his father's Gorsedd that he first obtained
Awen, which was Awen from God; hence has arisen the usage of holding the
Gorsedd <span id="fr_266"></span>[2](#fn_264.md) of Vocal Song in the
re-sort and Gorsedd of worship.

D. For what honourable purposes did Enos, the son of Seth, invent vocal
song?

M. In the first place, for the purpose of praising God and all goodness;
secondly, to commemorate good qualities, incidents, and knowledge;
thirdly, to convey instruction relative to praiseworthy sciences in
respect of God and man, that is, in such a way as would be easiest to
learn, and re-member, and most pleasant to listen to.

D. What was the name that the wise men first had, whose employment was
vocal song and laudable sciences?

M. One was called Gwyddon, and many Gwyddoniaid; and they were so
called, because they followed their art in woods, and under trees, in
retired and inaccessible places, for the sake of quietness, and the
meditation of Awenic learning and sciences from God, and for the sake of
quietness to teach the sciences to such as sought them, and desired
wisdom by means of reason and Awen from God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[259:1](bim1106.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="page_258">p. 258</span> In the document printed at p. 11, Huon is
said to be the son of Alser. Gwyn ab Nudd is celebrated in Welsh Romance
as the King of the Fairies, <span id="page_259">p. 259</span> Brenin y
Tylwyth Teg, in which capacity many interesting particulars respect ing
him have been collected in the Notes to Guest's Mabinogion, ii, p. 323.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[261:1](bim1106.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="page_260">p. 260</span> See Note, [p. 54](bim1026.htm#page_54.md).

<span id="fn_264"></span>[261:2](bim1106.htm#fr_266.md) Al. "chair."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Material of the World](bim1107.md)
