[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1097)  [Next](bim1099.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

### THE BOOK OF BARDISM.

Here is the Book of Bardism, that is to say, the Druidism of the Bards
of the Isle of Britain, which I, Llywelyn Sion <span
id="fr_236"></span>[1](#fn_235.md) of Llangewydd, extracted from old Books,
namely, the books of Einion the Priest, <span
id="fr_237"></span>[2](#fn_236.md) Taliesin, the Chief of Bards, <span
id="fr_238"></span>[3](#fn_237.md) Davydd Ddu of Hiraddug, <span
id="fr_239"></span>[4](#fn_238.md) Cwtta Cyvarwydd, <span
id="fr_240"></span>[5](#fn_239.md) Jonas of Menevia, <span
id="fr_241"></span>[6](#fn_240.md) Edeyrn the Golden-tongued, <span
id="fr_242"></span>[7](#fn_241.md) Sion Cent, <span
id="fr_243"></span>[8](#fn_242.md) Rhys Goch, <span
id="fr_244"></span>[9](#fn_243.md) and others, in the Library of Rhaglan,
by permission of the lord William Herbert, earl of Pembroke, <span
id="fr_245"></span>[10](#fn_244.md) to whom God grant that I may prove
thankful as long as I live. The first is a Treatise in the form of
Question and Answer, by a Bard and his Disciple--the work of Sion Cent,
which contains many of the principal subjects of the primitive wisdom,
as it existed among the Bards of the Isle of Britain from the age of
ages. In this Dialogue, the Disciple first puts the question, and the
Bard, his Teacher, answers, and imparts to him information and
knowledge. In the second place the Bard examines, and the Disciple
answers.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

The second examination.

Q. Prithee, who art thou? and tell me thy history.

A. I am a man in virtue of God's will, and the necessary consequence
that follows, for "what God wills must be."

Q. Whence didst thou proceed? and what is thy beginning?

A. I came from the Great World, <span id="fr_246"></span>[1](#fn_245.md)
having my beginning in Annwn. <span id="fr_247"></span>[2](#fn_246.md)

Q. Where art thou now? and how tamest thou to where thou art?

A. I am in the Little World, <span id="fr_248"></span>[1](#fn_245.md)
whither I came, having traversed the circle of Abred, and now I am a man
at its termination and extreme limits.

Q. What wert thou before thou didst become a man in the circle of Abred?

A. I was in Annwn the least possible that was capable of life, and the
nearest possible to absolute death, and I came in every form, and
through every form capable of a body and life, to the state of man along
the circle of Abred, where my condition was severe and grievous during
the age of ages, ever since I was parted in Annwn from the dead, by the
gift of God, and His great generosity, and His unlimited and endless
love.

Q. Through how many forms didst thou come? and what happened unto thee?

A. Through every form capable of life, in water, in earth, and in air.
And there happened unto me every se-verity, every hardship, every evil,
and every suffering, and but little was the goodness and gwynfyd before
I became a man.

Q. Thou hast said, that it was in virtue of God's love thou earnest
through all these, and didst see and experience all these; tell me how
can this take place through the love

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span> <span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

of God? And how many were the signs of the want of love during thy
migration in Abred?

A. Gwynvyd cannot be obtained without seeing and knowing every thing,
but it is not possible to see and to know every thing without suffering
every thing. And there can be no full and perfect love that does not
produce those things which are necessary to lead to the knowledge that
causes Gwynvyd, for there can be no Gwynvyd without the complete
knowledge of every form of existence, and of every evil and good, and of
every operation and power and condition of evil and good. And this
knowledge cannot be obtained without experience in every form of life,
in every incident, in every suffering, in every evil and in every good,
so that they may be respectively known one from the other. All this is
necessary before there can be Gwynvyd, and there is need of them all
before there can be perfect love of God, and there must be perfect love
of God before there can be Gwynvyd.

Q. Why are the things, which thou hast mentioned, necessary before there
can be Gwynvyd?

A. Because there can be no Gwynvyd without prevailing over evil and
death, and every opposition and Cythraul, and they cannot be prevailed
over without knowing their species, nature, power, operations, place,
and time, and every form and kind of existence which they have, so that
all about them may be known, and that they may be avoided, and that
wherever they are they may be opposed, <span
id="fr_249"></span>[1](#fn_247.md) counteracted, <span
id="fr_250"></span>[2](#fn_248.md) and overcome, and that we may be cured
of them, and be restored from under their effect. And where there is
this perfect knowledge, there is perfect liberty, and evil and death
cannot be renounced and overcome but where there is perfect liberty; and
there can be no Gwynvyd but with God in perfect liberty, and it is in
perfect liberty that the circle of Gwynvyd exists.

Q. Why may not perfect knowledge be obtained, without passing through
every form of life in Abred?

A. On this account, because there are no two forms

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

alike, and every form has a use, a suffering, a knowledge, an
intelligence, a gwynvyd, a quality, an operation, and an impulse, the
like and complete uniformity of which can not be had in any other form
of existence. And as there is a special knowledge in each form of
existence, which cannot be had in another, it is necessary that we
should go through every form of existence, before we can acquire every
form and species of knowledge and understanding, and consequently
renounce all evil, and attach ourselves to every gwynvyd.

Q. How many forms of existence are there? and what is the use of them?

A. As many as God saw necessary towards the investigation and knowledge
of every species and quality in good and evil, that there might be
nothing, capable of being known and conceived by God, without being
experienced, and consequently known. And in whatsoever thing there may
be a knowledge of good and evil, and of the nature of life and death,
there is a form of existence which corresponds with the attainment of
the knowledge required. Therefore, the number of the kinds and modes of
forms of existence is the sum that could conceive and understand with a
view to perfect goodness, knowledge, and gwynvyd. And God caused that
every living and animate being should pass through every form and
species of existence endued with life, so that in the end every living
and animate being might have perfect knowledge, life, and gwynvyd; and
all this from the perfect love of God, which in virtue of His Divine
nature He could not but exhibit towards man and every living being.

Q. Art thou of opinion that every living being shall attain to the
circle of Gwynvyd at last?

A. That is my opinion, for less could not have happened from the
infinite love of God, God being able to cause, knowing the manner how to
cause, and continually willing every thing to exist that can be
conceived and sought in

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His own love, and
in the desire of every animation whilst opposed to evil and death.

Q. When will this condition happen to every living being, and in what
manner will occur the end of the life of Abred.?

A. Every living and animate being shall traverse the circle of Abred
from the depth of Annwn, that is, the extreme limits of what is low in
every existence endued with life; and they shall ascend higher and
higher in the order and gradation of life, until they become man, and
their there can be an end to the life of Abred by union with goodness.
And in death they shall pass to the circle of Gwynvyd, and the Abred of
necessity will end for ever. And there will be no migrating through
every form of existence after that, except in right of liberty and
choice united with Gwynvyd, with a view to re-experience, and re-seek
knowledge. And this will remain for ever, as a variation and novation of
Gwynvyd, so that no one can fall into Ceugant, and thence into Abred;
for God alone can endure and traverse the circle of Ceugant. By this it
is seen that there is no Gwynvyd without mutual communication, and the
renewal of proof, experience, and knowledge, for it is in knowledge that
life and Gwynvyd consist.

Q. Shall every man, when he dies, go to the circle of Gwynvyd?

A. No one shall at death go to Gwynvyd, except he who shall attach
himself in life, whilst a man, to goodness and godliness, and to every
act of wisdom, justice, and love. And when these qualities preponderate
over their opposites, namely, folly, injustice, and uncharitableness,
and all evil and ungodliness, the man, when he dies, shall go to
Gwynvyd, that is heaven, from whence he will no more fall, because good
is stronger than evil of every kind, and life subdues death, prevailing
over it for ever. And he shall ascend nearer and nearer to perfect
Gwynvyd, until he is at its extreme limits, where he will abide for ever
and eternally. But the man who does not thus attach himself to

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span> <span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

godliness, shall fall in Abred to a corresponding form and species of
existence of the same nature as himself, whence he shall return to the
state of man as before. And then, according as his attachment may be to
either godliness or ungodliness, shall he ascend to Gwynfyd, or fall in
Abred, when he dies. And thus shall he fall for ever, until he seeks
godliness, and attaches himself to it, when there will be an end to the
Abred of necessity, and to every necessary suffering of evil and death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_235"></span>[225:1](bim1098.htm#fr_236.md) <span
id="page_224">p. 224</span> See Note, [p. 62](bim1030.htm#page_62.md).

<span id="fn_236"></span>[225:2](bim1098.htm#fr_237.md) Einion Offeiriad,
or the Priest, was the father of Thomas ap Einion, author or compiler of
the "Greal," the tale of "Pwyll Pendaran Dyved," and the "History of
Taliesin." He lived in the 14th century.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[225:3](bim1098.htm#fr_238.md) Taliesin flourished
from A.D. 520 to 570. He is ranked in the Triads, with Merddin Emrys and
Merddin ab Madog Morvryn, as the three "privardd bedydd," or baptismal
Bards of the Isle of Britain. Many of his compositions are still extant,
which, with some of later date, wrongly attributed to him, are printed
in the first volume of the Myvyrian Archaiology. Several Bardic
allusions may be discovered in his Poems.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[225:4](bim1098.htm#fr_239.md) Al. "of Euas." His
proper name was Davydd ab Roderic ab Madog, which is still to be seen on
his effigies in Dymeirchion Church, of which he was Vicar, and where he
lies buried. He flourished about 1340. He was an eminent and learned
Poet, and had a great share in regulating Welsh prosody. There is a
sacred poem by him "Am ddiwedd dyn a’i gorph," and a very poetical
translation of the "Officium B. Mariæ," from Latin into Welsh, which
fills thirty columns of the first volume of the *Myvyrian Archaiology*.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[225:5](bim1098.htm#fr_240.md) He was Meurig or
Maurice, treasurer of Llandaf, who died in 1290. He obtained the name of
"Cwtta Cyvarwydd" from a Book of his, so called, which contains a
compendium of the History of Glamorgan, with other articles, a list of
which is given by Edward Llwyd in the Archaiologia Britannica, p. 257.
He also wrote the History of the whole Isle of Britain; a Book of
Proverbs; the Rules of Poetry; and Welsh Theology. He also translated
the Gospel of St. John from the Latin into Welsh, with commentaries.
"These Books," says Ingo ab Dewi, (about 1700,) "were at Abermarlas
about fifty years ago."

<span id="fn_240"></span>[225:6](bim1098.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> Iohannes Menevensis, a divine and poet, who
flourished towards the close of the tenth century. Some compositions,
attributed to him, are printed in the first volume of the *Myvyrian
Archaiology*.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[225:7](bim1098.htm#fr_242.md) A poet and
grammarian, who flourished in the thirteenth century. The Grammar, which
he undertook at the command of the Princes of Wales, about 1270, has
recently been published under the auspices of the Welsh MSS, Society.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[225:8](bim1098.htm#fr_243.md) Sion Cent, or Dr.
John Kent, a very eminent poet, and learned divine, who flourished from
about 1380 to 1420. He wrote various Treatises in Latin on theological
subjects, thirty-nine of which may be enumerated, and many poems in his
native language, which were highly esteemed. Every manuscript volume of
Welsh poetry of early date generally contains some of his productions.
Three of them, one of which enumerates the Bardic Names of God, are
printed in the Iolo MSS.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[225:9](bim1098.htm#fr_244.md) Rhys Goch Eryri, or
Rhys ab Davydd, was a very eminent poet, who flourished from A.D. 1330
to 1420. About 30 of his poems on various subjects are preserved, among
them one entitled "Cywydd Cyfrinach," which is printed in the Iolo MSS,
p. 307, and is full of allusions to the mysteries of Bardism.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[225:10](bim1098.htm#fr_245.md) A distinguished
patron of Welsh literature. He was the author of a set of Theological
Triads, which appear from the style and language as if they were of
Bardic origin.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[227:1](bim1098.htm#fr_248.md) <span
id="page_226">p. 226</span> There are two poems printed in the Myv.
Arch., vol. i., and attributed to Taliesin, entitled respectively, "Canu
y Byd mawr," and "Canu y Byd bychan," or the Great World, and the Little
World. The former, referring to the creation, and the latter, to the
maintenance of the world, seem, both of them, to be founded on the
doctrine of the text. Iorwerth Vynglwyd (1460--1500) bears his testimony
to the fact that man was described in the creed of the Bards as a little
world, thus;--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Medd y barddas urddasawl,  
*Byd bach*, yw *dyn*, iach dan wawl.

Saith the revered Bardism,  
A little world is man in his vigour, under the light.

</div>

<span id="fn_246"></span>[227:2](bim1098.htm#fr_247.md) It was this
doctrine relative to the commencement of life from Annwn, that was, no
doubt, at the bottom of the opinion, which Julius Cæsar attributes to
<span id="page_227">p. 227</span> the Gauls. "Galli se omnes ab Dite
patre prognatos prædicaut, idque a Druidibus proditum dicunt." (De Bel.
Gal. l. vi, c. 18.)

<span id="fn_247"></span>[229:1](bim1098.htm#fr_249.md) <span
id="page_228">p. 228</span> "Ei gwrthryw," i.e. their species may be
opposed by a contrary species.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[229:2](bim1098.htm#fr_250.md) "Au gwrthrym," i.e.
their force be opposed by a contrary force.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abred.--Gwynvyd.--Awen](bim1099.md)
