[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1064)  [Next](bim1066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### COELBREN OF THE BARDS.

Here is shewn the mode of making the Coelbren of the Bards.

Take small pieces of wood, split into four parts, a cubit in length;
render the four sides fair, and exact, and smooth, their thickness being
about the fourth of an inch, or very little more than that, and the
width and depth being of equal size, that is, about the length of a
barleycorn each way in the thickness of the wood. When you have prepared
them thus far, trim down a little of the edges or corners of the wood,
to the width of the tenth or twelfth of an inch; so that, when the
letters are cut on one of the sides, they may not appear on any other
side, but in the rasped margin alone. After that, make necks on the
staves within the

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

length of two barleycorns of the end, round, and the thickness of a nail
or cabbage leaf, deeper than the surface of the tree; and trim both ends
neatly and smartly, that they may be beautiful to look at, and easy
under the finger to turn. Then the stave will be ready, which is also
called ebill, and in the plural ebillion, and its appearance will be as
here seen;--

<span id="img_14500"></span> ![](img/14500.jpg)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And on this stave
or ebill the letters are cut with a knife in small grooves the thickness
of a leaf or small straw in depth, and as wide as a slender stalk of
hay. Let every groove be cut fair and clear in its cutting. And when you
have cut on one side, cut on the next, and so on the four sides; but
take care not to cut deeper than the rasping of the edges. When you have
cut on the four sides, proceed to another stave, and from ebill to
ebill, until you shall have cut the whole of the poem or oration that
was intended. Then take four pieces of wood for the pillwydd, for these
sticks are called pillwydd, and with them make a frame, in which the
lettered ebillion shall be arrayed methodically and securely. These are
the delineations of the pillwydd;--

<span id="img_14501"></span> ![](img/14501.jpg)

that is, in each is made a series of small semicircular notches, as
large as half the necks of the ebillion, care being taken that the notch
of one piece of wood is exactly opposite to its fellow in the other. And
when two are finished, they are joined together, and afterwards the
ebillion are inserted by their necks in the pillwydd, and the two
pillwydd are tied round their necks at each end with a strong thread of
silk,

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

or with the small strings of a harp or violin, or with thin brass wires,
or the small sinews of a hind. After this, construct the other two
pillwydd in the same way, and place the ebillion, by their other necks,
in them, tying them as at the other end. Thus will all the ebillion be
strong and orderly, each one exactly in its place. And if there be
occasion, because of the length of the poem or oration, make another
framework, for it does not accord with convenience that there should be
above from twenty-four to thirty ebillion in the same framework;
therefore make two or three, or as many as may be required. When the
framework is completed exactly, it is called *Peithynen*, and each of
the ebillwydd will turn in it easily, for when one side of the ebill has
been read, it is turned so that the other side may be read, and so with
the four sides. The turning is made with the sun, or to the right hand.
And when one ebill has been read, you proceed to the next below it, and
so from one to the other until the whole be gone over. It should be
remembered that the trimmed and ornamented end is to be towards the
right hand, so that with it you may turn every one of them easily and
dexterously. Others place the ebillion for the finger's end alternately,
one to the right hand, and the other to the left hand, every other turn.
Let this be as is deemed best by the maker.

A sharp knife is required to cut the grooves fairly and clearly, with a
skilful, dexterous hand.

The breadth of either half of the pillwydd will be the length of two
barleycorns, or somewhat less, and the thickness of each the fourth of
an inch; and it is not convenient that there should be more bulk than
what I said in the wood materials, lest they should be too heavy, and
inconvenient to carry and handle.

Care should be taken that every groove be exact in its form, the
perpendiculars of every letter be in a right position, inclining neither
to the one hand nor to the other, and that the obliques slant correctly,
as they ought, according to the form of the letter.

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

On that end of the ebill, which projects through the pillwydd frame on
the left side, is made its numerical groove, and so its number on every
one, that it may be easy to put every ebill in its proper place, without
being obliged to read it, whilst others are before and after it. These
numbers are made in two ways, the one contains as many grooves as the
number of the ebill in the peithynen, the other is the numeral letter
that may be required.

Take care that every letter, in respect of its groove, be of uniform
thickness, otherwise it will be unseemly to the sight.

The best wood wherewith to construct a Peithynen are young oak saplings,
as thick as would leave the ebillion large enough, after the tree has
been split into four parts, and the rind and epidermis have been
completely chipped off from each quarter. They should be well dried
before they are finished and lettered: the best time to cut the wood is
the Feast of St. Mary.

The best wood in respect of the facility of chipping and grooving is
hazel wood, split into four parts, or willow wood, split into four
parts; and they ought to be well dried before they are lettered. The
best of all willows is the yellow willow. The ancient Poets, however,
sought the wood of mountain ash, regarding it as charmed wood, because
worms do not devour or corrupt it, and because no vain spirit, or wicked
fiend, will abide where there is mountain ash, and because neither charm
nor enchantment can avail against mountain ash, nor injure it, nor him
who carries it, and because no deadly poison can touch them.

This mode in regard to letters is the old mode of the Cymry before the
coming of strangers into the island of Britain. But when they obtained
the knowledge of the faith in Christ, writing on skin came to be
understood in Cymru, as at present; and when that was known, a Roll was
made, on which was placed the written skin, being folded and tied around
the same. This is the form of the Roll, which is made of any wood you
like, though mountain

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

ash is considered the best, because of the charms attached to that tree.

<span id="img_15100"></span> ![](img/15100.jpg)

It was around the thin part of the Roll, within the ends, that the
lettered skins were put, as many skins as would go round the Roll, which
were folded and tied about it. When paper was obtained, it was used
instead of skins, as at present. The most convenient of all forms of
book and writing is the Roll in respect of the facility and safety of
keeping it; but it is not much used now, except at the exhibition of
Gorsedd and Chair by such as are required to keep a Roll of the system
of song, and the pedigrees and privileges of country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peithynen](bim1066)
