[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1112)  [Next](bim1114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SENTENCES OF BARDISM.

Here are the Sentences of Bardism, from the Book of Ieuan, the son of
Hywel Swrdwal. <span id="fr_272"></span>[1](#fn_270)

1\. That does not but exist, from which a greater amount of good than of
evil can be produced; since it cannot be otherwise in virtue of God's
power, wisdom, and love.

2\. The existence of that, which does good to some, and does no harm to
others, is safe; since there is more utility from it, than if it had not
existed; and God will not permit possible good to be lost.

3\. Of that which is neither good nor bad, neither the existence nor
non-existence is safe for man, for nothing in reason is known of it.
Others say, that it is the material of every thing. However, there is
only God that knows its good and evil, its utility and inutility, and
whether the good or evil be the greater.

4\. Where a great good to all, without harm to any one, can be
comprehended, it cannot be but that it is in existence, since otherwise
the three principal attributes of God, namely, knowledge, wisdom, and
mercy, would not stand without being opposed by distress and necessity:
therefore Bardism is true.

5\. Truth cannot be had from that in which every truth cannot consist,
and which will not consist in every truth, for truth cannot be had from
what will contradict or withstand that which is true.

6\. It is true that, according to justice, there should be the best of
all things.

7\. It is true that, according to love, there should be the best of all
things.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span> <span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

8\. It is true that, according to power, there should be the best of all
things.

9\. It is true that, according to wisdom and knowledge, there should be
the best of all things.

10\. It is true that there cannot be in God other than all knowledge,
all wisdom, all power, all love, and all justice, without restraint,
without measure, without cessation, without end. Therefore, in respect
of the power of God, it cannot but be that the best of all things are in
existence; and it cannot be otherwise in respect of His knowledge; and
it cannot but be, in respect of His love, justice, and wisdom, that the
best of all things are in existence.

11\. It is true that God can accomplish the best of all things; on that
account, it cannot but be that the best of all things are in existence.

12\. According to justice, there should be ability in justice;
therefore, in respect of justice, there cannot but be that ability
belongs to justice.

13\. In respect of knowledge, there ought to be power in knowledge, and
in knowing what is best; therefore there is power in knowing what is
best.

14\. According to love, there should be what is most merciful;
therefore, by the love of God, what is most merciful is in existence in
every essence.

15\. God, in respect of His power, wisdom, knowledge, and love, can
produce the best of all things, the most just of all things, and the
most kind of all things; therefore, it cannot but be that the best of
all things are in existence.

16\. It cannot but be that the extreme limits of goodness, and of what
is good, are in God; on that account, there cannot but be that the
extreme of all goodness, and all that is good, is, and may be found,
from God, and by God, through His infinite grace and love.

17\. There cannot be a God, that does not possess all power, all love,
all wisdom, all knowledge, all justice, and all goodness. And it cannot
but be that whatever those,

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span> <span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

who possess these things, do, is found to be without distress, without
necessity.

And thus it ends.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271:1](bim1113.htm#fr_272) <span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> Ieuan ab Hywel Swrdwal was an eminent poet,
who flourished from about 1450 to 1480.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ten Commandments of the Bards](bim1114)
