[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1098)  [Next](bim1100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### ABRED.--GWYNVYD.--AWEN.

Q. How often may one fall in Abred?

A. No one will fall once of necessity, after it has been once traversed,
but through negligence, from cleaving to ungodliness, until it
preponderates over godliness, a man will fall in Abred. He will then
return to the state of man, through every form of existence that will be
necessary for the removal of the evil, which was the cause of his fall
in Abred. And he will fall only once in Abred on account of the same
ungodliness, since it will be overcome by that fall; nevertheless,
because of many other impieties he may fall in Abred, even numberless
times, until every opposition and Cythraul, that is, all ungodliness,
shall have been vanquished, when there will be an end to the Abred of
necessity.

Q. How many have fallen in Abred? and for what cause have they fallen?

A. All living beings below the circle of Gwynvyd have fallen in Abred,
and are now on their return to Gwynvyd. The migration of most of them
will be long, owing to the frequent times they have fallen, from having
attached themselves to evil and ungodliness; and the reason why they
fell was, that they desired to traverse the circle of Ceugant, which God
alone could endure and traverse. Hence, they fell even unto Annwn, and
it was from pride, which would

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span> <span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

ally itself with. God, that they fell, and there is no necessary fall as
far as Annwn, except from pride.

Q. Did all, who reached the circle of Gwynvyd after the primary
progression of necessity from Annwn, fall in Abred from pride?

A. No; some sought after wisdom, and hence saw what pride would do, and
they resolved to conduct themselves according to what was taught them by
God, and thereby became divinities, or holy angels, and they acquired
learning from what they beheld in others, and it was thus that they saw
the nature of Ceugant and eternity, and that God alone could endure and
traverse it.

Q. Does not the danger of falling in Abred, from the circle of Gwynvyd,
exist still as it did formerly?

A. No; because all pride and every other sin, will be overcome before
one can a second time reach the circle of Gwynvyd, and then by
recollecting and knowing the former evil, every one will necessarily
abhor what caused him to fall before, and the necessity of hatred and
love will last and continue for ever in the circle of Gwynvyd, where the
three stabilities, namely, hatred, love, and knowledge, will never
end. <span id="fr_251"></span>[1](#fn_249.md)

Q. Will those, who shall return to the circle of Gwynvyd after the fall
in Abred, be of the same kind as those who fell not?

A. Yes; and of the same privilege, because the love of God cannot be
less towards one than towards another, nor towards one form of existence
than another, since He is God and Father to them all, and exercises the
same amount of love and patronage towards them all, and they will all be
equal and co-privileged in the circle of Gwynvyd, that is, they will be
divinities and holy angels for ever.

Q. Will every form and species of living existence continue for ever as
they are now? If so, tell me why?

A. Yes, in virtue of liberty and choice, and the blessed will go from
one to another as they please, in order to repose from the fatigue and
tediousness of Ceugant, which God

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span> <span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

only can endure, and in order to experience every knowledge and every
gwynfyd that are capable of species and form; and each one of them will
hate evil of necessary obligation, and know it thoroughly, and
consequently of necessity renounce it, since he will perfectly know its
nature and mischievousness--God being a help, and God being chief,
supporting and preserving them for ever.

Q. How are these things to be known?

A. The Gwyddoniaid, from the age of ages, from the time of Seth, <span
id="fr_252"></span>[1](#fn_250.md) son of Adam, son of God, obtained Awen
from God, and thence knew the mystery of godliness.; and the Gwyddoniaid
were of the nation of the Cymry from the age of ages. After that, the
Gwyddoniaid were regulated according to privilege and usage, in order
that unfailing memory might be kept of this knowledge. After that, the
Gwyddoniaid were called Bards according to the privilege and usage of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain, because it was after the arrival of
the Cymry in the island of Britain, that this regulation was made; and
it is through the memorials of Bardism and Awen from God that this
knowledge has been acquired, and no falsehood can accrue from Awen from
God. In the nation of Israel were found the holy prophets, who through
Awen from God knew all these things as described in the Holy Scriptures,
And after Christ, the Son of God, had come in the flesh from Gwynvyd,
further knowledge of God, and His will, was obtained, as is seen in St.
Paul's Sermon. <span id="fr_253"></span>[2](#fn_251.md) And when we, the
Cymry, were converted to the faith in Christ, our Bards obtained a more
clear Awen from God, and knowledge about all things divine beyond what
had been seen before, and they prophesied, improving Awen and knowledge.
Hence is all knowledge concerning things divine and what appertains to
God.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

Q. How is Awen to be obtained, where it is not, so that a Bard may be
made of him, who would be a Bard?

A. By habituating one's self to a holy life, and all love towards God
and man, and all justice, and all mercy, and all generosity, and all
endurance, and all peace, and practising good sciences, and avoiding
pride and cruelty and adultery, and murder and ambuscade, and theft, and
covetousness, and all injustice, that is, the things that will corrupt
and destroy Awen, where it exists, and will prevent the obtaining it,
where it does not exist.

Q. Is it in the way it was first obtained, that Awen from God is still
obtainable?

A. It is in this way that Awen is obtained, that the truth may be known
and believed. Some, however, are of opinion that the way in which the
truth was first known, was, that the divinities, or holy angels, and the
saints or godly men, who went to heaven, and especially Jesus Christ,
the Son of God, came down from Gwynvyd to the Little World in the
condition of man, in order to teach, warn, direct, and inform those who
seek to be divine. That is, they came in the capacity of messengers sent
by God in His infinite love, and in virtue of their own great love
co-operating with the love of God, and as His obedient messengers. And
we shall have what of Awen from God is necessary for us, by attaching
ourselves to the good and godly with sincerity, and out of pure love for
all goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_249"></span>[237:1](bim1099.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="page_236">p. 236</span> What is stated here may explain the adage;--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Nid air i Annwn ond unwaith.

Annwn will be visited but once.

</div>

<span id="fn_250"></span>[239:1](bim1099.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="page_238">p. 238</span> Ieuan du’r Bilwg refers to Seth as a Bard;--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

SEDD mab ieuaf Addaf oedd,  
Breuddwydiwr, a *Bardd* ydoedd.

Seth was the youngest son of Adam,--  
He was a dreamer and a Bard.

</div>

<span id="fn_251"></span>[239:2](bim1099.htm#fr_253.md)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Pan elo’r goron ar garn ddifant  
Ofer pob peth ond *pregeth* PAWL SANT  
Pan elo ’r goron ar gyfeiliorni,  
Nid ellir ai gweryd ond gair Celi.--Penegoes MS. <span id="page_239">p.
239</span>

When the crown is on the point of being lost,  
All will be in vain except the *sermon of St. Paul*:  
When the crown goes astray,  
Nothing can save it but the Word of Celi.

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Three States](bim1100.md)
