[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1003)  [Next](bim1005.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### JULIUS CÆSAR, B.C. 99-44.

It is necessary that we should, at the outset, bear in mind the
following observation made by Cæsar, as to the comparative merits of the
Continental and British systems:

<span class="small">"The institution is thought to have originated in
Britain, and to have been thence introduced into Gaul; and even now
those who wish to become more accurately acquainted with it, generally
repair thither, for the sake of learning it."</span>

It is clear from this statement that Druidism, in Cæsar's time, was not
considered as pure and as well understood on the Continent as it was in
the British isle, its genuine home; an hypothesis, moreover,

<span id="page_xxvii">p. xxvii</span>

exactly in accordance with the traditions of the Bards:--"Bardism
originated in the Isle of Britain--no other country ever obtained a
proper comprehension of Bardism. Three nations corrupted what they had
learned of the Bardism of the Isle of Britain, blending with it
heterogeneous principles, by which means they lost it: the Irish; the
Cymry of Armorica; and the Germans." <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

According to this view, we must not expect that the two systems should
agree in all matters of detail, but only in principle and substance.

Cæsar's description refers solely to the Druidism of Gaul. How he
acquired his information, he does not tell us; it might have been in
part from personal observation, and in part, if not wholly, from his
friend Divitiacus, who was a Druid among the Ædui. It is possible that
his narrative in this respect is correct; still his general character
for veracity does not bind us to believe implicitly every word that he
says. Suetonius tells us, that Asinius Pollio, who was a contemporary of
Cæsar, was of opinion that his assertions are not altogether worthy of
credit;--"Asinius Pollio," he remarks, "thinks that they \[the works of
Cæsar\] were composed with but little accuracy, and little truth, since
Cæsar used to believe rashly respecting the deeds of other men, and also
to relate erroneously the things done by himself, either of set purpose,
or through failure of memory, and he is of opinion that he intended to
re-write and correct them." <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md) We shall
not, however, take the benefit of

<span id="page_xxviii">p. xxviii</span>

this opinion, but proceed at once to notice the principal points of
Druidism, as actually related by Cæsar himself, and to compare them with
the views of the Bards, in order to see how far they may be reconciled
one with the other. The whole account, as given by Cæsar of the
Continental Druids, is as follows:

"They preside over sacred things, have the charge of public and private
sacrifices, and explain their religion. To them a great number of youths
have recourse for the sake of acquiring instruction, and they are in
great honour among them. For they generally settle all their disputes,
both public and private; and if there is any transgression perpetrated,
any murder committed, or any dispute about inheritance or boundaries,
they decide in respect of them; they appoint rewards and penalties; and
if any private or public person abides not by their decree, they
restrain him from the sacrifices. This with them is the most severe
punishment. Whoever are so interdicted, are ranked in the number of the
impious and wicked; all forsake them, and shun their company and
conversation, lest they should suffer disadvantage from contagion with
them: nor is legal right rendered to them when they sue it, nor any
honour conferred upon them. But one presides over all these Druids, who
possesses the supreme authority among them. At his death, if any one of
the others excels in dignity, the same succeeds him: but if several have
equal pretensions, the president is elected by the votes of the Druids,
sometimes even they contend about the supreme dignity by force of arms.
At a certain time of the year, they assemble in session on a consecrated
spot in the confines of the Carnutes, which is considered the central
region of the whole of Gaul. Thither all, who have any disputes, come
together from every side, and acquiesce in their judgments and
decisions. The institution is thought to have originated in Britain, and
to have been thence introduced into Gaul, and even now, those who wish
to become more accurately acquainted with it, generally repair thither
for the sake of learning it.

"The Druids usually abstain from war, nor do they pay taxes together
with the others; they have exemption from warfare, and the free use of
all things. Instigated by such advantages, many resort to their school
even of their own accord, whilst others are sent by their parents and
relations. There they are said to learn thoroughly a great number of
verses. On that account, some continue at their education for twenty
years. Nor do they deem it lawful to commit those things to writing;
though, generally, in other cases, and in their public and private
accounts, they use Greek letters. They appear

<span id="page_xxix">p. xxix</span>

to me to have established this custom for two reasons; because they
would not have their tenets published, and because they would not have
those, who learn them, by trusting to letters, neglect the exercise of
memory; since it generally happens, that, owing to the safeguard of
letters, they relax their diligence in learning, as well as their
memory. In particular they wish to inculcate this idea, that souls do
not die, but pass after death from one body to another; and they think
that by this means men are very much instigated to the exercise of
bravery, the fear of death being despised. They also dispute largely
concerning the stars and their motion, the magnitude of the world and
the earth, the nature of things, the force and power of the immortal
gods, and instruct the youth in their principles.

"The whole nation of the Gauls is very much given to religious
observances, and on that account, those who are afflicted with grievous
diseases, and those who are engaged in battles and perils, either
immolate men as sacrifices, or vow that they will immolate themselves,
and they employ the Druids as ministers of those sacrifices; because
they think that, if the life of man is not given for the life of man,
the immortal gods cannot be appeased; they have also instituted public
sacrifices of the same kind. Some have images of immense size, the limbs
of which, interwoven with twigs, they fill with living men, and the same
being set on fire, the men, surrounded by the flames, are put to death.
They think that the punishment of those who are caught in theft or
pillage, or in any other wicked act, is more acceptable to the immortal
gods; but when there is a deficiency of such evil doers, they have
recourse even to the punishment of the innocent.

"They chiefly worship the god Mercury; of him they have many images, him
they consider as the inventor of all arts, as the guide of ways and
journeys, and as possessing the greatest power for obtaining money and
merchandise. After him, they worship Apollo, Mars, Jupiter, and Minerva.
Concerning them they have almost the same opinion as other nations,
namely: that Apollo wards off diseases; that Minerva instructs them in
the principles of works and arts; that Jupiter holds the empire of
heaven; and that Mars rules wars. To him, when they have determined to
engage in battle, they generally vow those things which they shall have
captured in war. When they are victorious, they sacrifice the captured
animals; and pile up the other things in one place.

"The Gauls declare that they have all sprung from their father Pluto,
and this they say was delivered to them by the Druids." <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md)

<span id="page_xxx">p. xxx</span>

The principal topics, which demand our attention in this extract, are:

1\. *The religious function of the Druids*. The two systems are
perfectly agreed in this respect, that the priestly office belonged to
the Druidic order. Cæsar, indeed, does not mention either of the other
two orders, but his silence is no proof that they did not exist in Gaul
as well as in Britain. It is very probable that the Druids were, in
respect of their office, the most conspicuous among the Gauls, and that
Cæsar's attention was especially drawn to their deeds, so as to overlook
the Bards and Ovates, or that he considered the functions of these as
absorbed in that of the Druids. We have the evidence of Diodorus Siculus
and Strabo that there were Bards in Gaul, and the latter says there were
Ovates (Οὐάτεις) also.

2\. *The respect in which they were held*. The Druids of Britain were,
likewise, highly esteemed by the people. According to the laws of
Dyvnwal Moelmud, "the Gorsedd of Bards" was "the oldest in its origin"
of "the three privileged Gorsedds of the Isle of Britain." Its different
functionaries had a right each to five free acres of land in virtue of
their office--were entitled to maintenance wherever they went--had
freedom from taxes--no person was to bear a naked weapon in their
presence--and their word was always paramount. These privileges, as well
as others, to which they had a right, are distinctly specified in the
present volumes, and they show the great respect and honour in which
they at all times stood in the community. The consequence was that many
persons were usually candidates for the office, not only among the
nobility and gentry, but also

<span id="page_xxxi">p. xxxi</span>

among those of low rank, for the bondsman became free on his assuming
the profession of Bardism, though he could not learn it "without the
permission of his proprietary lord, and the lord of the territory."
Cæsar regards the Druids and Knights as of a higher rank than the common
people, and as being distinct from them, and though he does not say that
the former could have arisen, and gained their nobility by means of
their office, yet it is not improbable that the teachers of Gaul were,
in this respect, similar to the Bards of the Isle of Britain. At any
rate, every Bard among the Cymry was according to his office a free and
honourable man, whatever his position might have been previously. In
this matter, therefore, we perceive no substantial difference between
the Druidism of Britain and the Druidism of Gaul.

3\. *The arbitration and settlement of disputes*. It appears from the
Laws of Dyvnwal Moelmud that there were "three Gorsedds according to the
privilege of the country and nation of the Cymry," having their
respective duties and functions with a view to the improvement of
society.

<span class="small">"The first is the Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle
of Britain, and their foundation and privilege rest upon reason, nature,
and cogency; or, according to other teachers and wise men, upon reason,
nature, and circumstance. And the privilege and office of those
protected by the Gorsedd of Bards are to maintain and preserve and
diffuse authorized instruction in the sciences of piety, wisdom, and
courtesy; and to preserve memorial and record of every thing commendable
respecting individuals and kindred; and every event of times; and every
natural phenomenon; and wars; and regulations of country and nation; and
punishments; and commendable victories; and to preserve a warranted
record of genealogies, marriages, nobility, privileges, and customs of
the nation of the Cymry; and to attend to the exigencies of other
Gorsedds in announcing what shall be achieved, and what shall be
requisite, under lawful proclamation and warning: and further</span>

<span id="page_xxxii">p. xxxii</span>

<span class="small">than this there is nothing either of office or of
privilege attached to a Gorsedd of Bards.......Second, the Gorsedd of
the country and common weal; or the Gorsedd of judicature and decision
of law, for the right and protection of the country and nation, their
refugees, and their aliens. These Gorsedds act severally; that is to
say, the Gorsedd of federate support makes a law, where an occasion
requires, and confirms it in a country and federate country; and that is
not allowed to a country distinct from a federate country. The Gorsedd
of judgment and judicature decides upon such as shall transgress the
law, and punishes him. And the Gorsedd of the Bards teaches commend-able
sciences, and decides respecting them, and methodically preserves all
the memorials of the nation to insure their authenticity. And it is not
right for any one of these Gorsedds to intermeddle with the deliberation
of either of the other two, but to confirm them, and to support them
regularly. The third Gorsedd, or that of federate support, in its
original and determinate purpose, is to effect what may be necessary as
to any thing new, and as to the improvement of the laws of a country and
federate country, by a federate jury of chiefs of kindreds, wise men,
and sovereign ruler. A sovereign prince, or ruler of paramount right, is
the oldest in possessive title of the kings and the princes of a
federate community: and he is to raise the mighty agitation; and his
word is superior to every other word in the agitation of the
country."</span>

According to the tenor of this extract, it was "the Gorsedd of judgment
and judicature" that possessed the special right of determining national
and social disputes, in conformity with the law that was enacted in a
"Gorsedd of federate support." They were matters of a literary character
mainly that came under the supervision of the Bards. Nevertheless, there
was some connection between the three institutions--they were "to
confirm, and support" each other "regularly." The Bards were required
more particularly to register the events that occurred in country and
nation, to preserve the records of genealogies, marriages, nobility,
privileges and customs, of the nation of the Cymry, and to attend to the
exigencies of other Gorsedds in announcing what shall be

<span id="page_xxxiii">p. xxxiii</span>

achieved, and what shall be requisite, under lawful proclamation and
warning. So far, then, it might be said that they settled matters
appertaining to inheritances and boundaries, as the Druids of Gaul did
in the time of Cæsar. The Roman captain might easily be mistaken with
respect to the extent of the authority and power of the Druids,
attributing to them more than in reality they possessed. After all, he
does not admit that the entire authority was in their hands--his
observation is, "they *generally* settle all their disputes, both public
and private." And even if things were exactly as he relates them, it is
not difficult to suppose that this was a natural corruption of the
primitive custom. Inasmuch as the Druids generally were possessed of
more learning and knowledge than any other class of people in the
country, it was quite natural that they should increase in political and
social authority, especially where the other establishments were not as
orderly and well defined as they were in Britain. We see this principle
at work in relation to the Church, during what is called "the dark
ages," when more than necessary of temporal and political authority fell
into the hands of ecclesiastics.

Cæsar says of the Druids of Gaul that the greatest punishment which was
inflicted upon evil doers was, to keep them from the sacrifices. It must
be admitted that there was nothing, as far as we know, in the institute
of Britain, which altogether answered to this interdict. Perhaps the
nearest approach to it was the refusal of the protection of the Gorsedd
to any member of the community, who, for some fault or other, was
announced to be exposed to a "naked

<span id="page_xxxiv">p. xxxiv</span>

weapon." The Bards, however, had a peculiar mode of degrading their
convicted brethren. It took place at a Gorsedd, and the act was called
"to bring the assault of warfare against" him who was to be thus
disfranchised. After the Bards had agreed in their decision, they
covered their heads, and one of them unsheathed the sword, named the
person aloud three times, with the sword lifted in his hand, adding when
he was last named, "the sword is naked against him." He could never
after be re-admitted; and was called "a man deprived of privilege and
exposed to warfare." There is some resemblance in this custom to what
Cæsar says of the excommunicated, "that no legal right was rendered to
them, nor any honour conferred upon them;" and the resemblance is
sufficient to show that the usages of the two countries had sprung from
the same root.

4\. *The Archdruid*. Among the Cymry the three orders, Bard, Druid, and
Ovate, were co-equal, one with the other, in point of privilege and
dignity, whilst they were different in regard to duties. For thus it is
stated in "Trioedd Braint a Defod:"--

 

"The three branches of Bardism: Poetry; Ovatism; and Druidism; that is
to say, these three branches are adjudged to be of equal privilege, and
equal importance, for there can be no superiority to one of them over
another--though they are distinct in purpose, they are not distinct in
privilege."

<span class="small">"There are three Bards of equal importance, that is,
the three worthy primitive Bards, namely: a licensed native Bard, or a
Poet according to privilege and usage; an Ovate-bard, devoted to genial
learning; and a Druid-bard, devoted to theology and morality;--and they
are said to be of equal importance, because one cannot be better than
another, or supreme over the rest;--though one is distinct from another
in respect of office and movement, still they are equal and of like
dignity in respect of obligation, effort, and object, which are,
learning, truth, and peace."</span>

<span id="page_xxxv">p. xxxv</span>

In this sense, then, it may be said that the system of the Cymry varied
from that of the Gauls. Nevertheless, occasionally, that is, when they
met in Gorsedd, "one presided," even among the British Bards. He was
called *chief*-Bard, or Gorsedd Bard; and if he were of the Druidic
order, he might be easily regarded as an *Arch*-druid, not only because
he presided, but because in doing so he stood on the "maen *arch*," in
the centre of the sacred circle. Every chief-Bard had a right to preside
at a Gorsedd, but still nothing could be decided without the consent of
the majority of Gorsedd Bards--the former was merely a kind of chairman
*primus inter pares*, for the time.

Cæsar seems to imply that one only presided during life, and when he
died, that another was elected in his stead. This is not altogether in
unison with the custom of the Cymry. Nevertheless, if such in truth was
the usage of Gaul, it might easily have been derived from our own
country. Whilst the people of the Continent did not properly understand
Bardism, there was nothing to prevent them from falling into a mistake
as to the nature of the authority, which the Bard president possessed,
deeming it to be personal, and intended to continue for life, whereas it
was official only--belonging to several, and to be exercised as
occasions required. The Cymry never had recourse to the sword in order
to settle the question of supremacy, as we learn from Cæsar was the case
sometimes on the Continent. This was quite an abuse--and thoroughly
inconsistent with the spirit of Bardism.

5\. *The place of meeting*. According to Cæsar, the Druids of Gaul had a
fixed place and time for meeting;

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

he mentions not the time, but the place he says was on the confines of
the Carnutes, in the middle of the country, as was supposed. "Thither,"
he says, "all, who have any disputes, come together from every side, and
acquiesce in their judgments and decisions." In like manner, the Bards
or Druids of Britain had their appointed times and places for meeting in
Gorsedd. Their times were the Albans, namely, Alban Eilir, Alban Hevin,
Alban Elved, and Alban Arthan, that is, the equinoxes and solstices, or
the commencement of the four seasons of the year. The principal places
are recorded in the following Triads:--

"The three principal Gorsedds of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
Gorsedd of Bryn Gwyddon at Caerleon-upon-Usk; the Gorsedd of Moel Evwr;
and the Gorsedd of Beiscawen.

"The three Gorsedds of entire song of the Isle of Britain: the Gorsedd
of Beiscawen in Dyvnwal; the Gorsedd of Caer Caradog in Lloegria; and
the Gorsedd of Bryn Gwyddon in Cymru."

There was thus one special Gorsedd in each of the three principal
provinces, where the native mind chiefly predominated. The Gorsedd was a
sort of national temple, to which the majority of persons within the
province resorted at the appointed times, in order to worship God, and
to receive instruction. All were invited, except such as were "deprived
of privilege, and exposed to warfare," and no impediments were allowed
to be put on their way, as they travelled "under the protection and
peace of God."

<span class="small">"Three common rights of federate country and border
country: a principal river; a high road; and a *resort of worship*; and
those are under the protection of God and His peace; since a weapon is
not to he unsheathed by such as frequent them against those they may
meet;</span>

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

<span class="small">and whoever shall do so, whether a native or a
stranger, a claim of galanas against him arises on the plaint of the
lord of the territory." <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md)</span>

6\. *The derivation of the Druidic system*. We have already noticed the
coincidence between the notion which prevailed in Gaul on this head and
the drift of the Cymric traditions.

7\. *Memorials*. "They are said," observes Cæsar, "to learn thoroughly a
great number of verses; and on that account, some continue at their
education for twenty years." One of "the three memorials of the Bards of
the Isle of Britain," was "the memorial of song." This was one of the
oldest vehicles in which events and sciences were handed down among the
Bards, and it is supposed that the particular form which they used was
the metre called "Triban Milwr," or the Warrior's Triplet. The name of
Tydain, the father of Awen, is especially associated with the memorial
of song; and "the poem of Tydain" is prominently alluded to in the
account of the establishment of Bardism. He was a contemporary of
Prydain.

As time rolled on, accumulating events and sciences, we may easily
suppose that "twenty years" would not be more than sufficient to enable
a man to treasure in his memory the "great number of verses" necessary
to contain and embody them. Generally, however, nine years was the time
during which a pupil was required to be under discipline previous to his
being graduated as a Chief Bard.

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

"They do not deem it lawful (*fas*) to commit those things to writing,"
i.e. the things appertaining to the system. Neither did the British
Bards countenance the habit of writing their traditions. On the
contrary, it was their custom to recite them publicly in every Gorsedd,
until they became deeply rooted in the memory of the people. This is
what they called the "voice of Gorsedd," and it was in this manner that
their traditions have come down to us. Cæsar's opinion respecting such a
practice coincides exactly with the reason which influenced the Bards of
Cymru. "They appear to me to have established this custom for two
reasons; because they would not have their tenets published, and because
they would not have those, who learn then, by trusting to letters,
neglect the exercise of memory." The Bards had a "Cyvrinach," or Secret,
which they did not consider it lawful for any one to know out of their
own order; such were the Name of God, and the Ten Letters. All this
secrecy related especially to the institute, and the candidate for
admission into it took an awful vow that he would not divulge the
*cyvrinach* to any one, who was not a regular Bard. They likewise
considered that the use of writing tended to weaken the memory, not only
in respect of the disciples, but also of the people generally; or
rather, with regard to the latter, they considered that the voice of
Gorsedd was the easiest mode of teaching them, and the most effectual
for preventing every kind of falsehood and corruption.

With respect to the voice of Gorsedd, and its connection with the
discipline of the Bards themselves, we have it thus stated in " the Book
of Lewys Morganwg,

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

which he compiled from many of the old Books:"

<span class="small">"There is no other than the memorial, voice, and
usage of Gorsedd belonging to the privileges and usages of the primitive
Bards, for they spring from primary and original right, before there was
any Book knowledge; therefore, they were submitted only to the memorial
of the voice, and usage of Gorsedd; or, as others say, to the memorial
of song, voice, and usage. And they have no permanent privilege and
authority, but what we know by these means."</span>

Nevertheless, the Bards had a knowledge of letters from the beginning.
It is said that Einigan, the first man, "beheld three pillars of light,
having on them all demonstrable sciences, that ever were, or ever will
be," and that "he took three rods of the quicken tree, and placed on
them the forms and signs of all sciences, so as to be remembered."
People misunderstood these, and "regarded the rods as a God, whereas
they only bore His Name. When Einigan saw this, he was greatly annoyed,
and in the intensity of his grief he broke the three rods, nor were
others found that contained accurate sciences. He was so distressed on
that account that from the intensity he burst asunder, and with his
\[parting\] breath he prayed God that there should be accurate sciences
among men in the flesh, and there should be a correct understanding for
the proper discernment thereof. And at the end of a year and a day,
after the decease of Einigan, Menw, son of the Three Shouts, beheld
three rods growing out of the mouth of Einigan, which exhibited the
sciences of the Ten Letters, and the mode in which all the sciences of
language and speech were arranged by them, and in language and speech
all distinguishable sciences. He then took

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

the rods, and taught from them the sciences--all, except the Name of
God, which he made a secret, lest the Name should be falsely discerned;
and hence arose the Secret of the Bardism of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain." <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)

The first ten letters were derived from the creative Name of God, <span
id="img__04000"></span> ![](img/_04000.jpg), and represented a, p, c, e,
t, i, 1, r, o, s; and "they had been a secret from the age of ages among
the Bards of the Isle of Britain, for the preservation of memorials of
country and nation. Beli the Great made them into sixteen, and divulged
that arrangement, and appointed that there should never after be a
concealment of the sciences of letters, in respect of the arrangement
which he made; but he left the ten cuttings a secret." <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11.md)

According to some authorities, the alphabet of the sixteen letters was
formed, and divulged in the time of Dyvnwal Moelmud. The original
Abcedilros, or alphabet of the ten letters, was quite different to that
of the sixteen and its augmentations; and whilst these were known to the
public, the former was known only to the Bards.

The Druids of Gaul had a knowledge of letters, though they did not
commit to writing the things that pertained to their institute.
"Generally," says our author, "in other cases, and in their public and
private accounts, they use Greek letters." The alphabet of the sixteen
was at this time open to the public in Britain; could it have been the
one which the Continental Druids used, mistaken by Cæsar for Greek
letters?

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

The Druids of Gaul had letters of their own, which were *similar* to the
letters of Greece; it is, therefore, not impossible that Cæsar
confounded one series with the other. Mr. Astle, who is well skilled in
ancient letters, gives a series of Gaulish characters, which are
somewhat similar to those of Greece. They were taken from the monumental
inscription of Gordian, the messenger of the Gauls, who suffered
martyrdom, in the third century, with all his family. "These
characters," he says, "were generally used by the people, before the
conquest of Gaul by Cæsar." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12.md)

Another author remarks:--"There are those who think the Druids had
ancient characters, which were both elegant, and similar to those of the
Greeks. For according to the testimony of Xenophon, and Archilochus, the
figures of those letters, which Cadmus brought out of Phoenicia into
Greece, resembled Gaulish, rather than Punic, or Phœnician
characters." <span id="fr_13"></span>[2](#fn_13.md)

He who compares the ancient Greek Alphabet with the Bardic Coelbren,
will find a remarkable similarity between them, so that a stranger might
easily mistake the one for the other.

The Druids of Britain as well as those of Gaul, made use of letters
under many circumstances. The "memorial of letters," or the "memorial of
Coelbren," was one of their "three memorials." This is clearly seen in
the Laws of Dyvnwal Moelmud. It would, therefore, not be difficult to
harmonize Cæsar's narrative respecting the "memorial of voice" and the
"memorial of letters" of the Gauls, with what we

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

know to have been the usage of the Bards of Britain in these matters.

8\. *The transmigration of souls*. The Bardic dogma on this head was,
that the soul commenced its course in the lowest water animalcule, and
passed at death to other bodies of a superior order, successively, and
in regular gradation, until it entered that of man. Humanity is a state
of liberty, where man can attach himself to either good or evil, as he
pleases. If his good qualities preponderate over his evil qualities at
the time of his death, his soul passes into Gwynvyd, or a state of
bliss, where good necessarily prevails, and from whence it is impossible
to fall. But if his evil qualities predominate, his soul descends in
Abred into an animal corresponding in character to the disposition he
exhibited just before he died. It will then rise as before, until it
again arrives at the point of liberty, where it will have another chance
of clinging to the good. But if it fails, it must fall again; and this
may happen for ages and ages, until at last its attachment to good
preponderates. It was believed, however, that man could not be guilty
twice of the same sin; his experience in Abred, whilst undergoing
punishment for any particular sin, would prevent him from loving that
sin a second time; hence the adage, "Nid eir i Annwn and unwaith."

The views of the Gaulish Druids, as far as they are expressed by Cæsar,
do not appear to differ from the above. "They wish to inculcate this
idea, that souls do not die, but pass after death from one body to
another." The only thing that may be *supposed* to be different is the
passing from one body to another, which, in the original Latin, seems as
if it meant from

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

one human body to another human body, "ab aliis--ad alios." But in
reality there is no inconsistency between the two systems, even in this
respect; for, though the soul of a good man was considered in general as
entering an angelic body in the circle of Gwynvyd, and the soul of a
wicked man as entering the body of a beast, a reptile, or a bird, in
Abred, yet, it was thought that occasionally the good soul returned from
Gwynvyd to inhabit a human body, and that the soul of one punished by
death, against his will, for an injurious evil, passed to another human
body. There is no doubt that this, with the Cymry as well as with the
Gauls, acted as a strong incentive to bravery, especially as they
considered that to suffer in behalf of truth and justice was one of the
greatest virtues, and was sure to bring the soul to everlasting bliss.

9\. *Astronomy*. "They dispute largely concerning the stars and their
motion," says Cæsar, and herein the Druids of Gaul were similar to those
of Britain. We have evidence enough to prove that the latter paid
particular attention to the doctrine of the stars. Testimony is borne to
their knowledge of the revolution of the stars even by the very word,
which they used to denote time, *amser*, compounded of *am*, round, and
*ser*, the stars. They themselves, also, not unfrequently went by the
name of *sywedyddion*, that is, astronomers, or men versed in the
science of the stars.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Talhaiarn y sydd  
Mwyaf *sywedydd*.</span>

</div>

It will be seen that the names given by our ancestors to the different
constellations, as enumerated in

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

these volumes, are thoroughly Cymric, and radical, thus indicating early
and profound knowledge on their part " concerning the stars and their
motion."

10\. *Cosmology*. The Bards believed that all the visible creation
sprang into existence simultaneously with the pronunciation of God's
Name; and this article occupies a very prominent place in their
religious creed. From other fragments in this Collection we find that
they professed to know something of the laws of nature; why water rises
to the surface of the earth, and descends from the clouds, and why the
sea is briny. And, if we take Taliesin as a proper representative of
Bardism, we may have abundant proof from his poems that they reasoned
much in his days "concerning the world, the earth, and the nature of
things."

11\. *Theology*. "And about the force and power of the immortal gods."
Let GOD be substituted for "gods," and this statement would apply
equally to the Cymry, and no difference whatever would exist between the
two systems on the subject. Nothing is oftener, and more positively
insisted upon in the Bardic creed than the doctrine of ONE GOD; and it
is remarkable that all the testimonies of archaiological research,
though they are for the most part of a negative character, tend to
confirm the antiquity and genuineness of that creed. The Bards were
careful to inculcate this truth above all, and brought it to bear upon
the several rites and ceremonies, which distinguished their national
worship. The ideas they had, also, of the nature and attributes of the
Deity were truly sublime and eminently magnificent, not to be equalled
perhaps by any other race of the Gentile

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

world, prior to its adoption of the more divine religion of Christ.

12\. *Sacrifices*. The views of the Bards on the subject of "aberthau,"
or oblations, are clearly and distinctly quoted in these volumes, so
that we need not give a summary of them here. What we have to do is to
harmonize the account, which Cæsar gives of the sacrifices of the
Continental Druids with the Bardism of the Cymry. The Roman captain
might easily fall into a mistake about those matters. When he saw
malefactors being put to death, under the supervision of the priests, he
would naturally infer that they were thus dealt with as sacrifices, to
propitiate the gods. He saw men, perhaps, giving themselves up
voluntarily to suffer the punishment due for their transgressions, and
he would reasonably suppose that they were "vowing to sacrifice
themselves." It is quite possible that he should, also, have seen good
men suffer in the cause of truth and justice, and his inference would
be, that they were being sacrificed for want of a sufficient number of
evil doers to take their place. But, if we grant that Cæsar gives a
correct account of the sacrifices of the Gaulish Druids, it is very easy
to perceive that the rite in question originated in the doctrine of
*eneidvaddeu*, which prevailed among the Cymry. "They think that if the
life of man is not given for the life of man, the immortal gods cannot
be appeased." Life for life was required by the laws of the Cymry; but
we do not find that our ancestors viewed the retaliation as what would
propitiate God, further than that to benefit the man himself, who was
put to death, might be taken as a sign of his reconciliation

<span id="page_xlvi">p. xlvi</span>

with God. If a murderer died a natural death, his soul would descend low
in Abred, but the fatal punishment inflicted upon him by the public
officers was considered, according to the order of providence, as
equivalent to that degradation, and his soul passed simultaneously to
another human body. In this sense, then, the punishment of *eneidvaddeu*
propitiated God; that is, God did not, on that account, place man in
such a miserable position as He would otherwise have done. Since the
Divine Being wishes every man to be saved, it may be said, that whatever
is done to facilitate that object, and to bring about its speedy
consummation, must be pleasing to Him.

It is very probable that the prisoners of the wicker image were no other
than the malefactors who would not surrender themselves voluntarily; we
can hardly see the necessity for the scheme in the case of the others.
We do not read of anything of the kind in connection with our own
island; most likely it was peculiar to the Continent.

Cæsar observes that it was the opinion of the Gaulish Druids "that the
punishment of those who were caught in theft or pillage, or in any other
wicked act, was more acceptable to the immortal gods" than that of the
innocent. It is difficult to withstand the supposition that these were
the words of the commentator himself, used by him as a reason for the
want of proportion, which he observed in the number of the bad and good,
that were immolated. If, on the contrary, it was really the opinion of
the Druids, then they must in this respect have differed much from their
Cymric brethren, who considered that the offenders, who gave themselves
up willingly

<span id="page_xlvii">p. xlvii</span>

to be punished, were more acceptable than those who were punished
against their will, and that the good, who suffered in behalf of truth
and justice, were still more so. Besides, there was something in the
above opinion inconsistent with the idea which mankind in general
entertained respecting the qualities of a sacrifice, and which sets
forth the immaculate, the obedient, and the innocent, as the one which
is most pleasing to God.

It appears from Cæsar that the agent, which the Gauls used for consuming
their sacrifices, was fire. Fire might in like manner be employed among
the Cymry for the punishment of those who were adjudged to be
*eneidvaddeu*. "There are three *eneidvaddeu* punishments: beheading;
hanging; and *burning*; and it is for the king, or lord of the
territory, to order which he willeth to be inflicted." <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md)

13\. *The Names of God*. We must again express our conviction that Cæsar
might have mistaken the several attributes, which belonged to the one
true God, for as many distinct and independent divinities, just as it is
said that some of the Cymry, in the in-fancy of the world, deified and
worshipped the rods which only bore the Name of God. Not at once did men
forget the great and primitive doctrine of the unity of the Godhead,
setting up in the imagination of their hearts "gods many, and lords
many." Even the names, by which the gods of the Gentiles were
designated, had been invented, and were used to denote the several
properties of the Deity, before that

<span id="page_xlviii">p. xlviii</span>

great corruption took place. As an old poet observes,--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Pluto, Proserpine, Ceres, Venus, Cupid,  
Triton, Nereus, Tethys, and Neptune,  
Hermes, Vulcan, Pan, Jupiter, Juno,  
Diana, and Apollo, are ONE GOD." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The same doctrine
is also taught in the hymns, which historians ascribe to Orpheus. It is
quite probable, therefore, that Cæsar, when he observed the several
parts of the Gaulish worship, concluded that they were adorations
offered to distinct gods, and that those gods were similar to the gods
of Rome and Greece, with whom he was best acquainted.

"They chiefly worship the god Mercury." This character is almost the
chief in every religious system; it is the same as to its original
nature with the Gwyddon of the Cymry, the Budha of the Indians, and the
Woden of the Saxons--that is, the Bard presiding at Gorsedd. It was the
office of this Bard to instruct men in various kinds of knowledge, and
to lead them along the ways of morality; therefore, his auditors might
easily consider him as "the inventor of all arts, the guide of ways and
journeys, and as possessing the greatest power for obtaining money and
merchandise."

"Of him they have many images." Perhaps the *maen crair*, on which the
presiding Bard stood, and the *meini gwynion*, at which his assistants
took their station, were these supposed images. But, granting that the
inhabitants of Gaul, in Cæsar's time, did worship the god Mercury, it is
easy to see that such

<span id="page_xlix">p. xlix</span>

was merely a misapprehension of the primitive views, which were
entertained respecting the Bard in Gorsedd. The same properties, but
more suitably adapted to the character of a divine being, were ascribed
to Mercury, as were supposed to belong to the Bard. The first, and most
natural step in this corruption, was to view the president of Gorsedd as
the representative of a Divine Gwyddon, and doubtless the people fell
into this mistake sooner than did the Druids themselves. Inasmuch as the
principles of Bardism were never so thoroughly understood in Gaul as
they were in Britain, it was not difficult to fall into error on the
point in question.

We know not whether Mercury was a name which the Druids themselves gave
to their president, or their god, or whether it was one that Cæsar
invented, from noticing the similarity that existed between their views
and worship and those of his own countrymen. If it be a Celtic name,
what does it mean? Is it MERCH-WR, (woman-man,) because the Gwyddon
looked straight before him along the line of the East--"Dwyrain," i. e.
*dwy rain*, the two rays--the ray of Eilir and the ray of Elved, which
in nature represented the two sexes, male and female? Or is it MARCH-WR,
(horse-man,) because he mounted, or, as it were, rode the *maen crair*,
whilst he presided in Gorsedd--the word *march* again being originally
derived from my--ARCH, i.e. the ARCH, or maen ARCH, being another name
of the stone on which the Bard stood?

"After him they worship Apollo," who is supposed "to ward off all
diseases." He is the same undoubtedly with the SUN in the Bardism of the
Cymry,

<span id="page_l">p. l</span>

which was regarded as the natural or physical representative of the Sun
of righteousness, or the Supreme God. Wherefore, many of the rites and
ceremonies of the Gorsedd were regulated with reference to this
luminary. The days for holding the Gorsedd were the four Albans, when
the rays of the orient sun converging to the *maen llog* delineated the
creative Name of God. The Bard thus standing in "the face of the sun,
and the eye of light," when he taught the people, literally "spoke in
the Name of the Lord." No Gorsedd could be held except when the sun was
above the horizon.

Since it is the property of the sun to warm, cheer, and revive, it may
well be said to "ward off diseases;" and when deified, the same
attribute would of course still belong to it, but in a more eminent
degree.

Having lost sight of the true position of the sun in the system of
Bardism, it was not difficult to fall into error, and to worship the
creature more than the Creator. It would appear that the Gentiles had
made gods of "the heavenly host" sooner than of any other parts of the
creation; and if the Gauls were to some extent idolaters in the time of
Cæsar, we may be sure that they worshipped the Sun.

The next god, whom Cæsar says they worshipped, was MARS, "the ruler of
wars." The British Bards were pre-eminently men of peace; no one was
allowed to carry a naked weapon in their presence, nor did they
ordinarily unsheath the sword against any one. We say ordinarily, for
there were occasions, on which they were required to act in a different
manner, as may be seen from the following Triad:--

<span id="page_li">p. li</span>

<span class="small">"The three necessary, but reluctant duties, of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain: secrecy for the sake of peace and public
good; invective lamentation required by justice; and *to unsheat*h the
sword against the lawless and depradatory." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)</span>

It was not for the purpose of acquiring unlawful possessions, and of
oppressing other people and countries, that they "unsheathed the sword;"
"they would not have country and lands by fighting and pursuing, but of
equity, and in peace." <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17.md) It was evil
that they resisted even unto blood. Accordingly, on his way to the
Gorsedd, the Bard carried the sword by its point, to signify his own
readiness to suffer in the cause of truth; it was sheathed on the *maen
crair*, for the people had been invited to attend, where there would be
no naked weapon against them; but against "a man deprived of privilege,
and exposed to warfare," it was unsheathed. It may be that the rite of
the sword in Gorsedd had created an opinion in the mind of Cæsar, that
the Druids were at the time worshipping Mars, the god of war; or it may
be that the Druids themselves, having forgotten its original import, had
come to regard it as referring to the same god, whom, they no doubt had
heard of as existing in the religious system of their neighbours. The
accompanying offerings and sacrifices seem to have been derived from
this view of Mars, since nothing of the kind can be traced to the usages
of the Cymry; unless the burying his horse and arms with a warrior had
been a sort of foundation for the custom.

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

After Mars, Jupiter is mentioned, as the god, who " held the empire of
heaven." IAU <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) was one of the names,
which the Cymry gave to the supreme God, and it signified the last or
most recent manifestation of the Godhead, such as that which occurred in
creation as contrasted with the preceding vacuum--after that in the
incarnation of His Son. Perhaps the word is the same with <span
id="img__05200"></span> ![](img/_05200.jpg), the unutterable Name of
God, by which He created all things--the Word of His might. There is,
however, another meaning given to the name in question in the traditions
of the Bards:--

"Disciple. Why is Iau (yoke) given as a name for God?

"Master. Because the yoke is the measuring rod of country and nation in
virtue of the authority of law, and is in the possession of every head
of family under the mark of the lord of the territory, and whoever
violates it is liable to a penalty. Now, God is the measuring rod of all
truth, all justice, and all goodness; therefore He is a yoke on all, and
all are under it, and woe to him who shall violate it." <span
id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19.md)

This meaning bears a close relation to the opinion that the owner of the
name "held the empire of heaven." Nevertheless, the name, even in this
sense, might have been founded upon <span id="img__05201"></span>
![](img/_05201.jpg), or, according to a further development, <span
id="img__05202"></span> ![](img/_05202.jpg), which signifies
preservation, creation, and destruction.

The Gauls could not fall into the error of inventing an additional
divinity in the person of Jupiter, for he was the principal god, or god
in his primary character--though their formation of different gods out
of his attributes necessarily encroaches upon, and abbreviates his
greatness and authority.

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

MINERVA. The Druids of Gaul, according to Cæsar, were of opinion that it
was this goddess who "instructed them in the principles of works and
arts." It is very likely that she was the same originally with the Awen,
(A wen, <span id="img__05300"></span> ![](img/_05300.jpg),) the Word of
God, that proceeded out of His mouth, even as Minerva is said to have
sprung out of the brain of Jupiter. It was from the AWEN that all
knowledge was derived--in like manner Minerva was considered as the
goddess of wisdom. One of the objects of AWEN is to produce
peace--Minerva produced the olive, the symbol of peace. In several other
respects, also, a remarkable similarity between the characteristics of
the Bardic Awen and the goddess Minerva, may be pointed out, though in
matters of detail this is not necessary, because Cæsar observes that the
opinion of the Gauls was but *almost* the same as that of the other
nations concerning the above divinities.

14\. *Origin of the people*. "The Gauls declare that they have all
sprung from their father Pluto, and this they say was delivered to them
by the Druids." There can be no doubt that this sentiment is perfectly
identical with that of the Bards relative to the procession of man from
Annwn.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Whence didst thou proceed? and what is thy
beginning?  
"I came from the Great World, having my beginning in Annwn." <span
id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20.md)</span>

</div>

We have thus gone through the testimony of Cæsar, the principal
classical authority on the subject of Druidism; we will now proceed to
examine the statements of the other ancient authors, who have

<span id="page_liv">p. liv</span>

touched upon the same point, though not so largely and minutely; namely,
Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Cicero, Pliny, Pomponius Mela, Tacitus,
Diogenes Laertius, and Ammianus Marcellinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[xxvii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_6.md) Trioedd Braint a
Defod.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[xxvii:2](bim1004.htm#fr_7.md) Suet. i.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xxix:1](bim1004.htm#fr_8.md) De Bel. Gal. liber vi.
cc. 13-18.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xxxvii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_9.md) The Laws of Dyvnwal
Moelmud.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xl:1](bim1004.htm#fr_10.md) Caffaeliad Llytlyr.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xl:2](bim1004.htm#fr_11.md) Ystorrynnau Cyssefin.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xli:1](bim1004.htm#fr_12.md) Origin and Progress
of Writing, p. 56.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xli:2](bim1004.htm#fr_13.md) Bucher. Fro. p. 183.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xlvii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_14.md) Laws of Dyvnwad
Moelmud.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xlviii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_15.md) See Davies's
Celtic Researches, p. 237.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[li:1](bim1004.htm#fr_16.md) Trioedd Braint a
Defod.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[li:2](bim1004.htm#fr_17.md) Trioedd Ynys Prydain.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[lii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_18.md) The Cymric form of
Jupiter, or Jove.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[lii:2](bim1004.htm#fr_19.md) Iau.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[liii:1](bim1004.htm#fr_20.md) Llyfr Barddas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Strabo](bim1005.md)
