[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1012)  [Next](bim1014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### C. CORNELIUS TACITUS.

We have left this author to the last, because he speaks of the Druids of
our own country. Tacitus lived in the time of Nero and his successors
until Hadrian. Though deemed in general a skilful and correct historian,
yet we have evidence enough to prove that he could occasionally run
counter of the truth; consequently we ought to be cautious how we
receive his statements. He utters a glaring falsehood when he treats of
the history of the Jews; declaring that they fled from the island of
Creta into Egypt, and received the name *Iudæi* from mount *Ida* in that
island--that Moses obtained water in the wilderness by following a herd
of wild asses, and that the Jews religiously preserved in their houses
the image or picture of a wild ass, in grateful memory of the event.
Tacitus had no excuse whatever for falling into these errors. There were
a great many Jews in Rome, and the Scriptures had been translated into
the Greek language long before his era; besides, St. Paul himself
actually visited the city, and preached the Gospel

<span id="page_lxviii">p. lxviii</span>

there in his time. If then, Tacitus, erred so egregiously, in the face
of so many opportunities of learning the real truth concerning a
renowned nation like the Jews, why might he not have fallen into similar
mistakes with regard to the Cymry, though he received his account from
his father-in-law, Agricola, who was governor of Britain?

But what says Tacitus of the Druidism of Britain? In speaking of the
invasion of the isle of Mona, or Anglesey, by Suetonius Paulinus, he
says:--

"There stood apart on the strand an army, thick with men and arms, and
women ran to and fro after the manner of Furies, clad in funereal
dresses, with dishevelled hair, and carrying torches before them. The
Druids, also, pouring out terrible prayers around them, with hands
raised towards heaven, struck the soldiers with awe by the novelty of
the sight; so that, as if their members clung to the spot, they offered
their unmoved bodies to the wounds. Afterwards, by the exhortations of
their leaders, and by their own mutual encouragements, not to be afraid
of a womanish and fanatical troop, they lead on the standards, overthrow
their opponents, and involve them in their own fires.

"A guard was afterwards placed over the conquered, and their groves were
cut down, which had been consecrated to their cruel superstitions; for
they considered it lawful to offer the blood of captives on their
altars, and to consult the gods by means of the nerves of men," <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33)

The historian has unquestionably coloured the above sketch as black as
possible; but, even if we grant that it is tolerably correct, there is
nothing in it, after all, which is inconsistent with the ancient Bardism
of the Cymry. Patriotism was a great virtue with them--and aggressive
war was looked upon as a dire crime--a crime that exposed its
perpetrators to the punishment

<span id="page_lxix">p. lxix</span>

of death. What wonder, then, is it, if the Cymry sentenced to death the
Roman soldiers, who chanced to fall into their hands? But, it may be
objected, they were slain by the Druids, as sacrifices to their gods.
There is no doubt that the Druids did superintend their execution, and
that this in a certain sense partook of the nature of a sacrifice. Their
death was a punishment for the offence, which they had committed, but at
the same time it was regarded as a sort of atonement, which made up for
the degradation they would have been subject to in Abred, if they had
died a natural death. If Tacitus had known something of the doctrine of
*eneidvaddeu*, he would have considered the act of the Druids on this
occasion as a just and merciful one; just, in that it punished the
transgressor, merciful, in that it placed him in a better state; for,
according to their creed, his soul would pass immediately into another
human body, totally cleansed from the guilt of the crime for which he
had died. So easy is it to misunderstand the nature and object of men's
actions, when viewed from a point which is external to their own
religious sentiments!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[lxviii:1](bim1013.htm#fr_33) Lib. xiv. c. 30.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Druids and Bards](bim1014)
