[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1005)  [Next](bim1007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### DIODORUS SICULUS, B.C. 44.

His description also is confined to the Druidism of Gaul, and is to the
following effect:--

<span class="small">"And there are among them \[the Gauls\] composers of
verses, whom they call Bards; these, singing to instruments similar to a
lyre, applaud some, while they vituperate others. There are also certain
philosophers and priests surpassingly esteemed, whom they call Druids.
They have also soothsayers, who are held in high estimation; and these,
by auguries and the sacrifice of victims, foretel future events, and
hold the commonalty in complete subjection: and more</span>

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

<span class="small">especially, when they deliberate on matters of
moment, they practise a strange and incredible rite; for, having devoted
a man for sacrifice, they strike him with a sword on a part above the
diaphragm: the victim having fallen, they augur from his mode of
falling, the contortion of his limbs, and the flowing of the blood, what
may come to pass, giving credence concerning such things to an ancient
and long-standing observance. They have a custom of performing no
sacrifice unattended by a philosopher, For they say that thanksgiving
should be offered to the gods by men acquainted with the divine nature
and using the same language, and by these they deem it necessary to ask
for good .things; and not only in the concerns of peace, but even of
war, not friends alone, but even enemies also, chiefly defer to them and
to the composers of verses. Frequently, during hostilities, when armies
are approaching each other with swords drawn and lances extended, these
men rushing between them put an end to their contention, taming them as
they would tame wild beasts. " <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)</span>

This description is somewhat similar to that which Strabo gives, as the
reader will easily perceive. Both authors agree as to the number of the
different orders--the esteem in which they were held--their custom of
predicting events by means of the sacrifice--and the influence of the
Bards in restraining armies from fighting.

1\. *The names of the orders*. Whilst Strabo gives the same names as
those used by the Cymry, that is, Bards, Ovates, and Druids, Diodorus
calls them Bards, Soothsayers, and Druids, making a soothsayer and an
ovate to be of the same import, and both are of opinion that this
functionary had to do with the act of sacrificing. They, likewise, agree
as to the office of the Bard, that he was a singer and a poet, and in
respect of the devotion which was paid by the Druid to philosophy, and
the necessity of his presence at the sacrifices.

<span id="page_lix">p. lix</span>

2\. *Vaticinations*. Strabo mentions only one thing from which they
augured future events, namely, "the palpitation" of the victim; Diodorus
adds two other particulars, namely, "his mode of falling" and "the
flowing of the blood." There is no allusion to these matters in the
Bardic traditions.

3\. *The mediation of the Druids*. According to the declaration of
Diodorus, the common people regarded the Druids as mediators between
themselves and the gods, and grounded their competency and fitness for
that purpose upon the fact that they were acquainted with the divine
nature, and used the same language. We have already seen that the Druids
of Britain, as well as those of Gaul, studied and taught much respecting
the nature and attributes of God. Using "the same language" seems to
imply that the language of divine worship was unchangeable, whatever
might be that of the people. And since the acts of the Gorsedd in
Britain were to be performed at all times in Cymraeg, we may reasonably
infer that it was in the old Celtic tongue Druidism was administered on
the Continent--there was not much difference between the Cymraeg and the
native language of Gaul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[lviii:1](bim1006.htm#fr_24) Hist. lib. v. c.
31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cicero](bim1007)
