[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1021)  [Next](bim1023) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE INVENTOR OF VOCAL SONG.--THE FIRST RECORDERS OF BARDISM.--ITS FIRST SYSTEMATIZERS.--THEIR REGULATIONS.--MODE OF INSCRIBING THE PRIMARY LETTERS.--ORIGIN OF THEIR FORM AND SOUND.--THE THREE MENWS.

Pray, who was the first that made a vocal song in Cymraeg?

Hu the Mighty, <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_64) the man who first
brought the Cymry into the Isle of Britain; and he made the song to be a
memorial of what happened to the nation of the Cymry from the age of
ages. And he inserted in it the praise of God for what the Cymry had
received at His hand, by way of protection and deliverance, also the
sciences and regulations of the nation of the Cymry. It was from that
song that instruction in vocal song, and the understanding of just
memorials, were first obtained. After that came Tydain, father of
Awen, <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_65) who improved the sciences and
art of vocal song, and reduced it to an artistic system, that it might
be the more easily learned, understood, and remembered, and be the more
pleasantly recited and listened to.

Pray, who were they that first preserved the memory and sciences of
Bardism, and gave instruction in wisdom?

The Gwyddoniaid, namely, the sages of the nation of the Cymry; they
preserved the memory in vocal song of the sciences and wisdom of
Bardism, and gave instruction in them; nevertheless the sciences of the
Gwyddoniaid possessed neither privilege nor license, except by
courtesy--neither system nor chair. <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_66)

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Who were the first that conferred system and chair on Bards and Bardism,
and on Poets and vocal song?

The three primary Bards, namely, Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_67) who lived in the time of Prydain, son of
Aedd the Great, and in the time of Dyvnvarth ap Prydain, his son. That
is, they devised a Chair and Gorsedd, and regulated teachers and
aspirants, and pupilage; and introduced instruction in sciences, and
fixed and just memorials in respect of the knowledge of Bardism, and
vocal song, with its appurtenances, and in respect of usages, that, of
justice, and according to the requirements of wisdom, were suitable to
Bards and Poets, as would be most requisite for the benefit and praise
of the nation of the Cymry.

Pray, my accomplished teacher, instruct me as to the regulation and
system of Chair and Gorsedd, which the three primary Bards introduced in
respect of Bards and Poets?

Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, did, of his acute and sagacious sense
and meditation, what he saw the best in every act and event for the
benefit and praise of the might of the nation of the Cymry. He then
called to him the Gwyddoniaid, and requested judgment by ballot as to
the three who should be found to be the wisest and best of them in
respect of sciences, when Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, were found to be
the best in respect of sciences, and wisdom, and secrecy, and the art of
vocal song. Then they conferred the privilege of country and nation upon
those whom they perceived to be the best in respect of the sciences, and
art of Bardism and vocal song, and upon the instruction which they gave,
and which was regulated by system and art. And these are the order and
system which they devised.

Pray, on what were letters first made, and in what manner?

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span> <span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

They were first made on trees, that is, wood was hewn into four sided
staves, on each of which were cut small notches, and it was by means of
as many notches as were necessary, that letters were formed. After that,
on a slate stone, that is, letters were engraved on it with a steel
pencil, or a flint. When it was done on wood, it was called *coelbren*,
and hence the grooves of the letters were called *coelbren*; and the
lettered stone was called *coelvain*. <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_68) There was a different way in which letters
were made on wood, other than by means of notches, namely, with black or
any other colour that might be most ready at hand. And this was
practised by the Cymry for ages before memory. When this island was won
by the men of Rome, they brought over here a plant, called *plagawd*,
that is, a sedge, which was obtained from the land of Asia, and the land
of Canaan, and wrote upon it. After that, art was applied to the skins
of calves, the skins of goats, and the skins of sheep, and plagawd was
made from them, and it is the best of all manufactures for books.
Nevertheless, the Bards of the Isle of Britain retain in memory and
history the mode of making the ancient books, in order to rescue the
Cymraeg from the misunderstanding, to which it would otherwise be
liable. Another reason is, that wood and stone can be procured where and
when plagawd cannot; wherefore there is no proper Gorsedd or Chair,
where the ancient usages and the ancient sciences, according to
understanding and art, are not exhibited. On that account there ought to
be wood in every Gorsedd and Chair, and besides a Roll of plagawd; that
is, there ought to be an exhibition of all the sciences of letters in
the Gorsedd and Chair of the Bards of the Isle

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span> <span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of Britain; and where there is no wood, then lettered stones.

Pray, how were letters first understood in respect of form and sound?

Thus, God, when there was in life and existence only Himself, proclaimed
His Name, and co-instantaneously with the word all living and existing
things burst wholly into a shout of joy; and that voice was the most
melodious that ever was heard in music. Co-instantaneously with the
voice was light, and in the light, form; and the voice <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_69) was in three tones, three vocalizations,
pronounced together at the same moment. And in the vision were three
forms and colours, which were the form of light; and one with the voice,
and the colour and form of that voice, were the three first letters. It
was from a combination of their vocalizations that every other
vocalization was formed in letters. He who heard the voice was Menw the
Aged, son of the Three Shouts; but others say that it was Einigan the
Giant that first made a letter, the same being the form of the Name of
God, when he found himself alive and existing co-momentaneously and
co-instantaneously with the voice.

Pray, my eloquent and learned teacher, how many men, that were Menws,
have there been in the nation of the Cymry, for I find mention and
account of others of the name of Menw?

Three persons, within memory and knowledge, have been of that name, that
is to say, Menw, son of the Three Shouts, the second was Menw the Tall
from the North, and the other, Menw, son of Menwad, of Arvon, the man
who was the first of the nation of the Cymry that made dramatic
representations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[41:1](bim1022.htm#fr_65) <span id="page_40">p.
40</span> Conformably with this statement is that of the Triads, where
Hu the Mighty is called one of "the three cultivators of song and
thought," because it was he that " first applied to vocal song the
preservation of memory and thought." Tr. 91. Third Series.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[41:2](bim1022.htm#fr_66) He was the third of
"the cultivators of song and thought," so considered, because it was he
that "first conferred art upon vocal song, and system upon thought." Id.
Geraint the Blue Bard, who flourished about A.D. 900, has recorded his
achievement in this respect;--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Goruc Tydain Tad Awen  
Oi fyfyrdawd fawr aren,  
Glof ar gof gan gerdd gymhen. <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

The achievement of Tydain, the father of Awen,  
Of his vast and wise meditation,  
Was the securing of memory by eloquent verse.  
                             Iolo MSS. pp. 262, 669.

</div>

<span id="fn_66"></span>[41:3](bim1022.htm#fr_67) "There were previously
Bards and Bardism, but they had no licensed system, <span
id="page_42">p. 42</span> nor privileges or usages, but what were
obtained by kindness and courtesy, under the protection of country and
nation, before the time of these three," i.e. Plennydd, Alawn, and
Gwron. Tr. 58, Third Series.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[43:1](bim1022.htm#fr_68) <span id="page_42">p.
42</span> "The three primary Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd,
Alawn, and Gwron; that is to say, they were the persons who devised the
privileges and <span id="page_43">p. 43</span> usages of Bards and
Bardism. Therefore are they called the three primaries. \* \* \* Some
say that they lived in the time of Prydain son of Aedd the Great; but
others say that they lived in the time of Dyvnwal Moelmud, his son, who
in some old Books is called Dyvnvarth ab Prydain." Id.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[45:1](bim1022.htm#fr_69) <span id="page_44">p.
44</span> Stone of credibility. The poets frequently allude to the
*coelvain*, thus,--

CYNDDELW.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Mwyn Ofydd i Feirdd ei faith *goelfain*.

A kind Ovate to Bards was his large *stone of credibility*.  
                                       To Owain Cyveiliog.

</div>

GRUFFYDD AB DAVYDD AB TUDUR, 1290-1340.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Colofn Prestatun *coelfeiniau* Awrtun.

The pillar of Prestatyn, the *belief stones* of Overton.

</div>

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

GRUFFYDD AB MEREDYDD AB DAVYDD, 1310-1360.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Mair ai *choelvain*:

Cor Ior aur drefnad  
Cyw aint wneuthuriad  
Mawr uchelfab rhad

Of Mary, and her *stone of credibility*:

The Choir of the Lord, of golden order,  
And of skilful workmanship,  
The great, high and gracious Son

</div>

SION TUDOR.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Wrth ddarllain coelfain celfydd  
Gair naw gloes ar gronigl wydd.

In reading an ingenious *stone of credibility*,  
Or the nine tropes on a wooden chronicle.

</div>

<span id="fn_69"></span>[47:1](bim1022.htm#fr_70) <span id="page_46">p.
46</span> Al. "Name."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Principal Elements of Various Things.--The
Gogyrvens](bim1023)
