[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1002)  [Next](bim1004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

# PREFACE.

THE promoters of the National Eisteddvod, which was held at Llangollen,
in the autumn of 1858, conscious of the increased attention that was
being paid by foreign scholars to the literature and usages of our
Cymric ancestors, and desirous, at the same time, of facilitating their
inquiries in that direction, as well as of effectually rescuing from a
precarious existence the traditions of the Bards, offered a prize of
£30, and a Bardic tiara in gold, for "the fullest illustration, from
original sources, of the theology, discipline, and usages of the
Bardo-druidic system of the Isle of Britain." Only one compilation was
received, which, nevertheless, received a very high encomium,
accompanied with a recommendation that it should be published, in the
following adjudication, which was read at the meeting by Myvyr
Morganwg, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) one of the three judges
appointed for the occasion.

<span class="small">"On this very important and interesting subject only
one composition has been received, which bears the feigned signature of
PLENNYDD. It is a very extensive collection, for the most part of
unpublished</span>

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

MSS., consisting of 287 folio pages, clearly and beautifully written,
and exhibiting indications of being carefully and accurately copied, for
the writer, following herein the example of the late Iola Morganwg, has
suffered even errors, which were obvious in the manuscripts before him,
to remain unaltered.

"The compiler has been very diligent, and remarkably successful in
obtaining access to such a vast number of ancient MSS. bearing on
Bardism, many of which had seen but little light for several years
before. With respect to their genuineness, PLENNYDD justly
observes,--'though their authors cannot in many instances be named, any
more than we can name the authors of the Common Law of England, yet the
existence of the peculiar dogmas and usages, which they represent, may
be proved from the compositions of the Bards from the era of Taliesin
down to the present time.'

"This collection contains a great many of the Rules and Usages
appertaining to the Gorsedd of the Bards, several valuable fragments on
the Natural and Moral Philosophy of our ancestors, together with the
ingenious Theology of the ancient Bardism of the Cymry; also curious
extracts on Astronomy, Arithmetic, the Bardic Coelbren, and a vast
quantity of Triads. Every fragment that can thus be made public, of what
once related to the primitive Gorsedd or Throne of the Bards, is truly
valuable, inasmuch as it was this simple, moral, and sublime system,
that constituted the very foundation of the primitive worship,
legislature, and scholastic institutes of the nation, and was the living
means of promoting learning and morality among all classes of the
people, in early times. And when we consider that the Gorsedd of the
Bards was but a continuation, in the White Island, of the circular
temples of patriarchal times, we may feel assured that it is among the
remains of Bardism, or the religious system connected with those
primitive temples, we may hope to discover, if at all, that *Golden
Key*, concealed and secured, which can open the mysteries, or esoteric
doctrine, of ancient nations.......

"We had no right to expect that we should find the 'Secrets of Bardism,'
or the 'Mysteries of *Maen Arch*,' introduced into a compilation, which
was intended to be made public; for such have been, and ought to be a
sort of mute tradition, and tradition only, to be communicated solely to
such as have proved themselves worthy to receive the.......

"Nevertheless, there may be found in this collection, some fragments
which contain, as is very clear to every initiated Bard, the remains of
that sublime learning, as it existed in the Isle of Britain anterior to
Christianity; such as those extracts about the elements--the migration
of the soul from the point of extreme evil in Annwn to the point of
extreme good in heaven--the mystic Name of God--the nature of Cythraul,
&c. In order to prove the genuineness and

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

great antiquity of these particulars to one who is not initiated in the
mysteries of Bardism, it may suffice that they are also discoverable,
though in a more corrupt form, in the ancient bardism of Hindoostan.
They are old dogmas, at present neither preserved nor existing amidst
the antiquities of any nation under the sun, except the Indians and the
Cymry.

"But we have in the present collection some pieces of mixed Bardism,
which may be called Monkish Bardism, or Bardism and Christianity mixed
together, which could easily take place after the introduction of
Christianity, owing to the remarkable--very remark-able coincidence
which exists between the two systems.

"The Compiler assures us that he is in possession of more documents,
which would have been added, if time had permitted. We trust that he
will hereafter kindly make the addition, and that the whole will be
published in one or more volumes. It will make a valuable Book, not only
as aid in the management of the Gorsedd of the Bards, but also, and
especially, because the time is undoubtedly coming, as is proved by
certain signs, when every fragment of the primitive Bardism of the Cymry
will be treasured as gold, and subjected to the severest criticism by
men of learning and research.

"I know not what the literati of the Continent will say, when the Book
is published, but I presume that their curiosity will be much excited by
its contents, and that they themselves will be highly pleased with the
labour and industry of the Compiler.......

"The three judges are of opinion that the writer deserves to have the
prize presented to him by acclamation, and with the full and joyful
approbation of the nation, as represented in this Great
Eisteddvod." <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

The compilation thus referred to is that, which, with omissions and
additions, somewhat re-arranged, and accompanied with an English
translation, is now offered to the public. With very few exceptions, the
several documents used on the present occasion, have been collected from
the manuscripts of the late Iolo Morganwg, Bard according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and one of

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

the two that constituted the only members of the Bardic institution,
when it was revived at the close of the last century. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) But though they are thus in his handwriting,
if we set aside some brief and unimportant notices, which, whether
original or otherwise, may have been couched in his own language, there
is every reason to believe that they are transcripts of older
manuscripts. In the first place we may remark, that they are
interspersed, without method or order of any kind, among the private and
casual entries of the Bard, which he made on loose scraps of old
letters, bills, and placards--bound together only after his death, and
that they were thus evidently not intended to be published. This fact of
itself would remove the notion of any design on his part to impose upon
the credulity of his countrymen. Moreover, we have had an opportunity of
examining fully and carefully those papers, and thus seen the Bard, as
it were, in his most private and unguarded moments, and can, as the
result of our observation, unhesitatingly pronounce him to be incapable
of perpetrating literary deceit or forgery, particularly with the view
of upholding a theory. Integrity of purpose is apparent throughout all
his works. Strong feelings, indeed, he had, amounting almost to
prejudice, but they were founded in jealous concern for the due
preservation of the traditions of the country, and never displayed,
except when he beheld a disposition to oppugn or disparage what he
considered ancient and national. It was on this ground, for instance,
that he so strenuously advocated the claims of Dosparth

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Morganwg, or the
Glamorgan system of versification, in preference to the twenty-four new
canons of poetry, which were sanctioned at the famous Eisteddvod, held
at Caermarthen, under the patronage of Gruffydd ab Nicholas, in the 15th
century. Secondly, the style is in general too archaic for the 18th
century, exhibiting occasionally terms of such an obsolete character as
to baffle the skill of the etymologist. Nor must it be asserted that
they were fabricated for a purpose, with a view of imparting to the
documents the appearance of antiquity, for even Iolo Morganwg himself
professes not to fully understand some of them. Thus, in reference to a
Triad entitled, "Tri phrif anaw Beirdd Ynys Prydain," he remarks, "the
meaning of this word (anaw) has not hitherto been satisfactorily given,"
and proposes the query, "whether it may not signify an original genius?"
and soon after, "whether *anaw* may not signify a philosopher?" Again,
after an extract, to which the name of Llywelyn Sion is attached,
relative to "Cadair Tarannon," he asks, "*Tarannon* and *Teyrnon*--were
they one and the same thing? Qu. whether *Cadair Teyrnon* in Taliesin be
not one and the same thing, and also the same thing as *gorsedd gwlad ac
arlwydd*?" The word *obryn* is not to be met with in the Dictionaries;
it may, and probably does, signify a state in Abred corresponding with
man's turpitude at the time of his death, which is the meaning given to
it by Iolo Morganwg; but assuredly if he had been driven to coin for
himself a compound which should express the above idea, instead of the
very unusual prefix *ob*, he would naturally have adopted *cyf*, *cyd*,
or *cyn*, as

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

in the case of *cydfil*, which occurs in the same Triad. Sometimes, when
the language is not obscure, he seems to misunderstand the import of a
word, and to suggest an interpretation, which, on due examination of the
Bardic doctrine, appears to be erroneous. Thus when, referring to
*light* in the Triad--"There are three cognates: man; liberty; and
light," he observes, "intellectual light is here probably meant," he
forgets that it is distinctly stated in other documents that man sprang
into existence simultaneously with the resplendent appearance of the
triple form of God's Name, which was the first manifestation of material
light. These facts clearly prove that Iolo Morganwg had no hand in
forging the documents in question. Thirdly, the different readings,
which abound in them, demonstrate that the Bard had frequently even more
than one manuscript before him, when he made his transcripts--a fact,
which shows, moreover, that their contents were then better known than
they are in our own day. Fourthly, whilst the general subject is the
same, there is a want of uniformity in some of the details, as in the
directions given for constructing a Peithynen, and the formation of a
Gorsedd--the explanation of the Divine epithet IAU--and the enumeration
and names of the elements. This circumstance, whilst it indicates a
variety of sources, whence the different expressions of opinion must
have been derived, at the same time excludes the idea of a collusion.
Had Iolo and some of his friends entered into a conspiracy to palm upon
the public, as an ancient system, a theory of their own invention, they
would doubtless have taken care that there should exist an exact
agreement

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

between the several parts of their joint production. It is of the
essence of forgery to endeavour to avoid varieties in matters of
detail--whilst truth, and integrity of purpose, having a greater regard
for the main subject, are generally indifferent to these particulars.
Lastly, Iolo Morganwg refers to the actual existence of some of the
documents, which he alleges to have copied, and gives, with very great
minuteness, the address of the owner. Thus, in relation to certain
extracts which he made from "Trioedd Barddas," "Trioedd Braint a Defod,"
"Trioedd Doethineb," and "Trioedd Pawl," which contain the very essence
of Bardism, as exhibited in our pages, he remarks;--"The Triades that
are here selected are from a manuscript collection, by Llywelyn Sion, a
Bard of Glamorgan, about the year 1560. Of this manuscript I have a
transcript; the original is in the possession of Mr. Richard Bradford,
of Bettws, near Bridgend, in Glamorgan;" and as if this were not
sufficiently particular, he adds in a note, "son of the late Mr. John
Bradford, who, for skill in ancient British Bardism, left not his equal
behind." Nor does this statement occur among the private papers of the
Bard, but appears in his published work--his "Poems Lyric and Pastoral,"
where also the selections alluded to are printed. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) If the reference had been untrue, it could
easily have been refuted, nor would his enemies, of whom he had several,
have been slow to take advantage of the circumstance to expose the whole
as a tissue of falsehood and deceit. But nothing of the kind took place.
It is fair, however,

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

to observe that the existence of the manuscript in question at the
present moment is open to doubt--the prize offered at the Eisteddvod
failed to bring it forth. Still we are in hopes that it is not
irretrievably lost, and it may be in the possession of some person who
"careth for none of these things."

We trust that these reasons are sufficient to justify us in our
conclusion, that Iolo Morganwg had nothing whatever to do with the
original compilation of the main documents, which form the present
collection, and that he merely transcribed older materials, which from
some sources or other had fallen into his hands.

Failing the attempt to convict Iolo Morganwg as a literary impostor, the
sceptics of the present day profess to discover the sources in question
in the Eisteddvodau, which were held subsequently to the beginning of
the 15th century, more especially those of 1570, 1580, and 1681. A body
of curious matter is found to exist, purporting to have come down to us,
through the medium of the Chair of Glamorgan, as genuine remains of the
theology and usages of the Bards. This is an incontrovertible fact.
Again, history notes with equal sternness the authorization, at the
above mentioned Congresses successively, of what was likewise called
Bardism: and the not unnatural inference is, that they are one and the
same. But, apparently for no other reason than that the code thus
promulgated was not formally committed to writing before, a higher
origin is denied to it, and of course the Bards of those periods, Ieuan
ab Hywel Swrdwal, Gwilym Tew, Lewys Morganwg, Meurig Davydd, Davydd
Benwyn, Llywelyn Sion, Davydd Llwyd Mathew, Edward Davydd, and others,
are

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

boldly charged with being its sole inventors. As they were not all
contemporaries, and as they held various positions in life, and were
also members of different religious communions, it would be difficult to
account for the unanimity with which they adopted the strange and
curious system, which these volumes present to our view. To accuse them
of being under the influence of that spirit, which led to the overthrow
of the monarchy, and to the establishment of the commonwealth on its
ruins, merely because their system represents the three orders of Bard,
Druid, and Ovate, as co-equal in rank and privilege, is, to say the
least, not warranted by facts. History does not point out a single Bard
of those times as mixing in any political intrigue. On the contrary
they, one and all of whom we have any knowledge, appear to have led
quiet lives, paying due and just homage of loyalty to the existing
government of the day, without opposition, and without complaint.
Besides, it may be interesting to know, why the Bards in question should
have selected this particular form, whether as the embodiment of their
own creed, or as the representation of ancient Druidism? There was
nothing in the prevailing philosophy of the day to suggest it; and to
say that they derived it from the traditions of the Brahmins, would be
to give them credit for a greater extent of knowledge than their
positions in life would warrant. Could they, then, have compiled the
whole system--ingenious, complex, and yet harmonious and symmetrical as
it was, out of the mere allusions to it, which are contained in the
works of the earlier Poets? The Rev. Edward Davies observes,--"It does
not appear, from their

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

own profession, nor from the research of Llwyd, and other antiquaries,
that this society possessed a single copy of the works of the ancient
Bards, previous to the eighteenth century." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) If the inference, evidently intended to be
drawn from this guarded form of expression, be well founded, of course a
direct negative must be returned to our inquiry. But we are not prepared
to endorse the opinion, favourable as it may be to our present argument.
We believe that the Bards of the 15th and 16th centuries were, to some
extent, acquainted with the poetical productions of their predecessors,
but at the same time we boldly maintain that it was next to impossible
they should agree upon any system drawn from those sources. And in proof
of our assertion, we need only refer to those who are known to have made
the trial. What two persons have been found to agree in their views of
the mystic allusions of the Bards? What an interminable distance there
is between the respective theories of Davies and Nash!

Whilst, however, we deny that the contents of these volumes could have
been derived immediately from the metrical compositions of the medieval
and early Poets, we believe that they can be abundantly proved by them.
There are numerous allusions, which, otherwise obscure and
unintelligible, become by means of the light thrown upon them from
Bardism, as clear as day. As an example; Rhys Brydydd, between 1450 and
1490, has the following lines on Hu the Mighty:--

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The smallest of the small  
Is Hu the Mighty, as the world judges;  
And the greatest, and a Lord to us,  
Let us well believe, and our mysterious God;  
Light His course, and active,  
An atom of glowing heat is His car;  
Great on land and on the seas,  
The greatest that I manifestly can have,  
Greater than the worlds--Let us beware  
Of mean indignity to him who deals in bounty. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)</span>

</div>

Even supposing Hu the Mighty to signify the Supreme Being, it would be
difficult to explain how He can be "the smallest of the small," and at
the same time "the greatest," or to show how His chariot is composed of
"an atom of glowing heat." Accordingly, the interpretations given by
Davies, Archdeacon Williams, and Nash, varied though they be, are
extremely vague and unsatisfactory, leaving us in a greater state of
bewilderment than if we had never received them. And yet how simple is
the illustration which Bardism affords--"Hu the Mighty--Jesus the Son of
God,--the least in respect of His worldly greatness whilst in the flesh,
and the greatest in heaven of all visible majesties." Or, which also
explains the nature of His car;--"the particles of light are the
smallest of all small things; and yet one particle of light is the
greatest of all great things, being no less than material for all
materiality that can be understood and perceived as within the grasp of
the power of God. And in every particle there is a place wholly
commensurate with God, for there is not, and cannot be less than God in
every particle of

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

light, and God in every particle; nevertheless God is only one in
number."

In like manner, there are various allusions to *annwn*, *abred*,
*manred*, *byd mawr*, *byd bach*, *pair Ceridwen*, the *Coelbren*, and
many other particulars of a similar kind, which, while they are in
themselves insufficient to constitute an intelligible groundwork on
which to raise a superstructure such as our pages contain, bear strong
testimony to the fact of its existence from the 16th up to the 6th
century. The transmigration related by Taliesin is not identical in
detail with that of Bardism, for in the latter the soul is not supposed
to enter inanimate objects, such as a sword, a star, a word, a book, a
boat, a shield, a tree, an axe, and a grain of wheat, which form some of
the gradations in "Cad Goddeu" and "Angar Cyvyndawd;" and we infer from
this discrepancy that the Bardic doctrine was not directly founded on
the poet's language. Still we may regard it as a valuable testimony to
the actual existence among the Cymry, at the time when the poems were
written, of a doctrine of metempsychosis, whether believed in, or
preserved merely as a matter of curiosity. To notice in detail all the
passages, which might be culled out of the works of the Poets, as
referring to the principal tenets and usages of Bardism, would swell our
Preface to an unnecessary length, especially since many of them are
inserted in the body of the work as footnotes; to then, then, we would
beg to direct the attention of our readers.

Further, the philosophical features of Bardism may be traced even in the
language of the Cymry, and the testimony, which it thus affords, is the
more valuable,

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

because it is indirect and unexpected. If we allow it possible that the
Bards of the 15th and 16th centuries should have actually drawn their
system directly from the works of their predecessors, no one can for a
moment entertain the thought that they were capable of drawing it from
the language, whether solely, or in conjunction with the poetry of
different times. Independently of Bardism, it would be difficult to
explain why *advyd*, a term signifying *re-world*, or a beginning of the
world over again, should in common use stand for adversity, but "Rhol
Cof a Chyfrif" informs us that it was originally applied to the state of
retraversing abred, which, being a punishment for sin, was of course a
state of hardship and adversity. Again, we find that the word *gwydd*
means both *wood* and *knowledge*, which cannot be accounted for except
on the supposition of a common origin, or that there was a mutual
connection between the one and the other from the earliest times. This
affinity is explained by the *Coelbren*. In like manner, the doctrine of
*eneidvaddeu* alone can satisfactorily account for the double meaning of
*maddeu*, and show us how a word, which properly means to liberate, or
to dismiss, came also to signify to forgive, which is its common import
at the present day. *Angau*, *aberth*, *huan*, *nefoedd*, and a host of
other words might be enumerated, which clearly refer to the mythology of
the ancient Cymry; hence it is manifest that no Welsh philologist can
effectually succeed in his investigations, unless in the first instance
he makes himself acquainted with Bardism.

What, then, shall we say? Did the Bards in question model their system
according to the description, which Julius Cæsar, and other foreign

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

writers, have given of Druidism? There is *prima facie* a wide
difference between the two systems. Cæsar speaks of a plurality of gods,
of an archdruid, who had superior authority over the others, and also of
the immolation of human sacrifices; whereas the unity of the Godhead is
the very soul and centre of Bardism, which also strongly insists upon
the co-equality of its orders, and seems to discountenance altogether
the notion of the sacrifice of living beings, in the strict acceptation
of the term, whether they were men or beasts. This circumstance,
therefore, is fatal to the hypothesis which would regard classical
Druidism as the groundwork on which the fabric of Bardism has been
raised. Still, if the latter is, as it professes to be, the genuine
remains of the primitive worship and philosophy of Britain, there must
be a possibility of harmonizing the two systems--they must in principle
be identical. To this subject we will now address ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[xiii:1](bim1003.htm#fr_0) The other adjudicators
were the Rev. T. James, Netherlong, Huddersfield, and the Rev. Silvan
Evans, Llangian, Pwllheli.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[xv:1](bim1003.htm#fr_1) The adjudication was
originally written in Welsh, in which language it was also read at the
meeting.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[xvi:1](bim1003.htm#fr_2) The other was the Rev.
Edward Evan, of Aberdare.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[xix:1](bim1003.htm#fr_3) see Vol. ii.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[xxii:1](bim1003.htm#fr_4) The Mythology and
Rites of the British Druids, p. 34.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[xxiii:1](bim1003.htm#fr_5) Dr. O. Pughe's Dict.,
sub voce *mymryn*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Julius Cæsar](bim1004)
