[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1117)  [Next](bim1119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TRIADS OF ST. PAUL.

1\. The three principal sciences of man: sciences respecting God; to
know what he is himself; and to know the tendency of species and nature.
From these three all other laudable sciences inevitably spring.

2\. The three requirements of God from man: faith, that is, firm belief;
religious obedience; and the performance of justice, in thought, word,
and deed.

3\. Three things God cannot be: unskilful; unjust; and unmerciful.

4\. The three principal employments of God: to enlighten the darkness;
to invest nonentity with a body; and to animate the dead.

5\. The three agents of God in making the worlds: will; wisdom; and
love; and from these three comes omnipotence.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

6\. Three things beyond all the research of man's sciences: the extreme
limits of space; the beginning and end of time; and the works of God.

7\. The three requirements of God at the hands of man: to do justice; to
impart learning and good sciences to those who are deficient in them;
and to urge upon every thing the duty of mercy towards all living beings
of every kind and form.

8\. Three things, which it is not easy to see clearly in another man,
and therefore it is not easy to prejudge them: the tendency of awen; the
endeavour of the intellect; and the judgment of conscience; these God
alone knows, and to Him belongs the right of judging them.

9\. There are three things, of whose length, breadth, and depth, no one
knows the thousandth part: the tendency of Awen from God; the
capabilities of knowledge; and the properties of truth; and God only
knows them.

10\. Three things which ought to be considered seriously three times
every day: the laws of truth; the laws of love; and the laws of God.

11\. Three things which there can be no reason to fear in the world to
come on the part of him who gives no reason to fear them in this world:
to meet another man before the face of God; the exhibition of works
performed in the presence of God; and a call from the great judgment,
where God Himself is judge.

12\. Three things which can never be: cause of fear in the world to come
for one who gives no cause to fear in this world; lack of mercy after
this world for one who shows nothing but mercy in this earthly life; and
lack of knowledge for him who, to the utmost of what he knew, has
exhibited knowledge to every man, fond of knowledge, and to all who
required it, or might be seen in want of it. Others say: and lack of
sciences, of whatever kind they may be, for him who has exhibited
knowledge, as far as he could, to those who were in want of it.

13\. The three best of all things that are found in this

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

world: bodily health; just and discreet understanding; and purity of
conscience.

14\. Three things that ought to be considered seriously before we
partake of our meals: first, would it be comely and right to present
them before God, as if He would partake of them, because of the just way
in which they have been obtained; secondly, could His grace be fitly
bestowed upon them, according to the desert of those who partake of
them; thirdly, are such meet to answer the purposes of God for the
benefit of man, that is, to support life and health. Where these
particulars do not apply to meals, and what relates to them, it is not
right and lawful before God to partake of them.

15\. There are three things connected with mercy, that will occur to him
who shows it towards every owner of life and soul: he will not fail to
have justice in every thing, which he does, whatever it may be; he will
not lack the approval of his own conscience; and he will not fail to
have the utmost of God's good will and mercy for ever, both in this
world, and in the world to come. Because, there is no justice but mercy,
and there is no mercy but what does not give pain to either the body or
mind of any species or form whatsoever, which may be found to possess
life.

16\. There are three things in mercy, in virtue of its kind and quality:
the first is the utmost of justice, for justice will not fail the act of
mercy, nor him who obtains it, whatever species of living beings he may
be; the second is co-operation with God, for it was of His infinite
mercy that God made all vitalities, and all the orders, <span
id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_311) and all their animations, of whatever
kind or form they actually exist, or may be conceived, since there was
no other species which justice could require at His hands; the third is
the impossibility, according to justice, of not obtaining all that can
be had from God as mercy, by him who performs it, co-equally and
commensurately with the performance itself. And thus is it said:--

17\. The three principal compounds of justice: utmost

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

love and mercy, because there can be no want of love on the part of God,
and His works of justice, towards any species or form, which have
received their existence from God and His operation only, there not
being in them anything that could possibly be displeasing to God, and
there is no justice but love towards those who have done no displeasure;
the second is, the utmost truth and sincerity of species, form, and
condition, because there ought to be but truth, sincerity, and rectitude
of condition and skill in what is done by one who can perform the best
of all acts, and God can do no less than perform what is best in every
species, form, and condition; the third is the utmost beauty or fairness
in what is done, because that is not right and becoming which is not the
most beautiful act of all the beautiful, and the fairest of the fair,
where it is accomplished, and where it is possible; but perfectly
possible to God are every excellency, every fulness, every skill, every
beauty, every surpassing feat, and every surpassing prudence, and
whatever of existences and acts He pleases will be effectuated, because
God does what He does for better, and not for worse; hence the proverb,
"For better, and not for worse, God does what He does;" also, "For the
best, and not for the worst, God does what He does." And these proverbs
are true; because it is demonstrated that it is not right to judge, or
think, or believe, or suppose, that all the works of God are other than
the best.

18\. Three things will be obtained from behaving properly, according to
courtesy, and leading a holy life: the regard of the world; joy of
conscience; and the good will of God.

19\. Three things will be obtained from a proper recognition of God,
that is, from a discernment of Him by means of a true knowledge of kinds
and qualities: every truth of being and existence; every beauty and
justice; and every eternal gwynvyd; that is to say, from having the
knowledge of God and His goodness, will be obtained the knowledge of
every thing possible to man, his understanding and reason,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

and to every awen, affection, beauty, and justice, of which he is
capable.

20\. Three things in man that will include every other goodness:
bravery; peace; and godliness.

21\. Three things in man that will exclude every goodness, of whatever
kind it may be: cowardice, or timidity; contentiousness; and ungodliness
arising from natural mischievousness.

22\. Three things that will never end: life; intellect; and light; but
they will improve and increase for ever and ever.

23\. There are three demeanours contrary to God: an oath contrary to
truth; a sentiment contrary to natural prudence; and course of life
contrary to innate awen. Others say; and concern of life contrary to
innate awen.

24\. The three fulnesses of God: fulness of life; fulness of knowledge;
and fulness of might and power; and from these three fulnesses comes the
fulness of every goodness, in every kind, part, form, and comprehension
possible to it.

25\. There are three things in God of pure necessity: an eye which sees
in every place, and at every time; an ear which hears in every place and
time; and memory, which preserves every thing, and every event, in deed,
word, and thought, in every place and time, in order to exhibit them in
the presence of the angels of heaven, and all the saints, before the
judgment of the day of doom, that every man may be paid for his deed and
conduct, whether that shall be in heaven or in hell.

26\. There are three things in man, that are the most odious of all to
God: craftiness; avarice; and becoming hardened against praiseworthy'
sciences.

27\. Three things that God regards as the best in every man: to be
liberally conscientious; to demean one's self with a clear regard to
truth; and to genialize prsiseworthy sciences.

28\. Three things invisible to him who is keenest of eye:

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span> <span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

the path of an arrow through the air; the path of fish in the sea; and
the path of wile through the world.

29\. Three things divine in a man: an amiable and cheerful countenance;
a meek and courteous demeanour; and contentment of mind. Others say: an
amiable countenance; gentle demeanour; and contentment with every will
of God.

30\. Three things devilish in a man: a harsh countenance; a proud
spirit; and insatiable covetousness.

31\. Three men it is difficult to make godly: the pugnacious; the
reveller; and the adulterer.

32\. The three superiors of the world and life: a pure conscience;
knowledge of the truth; and health of body and mind.

33\. Three things which the countenance cannot conceal: pride; anger;
and amorousness.

34\. Three things easy to be seen in the countenance of those who bear
them: sorrow; joy; and peace of mind.

35\. The three monstrosities of the world: the joy of fools; the
generosity of misers; and the courtesy of ungodly men.

36\. The three forerunners of mischief: not to seek the sciences of
truth; not to anticipate the usages of courtesy; and not to make an
oblation to God.

37\. Because of three things no man should <span
id="fr_314"></span>[1](#fn_312) become proud: his sciences; his
godliness; and the good he does; for he will not know or do, as long as
he lives, half of the one or the other of them, though he should do as
much as he can.

38\. Three things which every man should avoid doing: to cause worldly
loss to any man whatsoever; to cause bodily or mental pain to any man,
or to any other living or animated thing; and to cause deterioration to
any thing whatsoever, whether it be conduct, usage, learning, art, the
sciences of wisdom, and morality, or any other thing, of whatsoever kind
it may be; because the evil that he does

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

will fall upon him either in this world and life, or in that which is to
come in the next world.

39\. Three men that will be odious to God: he who causes hatred and
contentiousness among his neighbours; he who conceals the truth to the
injury of another; and he who servilely disputes against justice. Others
say; he who does against justice.

40\. The three indispensables of goodness: justice; beauty; and truth.

41\. The three indispensables of godliness: love truth; and prudence.
Others say; consideration.

42\. Three things that will augment godliness: sciences; alms; and
worship.

43\. The three souls of worship: truth; goodness; and beauty.

44\. The three mutual charms of worship: prayer; thanksgiving; and
praise.

45\. The three requirements of God at the hands of man: belief;
obedience; and worship.

46\. The three reasons for worship: to teach wisdom; to cultivate the
energies of the mind; and to gladden hope.

47\. Three things which God only can perform: what has never been in
existence before; to know all that will happen; and to judge the
conscience. Others say Three things which are possible only to God: to
perform what did not exist before; to know what will happen; and to
judge the conscience.

48\. There are three spirits from God, which ought to be in man before
he can be happy: reason to understand and to know all rectitude; awen to
love and to study all rectitude; and courageous patience to side firmly
with all rectitude, and against all wrong, and to suffer, where occasion
requires, for what ought to be, of whatever kind it may be.

49\. The three losses that will bring gain in the end to man: to lose
more than what life needs and requires; to

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

lose bodily health on the part of a vain-glorious man; and to lose what
one considers as his chief in and over every thing, for it is in this
that most of his sinfulness consists.

50\. The three different sciences concerning God: to remove far off from
all evil; to approach all goodness; and to acquiesce patiently in every
thing whatsoever, and in every incident and event of life.

51\. The three distinctions of truth: utility in every thing; beauty in
every thing; and strength to obviate and to oppose every thing.

52\. The three columns of godliness: truth; beauty; and goodness.

53\. For three godly reasons ought the Christmas Holidays to be kept: in
remembrance of the birth of Jesus Christ as the Saviour of the human
world; secondly, in order to give alms to God and the necessitous poor
out of all our possessions, for a gift to the poor is a gift to God;
thirdly, in godly joyfulness that the grace and blessings of God have
been obtained for men. He who does not call Jesus Christ and His Gospel
to memory, and gives no alms, and does not enjoy his property in godly
and religious gladness, will receive no benefit from keeping it on the
Feast of Christmas.

54\. Three things which a man ought to avoid, as he would the fall of
fire on his heart: pride; cruelty; and covetousness; for where they are,
all his doings will degenerate into ungodliness, irreligion, and all
mischievousness.

55\. Three things familiar to every mischievous person: falsehood;
deceit; and depredation.

56\. The three familiar things of the ungodly: pride; extortion; and
cruelty.

57\. The three customs of mischief: treachery; murder; and theft.

58\. The three familiarities of happiness: to love peace and
tranquillity; to love truth and justice; and to love God and all
goodness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_311"></span>[327:1](bim1118.htm#fr_313) <span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> Al. "and the orders."

<span id="fn_312"></span>[333:1](bim1118.htm#fr_314) <span
id="page_332">p. 332</span> Al. "a man should not."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Triads of St. Paul and Bardism](bim1119)
