[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1014)  [Next](bim1016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_lxxxiii">p. lxxxiii</span>

### LLYWELYN SION,

INASMUCH as Llywelyn Sion of Llangewydd was the person, by whom
principally the present Collection of Bardism was made, the following
brief Memoir of him may not be out of place here, or unacceptable to our
readers.

He was born in the early part of the 16th century, and became at the
usual age one of the disciples of Thomas Llywelyn of Rhegoes, and of
Meurig Davydd of Llanisan, both eminent Bards of the Glamorgan
Chair--the latter having presided in it A.D. 1560. His numerous
compositions show him to be a poet of vigorous and lofty thoughts, which
he, moreover, clothed in pure, correct, and elegant language. According
to Taliesin Williams, who professes to derive his information from
ancient manuscripts, he was also an antiquary of great research and
ability.

Sion Bradford describes him as a man well to do in the world,
accumulating wealth by the sale of transcripts of manuscripts, both
poetic and prosaic, by which means also he obtained great respect among
all classes of people. From the *Cywyddau*, that passed between him and
Sion Mowddwy, it would appear that he held a subordinate office--that of
crier--in the law court of Glamorgan. This

<span id="page_lxxxiv">p. lxxxiv</span>

position brought him into contact with many of the gentry and men of
influence in the country, who invited him to their houses, and, by
allowing him access to their libraries, afforded him facilities of
gratifying the literary bent of his mind. He was in particular
acquainted with Sir Edward Mansell, who, about 1591, wrote an excellent
"account of the conquest of Glamorgan." Sir Edward speaks of him under
the name of "Lewelyn John," as a painstaking and respectable writer. It
would appear that Sir Edward himself was a diligent collector of old
Welsh MSS. According to Sion Bradford, he was also in much esteem at
Rhaglan Castle; he says that it was from thence that he copied most of
his writings, Sir William Herbert having made there a collection of the
most valuable Welsh MSS., which were afterwards ruthlessly destroyed by
fire in the time of Oliver Cromwell. Indeed, Llywelyn Sion himself, at
p. 224 of the 1st volume of this work, confesses as much, and expresses
his unbounded obligation to "the lord William Herbert, earl of
Pembroke," for giving him permission to make extracts from ancient and
rare Books in the Castle of Rhaglan.

He presided in the Chair of Glamorgan A.D. 1580, and it was then that
his arrangement received the sanction of Gorsedd. His "Cyfrinach Beirdd
Ynys Prydain," which formed a part of his Collection, is beyond question
an excellent and invaluable treatise on Welsh versification, and one
which ought to be widely known beyond the limits of the Principality.
Indeed, a New Edition, with a translation, of this work, would form a
very appropriate sequel to BARDISM.

Sion Bradford says that he was an excellent teacher to many of the poets
of his time, as well as to other Welsh literati. It would seem from some
*Englynion*, which he composed, that, when far advanced in years, he
gave his Books to his young disciple Edward Davydd of Margam. At the end
of one of his collections, entitled "Llyfr Hir Llanharan," is written,
"Fy llaw i, Llywelyn Sion, o Langewydd,

<span id="page_lxxxv">p. lxxxv</span>

hyd ymma, Tach. y 27. 1613;" after which follows the handwriting of
Edward Davydd.

According to Watkin Powell, he composed a Book, which he designated,
"Atgofion Gwybodau yr Hen Gymry," being a treatise on the poetry,
genealogy, memorials, medicine, agriculture, law, handicraft, and
chemistry of the Ancient Cymry. This he sent to London to be printed,
but meanwhile the author died, and the Book was lost. According to one
authority, his death took place in 1615, but two other documents place
it respectively in 1616 and 1617, when he had attained the venerable age
of about 100.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](bim1016.md)
