[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1007)  [Next](bim1009.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PLINY, (born) A.D. 23.

This philosophic but credulous author speaks of the Druidism of Gaul, in
his "Natural Philosophy," as follows:

<span class="small">"The Druids (so they call their wise men) hold
nothing in greater reverence than the misletoe, and the tree on which it
grows, so that it be an oak. They choose forests of oaks, for the sake
of the tree itself, and perform no sacred rites without oak leaves; so
that one might fancy they had even been called for this reason, turning
the word into Greek, Druids. But whatever grows upon these trees, they
hold to have been sent from heaven, and to be a sign that the Deity
Himself has chosen the tree for his own. The thing, however, is very
rarely found, and when found is gathered with much ceremony; and above
all, on the sixth day of the moon, by which these men reckon the
beginnings of their months and years, and of their cycle of thirty
years, because the moon has then sufficient power, yet has not reached
half its size. Addressing it in their own language by the epithet of all
healing, after duly preparing sacrifices and banquets under the tree,
they bring to the spot two white bulls, the horns of which are then for
the first time garlanded. The priest clothed in a white dress ascends
the tree, and cuts the misletoe with a golden knife; it is caught in a
white cloak. Thereupon they slay the victims, with a prayer that the
Deity may prosper His own gift to them, to whom</span>

<span id="page_lxi">p. lxi</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

He has given it. They fancy that, by drinking it, fertility is given to
any barren animal, and that it is a remedy against all poisons." <span
id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md)

"Like to this Sabine herb is that called *selago*. It is gathered,
without using a knife, with the right hand wrapped in a tunic, the left
being uncovered, as though the man were stealing it; the gatherer being
clothed in a white dress, and with bare feet washed clean, after
performing sacrifice before gathering it, with bread and wine. It is to
be carried in a new napkin. According to the tradition of the Gaulish
Druids, it is to be kept as a remedy against all evil, and the smoke of
it is good for all diseases of the eyes. The same Druids have given the
name of *samolus* to a plant that grows in wet places; and this they say
must be gathered with the left hand by one who is fasting, as a remedy
for diseases of swine and cattle, and that he, who gathers it, must keep
his head turned away, and must not lay it down anywhere except in a
channel through which water runs, and there must bruize it for them who
are to drink it." <span id="fr_27"></span>[2](#fn_27.md)

"There is another kind of egg in high repute in Gaul, although the
Greeks make no account of it. A great number of snakes in summer time
are artificially twisted and rolled together into a mass by the saliva
of their jaws and the foam of their bodies. It is called snake's egg.
The Druids tell you that it is thrown into the air with hisses, and must
be caught in a cloak that it may not touch the ground; that he that
catches it must fly on horse-back, for that the snakes pursue him until
hindered by the intervention of some river; that the test of it is, if
it flows against the stream, even when tied with gold. And, according to
the common craft of wizards, shrewd to conceal their cheating, they
pronounce that it must be taken up at a particular time of the moon; as
though it rested with man's choice, whether that proceeding on the part
of the snake should take place or not." <span
id="fr_28"></span>[3](#fn_28.md)

Pliny says that he has seen one of these eggs, and that the Druids used
them as a distinguishing badge.

In the above description there are several new things, that present
themselves to our notice, in connection with the Druidism of Gaul.

1\. *One God*. It is remarkable that Pliny speaks of the Gauls as
professing one God; for though he

<span id="page_lxii">p. lxii</span>

had occasion to refer twice to the Deity, he uses the singular number
each time. In this matter he differs from Cæsar, and we may be allowed
to believe that though much ignorance and error had crept upon the
Continent, in later times, relative to the Divine Being, the unity of
His nature was to some extent acknowledged. But Pliny, after all, may be
only referring to one god in particular, out of many, that is, the one
that was interested in the circumstance to which he refers, and
therefore names him in the singular number.

2\. *The oak groves*. Though Pliny is undoubtedly mistaken as to the
etymology of the name Druid, yet we have the testimony of the Cymric
traditions that our remote progenitors did sometimes choose to worship
under the oak. This usage they seem to have derived from Seth, who
"first made a retreat for worship in the woods of the vale of Hebron,
having first searched and investigated the trees, until he found a large
oak, being the king of trees, branching, wide-spreading, thick-topped,
and shady, under which he formed a choir and a place of worship." <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)

3\. *The misletoe*. All admit that this plant was in great repute among
the Ancient Cymry. From remote times it has been used by the Bards to
decorate their tribunals on Alban Arthan, and even to this day traces of
that custom may be found in the country during the Christmas
festivities.

Three persons, Tydai, the Bard of Huon, Rhuvawn the Bard, and Melgin,
the son of Einigan the Giant,

<span id="page_lxiii">p. lxiii</span>

are recorded in a Triad as having worn around their heads a garland of
misletoe, "darllys awelvar."

One of the names by which the Cymry called this plant was *Holliach*,
which answers completely to the "omnia sanantem" of Pliny.

We know nothing of the rites which attended its gathering in Britain;
and therefore we are not in a position to say in what consisted the
resemblance or difference, as the case may be, between them and the
ceremonies mentioned above.

4\. *The white garment of the Druids*. Of the same description, as we
have seen, was the official dress of the British Druids.

5\. *The offering of bread and wine*. This seems to have come down from
Patriarchal times--from Melchizedec, who "brought forth bread and wine,"
type of the Blessed Eucharist, that "pure offering" which was to take
place under the Gospel; and though nothing is positively said of such a
rite as existing in the Bardism of the Cymry, it is likely enough that
it was practised. The reader is referred to the description given in
these pages of the sacrifices of the Bards.

6\. *Adder's stones or beads*--glain nadroedd. The three orders used to
wear these beads, of a colour uniform with that of their respective
robes; and they generally regarded them as possessed of rare virtues. It
is questioned whether they are the production of nature or art. Be that
as it may, they are always found in great numbers; and there are people
who search for them, and from whom they may be had, but they maintain
that they are only to be met with at one season of the year, and that
they are blown by

<span id="page_lxiv">p. lxiv</span>

a knot of snakes. "Ai chwythu y glain y maent?" "Are they blowing
beads?" is a proverbial inquiry applied to persons who lay their heads
together in conversation--an expression involving an opinion similar to
that of Pliny.

But our author is not altogether silent respecting the Druidism of
Britain, for he says:--

<span class="small">"Britain even now celebrates it \[Magism\]
wonderfully, with so many ceremonies, that it may seem to have imparted
it to the Persians."</span>

There is here, however, no mention of any doctrine or usage in
particular--Pliny merely intimates that there were many ceremonies in
connection with the Druidic worship, which view is not inconsistent with
the traditions of the Bards. The Persian, as well as the Gaulish system,
might have been received from Britain, both of them, however, being
greatly degenerated. Or it may be, that the resemblance, which Pliny
perceived between the Druidism of Britain and the Magism of Persia had
grown from the same root--the patriarchal religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_26"></span>[lxi:1](bim1008.htm#fr_26.md) Hist. Nat. lib. xvi.
sect. 95.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[lxi:2](bim1008.htm#fr_27.md) Lib. xxiv. ss. 62-3.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[lxi:3](bim1008.htm#fr_28.md) Lib. xxix. s. 12.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[lxii:1](bim1008.htm#fr_29.md) Y Cread. Golychwyd,
&c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Pomponius Mela](bim1009.md)
