[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Barddas](../bim) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bim1004)  [Next](bim1006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1578633079/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg, Vol. I.*, ed. by J. Williams Ab Ithel,
\[1862\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### STRABO, B.C. 54.

The description, which this author gives of Druidism, refers entirely,
like that of Cæsar, to Gaul, and is as follows:--

"And among the whole of them \[the Gauls\] three classes more especially
are held in distinguished veneration, the Bards, the Ovates, and the
Druids. The Bards are chaunters and poets. The Ovates are sacrificers
and physiologists. The Druids, in addition to physiology, practise ethic
philosophy. They are deemed to be most upright, and, in consequence, to
them are committed both public and private controversies, insomuch that
on some occasions they decide on battles, and stop the combatants on the
eve of engaging. Matters pertaining to murder are more especially
entrusted to their decision, and when profit accrues from these, they
think fertility will attend their country. These and others say that
souls are immortal, and that the world is so too; yet that ultimately
fire and water will prevail. To their simplicity and ferocity are
superadded much stupidity, vain boasting, and love of ornament. They
wear gold, having collars thereof on their necks, and bracelets on their
arms and wrists; and dignified persons are clad in dyed garments
embroidered with gold........

"Having stricken the man destined for sacrifice on the back with a
sword, they augur from the palpitation. They never sacrifice without the
Druids. Other kinds of human immolation are spoken of: some victims they
slay with arrows, or crucify for their offerings; and having prepared a
colossus of hay, and thrown wood upon it, they bum together oxen, all
sorts of wild beasts, and men." <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

Strabo and Cæsar both agree with respect to some things, such as, 1stly,
that the Druids were in great esteem among the people; 2dly, that they
decided disputes; 3dly, that their presence at the sacrifices

<span id="page_lv">p. lv</span>

was necessary; 4thly, the immortality of the soul; 5thly, human
sacrifices. There is no occasion, therefore, that we should make any
further observation on these subjects in the main. We will only notice
the variations and additions made by Strabo, and compare them with the
Bardism of the Cymry.

1\. *The three degrees*. These, according to the privilege and usage of
the Isle of Britain, were the Chief Bard, the Ovate, and the Druid, the
three being co-equal in dignity, though their offices were distinct.
Strabo calls his three classes exactly by the same names, but he does
not ascribe to them their respective functions quite in accordance with
Bardism, at least, as regards the Ovate, who, he says, was the
sacrificer, though he says again that they never sacrificed without the
Druids. It was not difficult to incur misapprehension with reference to
the duties of the several orders, for on special occasions one might
enter upon the office of another.

2\. *The justice of the Druids*. Justice was a virtue greatly inculcated
by the members of the Bardic College.

"The three foundations of Bardism: peace; love; and *justice*.

"For three reasons ought a man to hazard his life, and to lose it, if
necessary: in seeking for truth; *in clinging to justice*; and in
performing mercy." <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

3\. *Their influence in war*. The Bard, in his blue robe, was the herald
of peace. He was privileged to pass from one country to another in
safety and unharmed, for not only it was the law of Bardism, but also
the law of nations, that no person was to unsheath

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

a sword against him. He was a man of peace, according to his office, and
if he thus went between two armies on the field of battle, they
immediately ceased from fighting. The privilege of protection belonged
in the same manner to the Druid and Ovate.

4\. *Sacrifices*. It is very probable that Strabo refers to the rites of
*eneidvaddeu*, when he speaks of murder as being entrusted to the
decision of the Druids. The Bardic traditions contain no record of what
is here said concerning "the fertility of the country," or of the
particular mode of stabbing or slaughtering the men who. were sentenced
to death, unless it was done in a manner similar to that to which the
lord of the territory had recourse, when he drew blood from a degraded
Bard, namely, "from his forehead, his bosom, and his groin, that is,
from the seats of life and soul."

5\. *Vaticinations*. Our ancestors very generally professed to foretel
events, though it is not said that they founded their predictions upon
any particular appearance, which the men, whom they put to death,
exhibited. Meugant, in the 6th century, observes:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Trust to God that *the Druids will not prophesy*,  
When the privilege of the hill of legislature shall be broken."</span>

</div>

6\. *The eternal duration of the world*. The British Bards, likewise,
believed that every existence and form of life would continue for
ever--purged from evil. The opinion, which prevailed about the increase
or prevalence of *fire* and *water*, seems to be founded on the Bardism
of the Cymry:--

<span class="small">"There are three things on their increase: *fire*,
or light; understanding,</span>

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

<span class="small">or truth; and the soul, or life; *these will prevail
over every thing*, and then Abred will cease." <span
id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23)</span>

Elsewhere it is said, that life proceeds from "a conjunction of *water*,
*fire*, and nwyvre;" hence, if life is on the increase, it follows that
its component elements also acquire continual strength.

7\. *Ornaments*. The several members of the Bardic College wore proper
vestments, which were emblematic of their respective offices. The Bard
wore a sky blue robe, to signify peace; the Druid wore white, denoting
holiness; and the Ovate green, which was an emblem of progress. Each
colour was also uniform, to signify truth, which is one. Nevertheless,
it was lawful for them to introduce *silver* and *gold*, which, not
being subject to rust and stain, were signs of honour. "Therefore, a
gold fringe may be properly added to a Bard's robe, of whichever of the
three colours it is, or a *gold girdle* be put round him, for it is
right to honour truth, peace, godliness, and knowledge."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[liv:1](bim1005.htm#fr_21) Geograph. lib. iv.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[lv:1](bim1005.htm#fr_22) Trioedd Braint a
Defod.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[lvii:1](bim1005.htm#fr_23) Trioedd Barddas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Diodorus Siculus](bim1006)
