[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Shinto](../index) 
[Images](imglist)  [Index](index)  [Previous](igj07)  [Next](igj09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# A Passional Karma

ONE of the never-failing attractions of the Tôkyô stage is the
performance, by the famous Kikugorô and his company, of the
*Botan-Dôrô*, or "Peony-Lantern." This weird play, of which the scenes
are laid in the middle of the last century, is the dramatization of a
romance by the novelist Enchô, written in colloquial Japanese, and
purely Japanese in local color, though inspired by a Chinese tale. I
went to see the play; and Kikugorô made me familiar with a new variety
of the pleasure of fear.

"Why not give English readers the ghostly part of the story?"--asked a
friend who guides me betimes through the mazes of Eastern philosophy.
"It would serve to explain some popular ideas of the supernatural which
Western people know very little about. And I could help you with the
translation."

{p. 74}

I gladly accepted the suggestion; and we composed the following summary
of the more extraordinary portion of Enchô's romance. Here and there we
found it necessary to condense the original narrative; and we tried to
keep close to the text only in the conversational passages,--some of
which happen to possess a particular quality of psychological interest.

\*  
\*  \*

--This is the story of the Ghosts in the Romance of the Peony-Lantern:--

### I

There once lived in the district of Ushigomé, in Yedo, a
*hatamoto*<sup>\[1\]</sup> called Iijima Heizayémon, whose only
daughter, Tsuyu, was beautiful as her name, which signifies "Morning
Dew." Iijima took a second wife when his daughter was about sixteen;
and, finding that O-Tsuyu

\[1. The *hatamoto* were samurai forming the special military force of
the Shôgun. The name literally signifies "Banner-Supporters." These were
the highest class of samurai,--not only as the immediate vassals of the
Shôgun, but as a military aristocracy.\]

{p. 75}

could not be happy with her mother-in-law, he had a pretty villa built
for the girl at Yanagijima, as a separate residence, and gave her an
excellent maidservant, called O-Yoné, to wait upon her.

O-Tsuyu lived happily enough in her new home until one day when the
family physician, Yamamoto Shijô, paid her a visit in company with a
young samurai named Hagiwara Shinzaburô, who resided in the Nedzu
quarter. Shinzaburô was an unusually handsome lad, and very gentle; and
the two young people fell in love with each other at sight. Even before
the brief visit was over, they contrived,--unheard by the old
doctor,--to pledge themselves to each other for life. And, at parting,
O-Tsuyu whispered to the youth,--"*Remember! if you do not come to see
me again, I shall certainly die!*"

 

Shinzaburô never forgot those words; and he was only too eager to see
more of O-Tsuyu. But etiquette forbade him to make the visit alone: he
was obliged to wait for some other chance to accompany the doctor, who
had promised to take him to the villa a second time. Unfortunately the
old man did not keep this

{p. 76}

promise. He had perceived the sudden affection of O-Tsuyu; and he feared
that her father would hold him responsible for any serious results.
Iijima Heizayémon had a reputation for cutting off heads. And the more
Shijô thought about the possible consequences of his introduction of
Shinzaburô at the Iijima villa, the more he became afraid. Therefore he
purposely abstained from calling upon his young friend.

Months passed; and O-Tsuyu, little imagining the true cause of
Shinzaburô's neglect, believed that her love had been scorned. Then she
pined away, and died. Soon afterwards, the faithful servant O-Yoné also
died, through grief at the loss of her mistress; and the two were buried
side by side in the cemetery of Shin-Banzui-In,--a temple which still
stands in the neighborhood of Dango-Zaka, where the famous
chrysanthemum-shows are yearly held.

### II

Shinzaburô knew nothing of what had happened; but his disappointment and
his anxiety had resulted in a prolonged illness. He was

{p. 77}

slowly recovering, but still very weak, when he unexpectedly received
another visit from Yamamoto Shijô. The old man made a number of
plausible excuses for his apparent neglect. Shinzaburô said to him:--

"I have been sick ever since the beginning of spring;--even now I cannot
eat anything. . . . Was it not rather unkind of you never to call? I
thought that we were to make another visit together to the house of the
Lady Iijima; and I wanted to take to her some little present as a return
for our kind reception. Of course I could not go by myself."

Shijo gravely responded,--

"I am very sorry to tell you that the young lady is dead."

"Dead!" repeated Shinzaburô, turning white, "did you say that she is
dead?"

The doctor remained silent for a moment, as if collecting himself: then
he resumed, in the quick light tone of a man resolved not to take
trouble seriously:--

"My great mistake was in having introduced you to her; for it seems that
she fell in love with you at once. I am afraid that you must have said
something to encourage this affection--

{p. 78}

when you were in that little room together. At all events, I saw how she
felt towards you; and then I became uneasy,--fearing that her father
might come to hear of the matter, and lay the whole blame upon me.
So--to be quite frank with you,--I decided that it would be better not
to call upon you; and I purposely stayed away for a long time. But, only
a few days ago, happening to visit Iijima's house, I heard, to my great
surprise, that his daughter had died, and that her servant O-Yoné had
also died. Then, remembering all that had taken place, I knew that the
young lady must have died of love for you. . . . \[*Laughing*\] Ah, you
are really a sinful fellow! Yes, you are! \[*Laughing*\] Isn't it a sin
to have been born so handsome that the girls die for love of
you?<sup>\[1\]</sup> . . . \[*Seriously*\] Well, we must leave the dead
to the dead. It is no use to talk further about the matter;--all that
you now can do for her is to repeat the Nembutsu.<sup>\[2\]</sup> . . .
Good-bye."

\[1. Perhaps this conversation may seem strange to the Western reader;
but it is true to life. The whole of the scene is characteristically
Japanese.

2\. The invocation *Namu Amida Butsu!* ("Hail to the Buddha Amitâbha!"),
repeated, as a prayer, for the sake of the dead.\]

{p. 79}

And the old man retired hastily,--anxious to avoid further converse
about the painful event for which he felt himself to have been
unwittingly responsible.

### III

Shinzaburô long remained stupefied with grief by the news of O-Tsuyu's
death. But as soon as he found himself again able to think clearly, he
inscribed the dead girl's name upon a mortuary tablet, and placed the
tablet in the Buddhist shrine of his house, and set offerings before it,
and recited prayers. Every day thereafter he presented offerings, and
repeated the *Nembutsu*; and the memory of O-Tsuyu was never absent from
his thought.

Nothing occurred to change the monotony of his solitude before the time
of the Bon,--the great Festival of the Dead,--which begins upon the
thirteenth day of the seventh month. Then he decorated his house, and
prepared everything for the festival;--hanging out the lanterns that
guide the returning spirits, and setting the food of ghosts on the
*sbôryôdana*, or Shelf of Souls.

{p. 80}

And on the first evening of the Bon, after sundown, he kindled a small
lamp before the tablet of O-Tsuyu, and lighted the lanterns.

The night was clear, with a great moon,--and windless, and very warm.
Shinzaburô sought the coolness of his veranda. Clad only in a light
summer-robe, he sat there thinking, dreaming, sorrowing;--sometimes
fanning himself; sometimes making a little smoke to drive the mosquitoes
away. Everything was quiet. It was a lonesome neighborhood, and there
were few passers-by. He could hear only the soft rushing of a
neighboring stream, and the shrilling of night-insects.

But all at once this stillness was broken by a sound of women's
geta<sup>\[1\]</sup> approaching--*kara-kon*, *kara-kon*;--and the sound
drew nearer and nearer, quickly, till it reached the live-hedge
surrounding the garden. Then Shinzaburô, feeling curious, stood on
tiptoe, so as to look over the hedge; and he saw two women passing. One,
who was carrying a beautiful lantern decorated

\[1. *Komageta* in the original. The geta is a wooden sandal, or clog,
of which there are many varieties,--some decidedly elegant. The
*komageta*, or "pony-geta" is so-called because of the sonorous
hoof-like echo which it makes on hard ground.\]

{p. 81}

![The Peony Lantern](img/08000.jpg)

The Peony Lantern

with peony-flowers,<sup>\[1\]</sup> appeared to be a servant;--the other
was a slender girl of about seventeen, wearing a long-sleeved robe
embroidered with designs of autumn-blossoms. Almost at the same instant
both women turned their faces toward Shinzaburô;--and to his utter
astonishment, he recognized O-Tsuyu and her servant O-Yoné.

They stopped immediately; and the girl cried out,--

"Oh, how strange! . . . Hagiwara Sama!"

Shinzaburô simultaneously called to the maid:--

"O-Yoné! Ah, you are O-Yoné!--I remember you very well."

"Hagiwara Sama!" exclaimed O-Yoné in a tone of supreme amazement. "Never
could I have believed it possible! . . . Sir, we were told that you had
died."

\[1. The sort of lantern here referred to is no longer made; and its
shape can best be understood by a glance at the picture accompanying
this story. It was totally unlike the modern domestic hand-lantern,
painted with the owner's crest; but it was not altogether unlike some
forms of lanterns still manufactured for the Festival of the Dead, and
called *Bon-dôrô*. The flowers ornamenting it were not painted: they
were artificial flowers of crepe-silk, and were attached to the top of
the lantern.\]

{p. 82}

"How extraordinary!" cried Shinzaburô. "Why, I was told that both of you
were dead!"

"Ah, what a hateful story!" returned O-Yoné. "Why repeat such unlucky
words? . . .Who told you?"

"Please to come in," said Shinzaburô;--"here we can talk better. The
garden-gate is open."

So they entered, and exchanged greeting; and when Shinzaburô had made
them comfortable, he said:--

"I trust that you will pardon my discourtesy in not having called upon
you for so long a time. But Shijô, the doctor, about a month ago, told
me that you had both died."

"So it was he who told you?" exclaimed O-Yoné. "It was very wicked of
him to say such a thing. Well, it was also Shijô who told us that *you*
were dead. I think that he wanted to deceive you,--which was not a
difficult thing to do, because you are so confiding and trustful.
Possibly my mistress betrayed her liking for you in some words which
found their way to her father's ears; and, in that case, O-Kuni--the new
wife--might have planned to make the doctor tell you that we were dead,
so as to bring

{p. 83}

about a separation. Anyhow, when my mistress heard that you had died,
she wanted to cut off her hair immediately, and to become a nun. But I
was able to prevent her from cutting off her hair; and I persuaded her
at last to become a nun only in her heart. Afterwards her father wished
her to marry a certain young man; and she refused. Then there was a
great deal of trouble,--chiefly caused by O-Kuni;--and we went away from
the villa, and found a very small house in Yanaka-no-Sasaki. There we
are now just barely able to live, by doing a little private work. . . .
My mistress has been constantly repeating the *Nembutsu* for your sake.
To-day, being the first day of the Bon, we went to visit the temples;
and we were on our way home--thus late--when this strange meeting
happened."

"Oh, how extraordinary!" cried Shinzaburô. "Can it be true?-or is it
only a dream? Here I, too, have been constantly reciting the Nembutsu
before a tablet with her name upon it! Look!" And he showed them
O-Tsuyu's tablet in its place upon the Shelf of Souls.

"We are more than grateful for your kind remembrance," returned O-Yoné,
smiling. . . . {p. 84} "Now as for my mistress,"--she continued, turning
towards O-Tsuyu, who had all the while remained demure and silent,
half-hiding her face with her sleeve,--"as for my mistress, she actually
says that she would not mind being disowned by her father for the time
of seven existences,<sup>\[1\]</sup> or even being killed by him, for
your sake! . . . Come! will you not allow her to stay here to-night?"

Shinzaburô turned pale for joy. He answered in a voice trembling with
emotion:--

"Please remain; but do not speak loud--because there is a troublesome
fellow living close by,--a *ninsomi*<sup>\[2\]</sup> called Hakuôdô
Yusai, who tells people's fortunes by looking at their faces. He is
inclined to be curious; and it is better that he should not know."

\[1. "For the time of seven existences,"--that is to say, for the time
of seven successive lives. In Japanese drama and romance it is not
uncommon to represent a father as disowning his child "for the time of
seven lives." Such a disowning is called *shichi-shô madé no mandô*, a
disinheritance for seven lives,--signifying that in six future lives
after the present the erring son or daughter will continue to feel the
parental displeasure.

2 The profession is not yet extinct. The *ninsomi* uses a kind of
magnifying glass (or magnifying-mirror sometimes), called *tengankyô* or
*ninsomégané*.\]

{p. 85}

The two women remained that night in the house of the young samurai, and
returned to their own home a little before daybreak. And after that
night they came every night for seven nights,--whether the weather were
foul or fair,--always at the same hour. And Shinzaburô became more and
more attached to the girl; and the twain were fettered, each to each, by
that bond of illusion which is stronger than bands of iron.

### IV

Now there was a man called Tomozô, who lived in a small cottage
adjoining Shinzaburô's residence. Tomozô and his wife O-Miné were both
employed by Shinzaburô as servants. Both seemed to be devoted to their
young master; and by his help they were able to live in comparative
comfort.

One night, at a very late hour, Tomozô heard the voice of a woman in his
master's apartment; and this made him uneasy. He feared that Shinzaburô,
being very gentle and affectionate, might be made the dupe of some
cunning wanton,--in which event the domestics would be the first

{p. 86}

to suffer. He therefore resolved to watch; and on the following night he
stole on tiptoe to Shinzaburô's dwelling, and looked through a chink in
one of the sliding shutters. By the glow of a night-lantern within the
sleeping-room, he was able to perceive that his master and a strange
woman were talking together under the mosquito-net. At first he could
not see the woman distinctly. Her back was turned to him;--he only
observed that she was very slim, and that she appeared to be very
young,--judging from the fashion of her dress and hair.<sup>\[1\]</sup>
Putting his ear to the chink, he could hear the conversation plainly.
The woman said:--

"And if I should be disowned by my father, would you then let me come
and live with you?"

Shinzaburô answered:--

"Most assuredly I would--nay, I should be glad of the chance. But there
is no reason to fear that you will ever be disowned by your father; for
you are his only daughter, and he loves you very much. What I do fear is
that some day we shall be cruelly separated."

\[1. The color and form of the dress, and the style of wearing the hair,
are by Japanese custom regulated according to the age of the woman.\]

{p. 87}

She responded softly:--

"Never, never could I even think of accepting any other man for my
husband. Even if our secret were to become known, and my father were to
kill me for what I have done, still--after death itself--I could never
cease to think of you. And I am now quite sure that you yourself would
not be able to live very long without me." . . . Then clinging closely
to him, with her lips at his neck, she caressed him; and he returned her
caresses.

Tomozô wondered as he listened,--because the language of the woman was
not the language of a common woman, but the language of a lady of
rank.<sup>\[1\]</sup> Then be determined at all hazards to get one
glimpse of her face; and he crept round the house, backwards and
forwards, peering through every crack and chink. And at last he was able
to see;--but therewith an icy trembling seized him; and the hair of his
head stood up.

For the face was the face of a woman long

\[1. The forms of speech used by the samurai, and other superior
classes, differed considerably from those of the popular idiom; but
these differences could not be effectively rendered into English.\]

{p. 88}

dead,--and the fingers caressing were fingers of naked bone,--and of the
body below the waist there was not anything: it melted off into thinnest
trailing shadow. Where the eyes of the lover deluded saw youth and grace
and beauty, there appeared to the eyes of the watcher horror only, and
the emptiness of death. Simultaneously another woman's figure, and a
weirder, rose up from within the chamber, and swiftly made toward the
watcher, as if discerning his presence. Then, in uttermost terror, he
fled to the dwelling of Hakuôdô Yusai, and, knocking frantically at the
doors, succeeded in arousing him.

### V

Hakuôdô Yusai, the *ninsomi*, was a very old man; but in his time he had
travelled much, and he had heard and seen so many things that he could
not be easily surprised. Yet the story of the terrified Tomozô both
alarmed and amazed him. He had read in ancient Chinese books of love
between the living and the dead; but he had never believed it possible.
Now, however, he felt

{p. 89}

convinced that the statement of Tomozô was not a falsehood, and that
something very strange was really going on in the house of Hagiwara.
Should the truth prove to be what Tomozô imagined, then the young
samurai was a doomed man.

"If the woman be a ghost,"--said Yusai to the frightened servant,"--if
the woman be a ghost, your master must die very soon,--unless something
extraordinary can be done to save him. And if the woman be a ghost, the
signs of death will appear upon his face. For the spirit of the living
is *yôki*, and pure--the spirit of the dead is *inki*, and unclean the
one is Positive, the other Negative. He whose bride is a ghost cannot
live. Even though in his blood there existed the force of a life of one
hundred years, that force must quickly perish. . . . Still, I shall do
all that I can to save Hagiwara Sama. And in the meantime, Tomozô, say
nothing to any other person,--not even to your wife,--about this matter.
At sunrise I shall call upon your master."

{p. 90}

### VI

When questioned next morning by Yusai, Shinzaburô at first attempted to
deny that any women had been visiting the house; but finding this
artless policy of no avail, and perceiving that the old man's purpose
was altogether unselfish, he was finally persuaded to acknowledge what
had really occurred, and to give his reasons for wishing to keep the
matter a secret. As for the lady Iijima, he intended, he said, to make
her his wife as soon as possible.

"Oh, madness!" cried Yusai,--losing all patience in the intensity of his
alarm. "Know, sir, that the people who have been coming here, night
after night, are dead! Some frightful delusion is upon you! . . . Why,
the simple fact that You long supposed O-Tsuyu to be dead, and repeated
the Nembutsu for her, and made offerings before her tablet, is itself
the proof! . . . The lips of the dead have touched you!--the hands of
the dead have caressed you! . . . Even at this moment I see in your face
the signs of death--and you will not believe! . . . Listen to me now,
sir,--I beg of you,--if you wish to

{p. 91}

save yourself: otherwise you have less than twenty days to live. They
told you--those people--that they were residing in the district of
Shitaya, in Yanaka-no-Sasaki. Did you ever visit them at that place?
No!--of course you did not! Then go to-day,-as soon as you can,--to
Yanaka-no-Sasaki, and try to find their home! . . ."

And having uttered this counsel with the most vehement earnestness,
Hakuôdô Yusai abruptly took his departure.

 

Shinzaburô, startled though not convinced, resolved after a moment's
reflection to follow the advice of the ninsomi, and to go to Shitaya. It
was yet early in the morning when he reached the quarter of
Yanaka-no-Sasaki, and began his search for the dwelling of O-Tsuyu. He
went through every street and side-street, read all the names inscribed
at the various entrances, and made inquiries whenever an opportunity
presented itself. But he could not find anything resembling the little
house mentioned by O-Yoné; and none of the people whom he questioned
knew of any house in the quarter inhabited by two single women. Feeling
at last certain that further

{p. 92}

research would be useless, he turned homeward by the shortest way, which
happened to lead through the grounds of the temple Shin-Banzui-In.

Suddenly his attention was attracted by two new tombs, placed side by
side, at the rear of the temple. One was a common tomb, such as might
have been erected for a person of humble rank: the other was a large and
handsome monument; and hanging before it was a beautiful peony-lantern,
which had probably been left there at the time of the Festival of the
Dead. Shinzaburô remembered that the peony-lantern carried by O-Yoné was
exactly similar; and the coincidence impressed him as strange. He looked
again at the tombs; but the tombs explained nothing. Neither bore any
personal name,--only the Buddhist *kaimyô*, or posthumous appellation.
Then he determined to seek information at the temple. An acolyte stated,
in reply to his questions, that the large tomb had been recently erected
for the daughter of Iijima Heizayemon, the *hatamoto* of Ushigomé; and
that the small tomb next to it was that of her servant O-Yoné, who had
died of grief soon after the young lady's funeral.

{p. 93}

Immediately to Shinzaburô's memory there recurred, with another and
sinister meaning, the words of O-Yoné:--"*We went away, and found a very
small house in Yanaka-no-Sasaki. There we are now just barely able to
live--by doing a little private work. . . .*" Here was indeed the very
small house,--and in Yanaka-no-Sasaki. But the little *private work* . .
.?

Terror-stricken, the samurai hastened with all speed to the house of
Yusai, and begged for his counsel and assistance. But Yusai declared
himself unable to be of any aid in such a case. All that he could do was
to send Shinzaburô to the high-priest Ryôseki, of Shin-Banzui-in, with a
letter praying for immediate religious help.

### VII

The high-priest Ryôseki was a learned and a holy man. By spiritual
vision he was able to know the secret of any sorrow, and the nature of
the karma that had caused it. He heard unmoved the story of Shinzaburô,
and said to him:--

{p. 94}

"A very great danger now threatens You, because of an error committed in
one of your former states of existence. The karma that hinds you to the
dead is very strong; but if I tried to explain its character, you would
not be able to understand. I shall therefore tell you only this,--that
the dead person has no desire to injure you out of hate, feels no enmity
towards you: she is influenced, on the contrary, by the most passionate
affection for you. Probably the girl has been in love with you from a
time long preceding your present life,--from a time of not less than
three or four past existences; and it would seem that, although
necessarily changing her form and condition at each succeeding birth,
she has not been able to cease from following after you. Therefore it
will not be an easy thing to escape from her influence. . . . But now I
am going to lend you this powerful *mamori*.\[1\] It is a pure gold
image of that Buddha

\[1. The Japanese word mamori has significations at least as numerous as
those attaching to our own term "amulet." It would be impossible, in a
mere footnote, even to suggest the variety of Japanese religious objects
to which the name is given. In this instance, the *mamori* is a very
small image, probably enclosed in a miniature shrine of lacquer-work or
metal, over which a silk cover is drawn. Such {footnote p. 95} little
images were often worn by *samurai* on the person. I was recently shown
a miniature figure of Kwannon, in an iron case, which had been carried
by an officer through the Satsuma war. He observed, with good reason,
that it had probably saved his life; for it had stopped a bullet of
which the dent was plainly visible.\]

{p. 95}

called the Sea-Sounding Tathâgata--*Kai-On-Nyôrai*,--because his
preaching of the Law sounds through the world like the sound of the sea.
And this little image is especially a
*shiryô-yoké*,<sup>\[1\]</sup>--which protects the living from the dead.
This you must wear, in its covering, next to your body,--under the
girdle. . . . Besides, I shall presently perform in the temple, a
*segaki*-service<sup>\[2\]</sup> for the repose of the troubled spirit.
. . . And here is a holy sutra, called *Ubô-Darani-Kyô*, or "Treasure-
Raining Sutra:"<sup>\[3\]</sup> you must be

\[1. From *shiryô*, a ghost, and *yokeru*, to exclude. The Japanese have
two kinds of ghosts proper in their folklore: the spirits of the dead,
*shiryô*; and the spirits of the living, *ikiryô*. A house or a person
may be haunted by an *ikiryô* as well as by a *shiryô*.

2\. A special service,--accompanying offerings of food, etc., to those
dead having no living relatives or friends to care for them,--is thus
termed. In this case, however, the service would be of a particular and
exceptional kind.

3\. The name would be more correctly written *Ubô-Darani-Kyô*. It is the
Japanese pronunciation of the title of a very short sutra translated out
of Sanscrit into Chinese by the Indian priest Amoghavajra, probably
during the {footnote p. 96} eighth century. The Chinese text contains
transliterations of some mysterious Sanscrit words,--apparently
talismanic words,--like those to be seen in Kern's translation of the
Saddharma-Pundarika, ch. xxvi.\]

{p. 96}

careful to recite it every night in your house without fail. . . .
Furthermore I shall give you this package of
*o-fuda*;<sup>\[1\]</sup>--you must paste one of them over every opening
of your house,--no matter how small. If you do this, the power of the
holy texts will prevent the dead from entering. But--whatever may
happen--do not fail to recite the sutra."

Shinzaburô humbly thanked the high-priest and then, taking with him the
image, the sutra, and the bundle of sacred texts, he made all haste to
reach his home before the hour of sunset.

\[1. *O-fuda* is the general name given to religious texts used as
charms or talismans. They are sometimes stamped or burned upon wood, but
more commonly written or printed upon narrow strips of paper. *O-fuda*
are pasted above house-entrances, on the walls of rooms, upon tablets
placed in household shrines, etc., etc. Some kinds are worn about the
person;--others are made into pellets, and swallowed as spiritual
medicine. The text of the larger *o-fuda* is often accompanied by
curious pictures or symbolic illustrations.\]

{p. 97}

### VIII

With Yusai's advice and help, Shinzaburô was able before dark to fix the
holy texts over all the apertures of his dwelling. Then the *ninsomi*
returned to his own house,--leaving the youth alone.

Night came, warm and clear. Shinzaburô made fast the doors, bound the
precious amulet about his waist, entered his mosquito-net, and by the
glow of a night-lantern began to recite the Ubô-Darani-Kyô. For a long
time he chanted the words, comprehending little of their meaning;--then
he tried to obtain some rest. But his mind was still too much disturbed
by the strange events of the day. Midnight passed; and no sleep came to
him. At last he heard the boom of the great temple-bell of Dentsu-In
announcing the eighth hour.\[1\]

\[1. According to the old Japanese way of counting time, this
*yatsudoki* or eighth hour was the same as our two o'clock in the
morning. Each Japanese hour was equal to two European hours, so that
there were only six hours instead of our twelve; and these six hours
were counted backwards in the order,--9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4. Thus the ninth
hour corresponded to our midday, or midnight; {footnote p. 98} half-past
nine to our one o'clock; eight to our two o'clock. Two o'clock in the
morning, also called "the Hour of the Ox," was the Japanese hour of
ghosts and goblins.\]

{p. 98}

it ceased; and Shinzaburô suddenly heard the sound of *geta* approaching
from the old direction,--but this time more slowly: *karan-koron*,
*karan-koron!* At once a cold sweat broke over his forehead. Opening the
sutra hastily, with trembling hand, he began again to recite it aloud.
The steps came nearer and nearer,--reached the live hedge,--stopped!
Then, strange to say, Shinzaburô felt unable to remain under his
mosquito-net: something stronger even than his fear impelled him to
look; and, instead of continuing to recite the *Ubô-Darani-Kyô*, he
foolishly approached the shutters, and through a chink peered out into
the night. Before the house be saw O-Tsuyu standing, and O-Yoné with the
peony-lantern; and both of them were gazing at the Buddhist texts pasted
above the entrance. Never before--not even in what time she lived--had
O-Tsuyu appeared so beautiful; and Shinzaburô felt his heart drawn
towards her with a power almost resistless. But the terror of death

{p. 99}

and the terror of the unknown restrained; and there went on within him
such a struggle between his love and his fear that he became as one
suffering in the body the pains of the Shô-netsu hell.

\[1\]

Presently he heard the voice of the maid-servant, saying:--

"My dear mistress, there is no way to enter. The heart of Hagiwara Sama
must have changed. For the promise that he made last night has been
broken; and the doors have been made fast to keep us out. . . . We
cannot go in to-night. . . . It will be wiser for you to make up your
mind not to think any more about him, because his feeling towards you
has certainly changed. It is evident that he does not want to see you.
So it will be better not to give yourself any more trouble for the sake
of a man whose heart is so unkind."

But the girl answered, weeping:--

"Oh, to think that this could happen after the pledges which we made to
each other! . . .

\[1. *En-netsu* or *Shô-netsu* (Sanscrit "Tapana") is the sixth of the
Eight Hot Hells of Japanese Buddhism. One day of life in this hell is
equal in duration to thousands (some say millions) of human years.\]

{p. 100}

Often I was told that the heart of a man changes as quickly as the sky
of autumn;--yet surely the heart of Hagiwara Sama cannot be so cruel
that he should really intend to exclude me ill this way! . . . Dear
Yoné, please. find some means of taking me to him. . . . Unless you do,
I will never, never go home again."

Thus she continued to plead, veiling her face with her long
sleeves,--and very beautiful she looked, and very touching; but the fear
of death was strong upon her lover.

O-Yoné at last made answer,--

"My dear young lady, why will you trouble your mind about a man who
seems to be so cruel? . . . Well, let us see if there be no way to enter
at the back of the house: come with me!"

And taking O-Tsuyu by the hand, she led her away toward the rear of the
dwelling; and there the two disappeared as suddenly as the light
disappears when the flame of a lamp is blown out.

{p. 101}

### IX

Night after night the shadows came at the Hour of the Ox; and nightly
Shinzaburô heard the weeping of O-Tsuyu. Yet he believed himself
saved,--little imagining that his doom had already been decided by the
character of his dependents.

 

Tomozô had promised Yusai never to speak to any other person--not even
to O-Miné--of the strange events that were taking place. But Tomozô was
not long suffered by the haunters to rest in peace. Night after night
O-Yoné entered into his dwelling, and roused him from his sleep, and
asked him to remove the *o-fuda* placed over one very small window at
the back of his master's house. And Tomozô, out of fear, as often
promised her to take away the *o-fuda* before the next sundown; but
never by day could he make up his mind to remove it,--believing that
evil was intended to Shinzaburô. At last, in a night of storm, O-Yoné
startled him from slumber with a cry of reproach, and stooped above his
pillow, and said to him: "Have a care

{p. 102}

how you trifle with us! If, by to-morrow night, you do not take away
that text, you shall learn how I can hate!" And she made her face so
frightful as she spoke that Tomozô nearly died of terror.

O-Miné, the wife of Tomozô, had never till then known of these visits:
even to her husband they had seemed like bad dreams. But on this
particular night it chanced that, waking suddenly, she heard the voice
of a woman talking to Tomozô. Almost in the same moment the talking
ceased; and when O-Miné looked about her, she saw, by the light of the
night-lamp, only her husband,--shuddering and white with fear. The
stranger was gone; the doors were fast: it seemed impossible that
anybody could have entered. Nevertheless the jealousy of the wife had
been aroused; and she began to chide and to question Tomozô in such a
manner that he thought himself obliged to betray the secret, and to
explain the terrible dilemma in which he had been placed.

Then the passion of O-Miné yielded to wonder and alarm; but she was a
subtle woman, and she devised immediately a plan to save her husband by
the sacrifice of her master. And she gave {p. 103} Tomozô a cunning
counsel,--telling him to make conditions with the dead.

 

They came again on the following night at the Hour of the Ox; and O-Miné
hid herself on hearing the sound of their coming,--*karan-koron,
karan-koron!* But Tomozô went out to meet them in the dark, and even
found courage to say to them what his wife had told him to say:--

"It is true that I deserve your blame;--but I had no wish to cause you
anger. The reason that the *o-fuda* has not been taken away is that my
wife and I are able to live only by the help of Hagiwara Sama, and that
we cannot expose him to any danger without bringing misfortune upon
ourselves. But if we could obtain the sum of a hundred *ryô* in gold, we
should be able to please you, because we should then need no help from
anybody. Therefore if you will give us a hundred *ryô*, I can take the
*o-fuda* away without being afraid of losing our only means of support."

When he had uttered these words, O-Yoné and O-Tsuyu looked at each other
in silence for a moment. Then O-Yoné said:--

{p. 104}

"Mistress, I told you that it was not right to trouble this man,--as we
have no just cause of ill will against him. But it is certainly useless
to fret yourself about Hagiwara Sama, because his heart has changed
towards you. Now once again, my dear young lady, let me beg you not to
think any more about him!"

But O-Tsuyu, weeping, made answer:--

"Dear Yoné, whatever may happen, I cannot possibly keep myself from
thinking about him! . . . You know that you can get a hundred *ryô* to
have the *o-fuda* taken off. . . Only once more, I pray, dear
Yoné!--only once more bring me face to face with Hagiwara Sama,--I
beseech you!" And hiding her face with her sleeve, she thus continued to
plead.

"Oh! why will you ask me to do these things?" responded O-Yoné. "You
know very well that I have no money. But since you will persist in this
whim of yours, in spite of all that I can say, I suppose that I must try
to find the money somehow, and to bring it here to-morrow night. . . ."
Then, turning to the faithless Tomozô, she said:--"Tomozô, I must tell
you that Hagiwara Sama now wears upon his body a *mamori* called by the
name of *Kai-On-Nyôrai*,

{p. 105}

and that so long as he wears it we cannot approach him. So you will have
to get that *mamori* away from him, by some means or other, as well as
to remove the *o-fuda*."

Tomozô feebly made answer:--

"That also I can do, if you will promise to bring me the hundred *ryô*."

"Well, mistress," said O-Yoné, "you will wait,--will you not,--until
to-morrow night?"

"Oh, dear Yoné!" sobbed the other,--"I have we to go back to-night again
without seeing Hagiwara Sama? Ah! it is cruel!"

And the shadow of the mistress, weeping, was led away by the shadow of
the maid.

### X

Another day went, and another night came, and the dead came with it. But
this time no lamentation was heard without the house of Hagiwara; for
the faithless servant found his reward at the Hour of the Ox, and
removed the *o-fuda*. Moreover he had been able, while his master was at
the bath, to steal from its case the golden *mamori*, and to substitute
for it an image

{p. 106}

of copper; and he had buried the *Kai-On-Nyôrai* in a desolate field. So
the visitants found nothing to oppose their entering. Veiling their
faces with their sleeves they rose and passed, like a streaming of
vapor, into the little window from over which the holy text had been
torn away. But what happened thereafter within the house Tomozô never
knew.

The sun was high before he ventured again to approach his master's
dwelling, and to knock upon the sliding-doors. For the first time in
years he obtained no response; and the silence made him afraid.
Repeatedly he called, and received no answer. Then, aided by O-Miné, he
succeeded in effecting an entrance and making his way alone to the
sleeping-room, where he called again in vain. He rolled back the
rumbling shutters to admit the light; but still within the house there
was no stir. At last he dared to lift a corner of the mosquito-net. But
no sooner had he looked beneath than he fled from the house, with a cry
of horror.

Shinzaburô was dead--hideously dead and his face was the face of a man
who had died in the uttermost agony of fear;--and lying beside him in
the bed were the bones of a woman! {p. 107} And the bones of the arms,
and the bones of the hands, clung fast about his neck.

### XI

Hakuôdô Yusai, the fortune-teller, went to view the corpse at the prayer
of the faithless Tomozô. The old man was terrified and astonished at the
spectacle, but looked about him with a keen eye. He soon perceived that
the *o-fuda* had been taken from the little window at the back of the
house; and on searching the body of Shinzaburô, he discovered that the
golden *mamori* had been taken from its wrapping, and a copper image of
Fudô put in place of it. He suspected Tomozô of the theft; but the whole
occurrence was so very extraordinary that he thought it prudent to
consult with the priest Ryôseki before taking further action. Therefore,
after having made a careful examination of the premises, he betook
himself to the temple Shin-Banzui-In, as quickly as his aged limbs could
bear him.

Ryôseki, without waiting to hear the purpose of the old man's visit, at
once invited him into a private apartment.

{p. 108}

"You know that you are always welcome here," said Ryôseki. "Please seat
yourself at ease. . . . Well, I am sorry to tell you that Hagiwara Sama
is dead."

Yusai wonderingly exclaimed:--

"Yes, he is dead;--but how did you learn of it?"

The priest responded

"Hagiwara Sama was suffering from the results of an evil karma; and his
attendant was a bad man. What happened to Hagiwara Sama was
unavoidable;--his destiny had been determined from a time long before
his last birth. It will be better for you not to let your mind be
troubled by this event."

Yusai said:--

"I have heard that a priest of pure life may gain power to see into the
future for a hundred years; but truly this is the first time in my
existence that I have had proof of such power. . . . Still, there is
another matter about which I am very anxious. . . ."

"You mean," interrupted Ryôseki, "the stealing of the holy *mamori*, the
*Kai-On-Nyôrai*. But you must not give yourself any concern about

{p. 109}

that. The image has been buried in a field; and it will be found there
and returned to me during the eighth month of the coming year. So please
do not be anxious about it."

More and more amazed, the old *ninsomi* ventured to observe:--

"I have studied the *In-Yô*,<sup>\[1\]</sup> and the science of
divination; and I make my living by telling peoples' fortunes;--but I
cannot possibly understand how you know these things."

Ryôseki answered gravely:--

"Never mind how I happen to know them.... I now want to speak to you
about Hagiwara's funeral. The House of Hagiwara has its own
family-cemetery, of course; but to bury him there would not be proper.
He must be buried beside O-Tsuyu, the Lady Iijima; for his
karma-relation to her was a very deep one. And it is but right that you
should erect a tomb for him at your own cost, because you have been
indebted to him for many favors."

\[1. The Male and Female principles of the universe, the Active and
Passive forces of Nature. Yusai refers here to the old Chinese
nature-philosophy,--better known to Western readers by the name
FENG-SHUI.\]

{p. 110}

Thus it came to pass that Shinzaburô was buried beside O-Tsuyu, in the
cemetery of Shin-Banzui-In, in Yanaka-no-Sasaki.

--*Here ends the story of the Ghosts in the Romance of the
Peony-Lantern*.

\*  
\* \*

My friend asked me whether the story had interested me; and I answered
by telling him that I wanted to go to the cemetery of
Shin-Banzui-In,--so as to realize more definitely the local color of the
author's studies.

"I shall go with you at once," he said. "But what did you think of the
personages?"

"To Western thinking," I made answer, "Shinzaburô is a despicable
creature. I have been mentally comparing him with the true lovers of our
old ballad-literature. They were only too glad to follow a dead
sweetheart into the grave; and nevertheless, being Christians, they
believed that they had only one human life to enjoy in this world. But
Shinzaburô was a Buddhist,--with a million lives behind him and a
million lives before him; and he was too selfish to give up even one
miserable existence for the sake of the girl

{p. 111}

that came back to him from the dead. Then he was even more cowardly than
selfish. Although a samurai by birth and training, he had to beg a
priest to save him from ghosts. In every way he proved himself
contemptible; and O-Tsuyu did quite right in choking him to death."

"From the Japanese point of view, likewise," my friend responded,
"Shinzaburô is rather contemptible. But the use of this weak character
helped the author to develop incidents that could not otherwise,
perhaps, have been so effectively managed. To my thinking, the only
attractive character in the story is that of O-Yoné: type of the
old-time loyal and loving servant,--intelligent, shrewd, full of
resource,--faithful not only unto death, but beyond death. . . . Well,
let us go to Shin-Banzui-In."

We found the temple uninteresting, and the cemetery an abomination of
desolation. Spaces once occupied by graves had been turned into
potato-patches. Between were tombs leaning at all angles out of the
perpendicular, tablets made illegible by scurf, empty pedestals,
shattered water-tanks, and statues of Buddhas without heads or hands.
Recent rains had soaked the black soil,--leaving here and there small
pools of slime about

{p. 112}

which swarms of tiny frogs were hopping. Everything--excepting the
potato-patches--seemed to have been neglected for years. In a shed just
within the gate, we observed a woman cooking; and my companion presumed
to ask her if she knew anything about the tombs described in the Romance
of the Peony-Lantern.

"Ah! the tombs of O-Tsuyu and O-Yoné?" she responded, smiling;--"you
will find them near the end of the first row at the back of the
temple--next to the statue of Jizô."

Surprises of this kind I had met with elsewhere in Japan.

We picked our way between the rain-pools and between the green ridges of
young potatoes,--whose roots were doubtless feeding on the substance of
many another O-Tsuyu and O-Yoné;--and we reached at last two
lichen-eaten tombs of which the inscriptions seemed almost obliterated.
Beside the larger tomb was a statue of Jizô, with a broken nose.

"The characters are not easy to make out," said my friend--"but wait!" .
. . He drew from his sleeve a sheet of soft white paper, laid it over
the inscription, and began to rub the paper with a lump of clay. As he
did so, the characters appeared in white on the blackened surface.

{p. 113}

"'*Eleventh day, third month--Rat, Elder Brother, Fire--Sixth year of
Horéki* \[A. D. 1756\].' . . . This would seem to be the grave of some
innkeeper of Nedzu, named Kichibei. Let us see what is on the other
monument."

With a fresh sheet of paper he presently brought out the text of a
kaimyô, and read,--

"*'En-myô-In, Hô-yô-I-tei-ken-shi, Hô-ni':--'Nun-of-the-Law,
Illustrious, Pure-of-heart-and-will. Famed-in-the-Law,--inhabiting the
Mansions-of-the-Preaching-of-Wonder.'* . . . The grave of some Buddhist
nun."

"What utter humbug!" I exclaimed. "That woman was only making fun of
us."

"Now," my friend protested, "you are unjust to the woman! You came here
because you wanted a sensation; and she tried her very best to please
you. You did not suppose that ghost-story was true, did you?"

![Japanese Graveyard](img/11500.jpg)

{p. 117}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Footprints of the Buddha](igj09)
