[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm08)  [Next](rrm10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

### CHAPTER THE FIFTH

#### THE HERMETIC PHILOSOPHERS

THERE was among the sages a writer, Artephius, whose productions are
very famous among the Hermetic Philosophers, insomuch that the noble
Olaus Borrichius, an excellent writer and a most candid critic,
recommends these books to the attentive perusal of those who would
acquire knowledge of this sublime highest philosophy. He is said to have
invented a cabalistic magnet which possessed the extraordinary property
of secretly attracting the aura, or mysterious spirit of human
efflorescence and prosperous bodily growth, out of young men; and these
benign and healthful springs of life he gathered up, and applied by his
magic art to himself--by inspiration, transudation, or otherwise--so
that he concentred in his own body, waning in age, the accumulated
rejuvenescence of many young people: the individual owners of which new
fresh life suffered and were consumed in proportion to the extent in
which he preyed vitally upon them, and some of them were exhausted by
this enchanter and died. This was because their fresh young vitality had
been unconsciously drawn out of them in his baneful, devouring society,
which was unsuspected because it afforded a glamour delightful. Now this
seems absurd; but it is not so absurd as we suppose when considered
sympathetically.

Sacred history affords considerable authority to this kind of opinion.
We all are acquainted with the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

history of King David, to whom, when he grew old and stricken in years,
Abishag, the Shunammite, was brought to recover him--a damsel described
as 'very fair'; and we are told that she 'lay in his bosom', and that
thereby he 'gat heat'--which means vital heat, but that the king 'knew
her not'. This latter clause in *1 Kings* i. 4, all the larger critics,
including those who speak in the commentaries of Munster, Grotius,
Vossius, and others, interpret in the same way. The seraglios of the
Mohammedans have more of this less lustful meaning, probably, than is
commonly supposed. The ancient physicians appear to have been thoroughly
-acquainted with the advantages of the companionship, without irregular
indulgence, of the young to the old in the renewal of their vital
powers.

The elixir of life was also prepared by other and less criminal means
than those singular ones hinted above. It was produced out of the secret
chemical laboratories of Nature by some adepts. The famous chemist,
Robert Boyle, mentions a preparation in his works, of which Dr. Le Fevre
gave him an account in the presence of a famous physician and of another
learned man. An intimate friend of the physician, as Boyle relates, had
given, out of curiosity, a small quantity of this medicated wine or
preparation to an old female domestic; and this, being agreeable to the
taste, had been partaken of for ten or twelve days by the woman, who was
near seventy years of age, but whom the doctor did not inform what the
liquor was, nor what advantage he was expecting that it might effect. A
great change did indeed occur with this old woman; for she acquired much
greater activity, a sort of youthful bloom came to her countenance, her
face was becoming much more smooth and agreeable; and beyond this, as a
still more decided step

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

backward to her youthful period, certain *purgationes* came upon her
again with sufficiently severe indications to frighten her very much as
to their meaning; so that the doctor, greatly surprised at his success,
was compelled to forego his further experiments, and to suppress all
mention of this miraculous new cordial, for fear of alarming people with
incomprehensible novelties--in regard to which they are very tenacious,
having prejudices inveterate.

But with respect to centenarians, some persons have been mentioned as
having survived for hundreds of years, moving as occasion demanded from
country to country; when the time arrived that, in the natural course of
things, they should die, or be expected to die, merely changing their
names, and reappearing in another place as new persons--they having long
survived all who knew them, and thus being safe from the risk of
discovery. The. Rosicrucians always most jealously guarded these
secrets, speaking in enigmas and parables for the most part; and they
adopted as their motto the advice of one of their number, one of the
Gnostics of the early Christian period: 'Learn to know all, but keep
thyself unknown'. Further, it is not generally known that the true
Rosicrucians bound themselves to obligations of comparative poverty but
absolute chastity in the world, with certain dispensations and
remissions that fully answered their purpose; for .they were not
necessarily solitary people: on the contrary, they were frequently
gregarious, and mixed freely with all classes, though privately
admitting no law but their own.

Their notions of poverty, or comparative poverty, were different from
those that usually prevail. They felt that neither monarchs nor the
wealth of monarchs could endow or aggrandize those who already esteemed

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

themselves the superiors of all men; and therefore, though declining
riches, they were voluntary in the renunciation of them. They held to
chastity, because, entertaining some very peculiar notions about the
real position in creation of the female sex, the Enlightened or
Illuminated Brothers held the monastic or celibate state to be
infinitely that more consonant with the intentions of Providence, since
in everything possible to man’s frail nature they sought to trample on
the pollutions and the great degradation of this his state in flesh.
They trusted the great lines of Nature, not in the whole, but in part,
as they believed Nature was in certain senses not true and a betrayer,
and that she was not wholly the benevolent power to endow, as accorded
with the prevailing deceived notion. We wish not to discuss more
particularly than thus the extremely refined and abstruse protesting
views of these fantastic religionists, who ignored Nature. We have drawn
to ourselves a certain frontier of reticence, up to which margin we may
freely comment; and the limit is quite extended enough for the present
popular purpose, though we absolutely refuse to overpass it with too
distinct explanation, or to enlarge further on the strange persuasions
of the Rosicrucians.

There is related, upon excellent authority, to have happened an
extraordinary incident at Venice, that made a very great stir among the
talkers in that ancient place, and which we will here supply at length,
as due to so mysterious and amusing an episode. Every one who has
visited Venice in these days, and still more those of the old-fashioned
time who have put their experience of it on record, are aware that
freedom and ease among persons who make a good appearance prevail there
to an extent that; in this reserved and suspicious country, is difficult
to realize.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This doubt of
respectability until conviction disarms has a certain constrained and
unamiable effect on our English manners, though it occasionally secures
us from imposition, at the expense perhaps of our accessibility. A
stranger who arrived in Venice one summer, towards the end of the
seventeenth century, and who took up his residence in one of the best
sections of the city, by the considerable figure which, he made, and
through his own manners, which were polished, composed, and elegant, was
admitted into the best company--this though he came with no
introductions, nor did anybody exactly know who or what he was. His
figure was exceedingly elegant and well-proportioned, his face oval and
long, his forehead ample and pale, and the intellectual faculties were
surprisingly brought out, and in distinguished prominence. His hair was
long, dark, and flowing; his smile inexpressibly fascinating, yet sad;
and the deep light of his eyes seemed laden, to the attention sometimes
of those noting him, with the sentiments and experience of all the
historic periods. But his conversation, when he chose to converse, and
his, attainments and knowledge, were marvellous; though he seemed always
striving to keep himself back, and to avoid saying too  much, yet not
with an ostentatious reticence. He went by the name of Signor Gualdi and
was looked upon as a plain private gentleman, of moderate independent
estate. He was an interesting character; in short, one to make an
observer speculate concerning him.

This gentleman remained at Venice for some. months, and was known by the
name of 'The Sober Signior' among the common people, on account of the
regularity of his life, the composed simplicity of, his manners, and the
quietness of his costume; for he always wore dark clothes, and these of
a plain, unpretending

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

style. Three things were remarked of him during his stay at Venice. The
first was, that he had a small collection of fine pictures, which he
readily showed to everybody that desired it; the next, that he seemed
perfectly versed in all arts and sciences, and spoke always with such
minute correctness as to particulars as astonished, nay, silenced, all
who heard him, because he seemed to have been present at the occurrences
which he related, making the most unexpected correction in small facts
sometimes. And it was, in the third place, observed that he never wrote
or received any letter, never desired any credit, but always paid for
everything in ready money, and made no use of bankers, bills of
exchange, or letters of credit. However, he always seemed to have
enough, and he lived respectably, though with no attempt at splendour or
show.

Signor Gualdi met, shortly after his arrival at Venice, one day, at the
coffee-house which he was in the habit of frequenting, a Venetian
nobleman of sociable manners, who was very fond of art, and this pair
used to engage in sundry discussions; and they had many conversations
concerning the various objects and pursuits which were interesting to
both of them. Acquaintance ripened into friendly esteem; and the
nobleman invited Signor Gualdi to his private house, whereat--for he was
a widower--Signor Gualdi first met the nobleman's daughter, a very
beautiful young maiden of eighteen, of much grace and intelligence, and
of great accomplishments. The nobleman's daughter was just introduced at
her father's house from a convent, or *pension*, where she had been
educated by the nuns. This young lady, in short, from constantly being
in his society, and listening to his interesting narratives, gradually
fell in love with the mysterious stranger, much for the reasons of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Desdemona; though
Signor Gualdi was no swarthy Moor, but only a well-educated gentleman--a
thinker rather than the desirer to be a doer. At times, indeed, his
countenance seemed to grow splendid and magical in expression; and he
boasted certainly wondrous discourse; and a strange and weird
fascination would grow up about him, as it were, when he became more
than usually pleased, communicative, and animated. Altogether, when you
were set thinking about him, he seemed a puzzling person, and of rare
gifts; though when mixing only with the crowd you would scarcely
distinguish him from the crowd; nor would you observe him, unless there
was something romantically .akin to him in you excited by his talk.

And now for a few remarks on the imputed character of these
Rosicrucians. And in regard to them, however their existence is
disbelieved, the matters of fact we meet with, sprinkled, but very
sparingly, in the history of these hermetic people, are so astonishing,
and at the same time are preferred with such confidence, that if we
disbelieve--which it is impossible to avoid, and that from the
preposterous and unearthly nature of their pretensions--we cannot escape
the conviction that, if there is not foundation for it, their impudence
and egotism is most audacious. They speak of all mankind as infinitely
beneath them; their pride is beyond idea, although they are most humble
and quiet in exterior. They glory in poverty, and declare that it is the
state ordered for them; and this though they boast universal riches.
They decline all human affections, or submit to them as advisable
escapes only--appearance of loving obligations, which are assumed for
convenient acceptance, or for passing in a world which is composed of
them, or of their supposal. They mingle most gracefully in the society
of women, with hearts wholly incapable

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

of softness in this direction; while they criticize them with pity or
contempt in their own minds as altogether another order of beings from
men, They are most simple and deferential in their exterior; and yet the
self-value which fills their hearts ceases its self-glorying expansion
only with the boundless skies. Up to a certain point, they are the
sincerest people in the world; but rock is soft to their impenetrability
afterwards. In comparison with the hermetic adepts, monarchs are poor,
and their greatest accumulations are contemptible. By the side of the
sages, the most learned are mere dolts and blockheads. They make no
movement towards fame, because they abnegate and disdain it. If they
become famous, it is in spite of themselves: they seek no honours,
because there can be no gratification in honours to such people. Their
greatest wish is to steal unnoticed and unchallenged through the world,
and to amuse themselves with the world because they are in it, and
because they find it about them. Thus, towards mankind they are
negative; towards everything else, positive; self-contained,
self-illuminated, self-everything; but always prepared (nay, enjoined)
to do good, wherever possible or safe.

To this immeasurable exaltation of themselves, what standard of measure,
or what appreciation, can you apply? Ordinary estimates fail in the idea
of it. Either the state of these occult philosophers is the height of
sublimity, or it is the height of absurdity. Not being competent to
understand them or their claims, the world insists that these are
futile. The result entirely depends upon their being fact or fancy in
the ideas of the hermetic philosophers. The puzzling part of the
investigation is, that the treatises of these profound writers abound in
the most acute discourse upon difficult subjects, and contain splendid

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

passages and truths upon all subjects--upon the nature of metals, upon
medical science, upon the unsupposed properties of simples, upon
theological and ontological speculation, and upon science and objects of
thought generally--upon all these matters they enlarge to the reader
stupendously--when the proper attention is directed to them.

<span id="img_03200"></span> ![](img/03200.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. An Historical Adventure](rrm10)
