[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm06)  [Next](rrm08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### CHAPTER THE THIRD

#### EVER-BURNING LAMPS

IN the Papacy of Paul the Third, in the Appian Way, where abundance of
the chief heathens of old were laid, a sepulchre was opened, where was
found the entire body of a fair virgin swimming in a wonderful juice,
which kept it from putrefaction so well, that the face seemed no way
impaired, but lively and very beautiful. Her hair was yellow, tied up
artificially, and kept together with a golden circlet or band. Under her
feet burnt lamps, the light of which was extinguished at the opening of
the sepulchre. By some inscriptions found about the tomb it appeared
that she must have lain there fifteen hundred years. Who she was was
never known, although many concluded her to be 'Tulliola', the daughter
of Cicero. This discovery has been reported from various hands.

Cedrenus makes mention of a lamp, which, together with an image of
Christ, was found at Edessa in the reign of Justinian the Emperor. It
was set over a certain gate there, and elaborately enclosed and shut out
from the air. This lamp, as appeared from the date attached to it, was
lighted soon after Christ was crucified. It was found burning--as in
fact it had done for five hundred years--by the soldiers of Cosroes,
king of Persia; by whom, at this strange discovery and plunder, the oil
was taken out and cast into the fire. As it is reported, this wild act
occasioned such a plague as brought death upon numbers

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

of the forces of Cosroes, sufficiently punished for their sacrilegious
mischief.

At the demolition of our monasteries here in England, there was found in
the monument which was supposed to be that of Constantius Chlorus,
father to the great Constantine, a burning lamp, which was thought to
have continued burning there ever since his burial, which was about
three hundred years after Christ. The ancient Romans are said to have
been able to maintain lights in their sepulchres for an indefinite time,
by an essence or oil obtained from liquid gold; which was an achievement
assumed to have been only known to the Rosicrucians, who boasted this
among some other of their stupendous arts.

Baptista Porta, in his treatise on Natural Magic, relates that about the
year 1550, in the island of Nesis, in the Bay of Naples, a marble
sepulchre of a certain Roman was discovered; upon the opening of which a
burning lamp, affording a powerful illumination, was discovered. The
light of this lamp paled on the admission of the air, and it was
speedily extinguished. It appeared from undoubted tokens in the mode of
inscription that this wonderful lamp had been placed in its present
receptacle before the advent of the Saviour. Those who saw the lamp
declared that the effulgence was of the most dazzling character; that
the light did not flicker or change, but burnt marvellously steadily.

A most celebrated lamp, called that of Pallas, the son of Evander, who,
as Virgil relates, was killed by Turnus (the account will be found in
the tenth book of Virgil's Æneid), is that reported as discovered not
far from Rome, as far forward in time as the year 1401. It is related
that a countryman was digging in the neighbourhood, and that delving
deeper than

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

usual, he came upon a stone sepulchre, wherein there was discovered the
body of a man of extraordinary size, as perfect and natural as if
recently interred. Above the head of the deceased there was found a
lamp, burning with the supposed fabulous perpetual fire. Neither wind
nor water, nor any other superinduced means, could extinguish it; but
the flame was mastered eventually by the lamp being bored at bottom and
broken by the astonished investigators of this consummate light. The man
enclosed in this monument had a large wound in the breast. That this was
the body of Pallas was evident from the inscription on the tomb, which
was as follows:

Pallas, Evander’s son, whom Turnus’ spear  
In battle slew, of mighty bulk, lies here.

A very remarkable lamp was discovered about the year 1500 near Ateste, a
town belonging to Padua, in Italy, by a rustic who in his explorations
in a field came upon an urn containing another urn, in which last was
deposited one of these much-doubted miraculous lamps. The aliment of
this strange lamp appeared to be a very exquisite crystal liquor, by the
ever-during powers of which the lamp must have continued to shine for
upwards of fifteen hundred years. And unless this lamp had been so
suddenly exposed to the action of the air, it is supposed that it might
have continued to burn for any time. This lamp, endowed with such
unbelievable powers, was discovered to be the workmanship of an unknown
contriver named Maximus Olibius, who must have possessed the profoundest
skill in chemical art. On the greater urn some lines were inscribed in
Latin, recording the perpetuation of this wonderful secret of the
preparation and the starting of these (almost) *immortal* flames.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

St. Austin mentions a lamp that was found in a temple dedicated to
Venus, which,, notwithstanding that it was exposed to the open weather,
could never be consumed or extinguished.

Ludovicus Vives, his commentator, in a supplementary mention of
ever-burning lamps, cites an instance of another similar lamp which was
discovered a little before his time, and which was considered to have
been burning for a thousand and fifty years.

It is supposed that the perpetuity of the flame of these wonderful lamps
was owing to the consummate tenacity of the unctuous matter with which
the light was maintained; and that the balance was so exquisitely
perfect between the feeding material and the strength of the flame, and
so proportioned -for everlasting provision and expenditure, that, like
the radical moisture and natural heat in animals, neither of them could
ever unduly prevail. Licetus, who has advanced this opinion, observes
that in order to effectually prevent interference with this balance, the
ancients hid these lamps in caverns or in enclosed monuments. Hence it
happened that on opening these tombs and secret places, the admission of
fresh air to the lamps destroyed the fine equilibrium and stopped the
life (as it were) of the lamp, similarly as a blow or a shock stops a
watch, in jarring the matchless mechanism.

<span id="img_01600"></span> ![](img/01600.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Insufficiency of Worldly Objects](rrm08.md)
