[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm07)  [Next](rrm09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### CHAPTER THE FOURTH

#### INSUFFICIENCY OF WORLDLY OBJECTS

IT is a constant and very plausible charge offered by the general world
against the possession of the power of gold-making as claimed by the
alchemists, who were the practical branch of the Rosicrucians, that if
such supposed power were in their hands, they would infallibly use it,
and that quickly enough; for the acquisition of riches and power, say
they, is the desire of all men. But this idea proceeds from an ignorance
of the character and inclinations of real philosophers, and results from
an inveterate prejudice relative to them. Before we judge of these, let
us acquire a knowledge of the natural inclinations of very deeply
learned men. Philosophers, when they have attained to much knowledge,
which wearies them of merely mundane matters, hold that the ordering of
men, the following of them about by subservient people, and the
continual glitter about them of the fine things of this world, are,
after all, but of mean and melancholy account, because life is so brief,
and this accidental pre-eminence is very transitory. Splendour, show,
and bowing little delight the raised and abstract mind. That circuit of
comfort formed by the owning of money and riches is circumscribed by the
possessor's own ken. What is outside of this sight may just as well be
enjoyed by any other person as by the owner, since all is the thinking
of it; only granting that a man has sufficient for his daily wants,

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

letting the 'morrow, indeed, take thought for itself'. One dinner a day,
one bed for each night, in the alternations of sun and darkness, one of
everything that is agreeable to (or is desirable for) man, is sufficient
for any one man. A man’s troubles are increased by the multiplication
even of his enjoyments, because he is then beset with anxiety as to
their repetition or maintenance. Reduction of things to attend to, and
not multiplication, is his policy, because thinking of it is all that
can affect him about anything in this world.

By the time that the deep, philosophical chemist has penetrated to the
control and conversion of the ultimate elements, so as to have in his
view the secret operations of Nature, and to have caught Nature, as it
were: preparing her presentments and arranging her disguises behind the
scenes, he is no more to be amused with vain book-physics. After his
spying into the subtle processes of Nature, he cannot be contented with
the ordinary toys of men; for are not worldly possessions, honour, rank,
money, even wives and numerous or any children, but toys in a certain
sense? Where sink they in importance to him when the great unknown sets
in which awaits every man? He who can work as Nature works, causing the
sunshine, so to speak, to light fire up independently in itself, and to
breed and propagate precious things upon the atmosphere in which it
burns, causing the growing supernatural soul to work amidst the seeds of
gold, and to purge the material, devilish mass until the excrement is
expelled, and it springs in health into condensating, solid splendour, a
produce again to be sown, to fructify into fresh harvests--the
alchemist, or prince of chemists, who can do this, laughs at the hoards
of kings. By the time that the artist is thus so much more than man, is
he the less

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

desirous of the gratifying things to the ordinary man. Grandeur fades to
him before such high intellectual grandeur. He is nearer to the angels,
and the world has sunk infinitely below. His is the sky, and the bright
shapes of the clouds of the sky: which he is going to convert, perhaps,
into prisms, showering solid triumphs. He can well leave to common man
his acres of mud, and the turbid pools spotted over them like the
shining, showy discs of a snake. Man, under these enlightened
philosophical circumstances, will only value the unseen
kingdoms--glimpses of the immortal glories of which and of their
Rosicrucian inhabitants he has obtained in his magic reveries. What can
the longest ordinary man’s life give to such a gifted thinker? Man’s
senses and their gratification, as long as the inlets and avenues of
perception remain--world’s music, so long as the strings cling tight,
for the air of imagination to play upon them--appetites, with downward
eyes to find their satisfaction--man’s mortality, with an exit into the
shadows or into the grave while the sun is up: the longest life can but
give him repetition to satiety of these things--repetitions until he
seems almost to tire of the common sun. Of which he grows weary, as well
as of his waste or extent of knowledge.

To some minds, this world does not present such extraordinary
attractions. The very possession of the heights of knowledge induces
rather stay up there, amidst the stars, thane descent. Every man almost
has felt the sublime exaltation of a great height, when he has achieved
the top of a high hill, and looks out and over the landscape for miles
and miles. How very little the world looks under him! He is obliged to
descend, because he has his home under there. But he quits the upper
regions with reluctance, although it is somewhat frightening (as though
he

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

were going to be flown away with) to stay so, high up. You become giddy
by looking up at the stars, which then seem to be so much nearer as to
be attainable.

Limited as it is, life itself--very brief, very empty, very much
disposed to repeat dull things, gathering up from about you in a strange
sensation sometimes, in folds like a dream, or flowing on like a
sleep-inducing river to the sea, carrying faces seen and snatched away,
and obliterating voices which change into echoes--life, at its very
best, ought to be the stoicism of the spectator, who feels that he has
come here somehow, though for what purpose he knows not; and he is
rather amused as at a comedy in life, than engaged in it as in a
business. Even perpetual youth, and life prolonged, with pleasures
infinite--even the fancied ever-during life--would, to the deeply
thinking man who had risen; as it were, over life, and to that strangely
gifted being who has in himself the power of self-perpetuation (like the
Wandering Jew), seem vain. Man can be conceived as tiring of the
sun--tiring of consciousness even. What an expression is that,
'forgotten by Death'! The only being through whom the scythe of the
great destroyer passes scatheless! That life, as a phantom, which is the
only conceivable terrible doom of the 'Wanderer' (if such a magical
being ever existed); whom as a locomotive symbol, to be perpetuated
through the ages, the earth, at the command of the Saviour, refused to
hide, and of whom a legend--soon hushed in again--now and then rises to
the popular whisper and to the popular distrust!

We only adduce these remarks to show that, in, the face of the spectator
of the great ultimate, mysterious man, children are no necessity, but an
anxiety, estates are a burden, 'business' is the oft-told purposeless
tale to the wearying ear: He who can be

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the spectator of the ages has no particulars in ordinary life. He has
nothing which can interest him. He can have no precise and consolidated
likings or affections or admirations, or even aversions, because the
world is as a toy-shop to him--its small mechanism is an artificial
show, of which (given the knowledge of the wheels) he can predicate as
to-the movements safely--completely.

To return for a moment to the idea of the 'Wandering Jew', which some
have supposed to be derived from the claim of the Rosicrucians to the
possession of a secret means of renewing youth, and to the escape of
some notion of it from out their writings. Even supposing that this
strange tale was true, nothing can be imagined more melancholy than the
state of this lone traveller, moving with his awful secret through the
world, and seeing the successive generations, like leaves, perishing
from about him. He counts the years like the traveller of a long summer
day, to whom the evening will never come, though he sees his temporary
companions, at the different hours of the day, depart appropriately and
disappearing to their several homes by the wayside. To him the childhood
of his companions seems to turn to old age in an hour. He remembers the
far-off ancestors of his contemporaries. Fashions fleet, but your
unsuspected youth is accommodated to all. Yours is, indeed, the
persecution of the day-life, which will not let you fall to sleep and
cease to see the vanity of everything. Your friends of any period
disappear. The assurance of the emptiness of all things is the stone as
into which your heart is turned. Grey hairs (and the old face) have
nothing with you, though you see them appearing upon all others.
Familiar objects disappear from about you, and you and the sun seem the
only things that survive as old friends.

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Indeed, it may be
doubtful whether, to this supposed man of the ages, the generations
would not seem to be produced as a purposeless efflux  out of the ground
by the sun, like flowers or plants; so as mere matter of mould would all
flesh appear, with a phenomenon only going with it in the article of the
figure's uprightness as man; it having so strangely set its face against
the stars, unlike the creatures doomed to move horizontally.

We make these observations to show that, notwithstanding the opinions of
the world to the contrary, there may have been men who have possessed
these gifts--that is, the power of making gold and of perpetuating their
lives--and yet that the exercise of these powers was forborne; and also
that their secrets of production have most carefully been kept, lest
less wise men should (to speak in figure) have 'rushed in where they
feared to tread', and have abused where the philosophers even would not
use--despising wealth, which they could not enjoy, and declining a
perpetuated life, which would only add to their weariness--life being
only a repetition of the same suns, already found too unmeaning and too
long. For it is a mistake to suppose that this life is so equally
enjoyable by all. There is a sublime sorrow of the ages, as of the lone
ocean. There is the languishment for the ever-lost original home in this
tearful mortal state.

The philosophers knew that possession blunted desire, and that rich men
may be poor men. A remarkable answer was made by a man who, to all
appearance, possessed superabundantly the advantages of life--wealth,
honour, wife, children, 'troops of friends', even health, by day: but in
his night he lived another life, for in it was presented another
picture, and that unfailingly uncomfortable, even

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

to this good man--exchanging joy for horror. 'My friend', replied he to
an inquirer, 'never congratulate a man upon his happiness until you
become aware how he sleeps. Dreams are as that baleful country into
which I pass. every night of my life; and what can be said to a man who
dreams constantly (and believes it) that he is with the devil'?

There was no answering this, for every person leads two lives,
altogether independent of each other--the days and the nights both full
of life, though the night, with the dreams, may be of an opposite order.
The world’s circumstances may afford you solace and gratification--even
happiness--in the day; but you may be very miserable, notwithstanding,
if it happen that you have persecution in your dreams. Here the world’s
advantages are of no use to you, for you are delivered over helpless,
night after night, in your sleep--and you must have sleep--to the
dominion of Other Powers, whom all your guards cannot keep out, for
their inlet is quite of another kind than the ordinary life’s access. We
advise you, then, to beware of this dark door; the other will perhaps
take care of itself, letting in no ugly things upon you: but the former
may let in unpleasant things upon you in full grasp with your hands
bound.

<span id="img_02300"></span> ![](img/02300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: The Hermetic Philosophers](rrm09)
