[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm09)  [Next](rrm11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### CHAPTER THE SIXTH

#### AN HISTORICAL ADVENTURE

BUT to return to Signor Gualdi, from whom we have notwithstanding made
no impertinent digression, since he was eventually suspected to be one
of the strange people, or Rosicrucians, or Ever-Livers of whom we are
treating. This was from mysterious circumstances which occurred
afterwards in relation to him, and which are in print.

The Venetian nobleman was now on a footing of sufficient intimacy with
Signor Gualdi to say to him one evening, at his own house, that he
understood that he had a fine collection of pictures, and that, if
agreeable, he would pay him a visit some day for the purpose of viewing
them. The nobleman's daughter who was present, and who was pensively
looking down upon the table, more than half in love with the stranger as
she had become, thinking deeply of something that the Signor had just
said, raised her eyes eagerly at this expression of wish by her father
and, as accorded with her feelings, she appeared, though she spoke not,
to be greatly desirous to make one of the party to see the pictures. It
was natural that she should secretly rejoice at this opportunity of
becoming more intimately acquainted with the domestic life, of one whom
she had grown to regard with feelings of such powerful interest. She
felt that the mere fact of being his guest, and under the roof which was
his; would seem to bring her nearer to him; and, as common with lovers,
it appeared to her that their

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

being thus together would, in feeling at least, appear to identify both.
Signor Gualdi was very polite, and readily invited the nobleman to his
house, and also extended the invitation to the young lady, should she
feel disposed to accompany her father, since he divined from the
expression of her face that she was wishful to that effect. The day for
the visit was then named, and the Signor took his departure with the
expressions of friendship on all sides which usually ended their
pleasant meetings.

It followed from this arrangement, that on the day appointed the father
and daughter went to Signor Gualdi’s house. They were received by the
Signor with warm kindness, and were shown over his rooms with every mark
of friendliness and distinction. The nobleman viewed Signor Gualdi’s
pictures with great attention; and when he had completed his tour of the
gallery, he expressed his satisfaction by telling the Signor that he had
never seen a finer collection, considering the number of pieces. They
were now in Signor Gualdi’s own chamber--the last of his set of rooms;
and they were just on the point of turning to go out and bidding adieu,
and Gualdi was courteously removing the tapestry from before the door to
widen the egress, when the nobleman, who had paused to allow him thus to
clear the way, by chance cast his eyes upwards over the door, where
there hung a picture with the curtain accidentally left un-drawn,
evidently of the stranger himself. The Venetian looked upon it with
doubt, and after a while his face fell; but it soon cleared, as if with
relief. The gaze of the daughter was also now riveted upon the picture,
which was very like Gualdi; but she regarded it with a look of
tenderness and a blush. The Venetian looked from the picture to Gualdi,
and back again from Gualdi to the picture. It was some time before

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

he spoke; and when, he did; his voice sounded strangely.

'That picture was intended for you, sir', said he at last, hesitating,
to Signor Gualdi. A slight cold change passed over the eyes of the
stranger; but he only made reply by a low bow. 'You look a moderately
young man--to be candid with you, sir, I should say about forty-five or
thereabouts; and yet I know, by certain means of which I will not now
further speak, that this picture is by the hand of Titian, who has been
dead nearly a couple of hundred years. How is this possible'? he added,
with a polite, grave smile. 'It is not easy', said Signor Gualdi
quietly, 'to know all things that are possible or not possible, for very
frequently mistakes are made concerning such; but there is certainly
nothing strange in my being like a portrait painted by Titian.' The
nobleman easily perceived by his manner, and by a momentary cloud upon
his brow, that the stranger felt offence. The daughter clung to her
father's arm, secretly afraid that this little unexpected demur might
pass into coolness, and end with a consummation of estrangement, which
she feared excessively; she dreaded nervously the rupture of their
intimacy with the stranger; and, contradictory as it may seem, she
wanted to withdraw, even without the demur she dreaded being cleared up
into renewed pleasant confidence. However, this little temporary
misunderstanding was soon put an end to by Signor Gualdi himself, who in
a moment or two resumed his ordinary manner; and he saw the father and
daughter downstairs, and forth to the entrance of his house, with his
usual composed politeness, though the nobleman could not help some
feeling of restraint, and his daughter experienced a considerable amount
of mortification; and she could not look at Signor Gualdi, or

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

rather, when she did, she dwelt on his face too much.

This little occurrence remained as a puzzle in the mind of the nobleman.
His daughter felt lonely and dissatisfied afterwards, eager for the
restoration of the same friendly feeling with Signor Gualdi, and
revolving in her mind, with the ingenuity of love, numberless schemes to
achieve it. The Venetian betook himself in the evening to the usual
coffeehouse; and he could not forbear speaking of the incident among the
group of people collected there. Their curiosity was roused, and one or
two, resolved to satisfy themselves by looking at the picture
attentively the next morning. But to obtain an opportunity to see the
picture on this next morning, it was necessary to see the Signor Gualdi
somewhere, and to have the invitation of so reserved a man to his
lodgings for the purpose. The only likely place to meet with him was at
the coffee-house; and thither' the gentlemen went at the usual time,
hoping, as it was the Signor's habit to present himself, that he would
do so. But he did not come; nor had he been heard of from the time of
the visit of the nobleman the day before to the Signor's house--which
absence, for the first time almost that he had been in Venice, surprised
everybody. But as they did not meet with him at the coffee-house, as
they thought was sure, one of the persons who had the oftenest conversed
with the Signor, and therefore was the freer in his acquaintance,
undertook to go to his lodgings and inquire after him, which he did; but
he was, answered by the owner of the house, who came to the street-door
to respond to the questioner, that the Signor had gone, having quitted
Venice that morning, early, and that he had locked up his pictures with
certain orders, and had taken the key of his rooms with him.

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

This affair made a great noise at the time in Venice; and an account of
it found its way into most of the newspapers of the year in which it
occurred. In these newspapers and elsewhere, an outline of the foregoing
particulars may be seen. The account of the Signor Gualdi will also be
met with in *Les Mémoires Historiques* for the year 1687, tome i. p.
365. The chief particulars of our own narrative are extracted from an
old book in our collection treating of well-attested relations of the
sages, and of life protracted by their art for several centuries:
*Hermippus Redivivus; or, the Sage's Triumph over Old Age and the
Grave*. London, Second Edition, much enlarged. Printed for J. Nourse, at
The Lamb, against Catherine Street in the Strand, in, the year 1749.

And thus much for the history of Signor Gualdi, who was suspected to be
a Rosicrucian.

We shall have further interesting notices of these unaccountable people
as we proceed.

<span id="img_03700"></span> ![](img/03700.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: The Hermetic Brethren](rrm11)
