[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm26)  [Next](rrm28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

### CHAPTER THE TWENTY-SECOND

#### MYTH OF THE SCORPION, OR THE SNAKE, IN ITS MANY DISGUISES

ONE of the Targums says that ‏חיא‎, a serpent, tempted Adam, or the
first man, and not ‏היח‎, Eve, his wife. Here we have the object of
adoration of the Ophites--the female generative power--the Destroying,
Regenerating Power among the Ophites, and, indeed, the Gnostics
generally. The Serpent was called the Megalistor, or Great Builder of
the Universe (*Maia*, or Bhuddist illusion). Here again we recognize,
under another name (Ophites), the Cyclopes, or the builders of the
circular Temples at Stonehenge and everywhere else. Mr. Payne Knight has
repeated an observation of Stukeley, that the original name of the
temple at Abury was the "Snake's Head".' And he adds, 'It is remarkable
that the remains of a similar circle of stones (circular temple) in
Bœotia had the same name in the time of Pausanias' (Pausanias, *Bœot*.
cap. xix. s. 2).

The famous oracular stone, enclosed in the seat of St. Edward’s chair
(the Coronation Chair) in Westminster Abbey, was at one time a, stone to
which adoration was paid. It was possessed of imagined miraculous gifts.
This stone is asserted to be the same which the Patriarch rested his
head upon in the *Plain of* '*Luza*', and is said to have been carried
first to Brigantia, a city of Gallicia, in Spain. From thence it was
brought into, Ireland by Simon Brech, the first King of the Scots, about
700 years

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

before Christ; and from there, about 370 years, after, into Scotland, by
King Fergaze (Fergus). In the year of Christ 850 it was placed at the
Abbey of Scone (in the county of Perth) by King Kenneth; this being the
place where the Scottish Kings were generally crowned in those days. In
the year 1297 this Scottish wooden throne or chair, together with their
crown and sceptre, was brought into England by the English King Edward
the First, and placed in Westminster Abbey.

Si quid habent veri vel chronica, cana fidesve,  
Clauditur hac Cathedra nobilius ecce lapis,  
Ad caput eximius Jacob quondam Patriarcha  
Quem posuit, cernens numina mirapoli.  
Quem tulit ex Scotis, spolians quasi victor honoris,  
Edwardus Primus, Mars velut armipotens;  
Scotorum Domitor, noster Validissimus Hector,  
Anglorum Decus & gloria militiæ.  
                     *Antiquities of Westminster Abbey*, 1711.

It is still supposed, in accordance with the ancient prophecies, that
the stone in the Coronation Chair has miraculous gifts, and that the
sovereignty of England depends upon it. This magical stone carries with
it the tradition (how or whence derived no one knows), that it murmurs
approval at the coronation when the rightful heir assumes his or her
seat on it; but that, on the contrary, it would clap with terrific
noise, and fire flash from it, implying protest and denunciation, should
an usurper attempt to counter-work or control its mysteries. It still
has hooks for the chain which in former unknown times suspended it, when
it was borne as a talisman of victory at the head of the army--when
doubtless it was regarded as a Palladium of Prosperity, and a Divinity.
It is also said that the pre-eminence of London is connected with the
preservation of London Stone.

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

Both the ancient relic, London Stone, and the Coronation Stone in
Westminster Abbey, seem of the same character. They appear to have been
either worn down to their present smallness in the lapse of the ages, or
to have been mutilated at some unknown, remote period--possibly thrown
down and broken as objects of superstitious reverence, if not of direct
and positive idolatry, thus very probably exciting indignation, which,
as it found opportunity and scope for its exercise, was successful in
their demolition. In both these stones we certainly .have only
fragments--perhaps of Obelisks, or of Jewish 'Bethel' Pillars or
'Stones'--for all these supposed magical stones are of the same sacred
family.

The supposed magical stone, enclosed in the wooden block at the base of
the Coronation Chair, has been reputed, from time immemorial, to murmur
its approval or disapproval of the royal occupant, only at the moment
when the Sovereign was placed in the chair for investiture with the
sacred *pallium* or with the state robes, on the occasion of the King's
or the Queen's coronation.

In this respect the stone is very similar in its ascribed supernatural
gifts, and in this special oracular speaking-power, to all sacred or
magical stones; and more particularly to the famous statue of Memnon in
Egypt, which is said to give forth a long, melodious tone with the first
ray of sunrise, like that produced by the wind through the Æolian harp.
It is not quite clear whether this sound is expected to issue from the
stone in the royal chair at Westminster when approval is intended, and
the meaning of the stone is benign, or whether sounds at all are to be
heard only when displeasure is to be expressed. This strange asserted
power of the sacred stone at Westminster to become vocal directly allies
it with ether oracular

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

stones all over the world. The prevalence everywhere, and in all time,
of the existence of special stones having this miraculous gift is a
striking and curious proof of the continual, invincible yearning of man
for supernatural direct help and direction from powers exterior and
invisible to him. He earnestly desires the possibility of personal
communication with that intelligent, unseen world, which he cannot avoid
thinking is close about him, surveying his doings. Man tries to overcome
the assurance that this invisible, recognitive, responsive world, to
betake himself to in his time of trouble, is, so far as his senses
insist, so hopelessly out of reach. He languishes to think it
attainable.

The oracular stone at Westminster seems only a piece of some pillar or
*lithos*: but no one will attempt to dispute that it is an object of
prodigious antiquity, and that its history is very remarkable and
interesting. Its place of deposit, too, the shrine of Edward the
Confessor, is worthy of it; and both inspire deep reverence--nay, an
awful feeling.

<span id="img_19800"></span> ![](img/19800.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII: Ominous Character of the Colour 'White' to English
Royalty](rrm28.md)
