[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm37)  [Next](rrm39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

### CHAPTER THE EIGHTH

#### ROSICRUCIAN SUPPOSED MEANS OF MAGIC THROUGH SIGNS, SIGILS, AND FIGURES

THE Dragon's Head and Dragon's Tail are the points called Nodes, in
which the ecliptic is intersected by the orbits of the planets,
particularly by that of the moon. These points are of course shifting.
The Dragon's Head is the point where the moon or other planet commences
its northward latitude; it is considered masculine and benevolent in its
influence. The Dragon's Tail is the point where the planet's southward
progress begins; it is feminine and malevolent. The Dragon mystically is
the 'self-willed spirit', which is .externally derived into nature by
the 'fall into generation' (*Hermes Trismegistus*).

The same fine, catholic nature--which in its preternatural exaltation
appears so very precious in the eyes of the philosopher--is in the
common world defiled; abiding everywhere in putrefactions and the vilest
forms of seemingly sleeping, but in reality most active, forms of life.

According to Ennemoser, 'Magiusiah, Madschusie' signified the office and
knowledge of the priest, who was called 'Mag, Magius, Magiusi', and
afterwards 'Magi' and 'Magician'. Brucker maintains (*Historia
Philosophiæ Criticæ*, i. 160) that the positive meaning of the word is
'Fire-Worshipper', 'Worship of the Light'; to which opinion he had been
led by, the Mohammedan dictionaries. In the modern

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Persian the word
is 'Mag', and 'Magbed' signifies high-priest. The high-priest of the
Parsees at Surat, even at the present day, is called 'Mobed'.

The mythic figure placed in the front of the Irish Harp--the meaning of
which we have explained in a previous part of our book, and which is now
represented as a woman with the lower parts twined as foliage, or as
scrolls, into the body of the harp--is properly a Siren. This 'Siren' is
the same as Venus Aphrodite, Astarte, the Sea-Deity, or Woman-Deity, the
Dag, Dagan, Dagon, or idol of the Syrians, Tyrians, or Phœnicians; hence
her colour is green in the Iona, Ierne, or Irish acceptation. The woman
or virgin of the Irish Harp, who is impaled on the stock or 'Tree of
Life'--the Siren whose fatal singing means her mythic Bhuddistic or
Buddhistic 'penance of existence'--the Medusa whose insupportable beauty
congeals in its terror the beholder to stone, according to the
mythologists--this magic being is translated from the sign of Virgo in
the heavens, and sent mythically to travel condemned the verdant line of
beauty, or the cabalistic *benedicta line a viriditatis*. The whole of
the meaning, notwithstanding its glory, is, none the less, 'sacrifice'.
The Woman of the Harp of the Seven Strings, or the seven vocables,
vowels, or aspirations, or intelligent breathings, or musical notes, or
music-producing planets (in their progress); is purely an astrological
sigma--although a grand one--adopted into heraldry. In the old books of
heraldry, the curious inquirer will find (as will all those who doubt)
this 'Woman' or 'Virgin' of the 'Irish harp'--to whom, in the modern
heraldic exemplification, celestial wings are given, and who is made
beautiful as an angel (which in reality she is, the other form being
only her disguise) represented as a dragon with extended forky pinions,
and piscine or semi-fish-like

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

or basilisk extremity. There is a wonderful refluent, or interfluent,
unaccountable connexion, in the old mythology, between the 'Woman', the
'Dragon', or the 'Snake' and the 'Sea': so that sometimes, in the
obscure hints supplied in the picturesque suggestive ancient fables, it
is really difficult to distinguish one from the other. The associations
of an interchangeable character between dark and light, and 'Dragon' and
'Hero', ascribing to each some mystic characteristic of the other,
cannot be all fabling accident. There are hints of deep mysteries,
transcendent in their greatness: and beauty, lying under these things in
some concealed, real way. To bring these to the surface, to discover
their origin, and, to the justifiable and guarded extent, to assign them
properly, has been our aim. There must have been some governing,
excellent armorial reason, special and authorized, for the changing of
this first figure of a dragon into a woman, or a siren, or virgin, on
the Irish Harp; and this fact assists the supposition of an identity, at
some time, of these two figures, all drawn from the double sign
'Virgo-Scorpio' in the Zodiac. There is a strange confirmation of the
account of Creation in the *Book of Genesis*, in the discovery of the
'Woman and Snake' in the most ancient Babylonian or Chaldæan Zodiac. The
Indian zodiacs and the Egyptian zodiacs repeat the same myth, slightly
varied in certain particulars. The different versions of the story of
the Temptation and Fall, in the main respects, are the same legend, only
altered to suit ideas in every varying country. Traversing all the
long-descended paths of the mythologies, this singular, but in reality
sublime, myth preserves its place, and recurs up to the last in its
identity. The first chapter of Genesis seems to us to be clearly found
here in the signs of the Zodiac; which we know are

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

derived from the earliest astronomical studies, and which extraordinary
hieroglyphical zodiacal figures descended originally from the summit of
the famous Tower of Bel, or Belus--the first observatory where the
movements and the story of the stars were at the outset noted, and
handed as from the earliest expositors of the secrets of the heavens.
This 'Procession of Twelve' (in the origin it was the 'Procession of
Ten'), under the name of the Zodiac, tells, in its 'signs' the history
of the making of the world, according to the Chaldæans and Egyptians,
and also, in the hidden way, according, to the account in the Bible.

As the little and the large have sometimes a closer connexion than is
ordinarily supposed, we will pass on now to some more familiar and
commonplace examples.

It may be worth while to dwell with greater minuteness on the
little-understood origin of those light auxiliary troops, as they were
organized originally, the modern Hussars. This irregular,
lightly-equipped European cavalry plays an important part as a
skirmishing or foraging force. We are all accustomed to see the
elegantly appointed light cavalry called Hussars, and doubtless many
persons have frequently wondered as to the origin of that *dolman*,
pelisse, or loose jacket, which is worn, contrary to all apparent use,
dangling--an encumbrance rather than a cover or defence--on the
trooper's left shoulder. This pelisse, richly embroidered in the Eastern
fashion, is always the genuine distinctive mark or badge, with the
Wallachian or Hungarian, or Oriental, busby of the Hussar. The precise
time when this originally loosely disciplined and heathen soldiery came
into Europe is not fixed. They now form a dazzling and formidable branch
of light-cavalry service everywhere. All armies of modern times possess
regiments

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

of Hussars. They came originally from Tartary and the East, and they
brought with them their invariable mark, the rough fur cap, or
Ishmaelitish or 'Esau-like' black head-cover. They adventured into the
West with the now thickly ornamented and embroidered 'trophy', called
the pelisse or 'skin-coat ('*pel*' from *pellis*, 'skin'; thence
'pall').

In these modern tasteless, ignorant days all these distinctive learned
marks are obliterated in the equipment of troops. We may also instance,
as proofs of disregard and of bad taste, the blundering dishonour
offered to the majestic Obelisk brought to England in 1878, in the
choice of its inappropriate site, and in the ignoring, for state reward,
those who brought it to this country.

This pelisse is an imitation or reminder, and is the very remote symbol,
or garment, or 'cover of shame,' as it is called, with which, for very
singular cabalistic reasons (which, however, do not admit of
explanation), the two dutiful sons of Noah covered and 'atoned' for that
disgrace of their father, when, after he had 'planted a vineyard, and
had drunken of the wine, he lay disgracefully extended in his tent', and
was seen by his son Ham; whom Noah denounced. The Hussars (under other
names) were originally Eastern, Saracenic, or Moslem cavalry. The
horse-tails and jingles, or numberless little bells, which ought to
distinguish the caparisons of Hussars to the modern day, and which are
part of the special insignia of their origin, are all Oriental in their
character, like the bells of the wandering Zingari, 'Morris', or
Moresque, or Gypsy, or Bohemian fantastical dancers. Deep-lying in the
magical ideas of the Eastern peoples was the sacredness, and the
efficacy against evil spirits, of their small bells, like the bells of
the Chinese pagodas. All bells, in every instance, even from the giant
bell

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

of the Dom-Kirche or Duomo, or the cathedrals of Kasan or Casan, Moscow
or Muscovia generally, down to the 'knell', or the 'sacring' or warning
bell of the Romish Mass (which latter 'signal' has a signification
overpowering in its profundity), are held to disturb and to scare and
drive off evil spirits. These were supposed, according to the old
superstitious ideas, to congregate thickly, with opportunities
accidentally offered either in the din of battle to impair invisibly the
exertions of the combatants, or in the church to spoil the Eucharist, by
tempting the celebrating priest, or hampering or hindering the
ceremonial and its triumphant sacred climax.

The Eastern name of Venus is *Al-Huza* or *Husa*, which stands for the
Egyptian 'Divine Woman', or Isis.

'Hussey', with its inflections of opprobrium, in the
vernacular--strangely to say in regard of the champions mentioned above,
who are the followers and the children of Venus. Venus 'Hussey', as in a
certain sense she may be considered.

*Al-Huza* means the hyacinth, acacia, or lily, sacred to the 'Woman', or
to the complying and therefore productive powers of nature. The word
'Hussar' comes, through circuitous paths of translation, from its
original *Al-Husa*. These Hussars are the alert, agile, armed children,
or soldiers, of Cybele. It is well known that the knights of
old--particularly the Crusaders when they returned to the West--adopted
the Oriental fashion of covering their appointments and horse-furniture
with bells, the jingle raised by which, and at the same time the
spreading or flying-out, in onset, of the *lambrequin* or slit scarf
attached to the helmet, with the shouted war-cry, or *cri de guerre*,
struck terror into the opposed horse and rider. Naturalists suppose that
even the spangled tail of the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

peacock, with its emerald eyes, answers a similar, purpose, when spread
out, of frightening animals who intend an attack. The knights,
therefore, may have borrowed the hint of thus, startling their foes, and
of confusing them with the sudden display of colours and disturbing
points--as if sprung from a spontaneous, instant, alarming centre--from
the peacock when startled by an enemy. The bird has also his terrifying
outcry, similar to the knight's *mot de guerre*, or individual 'motto'.

The Hebrew priests were directed to fringe their garments round about
with 'bells and pomegranates', in the words of the text. The use and
intention of these 'bells and pomegranates' have been subjected to much
discussion, particularly a passage which we now cite:

'A golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon
the hem of the robe round about.' And it shall be upon Aaron to
minister: and *his sound shall be heard* when he goeth in unto the holy
place before the Lord, and when he cometh out, *that he die not*'
(*Exodus*. xxviii. 34-35).

The reason supposed in the Targum for the directions given to the priest
in these two verses of the chapter containing the law is, that the
priest's approach should be *cautious* to the innermost 'Holy of
Holies', or sanctuary of the Tabernacle. The sound of the small bells
upon his robe was intended to announce his approach before his, actual
appearance, in order to recall the attention of the 'Angel of the Lord'
to the fact of the coming of a mortal, so that He who was supposed to be
then personally descended, and possibly 'brooding' (to make use of the
words of *Genesis*), in the secret shrine or penetralia, might be
allowed *time* (according to the ideas of men) to gather up and
concentrate His presence--which 'no

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

man can be permitted to behold <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) and
live'--and to withdraw. For the Divinity to be seen by the profane eye
is guilt and annihilation to the latter; therefore the gods and all
spirits have, in every account of their appearance, been seen in some
worldly form, which might be acceptable to, and supportable by, a human
face. There is, theoretically, such contrariety, and such fatal
difference to the constitution of man, in the actual disclosure of a
spirit, that it is wholly impossible except by his death; therefore
spirits and divine appearances have always been invested in some natural
escape or guise, by the medium of which the personal communication,
whatever it might be, might be made without alarm, and without that
bodily disturbance of nervous assent which should destroy. This alarm
would, by the utter upsetting of the mind, and the possible fatal
effect, otherwise have rendered the disclosure impossible. The denial of
the interior parts of a sanctuary, or adytum, to the priests of the
temple, or even to the chief hierarch sometimes, is supposed to have
arisen on this account. Mythological story is full of the danger of
breaking in unpreparedly upon spiritual presences, or of venturing into
their haunts rashly or foolhardily. The real object and purpose of the
veil to the Hebrew Temple, and of the curtains and enclosures ordered in
the Jewish ceremonial complicated arrangements, are certainly of this
class. Thus, in the idea that God did really pass down at chosen times
from Heaven, even in a possible visible shape, to His Altar (though not,
perhaps, in the form expected by man in his ignorant notions), the
sacred place was carefully shut in, and all access to it set round with
rigid, awful caution. There is fine and subtle meaning in that old
expression in *Genesis*, 'to brood',

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

as if to be fixed or rapt, and thus to be self-contained and oblivious,
even inattentive. The ancients--the Greeks especially--constructed their
temples originally without roofs, in order that there might be no
obstacle interposed by them to the descent of the God to the temple
which was especially raised in His honour. He was imagined, at
favourable opportunities, to descend--either visibly or invisibly--into
His appropriate temple; and it was not to seem to exclude, but rather in
every way to invite straight from the supernal regions, that the
ancients left open the direct downward way to the penetralia. From this
sacred point, when the God was supposed to be expected or present, every
eye, even that of the High-Priest, was shut out. The covered temple, or
the ceiled temple--of which the chapter-house, or particular temple,
with a 'crown', or 'cap', or 'cover', presents the small example--is the
*domus templi* or *domus Dei*, where the 'Manifested God' is supposed to
be enclosed, or wherein the 'Man is made Flesh'--the microcosmos or
spirit within his cincture, or walls, or castle of comprehension, or of
senses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_14"></span>[336:1](rrm38.htm#fr_14) Unless self-disclosed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: Astro-Theosophical (Extra-Natural) System of the
Rosicrucians--The Alchemic Magisterium or 'Stone'](rrm39)
