[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm36)  [Next](rrm38.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

### CHAPTER THE SEVENTH

#### ROSICRUCIAN ORIGIN OF THE ORDER OF THE GARTER. DEDUCTIONS, AND PROOFS, FROM HISTORICAL AUTHORITIES

THE natural horns of the Bull or the Cow--both which animals were
deified by the Egyptians, and also by the Indians, who particularly
elected the Cow as the object of religious honour--were the models from
which originally all the volves and volutes, presenting the figure of
curved horns, or the significant suggestion of the thin horns of the
crescent or growing moon, were obtained. The representative horns
figured largely afterwards in all architecture, and were copied as an
important symbol expressive of the second operative power of nature. The
'Lunar' or 'Feminine Symbol' is the universal parent of the Hindoo and
Mahometan returned arches; find therefore, also, of the Horse-shoe
curves of the Arabian arches, and the hooked curves of all Gothic
architectural reproduction, whether in arches or otherwise. The Egyptian
volutes to the pillars, the Egyptian horns everywhere apparent, the
innumerable spiral radii distinct in all directions, or modified, or
interpenetrating the ornamentation of buildings in the East; the Ionic
volutes, the Corinthian volutes, which became pre-eminently pictorial
and floral in their treatment in this beautiful order, particularly in
the Greek examples (which are, however, very few); the more masculine
volves and volutes, or horns, of the Roman solid, majestic columns; the
capitals to the ruder and more grotesque of the

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

Indian temples; the fantastic scrolls and crooks and oval curves,
abounding on the tops of the spiring columns in the Gothic or, more
properly to call it, the Romantic architecture called 'pointed'--all
have a common ancestor in the horns of the bull, calf, or cow. All these
horns are everywhere devoted in their signification to the Moon. It is
in connexion with this secondary god or goddess, who is always
recognizable through the peculiar appendage of horns,--it is in
proximity to this god or goddess, who takes the second place in the
general Pantheon, the Sun taking the first--it is here, in all the
illustrations which the mythic theology borrows from architecture, or
the science of expressing religious ideas through hieroglyphical
forms--that the incoherent horns reiterate, always presenting themselves
to recognition, in some form or other, at terminal or at salient points.
Thus they become a most important figure, if not the most important
figure, in the templar architecture everywhere--of India, of Egypt, of
Greece, of Rome, even of the Christian periods--all the Christian ages,
earlier and later.

The figure called Nehustan--the mysterious upright set up by Moses in
the Wilderness--was a talisman in the form of a serpent coiled around
the mystic 'Tau'. This is a *palladium* offered for worship, as we have
explained in several places.

In a previous part of our book, we have brought forward certain reasons
for supposing that the origin of the Most Noble Order of the Garter was
very different from that usually and popularly assigned. The occurrence
which gave rise to the formation of the Order, and which explains the
adoption of the motto, does not admit of being told, except in far-off,
roundabout terms; propriety otherwise would be infringed.

We may say no more than that it was a feminine *accident*,

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

of not quite the character commonly accepted and not quite so simple and
ordinary as letting fall a garter. But this accident, which brought
about the foundation of the exalted Order, pre-eminently 'Rosicrucian'
in its hidden meanings--however clear it becomes when understood, and
however sublime, as the Rosicrucians asserted it was, when it is
apprehended in its physiological and also in its deeply mythic
sense--could not, of necessity, be placed before the world, because
ordinary persons could not have appreciated it, nor would they have felt
any other idea than repulsion and disbelief at the statement. The
commonplace, coarse, unprepared mind instantly associates indecency with
any explanation, however conclusive, which cannot for obvious reasons be
spoken 'on the house-tops'. We are now ourselves, against our desire,
compelled to speak circuitously about the real, successfully concealed,
very strange origin, in our modern ideas, of this famous 'Order of the
Garter'. The subject is, however, of very great consequence, because
there is either meaning of the highest force in this, which may be
called the 'brotherhood of princes', as the Order undoubtedly is in a
high sense; or there is no particular meaning, and certainly nothing
challenging startled attention. There is either truth in the abstract,
occult matters which the Order supposedly is formed to whisper and to
maintain, or there is only empty, meaningless pretence and affectation.
There is grandeur and reality in its formalities, or the whole
institution is no more than a parade of things that have no solidity,
and an assumption of oaths and obligations that regard nothing of
consequence--nothing of real, vital seriousness. We seek thus to
*ennoble* the 'Order' in idea, by giving it conclusively the sanction of
religion, and rendering to it the respect due to the mighty mystery
which may be suspected

<span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

to lie in it; which it *was* supposed to emphasize, *whatever it be held
now*. We are inclined to view with surprise--although in no grudging,
prejudiced, spirit--the obtrusion of the 'Crescent and Star,' the symbol
of the Grand Signior, Soldan, or Sultan of Turkey, the Representative of
Mohammed, the 'Denier of Christ', according to his supposed religious
obligations. It is certainly an anomaly to admit the denier of Christ in
an Order intended to exalt into vital distinct recognition the Divinity
of Christ as 'the Saviour of Mankind'. How can the Sultan of Turkey, or
any Mahometan, or any disbeliever, discharge the oaths which he is
solemnly assumed to take in this respect? We are disposed to contemplate
the addition of the Moslem banner--the direct contradiction and
neutraliser of the ensigns of the Christian knights--suspended in the
Chapel of the Order, the Chapel of St. George at Windsor, as a
perplexing, uncomfortable intrusion, according to assumed correct
Christian ideas. We fear that the admission of this heathen knight may
possibly imply heraldically the infraction of the original constitutions
of the Order, which created it as exclusively Christian. The 'Garter' is
specially devoted to the Virgin Mary and to the honour (in the
glorification of 'Woman') of the Saviour of Mankind. The
knights-companions are accepted; supposedly, as the special initiated
holy guard bf the Christian mysteries, and they. are viewed as a sworn
body of 'brothers', by day and night, from their first association,
bound to maintain and uphold, in life and in death, the faith that had
Bethlehem for its beginning and Calvary for its end. The bond and mark
of this brotherhood is the Red Cross of Crucifixion. The 'Red Cross'
which is the 'Cross' of the 'Rosicrucians'--thence their name.

Even the badge and star and symbol of this most

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christian Order,
if ever there were a Christian Order--which presents this red or
sanguine cross of the Redeemer, imaged in the cognisance of His
champion, or captain, or chief soldier, St. George or St. Michael, the
Trampler of the Dragon, and Custos of the Keys of the Bottomless Pit,
where the devils are confined--protests against the mingling of this
Mussulman banner with the Red Cross, which opposed it in the hands of
the Crusaders, and in those of all Christian knights. Now all the
Christian 'Garter' badges only seem to appeal and to protest quietly and
under allowance, with 'bated breath' as it were (as if afraid),
deficient in firmness and life, leaving results to chance, and
abandoning expostulation to be regarded or disregarded (or taken up
faintly) *according to circumstances*.

These are matters, however, which properly appertain to the office, and
lie in the hands of the dignitaries of the Order of the Garter. These
officials are its Prelate and 'Garter' himself (the personified
'Order'), who are supposed, because of the sublime duties with which
they are charged, to be the guardians of the meanings and the myths of
an Order of Knighthood whose heraldic display in one form or other
covers the land (or covers the world), and must be interpreted *either
as talisman or toy*. The Bishop of Winchester is always the chief
ecclesiastical authority of the Order. Remark here; as the sanctions of
this 'Most Noble Order', that in Winchester we directly alight upon
'King Arthur and his Knights of the "Round Table"'--what the 'Round
Table' is, we have explained elsewhere. In these days without faith,
wherein science (as it is called in the too arbitrary and overriding
sense) has extinguished the lights of enthusiasm, leaving even our
altars dark, desecrated, and cold, and has eliminated all possible
wonder from

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

the earth, as miracle from religion, and magic from the sensible or
insensible fields of creation--in these questioning, doubting, dense,
incredulous days, it is no inconsistency that the gorgeous emblazonments
of the Garter should provoke no more curiosity or religious respect than
peculiar ornaments do, signifying anything or nothing.

But to return to the import of the title of the Order of the Garter.
This is a point very engrossing to heralds, antiquaries, and all persons
who are interested in the history, traditions, and archæology of our
country. The origin of the Order would be trivial, ridiculous, and
unbelievable, if it be only thought due to the picking up of a lady's
garter. It is impossible that the great name and fame of this 'Garter'
could have arisen alone from this circumstance. The Garter, on the
contrary, is traceable from the times of King Arthur, to whose fame
throughout Europe as the mythic hero there was no limit in his own
period. This we shall soon show conclusively from the accounts of the
Garter by Elias Ashmole, who was 'Garter King of Arms', and who was one
of its most painstaking and enlightened historians; besides himself
being a faithful and conscientious expositor and adherent of the
hermetic Rosicrucian science. The 'Round Table' of King Arthur--the
'mirror of chivalry'--supplies the model of all the miniature tables, or
tablets, which bear the contrasted roses--red and white, as they were
originally (and implying the female *discus* and its accidents)--with
the noble 'vaunt', or motto, round them--'Evil to him', or the same to
him, 'who thinks ill' of these natural (and yet these magical) feminine
circumstances, the character of which our readers will by this time not
fail to recognize. The glory of woman and the punishment of woman after
the Fall, as indicated in Genesis, go hand in hand. It was in honour

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

of Woman, and to raise into dignity the expression of the condemned
'means' (until sanctified and reconciled by the intervention of the
'S.S.', or of the Holy Spirit, or of the Third Person of the Trinity),
which is her mark and betrayal, but which produced the world in
producing Man, and which saved the world in the person of the Redeemer,
'born of Woman'. It is to glorify typically and mystically this 'fleshly
vehicle', that the Order of the 'Garter'--Or 'Garder'--that keeps it
sacred was instituted. The Knights of the Garter stand sentinel, in
fact, over 'Woman's Shame', at the same time that they proclaim her
'Glory', in the pardoned sense. These strange ideas are strictly those
of the old Rosicrucians, or Brethren of the 'Red Cross', and we only
reproduce them. The early writers saw no indecency in speaking openly of
these things, which are usually hidden away, as improper to be spoken
about.

The blackness or darkness of 'Matter', or of the 'Mother of Nature', is
figured in another respect in the belongings of this famous feminine
Order, instituted for the glory of woman. Curious armorists, skilled in
the knowledge of the deep sacred symbolism with which the old heralds
suffused their illustrations or emblazonments, will remember that
*black* is a feature in the Order of the Garter; and that, among figures
and glyphs and hints the most profound, the 'Black Book', containing the
original constitutions of the Order--from which 'Black Book' comes the
important 'Black Rod'--was *lost*, or taken away for some secret reason
before the time of Henry the Fifth. See various pages, *ante*, for
previous remarks about the 'Garter'.

Elias Ashmole mentions the Order in the following terms: 'We may ascend
a step higher and if we may give credit to Harding, it is recorded that
King.

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arthur paid St.
George, whose red cross is the badge of the Garter, the most particular
honours; for he advanced his effigy in one of his banners, which was
about two hundred years after his martyrdom, and very early for a
country so remote from Cappadocia to have him in reverence and esteem.'

In regard to the story of the Countess of Salisbury, and her garter, we
shall insert the judgment of Dr. Heylin, who took great pains to
ascertain its foundation. 'This I take to be a vain and idle romance',
he says, 'derogatory both to the founder and the Order, first published
by Polydore Virgil, a stranger to the affairs of England, and by him
taken upon no better ground than *fama vulgi*, the tradition of the
common people--too trifling a foundation upon which to raise so great a
building.'

The. material whereof the Garter was composed at first is an *arcanum*,
nor is it described by any writer before Polydore Virgil, and he only
speaks of it in general terms. The Garter was originally without a
motto <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13.md). As to the appointments of the
Order, we may gain the most authentic idea of them from the effigies of
some of the first knights. Sir William Fitz-warin was buried on the
north side of the chancel of the church of Wantage, in Berkshire, in the
thirty-fifth year of the reign of King Edward the Third. Sir Richard
Pembridge, who was a Knight of the Garter, of the time of Edward the
Third, lies on the south side of the cathedral of Hereford. The monument
of Sir Simon Burley, beheaded A.D. 1388, was raised in the north wall,
near the choir of St. Paul's, London. It is remarkable that, Du Chesne,
a noted French historian, is the source from which we derive the
acknowledgment that it was by the special invocation of St. George that
King Edward the Third

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

gained the Battle of Cressy; which 'lying deeply in his remembrance, he
founded', continues Du Chesne, 'a chapel within the Castle of Windsor,
and dedicated it in gratitude to the Saint, who is the Patron of
England.' The first example of a Garter that occurs is on the
before-mentioned monument of Sir Francis Burley; where, on the front,
towards the head, are his own arms, impaling his first wife’s, set
within a garter. This wants the impress, or motto. Another shield of
arms, having the same impalement placed below the feet, is surrounded
with a collar of 'S.S.', of the same form with that about his neck. It
was appointed by King Henry the Eighth, and embodied in the Statutes of
the Order, that the collar should be composed of pieces of gold, in
fashion of Garters; the ground enamelled blue, and the letters of the
motto gold. In the midst of each garter *two roses* were to be placed,
the innermost enamelled red, and the outermost white; contrarily, in the
next garter, the innermost Rose enamelled white, and the outermost red,
and so alternately; but of later times, these roses are wholly red. The
number of these Garters is so many as to be the ordained number of the
sovereign and knights-companions. At the institution they were
twenty-six, being fastened together with as many knots of gold. And this
mode hitherto has continued invariable; nor ought the collar to be
adorned or enriched with precious stones (as the 'George' may be), such
being prohibited by the laws of the Order. At what time the collar of
'S.S.' came into England is not fully determined; but it would seem that
it came at least three hundred years since. The collar of 'S.S.' means
the Magian, or First Order, or brotherhood. In the Christian
arrangements, it stands for the 'Holy Spirit', or 'Third Person of the
Trinity.' In the

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gnostic talismans,
it is displayed as the bar, curved with the triple 'S.'. Refer to the
'Cnuphis Abraxoids' occurring in our book, for we connect the collar of
'S.S.' with the theology of the Gnostics.

That the Order of the Garter is feminine, and that its origin is an
apotheosis of the 'Rose', and of a certain singular physiological fact
connected with woman’s life, is proven in many ways--such as the double
garters, red and white; the twenty-six knights, representing the double
thirteen lunations in the year, or their twenty-six mythic 'dark and
light' changes of 'night and day'.

There are 13 Lunations in the Year, or the Solar Circle:--twice 13 are
Twenty-Six, the dark and the light renewals or changes of the Moon
(which is feminine). The dark infer the red rose, the light imply the
white rose; both equally noble and coequal in rank with parallel, but
different, Rosicrucian meanings. These mythic discs, or red and white
roses, correspond with the Twenty-Six Seats, or 'Stalls', around the
'Round Table' (which is an Apotheosis), allowing two chief seats (or one
'Throne') as preeminent for the King-Priest, Priest-King, in the
'Siege-Perilous.' The whole refers to King Arthur and his Knights of the
Round Table; set round as sentinels ('in lodge') of the *Sangreal*, or
*Holy Graal*--the 'Sacrifice Mysterious', or 'Eucharist'.

'But how is all this magic and sacred in the estimate of the
Rosicrucians?' an inquirer will very naturally ask. The answer to all
this is very, ample and satisfactory; but particulars must be left to
the sagacity of the querist himself, because propriety does not admit of
explanation. Suffice it to say, that it is one of the most curious and
wonderful subjects which has occupied the attention of antiquaries. That
archaeological puzzle, the 'Round Table of King

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Arthur', is a
perfect display of this whole subject of the origin of the 'Garter'; it
springs directly from it, being the same object as that enclosed by the
mythic garter, 'garder', or 'girther.'

King Edward the Third chose the Octave of the 'Purification of the
Blessed Virgin' for the inauguration of his Order. Andrew du Chesne
declares that this new Order was announced on 'New Year's Day, A.D.
1344'. There were jousts holden in honour of it on the 'Monday after the
Feast of St. Hilary following--January 19th'. There are variations in
the histories as to the real period of the institution of the Garter;
most historians specifying the year 1349 Ashmole states that a great
supper was ordered to inaugurate the solemnity of the institution, and
that a Festival was to be annually held at *Whitsuntide* (which means
the 'S.S.'); that King Edward erected a particular building in the
Castle, and therein placed a table ('Round Table') of 200 feet diameter,
giving to the *building itself* the name of the 'Round Table'. He
appropriated £100 per week--an enormous sum in those days--for the
maintenance of this table. In imitation of this, the French King, Philip
de Valois, instituted a 'Round Table' for himself at his court. Some say
that he had an intention of instituting an order of knighthood upon the
same 'feminine subject', but that he was anticipated by King Edward;
which shows that it was something more than an accident and a mere
garter which inspired the idea of this Rose forming the mystery. The
knights were denominated 'Equites Aureæ Periscelidis'. King Edward the
Third had such veneration for the Blessed Virgin Mary, that he ordained
that the habit of his Knights of the Garter should be worn on the days
of her Five Solemnities. Elias Ashmole states that the original of the
Statutes of Institution had wholly perished

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

long before his time. There was a transcript existing in the reign of
Henry the Fifth, in an old book called *Registrum Ordinis Chartaceum*.
Though the Order was instituted so long ago as in the year 1344, it was
not till the reign of Charles the Second that the Knights were empowered
to wear the star they use at present embroidered on their coats. The
rays are the 'glory' round the 'Red Cross'.

Sir John Froissart, the only writer of the age that treats of this
institution, assigns no such origin as the picking up of the Countess of
Salisbury's garter; nor does he adduce the words of the motto of the
Garter as having been spoken by King Edward the Third when encountering
the laughter of his court, and assuring them that he would make the
proudest eventually wear it as the most illustrious badge. There can be
only one conclusion as to the character of the investment which was
picked up; and which article of dress makes it clear that the Countess
of Salisbury--or the lady, whoever she may be, who has succeeded in
becoming so wonderfully celebrated in the after-ages of chivalry--should
have rather been at home, *and at rest*, than inattentive to saltatory
risks in engaging in a dance or in forgetful gambols at a crowded court.
There was no mention of this supposed picking up of a garter for 200
years, nor was there anything referring to such an origin occurring in
any of our historians other than Sir John Froissart, until Polydore
Virgil took occasion to say something of it in his notices of the origin
of the Order. In the original Statutes of the Order (which is a most
important point in the inquiry) there is not the least conjecture
expressed, nor does the compiler of that tract entitled *Institutio
clarissimi Ordinis Militaris a prænobili Subligaculo nuncupata*,
prefaced to the *Black Book of the Garter*, let fall any passage on
which

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

to ground the adroit conclusions about the Garter. Polydore does not
mention whose garter it was; this he cautiously declines to do. He says
that it was either the Queen’s, or that of the King’s mistress--meaning
Joan, Countess of Salisbury, with whom it was supposed the King was in
love, and whom he believed when she was bravely holding out for him
against the Scots, in her Castle of Wark-upon-Tweed; but she was
certainly no mistress of the King's, in the injurious and unworthy
sense. It is to be particularly noticed that the Latin words *subliGAR
subligaculum*, mean *not* a 'garter' but 'breeches, drawers, or
trousers'. It was therefore not a garter for the leg, but a cincture for
the body, which was thus picked up publicly, and elevated for honour, as
such an unexpected illustrious object; one around which the most noble
knights were to take enthusiastic oaths of the most devoted religious
homage. Now, unless there had been some most extraordinary meaning under
all this (lying under the apparent but only apparent, indecency), such
an idolizing of a garter could never have occurred, and the whole
occurrence ages ago would have been laughed into oblivion, carrying the
sublime honours of the 'Garter' with it. Instead of this, the Garter is
the highest token of greatness the Sovereign of England can bestow, and
it is contended for and accepted with eager pride by Princes.
'Subligaculum, *breeches, drawers, trousers*'. 'Subligatus, *cinctured,
bound, etc., wearing drawers*'. The origin of the 'Garter' is proven in
this word not to be a garter at all.

It is most generally supposed that it was on January 19th, 1344, that
King Edward instituted his famous Order of the Garter. This period, it
will be perceived, was almost within an octave of the purification of

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

the Blessed Virgin Mary; under whose patronage, and under the
guardianship of St. George on, earth (St. Michael in heaven; both these
Saints being the same, with earthly and spiritual attributes refluent
respectively) King Edward placed his profoundly religious Order. The
whole was a revival of the 'Round Table' of King Arthur, or the
apotheosized female *discus* in certain mythical aspects. To confirm us
in our assertion of the feminine origin of the Order of the
Garter--which many in their ignorance have questioned--we may state that
one of the old chroniclers, though somewhat guardedly, as befitted those
great persons of whom he spoke, declares that the lady who let fall her
garter, or 'garder', was the *Queen*, who had suddenly left the courtly
assembly in some confusion, and was hastening to her own apartments,
followed by the King, who, at first, did not perceive the reason when
the spectators avoided lifting the article, being aware to whom it
belonged; but who raised it himself, and called aloud, not the words of
the motto of the Garter, which the historian says that the Queen herself
spoke, but giving an intimation that he would, spite of their laughter,
'make the proudest of the refusers wear the rejected cincture as the
grandest badge that knighthood ever bore'. Rightly viewed, this little
evaded incident--which we desire to restore to its proper place of due
respect in the knowledge of Englishmen--is the most conclusive proof of
King Edward’s nobleness and greatness of heart, and of his chivalrous,
inexpressibly gallant delicacy; an instance admirable to all future
generations, and worthy of the most enduring applause. The reader
finally is referred to our observations in a previous part of our book
for evidence in our justification. In the foregoing we, give the
Rosicrucian view of the origin of the

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Garter'. It is
the centre-point round which have converged the noblest ideas and the
most illustrious individuals in the world. It is still the proudest and
most solemn badge, and the chiefest English knightly dignity. Strangely
enough, too, this whole history of the 'Garter' teaches, as its moral,
the greatness of the proper independence of shame, and the holiness of
its unconsciousness.

Also the gallantry and the knighthood of the holding sacred these
strange natural things.

<span id="img_32800"></span> ![](img/32800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_13"></span>[321:1](rrm37.htm#fr_13.md) A proof that it did not
originate with Edward the Third.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII: Rosicrucian Supposed Means of Magic Through Signs,
Sigils, and Figures](rrm38.md)
