[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm42)  [Next](rrm44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

### CHAPTER THE THIRTEENTH

#### INDIAN MYSTERIOUS ADORATION OF FORMS. THE UNITY OF THE MYTHOLOGIES FOUND IN THE BHUDDISTIC AND MOHAMMEDAN TEMPLES

GENERAL note on the *Sacti Puja*. POWER means the good goddess, *Maya
Maia* (i.e. Delusion). She is also called Bhagala, Vagula, Bagala-mukhi.
She has neither images nor pictures. The Girl in the Indian sacred,
secret Temple rites, who figures as the representative of Sacti, is the
supposed embodiment of the goddess offered for worship. The word Sacti
corresponds to genius, or 'sylph', of the Rosicrucian creed. The
doctrine of guardian angels and of patron saints is conveyed in these
Hindoo meanings in the machinery of the 'sylphs'.

During *Puja*, the Yogini is supposed to be in an exalted visionary
state (*guyána nidra*), wherein, like the sibyls among the ancients, and
the modern *clairvoyantes*, she answers questions in a delirious manner,
and is supposed to be for the time inspired. *The Foreign Quarterly
Review*, No X. for February 1830; art. viii.: '*Histoire Critique de
Gnosticisme, et de son influence sur les Sects religieuses et
philosophiques des six premiers siècles de l’ère chrétienne. Ouvrage
couronné par l’Académie Royale des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres*. Par
M. J. Matter, Professeur. 2 tomes, avec planches, 8vo, Paris, 1828.' The
third volume is of small size, and contains eleven plates of gems and
symbols. This book proves Gnosticism to be identical with the Sacti
creed of the Hindus.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Edward Sellon
advances this. See *Annotations on the Sacred Writings of the Hindus,
being an epitome of some of the most remarkable and leading tenets in
the faith of that people*. Printed for Private Circulation, 1865.
London.

*Brühm Atma*, the Breathing Soul, is, according to the Hindoos, a
spiritual Supreme Being, coeval with the formation of the world. In
process of time the Hindoos appear to have adopted a material type or
emblem of Brühm. A rude block of stone began to be set up. This was the
'*Phallus*', or, as they termed it, the '*Linga*'. This emblem had
reference to the Procreative Power seen throughout nature, and in that
primæval age was regarded with the greatest awe and veneration. This
simple and primitive Idolatry came by degrees to diverge into the
adoration of the elements, particularly Fire, and at length developed
itself by the institution of an emanation from *Brühm Atma* in his
Triune capacity, as Creator, Preserver (or 'Saviour'), and Destroyer.
These attributes were deified under the names of *Brahma*, *Vishnu*, and
*Siva*, on whom were conferred three *gunas*, or qualities, viz. *Rajas*
(passion), *Sat* (purity), and *Tumas* (darkness). This is the
*Trimurti*. 'Trimurti' (three-formed *Murti*), signifying also an image.
Our vital souls are, according to the *Vedanta*, no more than images, or
εἴδωλοα of the 'Supreme Spirit'--*As. Res.* vol. iii. It may be
concluded that the most exalted notion of worship among the Hindus is a
service of *fear*. The Brahmins say that the other Gods are good and
benevolent, and will not hurt their creatures; but that Siva is powerful
and cruel, and that it is necessary to appease him. As fear is, and must
be everywhere, the most potent feeling. Thence vital and active physical
religion. Distrust and fear of the external phenomena of the world, as
meaning mischief to us (it means the greatest

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --apparently--in
Death), created religion. Fear creates respect--respect is attention to
an object, and therefore dread of it. Because we are not acquainted with
its possible operation upon ourselves in regard of our being interfered
with or injured. Hence all religion is selfishness apart from
'inspiration', which the world (in its folly) calls 'superstition'.

The most popular representation of the Divine Being in India is
unquestionably the *Linga;* a smooth stone rising out of another stone
of finer texture, *simulacrum membri virilis et pudendum muliebre*.

This emblem is identical with *Siva* in his capacity of 'Lord of all'.
It is necessary, however, to observe that Professor Wilson, while
admitting that 'the *Linga* is perhaps the most ancient object of homage
adopted in India', adds, 'subsequently to the ritual of the *Vedhas*,
which was chiefly, if not wholly, addressed to the Elements, *and
particularly to Fire*. How far the worship of the *Linga* is authorized
by the *Vedhas* is doubtful, but that it is the main purport of several
of the *Puranas* <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) there can be no
doubt.' <span id="fr_18"></span>[2](#fn_18)

The universality of *Linga puja* (or worship) at the period of the
Mohammedan invasion of India is well attested. The idol destroyed by
Mahmoud of Ghizni was nothing more than one of those mystical blocks of
stone called Lingas. The worship of Siva under the type of the *Linga*
is almost the only form in which that Deity is reverenced. The Linga of
black or white marble, and sometimes of alabaster slightly tinted and
gilt, is placed in the middle of the Hindu temples. This is a Chinese
hint. The Chinese Pagodas are Phalli, storied 'Tors', or Obelisks;
abounding

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

in bells to be agitated in the winds to drive off the crowds of roving
malignant spirits. The whole of China may be mystically said to be
populated by '*Bells* and the Dragon'. Speaking of Siva and Pawáti, M.
de Langlet says 'Les deux divinités dont-il s’agit, sont très souvent et
très pieusement adorées sous le figure du Linga (le Phallus des
anciens), et de l’Yoni dans leur mystérieuse conjonction. L’Yoni so
nomme aussi Bhaga (pudendum muliebre). *Madheri*, douce; et *Argha*,
vase en forme de bateau.' Benares is the peculiar seat of the Linga or
Phallic worship. No less than forty-seven Lingas are visited, all of
pre-eminent sanctity; but there are hundreds of inferior note still
worshipped, and thousands whose fame and fashion have passed away. It is
a singular fact, that upon this adoration of the procreative and sexual
Sacti (or power) seen throughout nature, hinges the whole strength of
the Hindu faith. Notwithstanding all that has been said by half-informed
and prejudiced persons to the contrary, this *puja* does not appear to
be prejudicial to the morals of the people. Nearly all the *Pujas* are
conducted with the frequent ringing of bells, and the object of this is
twofold--first, to wake up the attention at particular parts of the
service; and secondly, to scare away malignant *Dewtas* and evil
spirits; precisely, in fact, for the same reasons as they are used at
the celebration of Mass in Roman Catholic countries.

Prakriti, the mother of gods and men, one with matter, the source of
error, is identified with Maya or delusion, and coexistent with the
Omnipotent, as his *Sacti*, his personified energy, his bride.
[*Prakriti*](errata.htm#9) is inherent *Maya*, 'because she beguiles all
things'.--*As. Res.* xvii. It is stated in one of the *Purans* that
*Brahma*, having determined to create the universe, became androgynous,
male and female (or

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'reflector' and
'reflected'); the right half having the sex and form of a man, the left
that of a woman. In his images he is sometimes thus represented, and is
then termed Ardnari. 'This is *Prakriti* of one nature with
*Brühm*--illusion, eternal, as the soul so is its active energy, as the
faculty of burning is in fire.' The Sacti system bears a striking
affinity with Epicureanism. It teaches Materialism, and the Atomic
System of the 'Confluence of Chance'. Compare the *Ananda Tantram*, c.
xvii. with Lucretius, lib. iii. On the base of Minerva's statue at Sais,
whom the Egyptians regarded to be the same as Isis, a goddess who bears
so striking an analogy to the Hindu *Prakriti* or nature, there was this
inscription: 'I am everything that was, that is, that is to be. Nor has
mortal ever been able to discover *what I am*.'--Plutarch, *De Iside et
Osiride*, S. ix. According to the immediate object of worship is the
particular ceremony, but all the forms (lighter or heavier) require the
use of some or all of the five *Makaras:* *Mánsa*, *Matsya*, *Madya*,
*Maithuna*, and *Mudra*, that is, fish, flesh, wine, women, and certain
charms or mystical gesticulations with the fingers. Suitable *muntrus*,
or incantations, are also indispensable, according to the end proposed,
consisting of various seemingly unmeaning monosyllabic combinations of
letters, of great imaginary efficacy. 'The combination of H and S is
principal, and is called *Prásáda-Mantra*, and described in the
*Kulárnava*.'--Wilson, *As. Res.* In many of the religious observances
solitude is enjoined, but all the principal ceremonies culminate in the
worship of Sacti, or POWER, and require, for that purpose, the presence
of a young and beautiful girl, as the living representative of the
goddess. This worship is mostly celebrated, in all due serious religious
formality, in a mixed society; the men of which represent *Bhairavas*,

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

or *Viras*, and the women *Bhanravis* and *Nayikas*.

The female thus worshipped is ever after denominated Yogini, i.e.
'attached' (set apart, sacred). This Sanscrit word is in the dialects
pronounced *Jogi* and *Zogee*, and is equivalent to a secular nun, as
these women are subsequently supported by alms. The leading rites of the
*Sakti-Sodhana* are described in the *Devi-Radhasya*, a section of the
*Rudra-Yámala*. It is therein enjoined that the object of worship should
be either 'A dancing-girl, a female devotee (or nun), a courtesan, a
*Dhobee* woman, a barber's wife, a female of the Brahminical or Sudra
tribe, a flower-girl, or a milkmaid'. Appropriate *muntrus* are to be
used. She is to be solemnly placed *naked* (as a sacred, unapproachable
'Thing', or object), but richly ornamented with jewels and flowers--the
triumphant spoils of glorious nature--*on the left* of a circle
(inscribed for the purpose), with *muntrus* and gesticulations. The
circle, or vacant enchanted space, must be rendered pure by repeated
incantations and rites; being finally baptized *with wine* by the
peculiar *mantra*. The *Sacti* is now sublimized or 'apotheosized'; but
if not previously initiated, she is to be farther made an adept by the
communication of the radical *Mantra* or last charm whispered thrice in
her ear, when the object of the ceremony is complete. The finale to this
solemnity is what might be concluded as likely, but--strange to
say--accompanied throughout by *muntrus* and forms of meditation and of
devotion incomprehensibly foreign to the scene. In other aspects this
presentation of the 'Yogini' is a '*Sacrifice*', and the whole meaning
of the rites is sacrificial--rites performed *before an altar*, and
implying--superstition undoubtedly--but deep mystery and some
profoundest suggestions. (Wilson, *As. Res.* vol. xii. 225: on Hind.
Sects. Vide *Rig* 

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Veda*, Book ii.
c. viii. ss. 13, 14, 2nd attham, 8th pannam, Rigs B. 14, which contain
the *Sucla Homa Mantram*, etc.)

The caste-mark of the *Saivas* and *Sactas* consist of three horizontal
lines on the forehead, with ashes obtained if possible *from the
hearth*, on which a *consecrated fire* is perpetually maintained.

The *Sacti* (or 'Sacred Presence') is personified by a naked girl, to
whom offerings are made of meat and wine, which are then distributed
amongst the assistants. Here follows the chanting of the *Muntrus*, and
sacred texts, and the performance of the *mudra*, or gesticulations with
the fingers. The whole service terminates with orgies amongst the
votaries of a very licentious description. This ceremony is entitled the
*Sri Chakra*, or *Purnabisheka*, THE RING or 'Full Initiation'. This
method of adoring the *Sacti* is unquestionably acknowledged by the
texts regarded by the *Vanis* as authorities for the excesses practised.
Wilson, on Hind. Sects, vol. xvii. *As. Res.* Ward, on the Vaisnavas, p.
309.

In Gregory's Works (*Notes and Observations upon several difficult
passages in Scripture*, vol. i. 4to. London 1684) is to be found a
significant comment. '*Noah prayed daily in the Ark before the body of
Adam*', i.e. before the PHALLUS, or Regenerator (Adam being the
primitive 'Phallus', or great Procreator of the Human Race)--(under its
present circumstances, and in the existing dispensation). 'It may
possibly seem strange', Gregory says, 'that this orison should be daily
said before the body of *Adam;* but it is a most confessed Tradition
among the Eastern men that Adam was commanded by God that his dead body
should be kept above ground till a fullness of time should come to
commit it ‏פיוססאלאוע‎ to the *middle of the earth* by a priest of the
Most High God.' See previous pages.

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This 'middle of
the earth' is Mount Moriah--the Meru of India.

The 'Brazen Serpent' continued to be worshipped by the Jews, and to have
incense offered to that Idol, till the reign of Hezekiah: 'For, it being
written in the Law of Moses "Whosoever looks upon it shall live", they
fancied they might obtain blessings by its mediation, and therefore
thought it worthy to be worshipped. Our learned Dr. Jackson observes
that "the pious Hezekiah was moved with the greater indignation against
the worship of this image, because in truth it never was--nor was
intended to be--a type of our Saviour, but a figure of His Grand
Enemy"', etc.

The Jews relapsed into idolatry by the adoration of the Golden Calf; set
up, too, not by a few schismatics, but by the entire people, with Aaron
at their head. The calf-superstition was doubtless a relic of what they
had seen in Egypt in the worship of Apis and Mnevis. Next we have the
'Golden Calves' set up by Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel. Then follows
(*Judges* viii. 22, etc.) the worship of Gideon's Ephod. 'The Ephod made
by Gideon with the spoil of the Midianites became after his death an
object of idolatry' (ibid., p. 41). We have also Micah's images and the
'Teraphim'. We learn from St. Jerome (who received it by tradition from
the ancient Jews, and indeed it is so stated in *Numbers* xxv. 1, 2,
etc.; xxiii. 28, and numerous other passages of the Old Testament) that
the Jews adored Baal Phegor (Baal-Pheor), the Priapus of the Greeks and
Romans. 'It was'; he says, 'principally worshipped by women; *colentibus
maxime feminis* (Baal-Phegor).' Maimonides observes that the adoration
offered to this Idol, called Pehor, consisted in discovering ------.
Chemosh, probably the same as Baal-Pheor, also received the

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

homage of the Jews, as also did Milcom, Molech, Baal-berith (or Cybele),
and numerous others--all of the same sexual cast.

From all this in regard to their irregular worship--or rather
(mysteriously) to their *regular* or assigned worship, it will be seen
that the Jews fell into Idolatry (and Phallic Idolatry, too) to an
extent interpenetrating, again most mysteriously, the whole scope of
their religion. There will consequently not appear anything so very
startling in the supposition that the Ark of the Covenant contained
symbolic objects referring to Phallic ideas. We have seen that the
'Stone', or 'Pillar', of Jacob was held in particular veneration--that
it was worshipped and anointed. We know from the Jewish records that the
Ark was supposed to contain the tables of stone. And if it can be
demonstrated that these stones implied a Phallic reference, and that
these 'tables' were identical with the symbolism accompanying the sacred
name Jehovah, Iehovah, or Yehovah, which, written in unpointed Hebrew,
with four letters is--IEVE or IHVH (the HE being merely an aspirate and
the same as E)--this process leaves us the two letters I and V (or, in
another of its forms, U). Then if we add the I *in* the U we have the
'Holy of Holies'; we also have the Linga and Yoni and Argha (Ark or Arc)
of the Hindus, the 'Iswarra' or 'Supreme Lord'. In all this may be
found--mystically--the 'Arc-Celestial' replicating-in upon
itself--symbolically and anagrammatically--and presenting itself as
identical with the 'Lingayoni' of the 'Ark of the Covenant'. Gregory
observes that the '*middle* of the Ark was the place of prayer--made
holy (consecrated) by the presence of Adam's Body.' (Refer to the
glyptic symbolism, the mystical engraving of the 'Ark', placed among the
full-page plates.

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thence 'Man' was
the Cabalistic (Rosicrucian) *Microcosmos* or 'Little World', in
contradistinction to the causer, or pattern, or original--*Macrocosmos*,
or 'Great', or 'Producing' ('Outside'), or 'Originating World'.

'The body of Adam was embalmed and transmitted from father to son, till
at last it was delivered up by Lamech into the hands of Noah.' Again,
the '*middle of the Ark*' was the place of prayer (and worship) made
holy by the presence of 'Adam's "Body".'--Gregory, p. 118. 'And "*so
soon as ever the day began to break*" Noah stood up towards the "body of
Adam",' etc., etc., 'and "prayed" (or "worshipped").' Here was the
origin of the 'Eucharist', as the reader will clearly see farther on
(see accompanying plate).

The most ancient monuments of Idolatry among the Gentiles were
consecrated pillars (Lingas), or columns, which the Jews were forbidden
to erect as objects of divine homage and adoration. And yet--a most
extraordinary contradiction--this practice is conceived to arise from an
imitation of Jacob, who 'took a stone' and 'set it up', etc. Further,
'this stone was held in great veneration in subsequent times by the
Jews, and removed to Jerusalem.' They were accustomed to 'anoint this
stone'; and from the word *Bethel*, the place where the pillar was
erected, came the word Bœtylia among the Heathen, which signified rude
stones, or uprights, which they worshipped either as 'symbols of
Divinity', or as 'true gods', animated (at certain times) by the
heavenly power. Thence the name 'Bowing Stones' amongst the Welsh--not
as stones to be 'bowed to', but 'bowing of themselves', like the modern
'tipping-discs' or other supposed enchanted idols or consultative tables
or objects. Indeed it would seem not

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

improbable that the erection of the Pillar of Jacob actually gave rise
to the worship of Phallus among some of the Pagan peoples. 'For', says
Lewis, 'the learned Bochart asserts that the Phœnicians (at least as the
Jews think) first worshipped this *very stone* which Jacob set up, and
afterwards consecrated others in imitation and in reminder of it.'

It is to little purpose that we are reminded that the Jews were
forbidden by their law to 'make unto themselves any graven image'; for,
as Lewis shows in the following passage, there may be exceptions to
this, as to every other general rule. 'Notwithstanding', he says, 'the
severity of the Law against the making of Images, yet, as Justin Martyr
observes in his Book against Trypho, it must be somewhat mysterious,
that God in the case of the "Brazen Serpent" should command an image to
be made, for which one of the Jews confessed he never could hear a
reason from any of their Doctors.' According to Theodoret, Arnobius, and
Clemens of Alexandria, the *Yoni* (then become *Ioni;* thence *Ionia*
and *Ionic*) of the Hindus was the sole object of veneration in the
Mysteries of Eleusis (Demosthenes, *On the Crown*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[392:1](rrm43.htm#fr_17) *Puranas* (New
Testament), the Modern Scriptures of the Hindus, as distinguished from
the *Vedhas* (as Bible), or more Ancient Scriptures. Wilson on Hindu
Sects--*As. Res.* vol. xvii.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[392:2](rrm43.htm#fr_18) *As. Res.* vol. xvii.
pp. 208-10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV: Doctrine and Rationale. The Embodied 'Children of
the Elements', Both of Heathen and of Christian Periods](rrm44)
