[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm47)  [Next](rrm49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

### CHAPTER THE EIGHTEENTH

#### CABALISTIC ILLUSTRATIONS. THE SAN-GRËALE, GREAL, OR HOLY GRËALE

THE engraving No. 4 at the end gives the mystical idea, or suggestion,
of the Round Table of the Knights of King Arthur, which is again typical
of the San Grëal. The romance of Guyot, or at least the traditional
fable of the *San Grëal*, spread over France, Germany, and England. In
the twelfth century the dogma of transubstantiation not being yet
defined by the Church, the *chalice*, the mark of the Knights Templars,
had not the deep mystic meaning which it received in the following
century. The *graal* signifies a *vase*. The San Grëal is identified
with the vessel in which Jesus celebrated the Holy Supper, and which
also was used to receive His blood flowing from the wound inflicted upon
Him by the centurion Longinus.

Walter Mapes, the historian of the San Grëal, ascribes to it a
supernatural origin. He gave out that God was its real author, and had
revealed it, in a celestial vision, to a holy hermit of Britain towards
the year A.D. 720. This writer makes Joseph one of the *coryphœi* of his
history of the San Grëal. After forty-two years of captivity Joseph of
Arimathæa, the guardian of the Grail or Grëal, is at last set at liberty
by the Emperor Vespasian. In possession of the sacred vessel, and a few
more relics, and accompanied by his relations and disciples Hebron and
Alain the Fishermen, he travels over a part of Asia, where he converts
Enelach, King of Sarras. He then goes to Rome, and thence to Britain,
where he preaches the gospel and

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

performs thirty-four miracles. He settles in the Island *Yniswitrin*,
Isle of Glass (the Grëal is of emerald, and consequently green), or
*Glas*tonbury, where he founds an Abbey (Glastonbury Abbey), and
institutes the Round Table (Arthur did this), in imitation of the Holy
Supper, which was partaken of at a 'Round Table' with the Twelve
Disciples, in their mythical *double-places*, twenty-four in all, and
with the double chief-seat, or 'cathedra', for the President or the
'Saviour'. Lastly, the apostle of the Britons builds a palace, in which
he preserves his precious relics, the Sacred Cup (refused to the Laity
as a communion), which takes the name of San Grëal, the bloody spear
(the 'upright' of the St. George’s Cross, to whom the 'Garter' is
dedicated), with which the centurion Longinus pierced the side of the
Lord, from whence issued 'blood and water'--the Rosicrucian heraldic
colours (royal), *Mars*--Red; *Luna*--Argent (or 'Fire' and 'Water').
There are Eight Angels, one to each half-heaven, or dark or light sides,
guarding the Four Corners of the World.

The Sacred Cup is identified with the vessel of the Holy Supper. The
Templars are the successors of the Knights of the Round Table. Their
successors again were the Knights of Malta, with their Eight 'Langues',
or Nations--each represented in a blade of, or ray, of the Eight-pointed
RED Templar Cross.

The Temple Church, London, was dedicated to St. Mary. The Grëal is a
sort of oracle. It is, so to speak, at the orders of the 'Mother of
God', to execute all 'Her' commands. Parsival--the German
champion-hero--thinks of transporting the Grëal to the East, from whence
it originally came. He takes the San Grëal, embarks at Marseilles with
the Templars, and arrives at the court of his brother Feirifix in India.
The Sacred Cup manifests a desire that Parsival

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

should remain possessor of the 'Grëal', and only change his name into
that of Prester John (Prestre, or Prêtre, Jehan, or John). Parsival and
the Templars settle in India. After the disappearance of the Grëal in
the West, King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table, losing the
'central object', or the 'Rose' (Rosicrucianism) of the Table, go on a
scattered (Knight-Errant or romantic) championship in search of it. They
travel over the world--but in vain. They cannot find the 'Grëal'. For it
is for ever *hidden* in the far 'East', or in the land of the 'Sun'.
Wolfram von Eschenbach tells us that Meister Guyot-le-Provençal found at
Toledo an Arabian book, written by an astrologer named Flegetanis,
containing the story of the marvellous vase called 'Grëal'.

The sacred vase, or the San Grëal, was placed, according to the myth of
Guyot, in a Temple (or Chapel), guarded by Knights *Templeis* or
*Temiplois* (Knights Templars). The Temple of the Grëal was placed upon
a mountain in the midst of a thick wood. The name of this mysterious
mountain (like the Mount Meru of the Hindoos and Olympus of the Greeks)
hints sublimity and secrecy. Guyot calls it *Mont Salvagge*, wild or
inaccessible mountain (or 'Holy Way'). The Grëal was made of a wonderful
'Stone' called *Exillis*, which had once been the most brilliant jewel
in the 'Crown of the Archangel Lucifer'--the gem was emerald (green;
Friday; the unlucky in one sense, the 'sacred' woman's day in another
sense). This famous legendary stone was struck out of the crown or
helmeted double-rayed or double-springing 'winged' crown--mythically--of
the Prince of the Archangels ('Lucifer'), in his conflict with the
opposing 'general of the skies'--Saint Michael, the 'Champion of
Heaven'; and the combative guardian of innocence and of 'virginity'
(mark).

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This immortal
'Stone'--the Grëal--fell into the 'Abyss'. It was mythologically
recovered.

The 'Stone' was brought from heaven (rescue) by Angels, and left to the
care of Titurel, the First King of the Grëal, who transmitted it to
Amfortas, the Second King, whose sister '*Herze*'-loïde was the mother
of Parsival, the Third King of the San Grëal. (These are the Three Kings
of Cologne, or the Three Magi or Astrologers.) A great many towns
pretended to possess this holy relic. In 1247 the Patriarch of Jerusalem
sent the San Grëal to King Henry the Third of England, as having
belonged to Nicodemus (see the *Gospel of Nicodemus*) and Joseph of
Arimathæa. The inhabitants of Constantinople, about the same time, also
fancied that a vessel which they had long esteemed as a sacred relic was
the San Grëal. The Genoese also felt certain that their *canto catino*
(Catillo, v. a. (L.) 'to lick dishes'; *Catinus*, i. m. (L.) 'a dish')
was nothing else than the San Grëal. The same (or similar) modifications
of the myth are to be noticed in a romance, in prose, entitled
*Percival-le-Gallois*. Not only is the Round Table considered in this
book as an imitation of the 'Holy Supper', but the author goes so far as
to give it the name of San Grëal itself. In the *Romance of Merlin*,
written towards the end of the thirteenth century, it is said that the
*Round Table* instituted by Joseph in imitation of the Holy Supper was
called 'Graal' that Joseph induced Arthur's father to create a third
*Round Table* in honour of the Holy Trinity.

*The San Grëal: an Inquiry into the Origin and Signification of the
Romances of the San Grëal*. By Dr. F. G. Bergmann, Dean of the Faculty
of Letters at Strasburg, and Member of the Royal Society of Antiquaries,
Copenhagen. Edinburgh: Edmonston and Douglas, 1870. We quote the above
in parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX: The Round Table is the Rationale or Apotheosis of
the Most Noble The Order of the Garter](rrm49)
