[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rrm41)  [Next](rrm43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564591182/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

### CHAPTER THE TWELFTH

#### THE ADAPTED ROSICRUCIAN CONTEMPLATION. INTRUSION OF SIN. RUINS OF THE OLD WORLDS.

THE extraordinary philosophy of the Rosicrucians (and of the Rosicrucian
system) is best explained (though it is all erroneous as to the true
meanings of the Brothers of the 'R. C.') through the following, charges
which were brought forward to the disparagement of these famous men.
Petri Gassendi Theologi Epistolica Exercitatio. In qua Principia
Philosophiæ Roberti. Fluddi Medici reteguntur. Parisiis, apud
Sebastianum Cramoisy, via Jacobæa sub Ciconiis, M.DC.XXX.

'*Primo*. Totam scripturam sacram referri ad alchymiam, et principia
alchymistica. Sensum scripturæ mysticum non esse alium, quàm explicatum
per alchymiam, et philosophicum lapidem. Non interesse ad ilium habendum
cujus religionis sis, Romanæ, Lutheranæ, aut alterius. Catholicum ilium
solum esse, qui credit in Lapidem Catholicum, hoc est Philosophicum,
cujus ope homines Dæmonia ejiciant, linguis loquantur novis, etc.

'*Second*. Cum Deus sit quædam Lux per totum mundum diffusa, illum tamen
non ingredi in ullam rem, nisi privs assumpserit quasi vestem spiritum
quendam æthereum, qualis opera alchymiæ extrahitur, et quinta essentia
vocatur. Facere proinde Deum compositionem cum hoc spiritu æthereo.
Residere cum illo præsertim in sole, unde evibretur ad generationem, et
vivificationem omnium rerum. Deum hoc modo esse formam omnium rerum, et
ita agere omnia, ut causæ secundæ per se nihil agant.

'*Tertio*. Compositum ex Deo, et Spiritu isto Æthereo esse animam mundi.
Purissimam partem hujus animæ esse naturam angelicam, et cœlum empyreum,
quod intelligatur permistum esse omnibus rebus. Dæmones etiam particulas
esse ejusdem essentiæ, sed malignæ materiæ alligatas. Omnes animas tam
hominum, quam

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

brutorum, nihil esse aliud, quam particulas ejusdem animæ. Eandem animam
esse Angelum Michaelem, seu Mitattron.

'*Quarto*. Quod est amplios, eandem mundi animam esse verum Messiam,
Salvatorem, Christum, Lapidem Angularem, et Petram universalem, supra
quam Ecclesia, et tota salus fundata sit. Hanc nempe esse præcipuam
partem Philosophici Lapidis, quæcum addensata rubescat, exinde dicatur
esse sanguis Christi, quo emundati, et redempti sumus. Neque enim nos
emundari sanguine Christi humano, sed hoc divino, et mystico.

'*Quinto*. Hominem justum esse alchymistam, qui Philosophico Lapide
invento, illius usu immortalis fiat. Mori tamen dici, cum partes
corruptibiles abijicit; Resurgere, cum fit incorruptibilis; Glorificari,
cum proinde easdem dotes assequitur, quæ tribuuntur corporibus
gloriosis. Hommes quihuc evaserint "FRATRES CRUCIS ROSEÆ" dictos, scire
omnia, posse omnia, non arbitrari rapinam esse se equales Deo, cum eadem
in illis sit mens, quæ in Christo Jesu.

'*Sexto*. Creationem none esse productionem rei ex nihilo, ut nos vulgo
intelligimus nihil. Materiam (quam sæpissime tenebras vocant) esse id,
quod proprie appelletur nihil; ac proinde cum Deus dicitur creare, aut
facere aliquid ex nihilo, intelligi creare, aut facere ex materia.
Moysen, cum Creationem Mundi descripsit, fuisse alchymistam, itemque
Davidem, Salomonem, Jacob, Job, et omnes alios; adeo ut etiam yeti
Cabbalistæ nihil aliud quam alchymistæ sint; itemque Magi, sapientes,
philosophi, sacerdotes, et alii.' Marinus Mersennus significantly adds:
'Quæso autem, nisi ista sunt impia, quid potest esse impium?'

In the first place, the whole of the Sacred Scriptures are a grand
mystical puzzle referring to ALCHEMY, and to the universal alchemic
process. The mystical sense of the Old and the New Testaments is none
other than the HISTORY OF ALCHEMY--originated in the *Cabala* (with the
secrets contained therein), and the *rationale* of that called 'The
Philosophers’ Stone'. It matters not to the question of these secrets
fixed what religions be professed; whether Christian, whether those of
the 'Sects', whether infidel and heathen. That only is 'Catholic' which
lies in the 'Stone'--otherwise *practical magic*; whereby Demons are
commanded, good spirits evoked, and the innermost

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

hidden resources of nature, and the Spirits of Nature, laid bare and
availed-of.

*Secondly*.--When Deity is said to be 'Light', pervading and vivifying
all nature, He enters not in anything unless a *mask* of the object is
adopted as the medium in which He fixes. This *aura* (or the
deliquescence of the uproused light) is the infinite Ethereal Spirit.
The spring or the moving spirits, or the means, of alchemy evolve out of
it. They are fivefold in their exercise or delimitation. God is indeed
*identical* with this supreme spirit. And the radiant or intense
material-nucleus is the lucid conflux-spot or the SUN stored (by its
spirits) with vigour, sensitiveness, and intelligence. From this Intense
Centre or Fiery Blaze of Power (the Sun), agitations and life vibrate in
masterdom from the middle-point to circumference. God, thus, in
producing, is said to be identified with Matter, and He so fills (and
IS) that there are not (nor can there be) secondary causes, except to
Man; who can *only know second causes*. This, be it noted, is
'Berkeleyism' on the one side, and its opposite, or 'Spinozism', on the
other--both being the same thing in reality; looked at *from either
side*; or from before and from behind.

*Thirdly*.--Composed of this 'mask', and of this infinite medium or
Divine Movement, is the general investment (or spirit) called the 'Soul
of the World'. The purer part of this sensitive, responsive soul is, in
its own nature, of the breath of the angels (*for 'the Angels were
made'*). The *anima mundi* is the Flaming Spiritual Region, in which all
things live. Even the devils are portions of this efflux, which is the
general life. But the Rebellious Spirits (the *vis inertiæ*, or the
*laziness*, so to speak), of matter--dense, contradictory,
inaccessible--are buried or lost--and were afterwards *chained*--in
inapprehensive matter. All particular

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
'sentiences'--whether of the brutes or man--are nothing other than parts
of the whole lucid spirit. Of the same soul (in essence) is the
Archangel Michael, or Mitattron. Also all the Angels in their Sevenfold
Regions; both of the Bad, and of the Good; of the Dexter and of the
Sinister Sides of Creation.

*Fourthly*.--Which is still more dreadful (in appearance), the same
*anima mundi*, or Soul of the World, is the real Messiah, Saviour,
Christ, the 'Corner-Stone of the Temple', the 'Temple' itself (the
universe) the 'STONE' (*Petram Universalem*), or 'ROCK' (Peter--St.
Peter), upon which the Church, and Salvation, is founded. This is the
mystical end and scope of that longed-for Beatitude--or Magical
Transfiguration--the 'Philosophers’ Stone', or 'Foundation'. Which
(being to be obtained 'out of the material' by 'supernatural' means)
when contracted into itself, and concentrated and intensified, glows (or
martyrises) into *flaming red*, or possession, or Glorified Agony (made
Heaven). From thence it is said to be the 'Blood' of Christ (and the
'Gross' of Christ), which 'blood' was shed for the redemption of the
world from the penalties of the (First?) FALL (by Which We Are). By
means of the 'Great Sacrifice' mortality is purged into purity back into
the celestial fire, and redeemed from Hell or Matter. However, we are
not redeemed by the blood of a 'Human' Christ, but by the atoning blood
*in a divine and mystical sense*. (See corresponding plates.)

Fire is contention--whether holy or unholy. Heat, intensified in the
struggle, agitates furiously to FIRE. Fire, triumphing and mastering the
matter which lends it its material and strength, when passing into
victory brandishes *into the calm and the glory of victory*, and becomes
yellow in its flaming precious. gold, and quiet *LIGHT* intense as the
grandest phenomenon--

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

sprung up skywards; or against gravity; therefore *reversing* nature's
principal law. The intenser the darkness, or the mass of matter (the
Rosicrucians’ 'other side' of Spirit, and of Light), the greater the
Light, and the greater the spirit and vivacity and force in the
Liberation *into Light* (and into Spirit) of the Darkness and the
Matter; when *its* farthest-winnowed atoms are forced asunder in the
darts of the fire, and turned '*inside-outwards*'. See preceding pages.
This is the 'Holy Grail', or 'Sangreal', or 'Sang-Reale' or Fire', or
'Mighty Redeeming Magic', sought by the Champions, or the Knights, of
King Arthur's Round Table. See Supplementary Explanations.

*Fifthly*.--The 'Just Man made Perfect' is the Alchemist (or rather,
Rosicrucian) who, having found the Philosophers’ Stone (San Graal, or
Holy Grail, or '*Sang Reale*' or 'Holy Rapture' or Magic Birth into the
Celestial Fire, or flame of Self-Extinguishment, or of 'Ecstasy'),
becomes immortal (and disappears, or 'dies' to the world). His 'chariot
of fire' being that of Enoch, or 'Translation'. To die is simply the
falling asunder and disintegration of the mechanism of the senses, which
have contracted inwards and formed (in life) the prison of the soul--a
prison of pains and penalties; from between the bars of the windows of
which (or out of the eyes) the suffering, languishing SPIRIT looks for
the often long-coming releasing GREAT SPIRIT-DEATH. The flitting is of
the flickering flame (consciousness) out of the urn. To 'Rise'--is to
cast off the chains of mortality. To become 'Glorified' is to discover
*in one's own identity* the glorious, godlike gifts or MAGIC--which are
the wings upon which to rise. Those men who have passed (as through a
door) in their lifetime from the 'hither' side (or world) to the
'thither' side (or the

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

world invisible)--following into the LIGHT the divine beckon to Paradise
of the ANGELS of LIGHT, are the BROTHERS of the ROSY CROSS, or the
ROSICRUCIANS, as they have been called; who 'know everything', can 'do
anything', and have even arrogated to themselves, when in them should be
set up the same angelical-magical spirit which was in the Christ-Jesus,
to be of the 'COUNCIL of GOD'. Though, in the world, they were the
humblest of the servants of the Almighty.

*In the Sixth Place*,--Creation is not the making of things out of
nothing, which we understand commonly (or vulgarly) of God’s work in the
beginning of the universe or of Creation. Matter, which the Rosicrucians
frequently refer to as Darkness, is that only which is properly, to be
called 'Nothing'. Thus when God is said to create, or make something out
of nothing (to do which is impossible), it is to be understood that He
worked with material, or with DARKNESS, which is the 'Blank side' or the
'Other Side of Light; turned away'. These profound metaphysical
distinctions are the key of all the Theologies. Moses, when he describes
the Creation of the World, is the Alchemist, relating in parable the
generation of the solids, and the flowing-over into the border-country
(out of the flesh) of the Invisible--WHERE EVERYTHING ULTIMATELY IS. The
history of David, Solomon (of the 'Temple'), Jacob (of the 'Ladder; or
Staircase from Earth to Heaven, and from Heaven to Earth', etc.), Job;
the accounts of the Heroes of the stories of the *Apocrypha* (the most
concealed or recondite of the 'things hidden'--*thence its name*), etc.,
are cabalistic and alchemical, similarly to all the mythologies, which
are, in their fanciful and mystic range of supposed facts, cabalistic
and alchemical. The true *Cabalistæ* are none other than Alchemists and
Rosicrucians. Likewise the Magi, Wise Men, Philosophers, Priests, and

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Heroes; from Jason
and the 'Three Kings' to King Arthur, and from Adam, Noah, Abraham, and
Moses, to Numa, Paracelsus, Borrichius, Robertus de Fluctibus (nearer
our own time), AND OTHERS.

The Rosicrucian system took the following forms:--These Philosophers
believed that there were Two Principles in the Beginning--Light and
Darkness, or Form and the Material *out of which the Form was*. That
before the Creation (distinctively so called), the Light Itself was as
'Divinity Latent' or 'At Rest'. In the Creation, or in the production of
things, Divinity became active, aroused, and inventive. By whatever name
distinguished, or by whatever style identified, Moses’ description of
Creation is to be taken as the process of alchemy, as worked by Nature
itself, being her Form; to which head are referred the kingdoms of
darkness, or chaos, and the Light emerging out of its own bosom or
DARKNESS.

After the active movement from the centre, or evolvement, or Creation,
the radiation and counter-working or interchange of Light and Darkness
in crossing and encountering irritated mutually, naturally; became
expansive and contractive angularly--thence pyramidal and starry. And in
the relative counterbalancing contemperation, the diversity of things
arose at the points of the masterdom into form or Light. The medium in
which the elements were (and the elements themselves) now grew 'in their
natures'. From these various rudiments of being--(in the vehicle Light)
the archetypical scheme arranged itself; which, 'One' in essence, was
'Triple' in procession or 'parade'. Hence the TRINITY.

But it is Incomprehensible, obviously, *without the means to comprehend
it*--which is CHRIST. Christ the 'PENALTY'--Christ the 'SACRIFICE'.
Christ the 'Glass' of the 'Universe', in which 'God' saw

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Himself'. But
'Christ' is not 'God' any more than the 'Glass' is the 'Seer'. From the
TRINITY and the vivifying *substratum* in the mathematical four corners
of the world, comes the ineffable name--'*Tetragrammaton*'. The
archetypical 'Idea' is also called
Reflective--Intelligible--Informed--Superessential--Endless in resource.

Object--Subject--Result: or the Three 'Persons' of the Trinity. The
reflection of God is in the Archetype which is the Second Principle, or
'Macrocosmos' (created worlds), exhibiting 'Either Side', or 'Will' in
'Action'. This is displayed in Three Divisions, or Spheres--called (1st)
the 'Empyræum' (God). (2nd) The 'Etheræum' (the 'Saviour'). (3rd) The
'Elements' (the Virgin Mary). Light emanates in the Sephiroth ('CABALA')
or 'Seven-fold' rotation--hence the 'production of phenomena'. In
uniting with the Ethereal Spirit, it becomes the Soul, or 'Responsive
Sentience of the World'. The further elucidation of the Rosicrucian
theological system, in its general features--*so far as in hint or
parable submitted to unenlightened comprehension*--will be found
prestated in previous pages, and elsewhere.

The Rosicrucians contend that music, or melody--*which is
enchantment*--pervades all nature in its prosperous or intended
progress, although it is only the wail, or plaint, of the instinctive
soul on its 'wounded', or 'sacrificed', or '*Ruined Side*'. It mourns
for its 'Original Lost Paradise'. The music of the spheres is no unreal
thing, but real as is the atmosphere of the spirits; for 'music is the
atmosphere of the spirits', and discords (though the necessity, support,
and balance of Creation) are a medium for the coarse and low spirits,
who inundate, as it were, the lees and the settlings of nature. In
discords, or in the inharmonious strife amidst the sounds, the

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

rabble of the spirits (so to term them) are stimulated to their envious
and spiteful, or malific or freakish and blundering, bad life. Beauty is
not, however, necessarily beauty--it may be *seduction*. For the higher
grades of the recusant or rebellious spirits who find their power in the
original permission that there '*might be phenomena*' are beautiful in
their assumption--or usurpation--of the lovely forms of spirit-life and
of nature. And they will prevail, sometimes, even against the best
efforts of the Angels of Light. The Cabalists whisper that God 'made the
world' by the 'means of music'--that music, as man knows music, is
essentially a power; that it is the faint, much-changed, much-enfeebled,
sole relic, and tradition, and reminder of Man’s Lost Paradise; that
(through it originally) everything was possible, as the gift of God;
which explains the classic fables of Orpheus, Amphion, and the
mythological wonder-workers in music; that music is modulated in the
movements of the planets according to the rearrangement of the
post-diluvian world, and in conformity with the readjustment of the
solar-system after mysterious aberration or cataclysm; that mortality
cannot hear, and that the human soul is so debased that it only catches
intermittently the faint echo of the continuous universal music which in
other--now material--senses is the life and growth and splendour of
everything.

There’s not the smallest orb, that thou behold’st,  
But in his motion like an angel sings,  
Still quiring to the young-eyed cherubims:  
Such harmony is in immortal souls;  
But, whilst this muddy vesture of decay  
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.

Music is magic, is sacred, and a power--as all harmony must be;--the
nerves of the world--the aspiration

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

of living things--the spell which breaks up and extols--into
super-added, super-natural life--the 'Real' into the 'Ideal'.
Harmony--or the mysterious solace and satisfaction and happiness at
heroism which we feel--is found in the beauty of the human figure, the
glories and graces of all growing objects and moving or unmoving
natures. Success in nature, and in life, with their changes--as man
knows 'nature' and 'life'--arise from the interstarry, mechanical
modifications, and the incidents (and, the apparent interference and
intertangle) through the restless movement of the planets. All the
glorious seeming mechanism of the starry sky shows so as mechanism only
to the *measuring senses* of man; but in reality it may be the play of
Infinite Spirit. (See accompanying Charts, A, B, C.) The planets of our
own system may be directed in their 'continual-speaking' changes by
their several crowds of governing spirits. Spirits being everywhere the
directors of matter, its solids are only to be separated by soul or
energy--as the wedge (directed by the will) cleaves inert or resistant
solids. Music is always in the air. Man has no ears for it, unless it is
*enlivened* to, or finds access to, his senses. But *his heart is its
home*--if he has a heart, and not an 'animal’s mechanic
throbbing-machine' only. Air is the breathing of nature. Music is always
in the air--more particularly at night, for Nature (being born of it) is
necessarily more nervously sensitive at night, whether for the
'beautiful' or the 'dreadful'; because both are equally exciting and
fascinating--basilisks both--as they are mysterious. We obtain by
pulsation, or scientific commotion of the air, by musical instruments,
the music out of it; and our fine nerves are the fine sensitives (born
of God), as the harp played upon to receive it. *Otherwise there is no
sense in music*. Otherwise our passions could not be stirred by it.

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> These are storms
and convulsions (rendered beautiful) certainly not born of God’s
original 'REST'. Rather they come of the stirring ambitions of
Lucifer--uprising--'Son of the Morning', 'Son of the Awakening'--'Son'
of the 'Sun'. Music and its success depend upon the prosperous progress
of the Planets which make it, as (in Astrology) they prearrange, order
and fix the fates of men. It is no inconsistent thing to say that, in
the Rosicrucian sense, every stone, flower, and tree has its horoscope
(we know that there are no two leaves alike), and that they are produced
and flourish in the mechanical resources of the mysterious necessities
of *astrology*--every object bearing its history in its lines and marks
(sigillated magnetism), as inspired by the Great Soul of the World;
which is all continual changing *purpose*, urging restlessly towards
'REST'.

'Nullam esse herbam, aut plantain inferius, cujus non sit stella in
firmamento, quæ eam percutiat, et dicat ei, cresce.' *Exercitatio in
Fluddanam Philosophiam*, p. 228. Parisiis, 1630.

Or back again to that from which it came. Moving in the *arc* of the
pendulum between the two points--Life and Death (as we know Life and
Death)--beyond which the 'swing' of this world’s 'Creation' points,
cannot pass--OR BE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII: Indian Mysterious Adoration of Forms. The Unity of
the Mythologies Found in the Bhuddistic and Mohammedan Temples](rrm43)
