[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib45)  [Next](shib47.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### TEMPLAR FORMS.

*I have transcribed each 'blank' in the forms below with exactly one
em-dash; some blanks are represented by several contiguous em-dashes for
legibility.—JBH*.

<span class="smallcaps">Although</span> the Grand Encampment has not
adopted permanent "Templar Forms," the author of <span
class="smallcaps">Shibboleth</span> suggests the following, to be used
until supplanted by Forms adopted by the supreme governing body:

#### FORM OF PETITION FOR DISPENSATION.

To the Right Eminent Sir —

Grand Commander of Knights Templar of —

The undersigned petitioners respectfully represent that they are Knights
Templar in good and regular standing, that they have the prosperity of
the Order at heart, and that they desire to promote its influence. In
order that a greater opportunity may be afforded them for the same, they
are desirous of forming a new Commandery, to be located at —, and to be
known as Commandery, No. —. They have nominated and do hereby recommend
Sir — to be the first Commander, Sir — to be the first Generalissimo,
and Sir — to be the first Captain General of said new Commandery; and
they pray for a dispensation empowering them to meet as a regular
Commandery at —, in the county of —, there to discharge the duties of
Knights Templar in a constitutional manner.

Should the prayer of the petitioners be granted, they promise a strict
obedience to the commands of the R. E. Grand Commander, to the statutes
and regulations of the Grand Commandery of —, the Constitution and laws
of the Grand Encampment, as well as to the usages of the Order.

Dated, — 18—

<span class="small">The petition must be signed by at least <span
class="smallcaps">Nine</span> Knights of the Order, and must be
recommended by the Commandery nearest to the place where the new
Commandery is to be located.</span>

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

<span class="small">RECOMMENDATION OF NEAREST COMMANDERY.</span>

Asylum of — Commandery, No. —,

—, 18—

At a stated meeting of — Commandery, No. —, held at its Asylum in —, on
the — day of —, 18—, the foregoing petition for the formation of a new
Commandery at —, in — County, was presented and considered; whereupon it
was

*Resolved*, That in the opinion of this Commandery good reasons exist
for the organization of a Commandery at this time at that place, and the
same is hereby recommended by this Commandery. It is hereby certified
that said petitioners are Knights Templar of good moral character, and
the Sir Knights recommended as officers of said Commandery are capable
of conferring correctly the orders of Knighthood.

By order of — Commandery, No. —,

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\], — Eminent Commander.

Attest:

—, Recorder.

<span class="small">CERTIFICATE OF A PAST COMMANDER.</span>

I, —, Past Commander of — Commandery, No. —, do hereby certify that I
have examined Sir Knights A B, C D, and E F, the officers recommended in
the foregoing petition, in the Rituals of the Orders of the Red Cross,
Temple, and Malta, and I find that they are fully capable to confer
these Orders correctly.

—, Past Commander.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\]

Attest:

—, Recorder.

#### DISPENSATION FOR NEW COMMANDERY.

<span class="small">IN HOC SIGNO VINCES.</span>

*To all whom it may concern:*

Know ye, that I, —, Right Eminent Grand Commander of Knights Templar of
the State of —, having received a petition from a constitutional number
of Fratres, who have

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

been properly vouched for as Knights Templar in good standing, setting
forth that, having the prosperity of the Order at heart, they are
desirous of establishing a new Commandery at —, under our jurisdiction,
and requesting a Dispensation for the same; and,

Whereas, the consent of the nearest Commandery has been granted, and
there appears good and sufficient cause for granting the prayer of the
said petition, I do, therefore, by virtue of the power in me vested by
the Constitution and Laws of the Order, grant this Dispensation,
empowering Sir to act as Eminent Commander, Sir — to act as
Generalissimo, and Sir — to act as Captain General of a Commandery to be
held under our jurisdiction, at —, in the County of —, by the name — of
Commandery, No. —.

And the said Fratres and their associates are authorized to confer the
Orders of Knighthood according to the Constitution of the Order, its
customs and usages, and the Rules and Regulations of the Right Eminent
Grand Commandery of —, and not otherwise.

This Dispensation shall continue of force until the next Annual Conclave
of the Grand Commandery, unless revoked by the Grand Commander.

Given under my hand, and the seal of the Grand Commandery, at —, this —
day of — , A. D. 18—, A. O. 7—.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\]

—, *Grand Commander*.

Attest:

—, *Grand Recorder*.

#### CHARTER.

<span class="small">IN HOC SIGNO VINCES</span>

The Right Eminent Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of —,

The Right Eminent —, Grand Commander,

The Very Eminent —, Deputy Grand Commander,

The Eminent —, Grand Generalissimo,

The Eminent —, Grand Captain General,

do, by these presents, appoint, authorize and empower our Frater, Sir —,
to be the Eminent Commander; our Frater, Sir —, to be the Generalissimo;
and our Frater, Sir —, to be the Captain General, of a Commandery of
Knights Templar, to

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

be, by virtue hereof, constituted, formed, and held in —, County of —,
which Commandery shall be distinguished by the name and style of —
Commandery, No. —.; and the said Eminent Fratres, and their successors
in office, are hereby respectively authorized and directed, by and with
the consent and assistance of a quorum of the members of the said
Commandery, duly summoned and present upon such occasion, to elect and
install the officers of the said Commandery, as vacancies happen, in
manner and form as is or may be prescribed by the Constitution and
Regulations of this Grand Commandery.

And further, the said Commandery is hereby invested with full power and
authority to assemble upon proper and lawful occasions, to make Knights
Templar and to admit members, as also to do and perform all and every
such acts and things appertaining to the Order as ought to be done, for
the honor and advantage thereof, conforming in all their proceedings to
the Constitution and Regulations of this Grand Commandery and the Grand
Encampment of the United States; otherwise, this Warrant or Charter, and
the powers thereby granted, to cease and be of no further effect.

Given under our hands, and the seal of the Grand Commandery, in the city
of —, this — day of —, A. D. 18—, A. O. 7—.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\]

—, *Grand Commander*,

—, *Deputy Grand Commander*,

—, *Grand Generalissimo*,

—, *Grand Captain General*.

Attest:

—, *Grand Recorder*.

#### POWER TO CONSTITUTE A COMMANDERY.

*To all whom it may concern:*

Whereas, the Right Eminent Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the
State of —, at its last Annual Conclave, empowered by Charter, duly and
regularly issued, Sir Knights —, Commander; —, Generalissimo, and —,
Captain General, and their successors, to assemble as a regular
Commandery, by the name of — Commandery, No. —., and the Constitution of
the Order requiring that the same should be duly constituted;

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

Now, therefore, I, —, Grand Commander of Knights Templar of the State of
—, reposing especial trust and confidence in the skill and ability of
our Eminent Frater, Sir —, Past Commander of Commandery, No. —, do
authorize and empower him, being unable to attend in person, to
constitute in form the Sir Knights named in said Charter into a regular
Commandery, to be known and hailed by the name aforesaid, and to install
the officers elect, agreeably to the Constitution and customs of the
Order.

Given under my hand, this — day of —, A. O. 7—.

—, *Grand Commander*.

#### FORM OF PETITION FOR THE ORDERS.

*To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of — Commandery, No. —.,
Knights Templar, stationed at —, State of —:*

I hereby declare that I am a Royal Arch Mason in good standing; that I
received the degree of Master Mason in — Lodge, No. —., of —, and the
degree of R. A. Mason in — Chapter, No. —, of —, and that I am desirous
of receiving the Orders conferred in your Commandery.

I further declare that I am a firm believer in the Christian religion.

Should my petition be favorably considered, I promise a cheerful
conformity to the rules and usages of the Order and of your Commandery.

This is my — application for the Orders of Knighthood.

<span class="small">If the petitioner has applied previously, he must
name the Commandery to which he applied, after this statement.</span>

My age is — Residence — Occupation — Dated at —, —, A. D. 18—.

——————

We recommend Companion — to the favorable consideration of the
Commandery as a worthy Royal Arch Mason.

——————

——————

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="small">REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON ABOVE PETITION.</span>

The undersigned, a committee appointed to report upon the foregoing
petition, respectfully state that they have discharged the trust
confided to them, and report —.

——————

——————

——————

—, this — day of —, A. D. 18—.

#### FORM OF PETITION FOR MEMBERSHIP.

*To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of — Commandery, No. —.,
Knights Templar, stationed at —:*

I hereby declare that I am a Knight Templar in good standing, and late a
member of — Commandery, No. —., stationed at —, as appears by my dimit,
herewith presented; and that I am desirous of becoming a member of your
Commandery.

My age is — Residence — Occupation —

—, —, A. D. 18—.

——————

We recommend Sir — to the favorable consideration of the Commandery as a
worthy Knight Templar.

——————

——————

<span class="small">A committee must report on this petition.</span>

#### FORM OF DIMIT.

*To all whom it may concern*:

— Commandery, No. —., Knights Templar, stationed at —, acknowledging the
jurisdiction of the Grand Commandery of —, Knights Templar.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Ne Varietur</span>......

This certifies that Sir —, whose name appears in the margin hereof, is a
member of this Commandery in good and regular standing, and having
expressed a desire to withdraw his membership, and having paid all his
dues to date, is hereby dismissed from the membership of — Commandery,
and granted this certificate of the same.

Done at a Stated Conclave of — Commandery, No. —, on the day of —, 18—,
A. O. —.

In testimony whereof we have subscribed our names, and affixed the seal
of the Commandery.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\]

—, Eminent Commander.

—, Recorder.

#### FORMS FOR TEMPLAR TRIALS.

The important requisites of a Complaint against a Knight Templar are
comprehensiveness and clearness. The nature of the offense charged must
be clearly defined, and the time, place and circumstances accurately
stated, together with the names of the persons who witnessed the
commission of the offense. The form of the specification, is important
so that there may be no ambiguity. The following is suggested:

<span class="small">COMPLAINT.</span>

*To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of — Commandery, No. —.,
K. T:*

Sir Knight is hereby charged with immoral and unknightly conduct:

<span class="smallcaps">First Specification</span>.—That the said Sir —,
on the day of — —, 18—, at —, in the county of —, , State of —, did
——————.

<span class="small">\[Carefully and accurately describe the offense
committed.\]</span>

in violation of his duty as a Knight Templar, and to the scandal and
disgrace of the Order of the Temple.

<span class="small">There should be a Specification for each distinct
offense charged, and all should conclude as above. When all the
Specifications are set up, then the Complaint may conclude with these
words:</span>

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

It is therefore demanded, that the said Sir — be dealt with according to
the law and usages of Templar Knighthood.

——————

— this — day of —, 18—.

The Complaint thus drawn will be presented in open Commandery, and if
the Commandery receives the same the Eminent Commander will appoint a
committee to take testimony, unless the Commandery decides by vote to
hear the testimony in open Commandery. These facts must be recorded in
the minutes. The full Complaint need not be entered upon the minutes,
unless the Commandery so directs, but the nature of the charges should
be entered.

The next step is for the Recorder to furnish the accused a complete copy
of the Complaint, and its Specifications, and a transcript of the action
taken by the Commandery thereon. This form is suggested as the official

<span class="small">NOTICE TO THE ACCUSED.</span>

*Sir —:*

Take notice that the foregoing (or the within) charges were preferred
against you at a Stated Conclave of — Commandery, No. —, on the — day
of, 18—, and that the Commandery decided to hear the testimony in open
Commandery (or appointed Sir Knights —, —, —, a committee to take
testimony). It (or they) will meet for that purpose on the — day of,
18—, at —, and at — o'clock, — M., at or before which time you are to
answer the said charges.

Witness our hand, and the seal of the Commandery, this — day of —, 18—.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>.\]

—, *Recorder*.

These papers may be delivered to the accused in person, or may be mailed
to his known address. Great care should be taken to serve these papers
in a proper manner. The case should not proceed until service is made,
if possible. But if the accused absents himself and purposely avoids
service, the delivery of the papers at his home, place of business, or a
known place that he resorts, either by personal delivery or through the
United States mail, is sufficient.

The papers having been served, the accused will answer, and he may first
object to any or all members of the Commission. The Commandery, or
Commander, as the procedure maybe, hears his objection, and if the
grounds are valid, may select other Fratres to serve as Commissioners.

The accused will answer in his own way, no particular form being of any
importance. He may admit and plead extenuating circumstances, or he may
deny in part or the whole.

At the time appointed to talk the testimony the accused, if he desires
to do so, should appear and first file his answer to the charge, and
then proceed to the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="small">taking of the testimony. The accused, either by
himself or counsel (the latter must be a Knight Templar), has the right
to cross-examine witnesses introduced by the opposite party, and also,
when the accuser is through with the testimony in support of the
charges, to introduce witnesses in leis defense, the opposite party
having the right to cross-examine. The accused may, if he prefer, file
the answer with the Recorder before the time fixed for taking
testimony.</span>

<span class="small">ANSWER OF ACCUSED.</span>

A. B., in person, denies the charges made against him, and every matter
and thing contained in the several specifications of the same, and
demands trial thereon.

——————

<span class="small">The answer will vary, of course, according to the
facts. One specification may be admitted and another denied, or all of
them may be admitted, and matters set up in extenuation or excuse.
Assuming that the answer is a denial, the next step, unless the
witnesses are in attendance at the request of the parties, is to issue,
at the request of both parties, process to secure the attendance of the
witnesses. The Commandery, or the Committee, should fix the times of
meetings, and meet at such times as will secure a prompt investigation
of the matter, and at the same time not require such haste as may do
injustice to any.</span>

<span class="small">SUMMONS FOR WITNESS.</span>

*Sir Knight —:*

You are hereby summoned and required to attend as a witness before —
Commandery, No. —, at a meeting to be held at its Asylum, on the — day
of —, 18—. (or before a Special Committee of — Commandery, No. —,
appointed to take testimony, at a meeting to be held by said Committee,
at —, on the — day of —, 18—.), then and there to testify as to charges
preferred against Sir Knight —, and this you will in no wise omit.

—, *Eminent Commander*.

— this — day of, 18—.

This may be made to answer for several witnesses by inserting their
names, and adding the words "and each of you" after the words "you."
This summons can be used, of course, for Knights Templar only. Others
attend, if at all, before a Committee, and at their option.

At each meeting of the Commandery (or the Committee) the Recorder of the
Commandery, or the Secretary of the Committee, and at its first meeting
it should select a Chairman and Secretary, should keep accurate and full
minutes of all that transpires on the trial. All motions, exceptions to
the competency of testimony, or to the ruling of the Commander or the
Committee, should he fully and accurately stated, and the testimony
reduced to writing in the exact language of the witness as nearly as may
be.

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

<span class="small">When the testimony is closed on both sides, if taken
before a Committee, a report should be made to the Commandery by the
Committee. This report should be filed with the Recorder a sufficient
time in advance of a Stated Conclave, to enable him to cause to be
summoned all the resident members of the Commandery to attend at the
next Stated Conclave. The trial may take place at a Special Conclave
called by the Commander for that purpose, but the resident members must
be notified of the time and place, and summoned to attend.</span>

<span class="small">REPORT OF COMMITTEE.</span>

*To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of — Commandery, No. —,
K. T.:*

The Committee appointed to take testimony upon the charges preferred
against Sir Knight A. B. by Sir Knight C. D. has attended to the duty
assigned, and submits herewith, as a part of this report, full minutes
of the action of the Committee, as well as the testimony taken.

— this — day of, 19—.

*Committee:*

——————

——————

——————

Should the accused admit the charges when served upon him, proof of such
admission or confession will be all that the Committee is required to
have made, and they will make up their minutes and report accordingly.

If the accused fails to appear and answer the charges, after personal
service, the Committee may proceed, after taking proof of such service,
to take proof of the charges.

When this report is submitted to the Commandery, or the testimony is
closed, when taken before the Commandery, the parties concerned may
comment thereon. This, of course, is optional. Before proceeding to vote
the accused should retire.

The Commandery then proceeds to consider the matter in the following
manner:

<span class="small">FIXING PUNISHMENT.</span>

"Are the charges sustained?" is the first question, and if decided in
the affirmative, the Commandery then proceeds, by vote, to fix the
punishment. This is done by putting the question:

1st. "Shall the accused be expelled?" If this is decided in the
negative;

2d. "Shall the accused be indefinitely suspended?" If this is decided in
the negative;

3d. "Shall the accused be definitely suspended?" If this is decided in
the affirmative, then, on motion, the time should be fixed by vote; but
if decided in the negative;

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

4th. "Shall the accused be reprimanded?" Which, of course, the other
questions having been negatived, will be decided in the affirmative, the
charges having been sustained, and this being the lightest punishment
which can be inflicted. It would be error for a Commandery to sustain
the charges, and then refuse to inflict any punishment.

<span class="small">When the matter is disposed of by the Commandery,
the Recorder should at once give notice thereof to the accused.</span>

<span class="small">NOTICE OF JUDGMENT.</span>

*To Sir Knight —*

Take notice that the foregoing (or the within) is a copy of the action
of — Commandery, No. —., upon the charges preferred against you by —, as
the same appears of record on the minutes of the Lodge.

—, *Recorder*.

<span class="small">Either party may, within — months from the date of
the action of the Commandery, appeal to the Grand Commandery. Notice of
the appeal should be given within that time, and the appeal, giving the
grounds relied upon, must be filed with the Recorder of the Commandery
within — days after notice of appeal, and a copy of the notice and
appeal must be forwarded to the Grand Recorder.</span>

<span class="small">NOTICE ON APPEAL.</span>

*To, —, Recorder of — Commandery, No. —., Knights Templar:*

Take notice, that I shall bring an appeal from the action of said
Commandery, on the — day of —, 18—, in passing sentence of — on me, to
the R. E. Grand Commandery of the State of —, on the grounds to be
stated in my appeal.

A— B—

— this — day of—, 18—.

<span class="small">APPEAL.</span>

*To the R. E. Grand Commandery Knights Templar of the State of —:*

The undersigned hereby appeals to you from the decision of — Commandery,
No. —., made on the — day of —, 18—, in passing sentence of — on him,
and he specifies the following as the ground of his appeal:

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

1st. That — —————.

<span class="small">\[State the grounds clearly and truthfully.\]</span>

A— B—

this — day of —, 18—.

<span class="small">When the appeal is filed with the Recorder, the
Commandery should cause an answer thereto to be prepared, and must
furnish the transcript of the proceedings to the Grand Recorder.</span>

<span class="small">ANSWER TO APPEAL.</span>

— Commandery, No. —., answers the appeal of Sir —, and says:

That ———————.

—, *Eminent Commander*.

— this — day of —, 18—.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>\]

Attest:

—, *Recorder*.

<span class="small">The Recorder of the Commandery, in the preparation
of a transcript, should be very careful to give fully and exactly all
that transpired on the trial, never giving copies unless ordered by the
Commandery as to some particular document used, always sending up
original papers. The transcript should be made in a plain, legible
handwriting, and fastened at top of the paper, and the Recorder should,
under the seal of the Commandery, certify to the correctness of the
transcript in words like unto the following:</span>

<span class="small">CERTIFICATE TO TRANSCRIPT.</span>

I —, Recorder of — Commandery, No—, Knights Templar, do certify that the
foregoing is a full, true, and perfect transcript of all the records and
proceedings had by and before said Commandery upon the charges preferred
by — against —, as the same appear upon the minutes of said Commandery,
and on file in the archives thereof.

In testimony whereof, I hereto subscribe my name and affix the seal of
said Commandery this — day of —, A. D. 18—, A. O. 7—.

\[<span class="smallcaps">seal</span>\]

—, Recorder.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="small">Recorders should examine with great care the Edicts
and Regulations of the Grand Commandery and Grand Encampment upon the
subject of trials and appeals, and should strictly conform thereto,
varying the foregoing forms as circumstances may require, in order to
comply with the requirements of said governing bodies.</span>

<span class="small">APPEAL TO THE GRAND ENCAMPMENT.</span>

<span class="small">In case of a proper appeal to the Grand Encampment,
the following form may be substantially adopted:</span>

*To the Grand Encampment of Knights Templar of the United States:*

The undersigned, your petitioner, respectfully represents that on or
about the — day of —, 18—, charges for *immoral and unknightly conduct*
(stating the general nature of the charges) were preferred against him
by Sir Knight, in — Commandery, No.—, under the jurisdiction of the
Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of, and such
proceedings were thereupon had in the said — — Commandery; that your
petitioner was adjudged by the same Commandery guilty of the offense so
charged against him, and was therefore adjudged to (state the penalty
imposed). That from such determination and sentence or judgment, your
petitioner appealed to the said Grand Commandery, and thereupon such
proceedings were had in and by said Grand Commandery; that afterward,
and on or about the day — of —, 18—, the said determination and
sentence, or judgment, were in *all things affirmed* (state the decision
in fact given on the appeal) by the said Grand Commandery; and now your
petitioner, feeling himself aggrieved by the action and determination of
the said Grand Commandery, in the premises, and being advised that the
same is erroneous, appeals therefrom to the Grand Encampment of the
United States, and specifies, among other grounds of error therein, the
following:

<span class="small">\[State the several errors in, and objections to,
the proceedings and determination of the Grand Commandery relied upon
separately, and numbering them distinctly.\]</span>

Your petitioner, therefore, prays that the said Grand Commandery may be
required to answer this petition; and that the testimony, proceedings,
determination and judgment aforesaid, as well of the said — Commandery,
as of said Grand Commandery, may, upon this appeal, be reviewed, and
that such sentence and determination,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

or judgment, may be reversed, modified or amended, as may be agreeable
to knightly usage, justice or equity.

——————

— this — day of —, 18—.

<span class="small">This appeal should be delivered to the Grand
Recorder of the Grand Commandery, and a duplicate thereof delivered to
the Grand Recorder of the Grand Encampment. As soon thereafter as
practicable, and before the next Triennial Conclave of the Grand
Encampment, the Grand Recorder of the Grand Commandery should transmit
to the Grand Recorder of the Grand Encampment a transcript of all the
testimony, papers, and proceedings in the case which were before the
Grand Commandery, together with its action and final determination
therein, all duly authenticated under the seal of the Grand
Commandery.</span>

<span class="small">PETITION FOR RESTORATION.</span>

*To the Eminent Commander, Officers and Members of — Commandery, No.
—.:*

The undersigned respectfully represents that, on the — day of —, 18—, he
was, by the judgment and sentence of said Commandery, expelled (or
indefinitely suspended) front the rights and privileges of Knight
Templary, and from membership in said Commandery.

For the following reasons (*here state them*) he prays to be restored to
the rights and privileges of which he was thus deprived, and promises,
if his prayer shall be granted, to conform to the legal conditions of
his restoration.

——————

— this — day of —, 18—.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reception of Grand Visitors](shib47.md)
