[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib37)  [Next](shib39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### BURIAL SERVICE.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### GENERAL REGULATIONS.

1\. No Knight Templar can be buried with the funeral honors of
Knighthood, unless he be in regular standing.

2\. It is the duty of the Eminent Commander to convene the Commandery,
upon notice of the death of a Sir Knight who may be entitled to receive
funeral honors, upon request, made when living or by his family after
his decease, for the purpose of attending the funeral ceremonies.

3\. The Knights, on such occasions, will attend in full uniform,
pursuant to the regulations; their sword hilts and the Banner of the
Commandery suitably dressed in mourning.

4\. On the coffin of the deceased will be placed his hat and sword; and
if an Officer, his jewel, trimmed with crape.

5\. The Eminent Commander will preside during the services, and,
assisted by the Prelate, lead in the ceremonies, pursuant to the Ritual.
If Grand Officers or Past Grand Officers be present, they will be
allotted a place in the procession according to their rank.

6\. The Knights will assemble at their Asylum, and march to the
residence of the deceased, in the usual order of processions, swords at
Carry; the line being headed by the Warder, and the Officers being in
the rear, according to rank; that is, the Eminent Commander last.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The military movements necessary to the Burial Service will be conducted
according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

When desirable, the part of the service set down for the "Residence or
the Church" may be deferred until the procession reaches the grave.

During the reading of the Scriptures, and during Prayer, all will
Uncover without commands or signals, and Re-cover at conclusions.

If it is inconvenient to form the Triangle at the grave, the Commandery
can be formed in two lines, one on each side of the grave,

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the Commander and Prelate at the head, pall-bearers beside the coffin,
and mourners and friends at the foot.

The Ritual directs that the body be lowered into the grave immediately
after the address by the Prelate, and when the Junior Warden removes the
sword from the coffin. It has been the practice of the author of this
<span class="smallcaps">Monitor</span> to not lower the coffin until the
service was concluded, and the Lord's Prayer repeated. Then, while being
lowered, to sing a hymn, which always proved a great relief to the
mourners, as well as adding to the solemnities of the entire service.

It is effective to have the "Responses" made, in unison, by the
Generalissimo and Captain General, only.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### THE RITUAL.

###### AT THE RESIDENCE, OR IN THE CHURCH.

EC.—Sir Knights, in the solemn rites of our Order, we have often been
reminded of the fact that we were born to die. Mortality has been
brought to view, that we might more earnestly seek an immortality beyond
this fleeting life, where death comes no more forever. The sad and
mournful knell has betokened that another spirit has winged its flight
to a new existence. An alarm has come to the door of our Asylum, and the
messenger was Death. None presumed to say to the awful presence: "Who
dares approach?" A pilgrim warrior has been summoned, "and there is no
discharge in that war." A burning taper of life in our Commandery has
been extinguished, and none save the High and Holy One can re-light it.
All that remains of our beloved companion lies mute before us, and the
light of the eye, and the breathing of the lips, in fraternal greeting,
has ceased to us forever on this side of the grave. His Sword, vowed to
be drawn in the cause of truth, justice, and liberty, only, reposes in
its scabbard, and we can no longer shield him from wrong and oppression.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="small">*The Knights here return Swords without command, on
the signal of the Eminent Commander*.</span>

It is meet, at such a time, that we should be silent, and allow the
words of the Infinite and Undying to speak, that we may gather
consolation from His revelations, and have impressed upon our minds
lessons of wisdom, instruction, and the meetness of preparation for the
last great change which must pass upon us all.

Let us be reverently attentive while our Prelate reads unto us a lesson
from the Holy Scriptures.

P.—Help, Lord: for the faithful fail from among the children of men.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Help us, O Lord.

P.—*The righteous* cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of
all their troubles.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Hear us, O Lord.

P.—The Lord *is* nigh unto them that are of a broken heart: and saveth
such as be of a contrite spirit.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Be nigh unto us, O Lord.

P.—The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants: and none of them that
trust in Him shall be desolate.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Redeem us, O Lord.

P.—For I will not trust in my bow, neither shall my sword save me.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Redeem us, O Lord.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

P.—But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave: for he shall
receive me.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Redeem us, O Lord.

P.—Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? Shall the dead arise *and* praise
thee? Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? *or* thy
faithfulness in destruction?

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Save us, O Lord.

P.—We spend our years as a tale *that is told*. The days of our years
*are* threescore years and ten; and if by reason of strength *they be*
fourscore years, yet *is* their strength labor and sorrow; for it is
soon cut off, and we fly away. So teach *us* to number our days, that we
may apply *our* hearts unto wisdom.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Teach us, O Lord.

P.—For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we *are* dust. As *for*
man, his days *are* as grass: as a flower of the field, so he
flourisheth. For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place
thereof shall know it no more. But the mercy of the Lord *is* from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Show mercy, O Lord.

P.—We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed, In a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, at the last trump: for the trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal *must* put on
immortality. So when this corruptible shall have put on in-

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

corruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be
brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
victory. O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where *is* thy victory?

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—O death, where is thy sting? O
grave, where is thy victory?

P.—The sting of death *is* sin; and the strength of sin *is* the law.
But thanks *be* to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord
Jesus Christ..

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Thanks be unto God.

EC.—Shall the memory of our departed brother fade from among men?

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—It is cherished in our souls
forever.

EC.—Shall no record be left of his virtues and worth?

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—It is inscribed upon our hearts; it
is written in our archives; the heart may cease to throb, and the
archives may moulder and decay, but the tablets of the Recording Angel
on high can never perish.

<span class="small">*The Recorder here opens the Book of Records of the
Commandery, on which a page is set apart, suitably inscribed, and
says:*</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Recorder</span>.—Thus it is written.

<span class="small">*The Knights bow their heads*.</span>

EC.—He was a true and courteous Knight, and has fallen in life's
struggle full knightly, with his armor on.

P.—Rest to his ashes and peace to his soul.

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Rest to his ashes and peace to his
soul.

P.—Sovereign Ruler of the Universe! into thy hands we devoutly and
submissively commit the departed spirit.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—Thy will be done, O God.

*A Hymn will then be sung.*

*The following, or an extemporaneous, Prayer will then be made by the
Prelate, or by any clergyman present:*

<span class="smallcaps">Father of Light</span>, in this dark and trying
hour of calamity and sorrow, we humbly lift our hearts to Thee. Give us,
we pray, that light which cometh down from above. Thou hast mercifully
said in Thy holy word, that the bruised reed Thou wouldst not break;
remember in mercy, O Lord, these bereaved ones now before Thee. \[Be
Thou, at this hour, the Father of the fatherless, and the widow's God.
Administer to them the consolations which they so sorely need.\] Cause
us to look away from these sad scenes of frail mortality to the hopes
which lie beyond the grave, and bind us yet closer together in the ties
of brotherly love and affection. While we see how frail is man, and how
uncertain the continuance of our lives upon the earth, and are reminded
of our own mortality, lead us, by Thy grace and spirit, to turn our
thoughts to those things which make for our everlasting peace; and give
us a frame of mind to make a proper improvement of all the admonitions
of thy providence, and fix our thoughts more devotedly on Thee, the only
sure refuge in time of need. And at last, when our earthly pilgrimage
shall be ended, or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be
broken, wilt Thou, in that moment of mortal extremity be indeed
*Emmanuel*—God with us! May the lamp of Thy love dispel the gloom of the
dark valley, and may we be enabled by the intercession of Thy

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Son, to gain
admission into the blessed Asylum above; and in Thy glorious presence,
enjoy a union with the spirits of the departed, perfect as is the
happiness of heaven, and durable as the eternity of God. <span
class="smallcaps">Amen</span>!

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—<span class="smallcaps">Amen and
Amen</span>!

*All Re-cover.*

*The procession will then form and march to the place of interment, in
the same order as before*.

<span class="small">AT THE GRAVE.</span>

*On arriving at the place, while forming in order, a suitable Dirge may
be played by the band.*

*The Knights will form, if convenient, a Triangle around the grave, the
base being at the foot, the Eminent Commander and Prelate being at the
head, and the friends and relatives at the foot. If a Triangle is
inconvenient, form in two lines on the sides of the grave*.

P.—Sir Knights, there is one sacred spot upon the earth where the
footfalls of our march are unheeded; our trumpets quicken no pulse and
incite no fear; the rustling of our banners and the gleam of our swords
awaken no emotion. It is the silent city of the dead where we now stand.
Awe rests upon every heart, and the stern warrior's eyes are bedewed
with feelings which never shame his manhood. It needs no siege, nor
assault, nor beleaguering host to enter its walls; we fear no sortie,
and listen for no battle shout. No Warder's challenge greets the ear,
nor do we wait awhile with patience for permission to enter.

Hither must we all come at last; and the stoutest heart and the manliest
form that surrounds me will then be led a captive, without title or
rank, in the chains of mortality and the habiliments of slavery to the
King of Terrors.

But if he has been faithful to the Captain of his Salvation,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

a true Soldier of the Cross; if he has offered suitable gifts at the
shrine of his departed Lord, and bears the signet of the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, then play he claim to be of that princely house and to
be admitted to audience with the Sovereign Master of Heaven and Earth.
Then will he be stripped of the chains of earthly captivity and clothed
in a white garment, glistening as the sun, and be seated with princes
and rulers, and partake of a libation, not of death and sorrow, but of
that wine which is drunk forever new in the Father's kingdom above.

We can not come here without subdued hearts and softened affections.
Often as the challenge conies which takes from our side some loved
associate, some cherished companion-in-arms, and often as the trumpet
sounds its wailing notes to summon us to the death-bed and the brink of
the sepulchre, we can not contemplate "the last of earth" unmoved. Each
successive death-note snaps some fiber which binds us to this lower
existence and makes us pause and reflect upon that dark and gloomy
chamber where we must all terminate our pilgrimage. Well will it be for
our peace then, if we can wash our hands, not only in token of
sincerity, but of every guilty stain, and give honest and satisfactory
answers to the questions required.

The sad and solemn scene now before us stirs up these recollections with
a force and vivid power which we have hitherto unfelt. He who now
slumbers in that last, long, unbroken sleep of death was our brother.
With him have we walked the pilgrimage of life and kept ward and watch
together in its vicissitudes and trials. He is now removed beyond the
effect of our praise or censure. That we loved him our presence here
evinces; and we remember him in scenes to which the world was not
witness, and where the better feelings of humanity were exhibited
without disguise. That he had faults and foibles is but to repeat what
his mortality

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

demonstrates—that he had a human nature, not divine. Over these errors,
whatever they may have been, we cast, while living, the mantle of
charity; it should, with much more reason, enshroud him in death. We who
have been taught to extend the point of charity even to a foe when
fallen, can not be severe or merciless toward a loved brother.

The memory of his virtues lingers in our remembrance and reflects its
shining lustre beyond the portals of the tomb. The earthen vase which
has contained precious odors will lose none of its fragrance, though the
clay be broken and shattered. So be it with our brother's memory.

<span class="small">*The Junior Warden removes the Sword from the
coffin, which will then be lowered into the grave, while the Prelate
repeats as follows:* (See General Regulations for a different
ceremony.)</span>

P.—I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though
he were dead, yet shall he live: and whosoever liveth and believeth in
me shall never die. To the earth we commit the mortal remains of our
deceased brother,—we have already commended his soul to his
Creator,—with humble submission to Divine Providence. (*Here cast some
earth on the coffin*.) Earth to earth (*cast earth again*)*;* ashes to
ashes (*cast more earth*)*;* dust to dust—till the morn of the
resurrection, when, like our risen and ascended Redeemer, he shall break
the bonds of death, and abide the judgment of the great day. Till then,
Friend, Brother, Sir Knight, farewell! Light lie the ashes upon thee,
and may the sunshine of heaven beam bright on thy waking!

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—<span class="smallcaps">Amen and
Amen</span>!

<span class="small">*The Junior Warden presents the Sword to the Eminent
Commander, who says:*</span>

EC.—Our departed brother was taught, while living, that

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

this Sword, in his hands, as a true and courteous Knight, was endowed
with three most estimable qualities: Its hilt with *justice* impartial;
its blade with *fortitude* undaunted; and its point with *mercy*
unrestrained. To these lessons, with their deep emblematical
significance, we trust he gave diligent heed. He could never grasp its
hilt without being reminded of the lively significance of the attributes
it inculcated. He has borne the pangs of dissolving nature,—may we trust
that with the same *fortitude* he sustained the trials of this passing
existence. To his name and memory be *justice* done, as we hope to
receive the like justice ourselves. And may that *mercy* unrestrained,
which is the glorious attribute of the Son of God, interpose in his
behalf to parry the sword of Divine Justice, and to admit him to the
blessed companionship of saints and angels in the realms of light and
life eternal.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—<span class="smallcaps">Amen and
Amen</span>!

<span class="small">*The Senior Warden presents a Cross to the Prelate,
who says:*</span>

P.—This symbol of faith—the Christian's hope and the Christian's
trust—we again place upon the breast of our brother, there to remain
till the last trumpet shall sound and earth and sea yield up their dead.
Though it may, in the past history of our race, have been perverted into
an ensign of oppression and wrong; though it may have been made the
emblem of fraud and superstition and moral darkness, its true
significance remained,—the badge of the Christian warrior. To-day it
calls to mind Gethsemane and its sorrowful garden; the judgment hall of
Pilate and the pitiless crown of thorns; Golgotha and Calvary, and their
untold agonies, that fallen man might live and inherit everlasting life.
If an inspired apostle was not ashamed of the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cross, neither
should we be; if he gloried in the significance of the truths it
shadowed forth, so ought we to rejoice in it as the speaking witness of
our reliance beyond the grave. May this hope of the living have been the
anchor to the soul of our departed brother—the token to admit him to
that peaceful haven where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary
are at rest.

<span class="smallcaps">Res</span>.—<span class="smallcaps">Amen and
Amen</span>!

<span class="small">*The Prelate drops the Cross into the grave, or lays
it on the coffin, and continues:*</span>

P.—The Orders of Christian Knighthood were instituted in a dark period
of the world's history, but their mission was high and holy. To succor
and protect the sorrowing and destitute, the innocent and oppressed, was
their vow and their life-long labor and duty. For long, long years they
well and nobly performed their vows and did their devoirs. In those rude
ages the steel blade was oftener the arbiter of justice than the
judgments of judicial tribunals or the decrees of magistrates. So long
as the Templars adhered to their vows of poverty they were virtuous and
innocent, and their language was in truth, "Silver and gold have I none;
but such as I have give I thee." But, with the accession of wealth and
civil power, they were tempted, and fell from their high estate, and
their possessions attracted the cupidity and their prowess incurred the
hatred of the despots of those times. When the martyred De Molai had
perished and the Order was proscribed, they united with the fraternity
of Free and Accepted Masons, and returned to their primitive simplicity
of manners; and a rough habit, coarse diet and severe duty was all that
was offered to their votaries.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

In our land we have perpetuated only the distinctive rites, with the
appellations and regulations of the defenders of the Holy Sepulchre—the
early champions and soldiers of the Cross—and this as a guerdon of
merit, not a badge of rank. The Sword in our hands is more as a symbol
of the duties we have vowed to fulfill than an instrument of assault or
defense. We claim to exercise practical virtues in the holy bonds of our
confraternity, in humble imitation of those renowned Knights of the
olden time; for there is still in this refined age innocence to be
guarded, widowed hearts to be relieved of their burdens, and orphanage
to be protected from the chill blasts of a wintry world; and to be true
and courteous is not limited to any age or clime.

Our brother, whose cold and lifeless remains have just been committed to
the earth, was one of our fraternal band, bound by the same ties and
pledged to the same duties. To his bereaved and mourning friends and
relatives we have but little worldly consolation to offer, but we do
tender them our heartfelt sympathies. And if the solemn and interesting
ceremonies in which we have been engaged have not pointed them to a
higher hope and a better consolation, then all our condolence would be
in vain.

Sir Knight Companions, let us pray.

*Here all repeat the* <span class="smallcaps">Lord's Prayer</span>.

The Prelate will then pronounce the following

<span class="small">BENEDICTION.</span>

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all. <span
class="smallcaps">Amen</span>!

<span class="small">*Lines are reformed, and the Commandery returns to
the Asylum*.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Order of Malta](shib39.md)
