[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib47)  [Next](shib49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

### HINTS TO EMINENT COMMANDERS.

1\. Give unremitting attention to the protection of the Ritual, and the
Paraphernalia of your Commanderies. The first should never be out of
your care, the other should be kept in perfect repair.

2\. Be certain that the Sentinel, or Janitor, has everything in
readiness for the Conclaves of the Commanderies. The comfort of your
Fratres should be an unremitting solicitude. Their attendance will be
largely affected by your attention to this hint.

3\. See to it that your Fratres are provided with uniforms, but in doing
so be not forgetful of the tenderness of many on matters that affect
their purses. Persuade, but do not command. Some Grand Commanderies have
a rule on this matter of uniforming. Enforce it in love.

4\. Do not begin the Opening Ceremonies until you are certain that the
Asylum is in proper array, and all necessary arrangements are made.

5\. Permit no admissions during the Opening Ceremonies. Allow no
conversation, not even whispering, while opening. Such interruptions
seriously affect the solemnities.

6\. Never begin the Work until you are certain that everything is ready,
in place, and in order. Halts to make search for missing paraphernalia
are destructive to good Work.

7\. Permit no moving about the Asylum, conversation, or comments during
the Work. This is of vital importance. Fratres who think they can not
refrain from these disturbances should quietly withdraw to the Reception
Room, or some other outer apartment. Be certain to make your request for
absolute silence before you begin Work.

8\. Do not permit military drill during the Work. Form the Escort by
arrangements made by the Captain General before the Work begins. Let the
chosen Knights so sit that at the low-given command—"Fall in"—they may
quietly step to their places, with Swords at a Carry. The formation by
counting and facing breaks up all solemnity. And all military commands
given should be in subdued tones of voice.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

9\. This Monitor favors the appearance of none at the D—a, on the First
Entrance, but the Eminent Commander, Senior Warden, and Cand. All others
seated, and in silence. Asylum in full lights. This is one scene. Second
Entrance finds Nine b—d at D—a, and *only* D—a lights burning. This
scene is entirely unlike the former,—an important matter of progression.
When the <span class="smallcaps">PP.</span> re—, the vacancy is
symbolized as filled, and he and the two Wardens, with the Nine, make
twelve also. The First is a series of Tests by the Chief; the Second is
the Filling of the Vacancy caused by apostasy. If these points are kept
in view the Lessons will be most imposing.

10\. The author of this Monitor believes that the laying down and taking
up the C—s at the Libs is destructive of solemnity. By the method herein
suggested there are only two C—s,—one for the Eminent Commander, the
other for the Cand. Nothing distracts his attention from the solemn
Tests if practiced this way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rules of Order](shib49)
