[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib39)  [Next](shib41.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

# SECOND APPENDIX

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

##### ANNO DOMINI.

The Christian Era was first used by a Roman abbot, Denys le Petit, or
Dionisius Exigus, about the year 527. It was generally adopted in
England in the eighth century. The Council of Chelsea, July, 816,
ordained that all bishops should date their acts from the year of the
incarnation of our Saviour. In the Eastern Empire it was not in general
use until after the capture of Constantinople by Mahomet II, in 1453.

Down to 1752 the Historical year in England commenced on January 1st,
and the Ecclesiastical, Civil (Legal) year commenced on March 25th. This
led to great confusion, to avoid which it was long the custom to add the
date of the *Historical* to that of the *Legal* year, when speaking of
any day between January 1st and March 25th, thus:

<span id="img_13900"></span> ![January 30, 1648 = 1648, the Civil
(Legal) year. 1649 = 1649, the Historical Year](img/13900.jpg.md)

Others wrote it thus: January. 30, 1645-9. The lower, or last, figure
always indicated the year according to the present calculation.

##### MASONIC CALENDARS.

The various bodies of Freemasonry have adopted Calendars for their
special use. In the following table the figures are carried out for the
year 1893.

<span class="smallcaps">Knights Templar</span> founded 1118. Hence *Anno
Ordinis* 775.

<span class="smallcaps">Second Temple</span> began to be built by
Zerubbabel, B. C. 330.

Hence the <span class="smallcaps">Royal Arch</span>, *Anno Inventionis*
(Year of Discovery) 2423.

<span class="smallcaps">Royal and Select Masters</span> refer to
completion of the Temple, 1000 B. C.

Hence <span class="smallcaps">R. and A. Masters</span>, *Anno
Depositionis* (Year of Deposit) 2893.

<span class="smallcaps">Ancient Craft Masons</span> use *Anno Lucis*
(Year of Light)—Creation 5893.

<span class="smallcaps">Scottish Rite</span> uses *Anno Mundi* (Year of
World)—Creation 5653.

##### THE MOON'S RISING AND SETTING.

At 4 days old the moon sets at about 10 at night.

At 5 days old at about 11 at night.

At 6 days old at about 12 at night.

At 7 days old at or near I in morning.

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

At 15 days old at full it rises about 6 in evening.

At 16 days old at a quarter past 7 in evening.

At 17 days old at half past 8 in evening.

At IS days old about Lo at night.

At 19 clays old about 11 at night.

At 20 days old about 12 at night.

##### THE DIVISION OF TIME.

###### DAYS OF THE WEEK.

<span class="smallcaps">Sunday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Sunnandæg*), day of
the sun.

<span class="smallcaps">Monday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Monandæg*), day of
the moon.

<span class="smallcaps">Tuesday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Tiwesdæg*), from
Tiw, the god of war.

<span class="smallcaps">Wednesday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Wodnesdæg*),
from Odin, the god of storms.

<span class="smallcaps">Thursday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Thunresdæg*), day
of Thor, the god of thunder.

<span class="smallcaps">Friday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Frigedæg*), day of
Freya, goddess of marriage.

<span class="smallcaps">Saturday</span> (Anglo-Saxon, *Saterdæg;* Latin,
*Dies Saturnus*), day of Saturn, the god of time.

The Chinese and Thibetans have a week of five days, named after iron,
wood, water, feathers and earth.

###### NAMES OF THE MONTHS.

<span class="smallcaps">January</span>.—The Roman Janus presided over
the beginning of everything; hence the first month of the year was
called after him.

<span class="smallcaps">February</span> (Latin, *Februarius*).—The month
of purification; on the 15th day of this month the Feast of Expiation
was held.

<span class="smallcaps">March</span>.—Named from the Roman god of war,
Mars.

<span class="smallcaps">April</span>, (Latin, *Aprilis*).—Probably
derived from *aperire*, to open; because spring generally begins and the
buds open in this month.

<span class="smallcaps">May</span> (Latin, *Maius*).—From Maia, a
feminine divinity worshiped at Rome on the Ist day of this month.

<span class="smallcaps">June</span>.—From Juno, a Roman divinity
worshiped as the queen of heaven.

<span class="smallcaps">July</span> (*Julius*). Julius Cæsar was born in
this month.

<span class="smallcaps">August</span>.—Named by the Emperor Augustus
Cæsar, B. C. 30, after himself. He regarded it as a fortunate month,
being that in which he had gained several victories.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="smallcaps">September</span> (*Septem*, or seven).—September
was the seventh month in the old Roman calendar.

<span class="smallcaps">October</span> (*Octo*, or eight).—Eighth month
of the old Roman year.

<span class="smallcaps">November</span> (*Novem*, or nine).—November was
the ninth month in the old Roman year.

<span class="smallcaps">December</span> (*Decem*, or ten).—December was
the tenth month of the early Roman year. About the twenty-first of this
month the sun enters the Tropic of Capricorn, and forms the winter
solstice.

###### THE YEAR.

The Solar or astronomical year was, 265 years B. C., determined to
comprise 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, 51 seconds. The *Lunar* year,
comprehending 12 moons, or 354 days, 8 hours, 48 minutes, was the
regulator of time among the Chaldeans, Persians and Jews. Till the time
of William the Conqueror the English began their year on the 25th of
December. Down to 1732 the year did not legally commence till the 25th
of March. In Scotland, at that date, the year began on the 1st of
January.

To adjust the Calendar, a new one was published by Pope Gregory XIII in
1582, omitting ten days, the 5th of October becoming the 15th. The New
Style was not adopted in Great Britain till 1752, when eleven days were
jumped, the 3d of September being reckoned the 14th. In Russia and the
East the Old Style is still in force, and all Russian dates are twelve
days earlier than English.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Knight Templar Grand Jurisdictions of the United States](shib41.md)
