[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib25)  [Next](shib27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_starsep"></span> ![](img/starsep.jpg)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### A RITUALISTIC COMMENTARY.

"The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the children of the
captivity builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel." Ezra iv: 1.

The "adversaries" are enumerated in verses 7, 8 and 9. The territory
assigned to Judah was about forty-five miles long and fifty miles wide,
and extended from the Jordan to the Mediterranean. The territory
assigned to Benjamin was about twenty-six miles long and twelve miles
wide. It extended from the Jordan to seven miles west of Jerusalem.

These were the oldest and the youngest sons of Jacob, and they fell heir
to Jerusalem, the Temple, and the glories of the Mosaic traditions, on
the secession of the Ten Tribes under Rehoboam. Judah means "the praise
of the Lord;" Benjamin means "the son of the right hand."

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

"And they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God
with us." Matt. i: 23.

"Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his
name Immanuel." Isaiah vii: 54.

Emmanuel is the Greek form of the Hebrew Immanuel. Ahaz is informed of
the birth of Messiah by Isaiah, and Matthew says this prophecy was
accomplished in the birth of Christ.

It was in its Greek form that the word was familiar to the Templars of
old, as well as of to-day.

"And thou shalt call his name Jesus: for he shall save his people from
their sins." Matt. i: 21.

Jesus is the Greek form of the Hebrew Joshua, or Jeshua, which is a
contraction of Jehoshua, (Numbers xiii: 16.) Its literal meaning is "he
of Jehovah," and we define it as "Saviour." Jesus Christ means "
Anointed Saviour." As such is he adored by the Templar.

 

"And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a
place of a skull." Matt. xxvii: 33.

Golgotha literally means "a heap of skulls," but three of the
Evangelists define it as "a place of a skull." Luke says, "which is
called Calvary," that is, "a skull." The Greek word is κραντον which the
Vulgate renders *Calvariam*, meaning "a bare skull." It is probable the
name was given this elevation because of its peculiarly shaped summit.

The awful tragedy enacted on Golgotha is dear to the true Templar, and
he ever holds his sword in readiness to defend the religion founded upon
that tragedy.

 

Moreover the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write in it
with a man's pen concerning Maher-shalal-hash-baz." Isaiah viii: i.

An attempt at literal rendering of this passage would result in, "Take
thee a great roll, and write in it with a man's pen concerning Make
speed to the spoil, hasten the prey." The phrase is as difficult of
translation as is the phrase, "Anathema Maran-atha." It means in its
naked form, "Hasten-booty, Speed-spoil." It is pronounced *Mā-her shălăl
hăsh´băz*.

This phrase was cherished by the ancient Templars, who held it to be
symbolical of that readiness for action which should characterize a true
Soldier of Christ!

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

"At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the river,
and Shethar-boznai, and their companions, and said thus unto them, Who
hath commanded you to build this house and to make up this wall? " Ezra
v: 3.

This Tat na-i was Satrap of the province west of the Euphrates, next to
Judea. Shethar-boz na-i was not a Satrap, but an officer of rank, and
though his name meant "star of splendor," he united with Tatnai in an
effort to shroud with gloom the hopes of the returned children of the
captivity. God caused their wrath to praise him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The So-Called Vision of Constantine](shib27)
