[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib34)  [Next](shib36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

### GRAND COMMANDERIES.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

#### INSTALLATION OF THEIR OFFICERS.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Grand Commander will appoint a Grand
Marshal, under whose direction the Officers elect will retire to an
adjoining room. The Jewels will be placed on a table, which is in front
of the Installing Officer. The Altar is beside this table.

Twelve chairs will be placed just west of the Altar, as seats for the
Officers elect when they enter. The chairs will extend from North to
South, the seat of the Grand Commander on the right, and of the Grand
Warder on the left.

GC.—Let the Grand Officers elect enter.

<span class="small">*The Grand Marshal, who is notified by the Captain
of the Guard, conducts the Officers elect, in single file, to the East,
and halts them in front of the chairs, facing the East*.</span>

GC. (*As Officers enter*)—<span id="img_note3"></span>
![](img/note3.jpg)

<span class="small">*If there is an instrument, a March will be
played*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span> (*When the Officers are halted,
facing East*)—Right Eminent Commander, these are the Officers chosen by
the Grand Commandery, and they are now ready for installation.

GC.—Excellent Grand Prelate, lead us in an Invocation to the Throne of
Grace. Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! <span
class="smallcaps">Uncover</span>!

<span class="small">*The Grand Prelate offers the following, or some
other*</span>

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<span class="small">PRAYER.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Almighty</span> God, our Heavenly Father, from
whom cometh every good and perfect gift, we humbly approach Thy
presence, and beseech Thee, for the sake of Thine only begotten Son, to
look upon us in infinite mercy, and bless this our Commander, and those
associated with him in office, with a rich outpouring of Thy grace.
Pardon our sins, and blot out our transgressions from before Thee!
Incline the hearts of these Officers to follow after Thee! Endow them
with wisdom, and give unto each patience, perseverance, courage,
constancy, faith, and humility.

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">Lord's Prayer</span> (*in
which all unite*).</span>

GC.—Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Re-cover</span>!

GC.—Sir Knights, before investing you with the Jewels of your official
positions, it becomes my duty to receive from you the Vow of office. Are
you willing to take such a Vow?

<span class="small">*The Grand Commander and all the Officers elect bow
in assent*.</span>

GC.—Let the Grand Commander elect approach the East.

<span class="small">*The Grand Marshal conducts him to the East*.</span>

GC. (*GC. draws his Sword and holds it vertically*)—You will grasp the
blade of this Sword with your left hand, and then place your right hand
upon your heart. (*Done*.) Now repeat after me:

<span class="small">VOW OF OFFICE.</span>

I, —, do solemnly promise and vow, that I will maintain and support the
Constitution of the Grand Encampment

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

of Knights Templar of the United States of America, the Statutes and
Regulations of the Grand Commandery of the State of — and that I will,
to the best of my ability, faithfully discharge the duties of the office
to which I have been elected.

<span class="small">*Installing Officer returns his Sword to
scabbard*.</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE.</span>

GC.—Right Eminent Sir, having been called by the members of this Grand
Body to fill the highest office in their gift, I congratulate you upon
having received such distinction at their hands, and I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office.

Your authority will at all times be respected and your orders will be
cheerfully obeyed. It is expected that you will not only have a watchful
care over the interests of the Order in your jurisdiction, and enforce a
prompt obedience to its Rules and Regulations, but that you will
yourself exemplify, in your daily walk and conversation, the excellent
tenets of your profession; that your ears will never be closed to the
cry of the widow and the orphan; and that you will not turn aside from
injured innocence, or from a frater in distress. Maintain with
unfaltering zeal the Statutes and Regulations of this Grand Body, and by
your own respect for law prompt others to a cheerful obedience of all
lawful requirements. You will now assume your station.

<span class="small">*The Grand Commander is escorted by the Grand
Marshal to his station, where he stands*.</span>

GC.—Sir Knights, *Present* <span class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! Behold
your Grand Commander! Grand Commander, behold the Grand Commandery!

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="small">Remarks by the new Grand Commander will now be in
order. He will install the remaining Officers, or may request the
Installing Officer to continue.</span>

GC.—Sir Knights, *Carry* <span class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! *Return*
Swords <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>!

GC.—Remaining Officers elect (*they arise*): Before proceeding to invest
you with the honors and responsibilities of your several offices, it
becomes my duty to administer to you the Obligation of office. As you
have severally consented to take upon yourselves that Obligation, place
yourselves in position to take that Vow.

<span class="small">The Grand Marshal will then cause each Sir Knight in
the line of Officers elect occupying the odd number from the right of
the line, to draw his Sword, and drop it to the left to a horizontal
position. The Sir Knight on his left will lay his left hand upon the
Sword, then each places his right hand upon his left breast, and repeats
after the Grand Commander the following Vow:</span>

GC.—Repeat after me:

I, —, do solemnly promise and vow, that I will maintain and support the
Constitution, Laws, and Statutes of the Grand Encampment of the United
States, the Constitution, Statutes, and Regulations of this Grand
Commandery, and that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the
duties of the office to which I have been chosen.

GC.—Escort the Deputy Grand Commander to the East, and the remainder of
the Officers elect will resume their seats.

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span>—Right Eminent Grand Commander, I
present unto you Very Eminent Sir —, who has been elected Deputy Grand
Commander of this Grand Commandery, and who is now ready for
installation.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

GC.—In the exalted station to which you have been chosen, Very Eminent
Sir, you are the immediate representative of the Grand Commander, and in
case of unforeseen casualty to him—which God forbid—you are to enter
upon his functions and assume his responsibilities. The elevated
position you are thus called to occupy demands a corresponding zeal and
devotion on your part, which, I doubt not, you will ever be found ready
to exercise. I now invest you with the Jewel of your office, and will
only remind you that you are henceforward on duty, and that the faithful
soldier and valiant Knight sleeps not at his post.

<span class="small">*The Grand Marshal will present the remaining
Officers in the same manner, when the Installing Officer will deliver to
them the following Charges:*</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND GENERALISSIMO.</span>

Eminent Sir, having been elected to the important station of Grand
Generalissimo, I take great pleasure in investing you with the
appropriate Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the
Grand Commander, and the exercise of all your talents and zeal will be
necessary in the discharge of your various duties. In the absence of
your superior officers, the command will devolve upon you. I charge you,
therefore, to be faithful to your associates; put them often in
remembrance of those things which tend to their everlasting peace; be
instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
longsuffering and doctrine, ever remembering the promise, "Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life."

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND CAPTAIN GENERAL.</span>

Eminent Sir, the office of Grand Captain General, to which you have been
elected, is one of the most important in the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

gift of the Grand Commandery, and I now invest you with the Jewel of
your office. Your station is on the left of the Grand Commander, and you
are to assist him and your associate officers in council, and in their
absence to govern the Grand Commandery. You are to have in charge the
Grand Asylum, and see that it is in suitable array for the dispatch of
business. Improve your opportunities in extending knightly courtesy and
hospitality to all true and faithful Sir Knights, and in the
preservation of harmony within the bounds of our jurisdiction; and
whatsoever ye do, do *it* heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men;
continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanksgiving; ever
bearing in mind the promise, "Be not weary in well doing: for in due
season we shall reap, if we faint not."

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND PRELATE.</span>

Revered Sir, to you has been assigned the sacred duties of the office of
Grand Prelate, and I invest you with the appropriate Jewel of your
office. Your station will be on the right of the Grand Generalissimo.
The duties of your office are sacred and important, and will require
your attendance at every Conclave. And may He who is able, abundantly
furnish you for every good work, preserve you from falling into error,
improve, strengthen, establish and perfect you; and finally greet you
with, "Well done, *thou* good and faithful servant: enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord."

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND SENIOR WARDEN.</span>

Eminent Sir, you have been elected Grand Senior Warden in this Grand
Commandery, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your
station is at the Southwest angle of the Triangle. Let it be your
constant care that the Warrior be not deterred from duty, nor the
Penitent molested on his journey.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND JUNIOR WARDEN.</span>

Eminent Sir, having been elected Grand Junior Warden, I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office. Your station is at the Northwest angle of
the Triangle. Your duty will be to attend on all visiting Knights, and,
if found worthy, to introduce them, on the order of the Grand Commander,
into the Asylum. Be ye therefore perfect, always abounding in the work
of the Lord.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND TREASURER.</span>

Eminent Sir, you have been elected Treasurer of the Grand Commandery,
and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on
the right, in front of the Grand Generalissimo. The qualities that
should especially distinguish the incumbent of your station are accuracy
and fidelity—accuracy, in keeping a fair and minute account of all
receipts and disbursements; fidelity, in carefully preserving all the
property and funds of the Grand Commandery that may lawfully come into
your hands, and rendering a just account of the same whenever called
upon. Your respect for and attachment to this Grand Commandery and the
great Order of the Temple, will stimulate you to a zealous, faithful,
and prompt discharge of the trust confided to you.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND RECORDER.</span>

Eminent Sir, by the suffrages of the Grand Commandery you have been
chosen Grand Recorder, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your
office. In selecting you to discharge the duties of this most important
trust, the Sir Knights have been guided by a belief that you possess in
a large degree the qualities that should distinguish a Grand Recorder. I
can not doubt your resolve to discharge these important duties with
benefit to this Grand Commandery, and with

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

honor to yourself. Your station, to which you will now repair, is on the
left, and in front, of the Grand Captain General.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND STANDARD BEARER.</span>

Eminent Sir, to you has been awarded the distinction of Grand Standard
Bearer, and I now invest you with the Jewel appropriate to that office.
Your station is in the West. Your duty is to display, support, and
protect the Banner of our Order, which I now place in your official
custody. Let your conduct be such that the virtuous will delight to
imitate it.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND SWORD BEARER.</span>

Eminent Sir, having been elected Grand Sword Bearer, I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the Grand
Standard Bearer. You are to assist in the protection of the Banner of
our Order with that mystic Sword which is endowed with justice and
tempered by mercy.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND WARDER.</span>

Eminent Sir, the Grand Commandery has selected you to fill the office of
Grand Warder, and I now invest you with the Jewel of your office. Your
station is on the left of the Grand Standard Bearer. Your duty is to
announce the approach of the Grand Commander, and to announce all
visiting Sir Knights who may be admitted to the privileges of our
Conclaves. You will therefore be punctual, and by a strict performance
of duty merit not only the honor now conferred upon you, but the
commendation of all Sir Knights who may experience your official
courtesy.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GRAND CAPTAIN OF THE GUARD.</span>

Eminent Sir, you have been elected to the responsible station of Grand
Captain of the Guard, and I now invest you

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

with the Jewel appropriate to your office. Holding the post of danger
and of honor, your vigilance should be sleepless, your courage
undaunted, and your courtesy beyond question. See to it that the avenues
of approach are strictly guarded. Your courage should keep the unworthy
at bay, but the valiant and the true should receive from you the
knightly welcome due to a Soldier of the Cross.

GC.—Sir Knight Grand Marshal, make Proclamation in the East.

<span class="smallcaps">G. Mar.</span>—Sir Knights, <span
class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! In the name and by authority of the
Grand Commandery of Knights Templar of the State of —, I proclaim the
Officers thereof duly elected and installed.

GC.—Grand Commandery, <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Installation of Grand Encampment](shib36)
