[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib33)  [Next](shib35.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

### INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS OF A COMMANDERY.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Commandery having been duly
constituted, the Officers are to be installed with the following
ceremony: The Table, on which lie the Jewels, is placed in front of the
Grand Commander, and the Tapers on the Triangle are lighted.

The Commandery is opened, and the Grand Commander, and his Staff, are
received according to the Tactics of the Jurisdiction.

The Officers to be installed having withdrawn to another room, the
ceremonies will begin thus:

GC.—Let the Officers you have chosen, and desire to have installed at
this time, enter.

The Grand Marshal conducts the Officers elect into the Asylum. The Grand
Commander will cause the Commandery to arise. The Officers elect will he
escorted to the East in single file, and so arranged that when their
left flank faces the East the Officers will be standing thus:

W. SwB. StB. Rec. Tr. JW. SW. P. CG. G. EC.

The Officers will enter with Swords at Carry, and when they have reached
the East the Marshal will command—

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—*File* <span
class="smallcaps">Right</span>! (*When in proper place*) <span
class="smallcaps">Halt</span>! *Left* <span
class="smallcaps">Face</span>! *Present* <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>!

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span> (*Saluting*)—Right Eminent Grand
Commander, these are the Officers chosen by this Commandery, whose
installation is desired at this time.

GC.—Sir Knights, *Carry* <span class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! *Return*
<span class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! <span class="smallcaps">Be
seated</span>!

<span class="small">*All obey these commands, and the Officers are
seated on chairs previously located for them*.</span>

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

GC.—Sir Knight Marshal, present the Eminent Commander for installation.

<span class="small">*Marshal lakes the Commander by left arm and
conducts him to the Altar, which had been placed, with the Jewels
thereon, in front of the GC*.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Right Eminent Grand Commander, I
have the honor to present to you Eminent Sir —, who has been elected to
the office of Commander of this Commandery. I find him to be well
skilled in our sublime mysteries, and observant of the noble precepts of
our forefathers, and therefore I have no doubt but that he will
discharge the important duties of his office with fidelity.

GC.—Eminent Sir, are you ready to subscribe to the Vow of office?

<span class="small">*If the Commander elect answers that he is, then the
Grand Commander will draw his Sword, and hold it horizontally, the edge
toward the Commander elect, who will grasp the blade with his left hand,
and place his right hand on his left breast*.</span>

GC.—You will repeat after me—

I, — —, do promise and vow that I will support and maintain the
Constitution and Code of Statutes of the Grand Encampment of Knights
Templar of the United States of America; that I will support and
maintain the Bylaws of this Commandery, and the Laws, Constitution,
Rules and Edicts of the Grand Commandery under whose immediate authority
I act; and I will, to the best of my knowledge and ability, faithfully
discharge the various duties incumbent upon the office to which I have
been elected.

GC.—Eminent Sir, having been elected to the important and honorable
station of Commander of this Commandery,

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

it is with unfeigned pleasure that I enter upon the discharge of the
duty of installing you into office. As the head of a Christian
institution you are charged with important responsibilities and duties,
and it is confidently anticipated that your fidelity to these trusts
will reflect honor upon yourself and credit upon your Commandery. It now
becomes my duty to propose certain questions to you, to which
unequivocal answers are required: Do you solemnly promise, upon the
honor of a Knight Templar—

I. That you will redouble your endeavors to correct the vices, purify
the morals, and promote the happiness of those of your brethren who have
attained this magnanimous Order?

II\. That you will never suffer your Commandery to be opened, unless
there be present nine regular Knights of the Order?

III\. That you will not confer the Orders upon any one who has not shown
a charitable disposition, or who has not made a considerable proficiency
in the foregoing degrees.

IV\. That you will promote the general good of our Order, and on all
proper occasions be ready to give and receive instructions, and
particularly from the General and State Grand Officers?

V. That, to the utmost of your power, you will preserve the solemnities
of our ceremonies, and behave, in open Commandery, with the most
profound respect and reverence, as an example to your brethren?

VI\. That you will not acknowledge or have intercourse with any
Commandery that does not work under a constitutional warrant or
dispensation?

VII\. That you will not admit any visitor into your Commandery who has
not been knighted in a Commandery legally constituted, without his first
being formally healed?

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

VIII\. That you will pay due respect and obedience to the instructions
of the General and State Grand Officers, particularly relating to the
several Lectures and Charges, and will resign the chair to them,
severally, when they may visit your Commandery?

IX\. That you will support and observe the Constitution of the Grand
Encampment of the United States, and the Statutes and Regulations of the
Grand Commandery under whose authority you act?

X. That you will bind your successor in office to the observance of the
same rules to which you have now assented?

Do you submit to all these things, and do you promise to observe and
practice them faithfully?

<span class="small">*The Eminent Commander assents. Grand Commander
returns his Sword*.</span>

GC.—Eminent Commander, having been chosen by the Knights of your
Commandery to fill the most exalted station in their power to bestow, I
congratulate you upon being the recipient of such honorable preferment,
and now invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Cross
surrounded by rays of light. It is to remind you that *humility*,
*love*, and pure *benevolence* are refulgent rays that emanate from the
pure and undefiled religion of the blessed Emmanuel, and which should
ever characterize the members of this Christian Order. It is to remind
you of Him who died that He might give life to the world, and who is
indeed the Lord and Saviour of all those who accept His guidance and
obey His precepts.

I present you the Charter of your Commandery.

You will receive it as a sacred deposit, and never permit it to be used
for any other purposes than those expressed in it, and safely transmit
it to your successor in office.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

I also commit to your hands the Holy Bible, the great light in every
degree of Masonry. The doctrines contained in this sacred volume create
in us a belief in the existence of the Eternal Jehovah, the only true
and living God, the Creator and Judge of all things in heaven and on
earth; they also confirm in us a belief in the dispensations of His
providence. This belief strengthens our Faith, and enables us to ascend
the first step of the Grand Masonic ladder. This Faith naturally
produces in us a Hope of becoming partakers in the promises expressed in
this inestimable gift of God to man, which Hope enables us to ascend the
second step; but the third and last, being Charity, comprehends the
former, and will continue to exert its influence when Faith shall be
lost in sight, and Hope in complete fruition. The Cross Swords, testing
upon the Holy Bible, are to remind us that we should he "strong in the
Lord, and in the power of His might;" that we should put on the whole
armour of God, to be able to wrestle successfully against principalities
and powers, and spiritual wickedness in high places.

I also present you the Constitution of the Grand Encampment of the
United States of America, the Rules and Regulations of the Grand
Commandery of this State, and the By-laws of your Commandery. You will
frequently consult them yourself, and cause them to be read for the
information of your Commandery, that all, being informed of their duty,
may have no reasonable excuse to offer for the neglect of it.

And now, Eminent Sir, permit me to induct you into the chair of your
Commandery, and in behalf of the Knights here assembled, to offer you my
most sincere congratulations on your accession to the honorable station
you now fill. It will henceforth be your special duty to preserve
inviolate the Constitution and Laws of the Order; to dispense justice,
reward merit, inculcate the almighty force and the importance of truth,
and diffuse the sublime principles of universal

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

benevolence. You will distribute alms to poor and weary pilgrims
traveling from afar, feed the hungry, clothe the naked, and bind up the
wounds of the afflicted. You will inculcate the duties of charity and
hospitality, and govern your Commandery with justice and moderation. And
finally, my brother, may the bright example of the illustrious heroes of
former ages, whose matchless valor has shed undying lustre on the name
of Knight Templar, encourage and animate you to the faithful performance
of every duty.

GCG.—Commandery, <span class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! *Draw* <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! *Present* <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>!

GC.—Sir Knights, Behold your Eminent Commander! Recollect that the
prosperity of your Commandery will as much depend on your support,
assistance and obedience, as on the assiduity, fidelity and wisdom of
your Commander.

Be ye therefore diligent and faithful in the performance of your
respective duties.

<span class="small">*The new Commander having made any remarks he
desired—*</span>

GCG.—Carry <span class="smallcaps">Swords</span>! Return <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>!

GC.—Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>!

GC.—Prepare the remaining Officers for installation.

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Officers elect, <span
class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! Prepare for taking the Vow!

<span class="small">*The Marshal will cause the odd numbers to draw
their Swords. and drop them to the left, in front of the breasts of the
even numbers. The even numbers will grasp the blades of these Swords
with their right hands. When all is ready*—</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Officers elect, <span
class="smallcaps">Uncover</span>!

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Right Eminent Grand Commander, the
Officers elect are in proper position to take upon themselves the Vow of
office.

GC.—Before proceeding to install you into your respective stations it is
my duty to administer to each of you the Vow of office. Do you severally
consent to take upon yourselves that Vow?

<span class="small">*Each must assent for himself*.</span>

GC.—Then repeat after me:

I, — —, do promise and vow that I will maintain and support the
Constitution and Code of Statutes of the Grand Encampment of the United
States of America, the Constitution, Rules and Edicts of the Grand
Commandery of — —, and that I will, to the best of my ability,
faithfully discharge the duties of the office to which I have been
elected.

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Officers elect, <span
class="smallcaps">Re-cover</span>! *Carry* <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>!

GC.—Sir Knights, <span class="smallcaps">Be seated</span>! Sir Knight
Marshal, present the Generalissimo.

<span class="smallcaps">Mar.</span>—Right Eminent Grand Commander, I
present Sir — —, who has been chosen Generalissimo of this Commandery,
for installation.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE GENERALISSIMO.</span>

GC.—Sir, you have been elected Generalissimo of this Commandery. I now
invest you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Square, surmounted
by a Paschal Lamb. When beholding the Lamb, let it stimulate you to
have, at all times, a watchful eye over your own conduct, and an earnest
solicitude for the prosperity of the kingdom of the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

blessed Emmanuel, the spotless Lamb of God, who was slain from the
foundation of the world.

The Square is to remind you that the same principles of brotherly love
and friendship should forever govern the members of Freemasonry and of
the Orders of Knighthood. Your station is on the right of your
Commander; your duty is to assist him in his various duties, and, in his
absence, to preside. I charge you, therefore, to be faithful to the Sir
Knights with whom you are associated; put them often in remembrance of
those things which tend to their everlasting peace. Finally, "preach the
word; be instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with
all longsuffering and doctrine;" ever remembering the promise, "Be thou
faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life."

<span class="small">*The remaining Officers are presented in the same
way by the Marshal, when the Grand Commander will deliver the Charges as
follows:*</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE CAPTAIN GENERAL.</span>

Sir, you are elected Captain General of this Commandery. I now invest
you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Level, surmounted by a
Cock. As the undaunted courage and valor of the Cock stimulates him to
conquer his competitor, or yield himself a victim to the contest, so
should you be stimulated to the discharge of every duty. You should have
on "the breastplate of righteousness," so that with patience and
meekness you may ever travel on the *level* of humility, and be so
supplied with divine grace as to prevent you from selling your God or
denying your Master. Your station is on the left of your Commander. Your
duty, among other things, is to see that due preparation is made for the
various meetings of the Commandery; that the Chambers and Asylum are in
suitable array for the introduction

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

of candidates and the dispatch of business. You are also to receive and
communicate to the lines all orders issued by the Eminent Commander. You
are to assist in Council, and, in the absence of your Commander and
Generalissimo, you are to preside over the Commandery. And now, I exhort
you, that with fidelity you perform every duty; and whatsoever ye do, do
*it* heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; continue in prayer, and
watch in the same with thanksgiving; ever bearing in mind the promise,
"Be not weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we
faint not."

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE PRELATE.</span>

Sir, you are elected Prelate of this Commandery. I have the pleasure of
investing you with this Triple Triangle, which is the Jewel of your
office, and a beautiful emblem of Jehovah. Your station is on the right
of the Generalissimo; your duty is to officiate at the Altar and to
offer up prayers to Deity. Your Jewel is to remind you of the importance
of the trust reposed in you. And may He who is able, abundantly furnish
you for every good work, preserve you from falling into error, improve,
strengthen, establish and perfect you; and finally greet you with, "Well
done, thou good and faithful servant: enter thou into the joy of thy
Lord."

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE SENIOR WARDEN.</span>

Sir, you are elected Senior Warden of this Commandery. I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office, which is a Hollow Square and Sword of
Justice. It is to remind you that, as the children of Israel marched in
a hollow square in their journey through the wilderness, in order to
guard and protect the Ark of the Covenant, so should you be vigilant in
guarding every avenue from innovation and error. Let

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

the Sword, therefore, be ever drawn to guard the Constitution of the
Order. Your station is at the Southwest angle of the Triangle, and upon
the right of the First Division. You will attend Pilgrim Warriors,
comfort and support Pilgrim Penitents, and after due trial, introduce
them into the Asylum. Let it be your constant care that the warrior be
not deterred from duty, nor the penitent molested on his journey.
Finally, let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE JUNIOR WARDEN.</span>

Sir, you are elected Junior Warden of this Commandery. I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office, which is an Eagle and Flaming Sword. It
is to remind you to perform your various duties with justice and valor,
having an eagle eye on the prosperity of the Order. Your station is at
the Northwest angle of the Triangle. Your duty is to .attend poor and
weary pilgrims traveling from afar, accompany them on their journey, and
in due time recommend them to the Eminent Commander. You will be careful
that, in addition to the pilgrim's garb, sandals, staff and scrip, their
whole preparation and deportment shall be such as to cause them to be
recognized as children of humility. Teach them that "*Magna est Veritas,
et Prævalebit*," is the Motto of the Order; and although they will often
find the heights of fortune inaccessible, and the thorny path of life
crooked, adverse and forlorn, yet, by faith and humility–courage,
constancy, patience and perseverance—they may gain admission into the
Asylum above; there to enjoy the rewards that await the valiant soldiers
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Finally, be ye perfect, always abounding in
the work of the Lord, that you may be a shining light in the world. A
city that is set on a hill can not be hid.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE TREASURER.</span>

Sir, you are elected Treasurer of this Commandery. I now invest you with
the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the right of the
Generalissimo, in front. The qualities which should recommend a
Treasurer are accuracy and fidelity; accuracy, in keeping a fair and
minute account of all receipts and disbursements; fidelity, in carefully
preserving all the property and funds of the Commandery that may be
placed in his hands, and rendering a just account of the same whenever
he is called upon for that purpose. I presume that your respect and
attachment to the Commandery, and. your earnest solicitude for a good
name, which is better than precious ointment, will prompt you to the
faithful discharge of the duties of your office.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE RECORDER.</span>

Sir, you are elected Recorder of this Commandery. I now invest you with
the Jewel of your office. Your station is on the left of the Captain
General, in front. The qualities which should recommend a Recorder are,
promptitude in issuing the notifications and orders of his superior
officers, punctuality in attending the meetings of the Commandery,
correctness in recording their proceedings, judgment in discriminating
between what is proper and what is improper to be committed to writing,
integrity in accounting for all moneys that may pass through his hands,
and fidelity in paying the same over into the hands of the Treasurer.
The possession of these good qualities, I presume, has designated you
for this important office, and I can not entertain a doubt that you will
discharge its duties beneficially to the Commandery and honorably to
yourself. And when you shall have completed the record of Your
transactions here below, and finished the term of your probation, may
you be admitted

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

into the celestial Asylum of saints and angels, and find your name
recorded in the Lamb's Book of Life.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE STANDARD BEARER.</span>

Sir, you are elected Standard Bearer of this Commandery. I now invest
you with the Jewel of your office, which is a Plumb, surmounted by a
Banner. Your station is in the West, and in the center of the Second
Division. Your duty is to display, support and protect the Standard of
our Order, which I now, with pleasure, confide to your valor. You will
remember that it is our rallying point in time of danger; and when
unfurled in a just and virtuous cause, you will never relinquish it to
an enemy but with your life. Let, therefore, your conduct be such as all
the virtuous will delight to imitate; let the refulgent rays which ever
emanate from pure benevolence and humility, diffuse their lustre on all
around, that it may encourage and animate all true and courteous
Knights, and, at the same time, confound and dismay all their enemies.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE SWORD BEARER.</span>

Sir, you are elected Sword Bearer of this Commandery. I now invest you
with the Jewel of your office, which is a Triangle and Cross Swords.
Your station is on the right of the Standard Bearer, and on the right of
the Second Division when separately formed. Your duty is to assist in
protecting the Banners of our Order, with a heart devoted to the
principles of Faith, Hope and Charity. Holding the mystic sword that
is-endowed with justice and fortitude, and tempered with mercy, you may
cast your eyes upon the Standard, and recall that "*In Hoc Signo
Vinces*" is not only an expressive Motto of our Order, but is consoling
to the heart of every believer.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE WARDER.</span>

Sir, you are elected Warder of this Commandery. I now invest you with
the Jewel of your office, which is a Square Plate, with a Trumpet and
Cross Swords engraved thereon. Your station is upon the left of the
Standard Bearer, and upon the left of the Second Division, when formed
in line. Your duty is to sound the Assembly, announce the approach and
departure of the Eminent Commander, to post the Sentinels, and see that
the Asylum is duly guarded. You will, also, report all petitions from
visitors and strangers. I charge you to be punctual in your attendance,
and indefatigable in the discharge of your important duties; for, though
yours is among the last offices in the Commandery, it is by no means the
least in importance.

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE SENTINEL.</span>

Sir Knight, you are appointed Sentinel. I now invest you with the Jewel
of your office, which is a Square Plate, with a Battle Axe engraved
thereon. Your post is that of honor as well as of danger. You will,
therefore, be vigilant, challenge with spirit, examine with caution,
admonish with candor, relieve cheerfully, protect with fidelity, and
fight valiantly.

GCG.—Commandery, <span class="smallcaps">Attention</span>! *Draw* <span
class="smallcaps">Swords</span>!

<span class="small">CHARGE TO THE COMMANDERY.</span>

Sir Knights, to manage and conduct the concerns of a Commandery of
Knights Templar with that promptitude, integrity and skill which the
institution demands, will require the exercise of all the talents and
perseverance of its Officers and members. Are any of you solicitous that
your

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

equals and inferiors should conduct themselves toward you with deference
and respect? you will be sure to let no opportunity pass without
furnishing them an example in your own conduct. The Officers will
recollect that those moral and religious duties and precepts which they,
from time to time, so forcibly impress upon the minds of others, should
by no means be neglected by themselves; and the most effectual way to
insure success is to let precept and example go hand in hand.

I would therefore exhort you to look well to the East, to the West, to
the North, and to the South, and see that the entering avenues are
strictly guarded, and that you suffer no one to pass the threshold of
your Asylum but the worthy children of humility; and, at the same time,
that you suffer no one to walk among you disorderly without admonition
or reproof. While such is the conduct of the Officers and members, you
may rest assured that this valiant, magnanimous Order will forever
flourish like the green bay tree.

And now, Sir Knights, I would address you in the language of David to
his beloved city, Peace be within thy walls, *and* prosperity within thy
palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say, Peace
*be* within thee.

<span class="small">*The Marshal then proclaims the \[new\] Commandery
in the following manner, viz.:*</span>

In the name of the Grand Commandery of the State of —, I proclaim this
Commandery , by the name of — Commandery, No.—, to be legally
constituted, consecrated, and the Officers duly installed.

<span class="small">*After the necessary business is finished, the
Commandery is closed*.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Grand Commanderies](shib35.md)
