[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](shib09)  [Next](shib11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766158284/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor*, by George Cooper Connor, \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### THREE ANCIENT CITIES OF PERSIA.

<span class="smallcaps">Persepolis</span>.—This was the chief city, or
capital, of the Persian kingdom proper. Alexander destroyed it, and
Darius Hystaspes is supposed to have founded it. To-day its ruins stand
in the valley of Schiraz, the wonder of the world. These ruins are an
immense platform, fifty feet above the plain, hewn partly out of the
mountain itself, the remainder built of marble blocks from twenty to
sixty feet in length, so nicely fitted together that the joints are
scarcely discernible to-day. This platform is fourteen hundred feet
long, and nine hundred feet wide, and faces the four quarters of the
world. The ascent from the plain is made by marble steps, passing
colossal figures, until you reach the gigantic columns, with their
beautiful capitals, twelve to fifteen feet in circumference, and fifty
feet high, which supported the cedar roof that protected the residents
from the hot sun. And there you see rows of carved images, men of every
nation and clime.

This was the palace of Darius. To this palace Ahasuerus may have brought
his fair Jewish wife, Esther, from Tusa, and from there had her
conducted to the other palace still farther up the mountain, which the
drunken Alexander burned B. C. 330.

<span class="smallcaps">Susa</span>, or <span
class="smallcaps">Shushan</span>.—So named because of the lilies that
abounded in the valley. In Daniel's time it was in possession of the
Babylonians, but when Cyrus conquered Babylon he transferred it to
Persia.

It was from this city of Shushan that Darius issued his decree for the
rebuilding of Jerusalem, and its Temple, it being the winter residence
of Darius, and of all the Persian kings after Cyrus. In gratitude for
this decree the Jews called the eastern gate of the Second Temple the
Gate of Shushan. It is said that a resemblance of the city of Shushan
was engraved upon that gate.

<span class="smallcaps">Ecbatana</span>.—This was a city of the Medes, a
beautiful place, and after the union of the Medes and Persians became a
favorite summer residence of the Persian monarchs.

In this city is shown to-day the tombs of Mordecai and Esther, but why
they should have been interred in that city is a mystery.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

It was in Ecbatana that Cyrus held his capital, and in its archives,
therefore, was found the roll which proved to Darius that Cyrus had made
a decree allowing the Jews to rebuild the Temple.

It is held by many that it was in this city of Ecbatana that Zoroaster
made his first appearance.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

##### THE RELIGION OF THE ANCIENT PERSIANS.

Up to the seizure of the throne by Smerdis the Magian religion was
dominant among the Medes and Persians. That religion abominated the
worship of images, as Judaism did, and worshiped the One God only by
fire. This religion fell into disgrace when its chief, Smerdis, was
driven from the throne with such awful slaughter. Darius was a Magian at
that time, and for some time afterwards.

Sabianism was idolatry, the opposite of Magianism, but it gained favor
on the disgrace of the Magians. This religion consisted chiefly in the
worship of the host of heaven,—hence the name from *tsaba*, host,—and
the worship of the planets. In his later life this religion became so
powerful that Darius gave it his adherence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concluding Remarks](shib11.md)
