[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31094)  [Next](cc31096.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 10:26-31; MARK 4:22-23;  
LUKE 8:17; 12:2-7

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p2"></span><span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
10:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#022.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p5"></span>**26**.** **Fear them not therefore: for
nothing is covered that shall not be revealed, and nothing is hid that
shall not be known. **27**.** **What I say to you in darkness speak you
in light: and what you hear in the ear proclaim on the housetops.
**28**.** **And fear not those who kill the body, but cannot kill the
soul: but rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in gehenna.
**29**.** **Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing, and not one of
them shall fall to the ground without your Father? **30**.** **But even
the hairs of your head are all numbered. **31**.** **Fear not therefore:
you are of more value than many sparrows.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p6"></span>**22**.** **For nothing is hid which
shall not be revealed; and nothing is secret that shall not come to
light. **23**.** **If any man have ears to hears, let him hear.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p7"></span>**17**.** **For there is nothing hid
that shall not be revealed, and nothing concealed that shall not be
known and come to light.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p9.1"></span>[Luke
12:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#002.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p10"></span>**2**.** **For nothing is covered which
shall not be laid open, and nothing is hid wich shall not be known.
**3**.** **Therefore, those things which you have spoken in darkness
shall be heard in light: and what you have spoken in the ear in closets
shall be proclaimed on the housetops. **4**.** **And I say to you my
friends, Be not afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have
nothing more that they can do. **5**.** **And I will show you whom you
should fear: fear him who, after that he hath killed, hath power to
throw into gehenna: yea, I say to you, Fear him. **6**.** **Are not five
sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them is forgotten before
God? **7**.** **But even the hairs on your head are all numbered: fear
not therefore: you are of more value than many sparrows.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p13.2"></span>.** *Fear them not therefore* When the
apostles saw the gospel so greatly despised, and recollected the small
number of believers, they might be apt to throw away hope even for the
future. Christ now meets this doubt, by declaring that the gospel would
be widely spread, would at length rise superior to all the hindrances
which might arise from men, and would become generally known. The
saying, *nothing is covered that shall not be revealed,* has some
appearance of being a proverb: but we restrict it in a special manner to
the doctrine of salvation, which Christ promises will be victorious,
whatsoever may be the contrivances of men to oppose it. Though he
sometimes preached openly in the temple, yet, as his doctrine was
rejected, it was still *concealed* in dark comers: but he declares that
the time for proclaiming it will come; which, we know, happened shortly
afterwards. In no part of the earth was there ever such thunder heard as
the voice of the gospel, which resounded through the whole world. As
this promise ought to fill them with courage, Christ exhorts them to
devote themselves to it with boldness and perseverance, and not to be
alarmed, though they see the gospel hitherto despised, but, on the
contrary, to become its zealous preachers.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p14"></span>The passage which I have taken from
Mark was, perhaps, spoken at a different time, and in a different sense:
but as the sentences in that place are concise, I have followed the
meaning which appeared to me the most probable. After having commanded
the apostles to assemble *burning lamps by* sending out a bright light
to a great distance, he immediately afterwards adds, *nothing is hidden
which shall not be revealed*. Now the *lamp* of the gospel was kindled
by the apostles, as it were in the midst of darkness, that by their
agency it might be raised on high, and shine throughout the whole world.
The passage in the eighth chapter of Luke’s Gospel is precisely alike.
As to the passage in the twelfth chapter, there is no room to doubt that
it has the same meaning, though there is a difference in the words: for
Christ there commands the apostles *to bring to light what they had
spoken in darkness*. This means, that hitherto they had only spoken in
whispers about the gospel, but that their future preaching would be so
public, that it would spread to the most distant parts of the world.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p15"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p16"></span>**28.** *And fear not those who hill
the body* To excite his disciples to despise death, Christ employs the
very powerful argument, that this frail and perishing lift ought to be
little regarded by men who have been created for a heavenly immortality.
The statement amounts to this, that if believers will consider for what
purpose they were born, and what is their condition, they will have no
reason to be so earnest in desiring an earthly life. But the words have
still a richer and fuller meaning: for we are here taught by Christ that
the fear of God is dead in those men who, through dread of tyrants, fall
from a confession of their faith, and that a brutish stupidity reigns in
the hearts of those who, through dread of death, do not hesitate to
abandon that confession.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p17"></span>We must attend to the distinction
between the two opposite kinds of *fear*. If the *fear* of God is
extinguished by the dread of men, is it not evident that we pay greater
deference to them than to God himself? Hence it follows, that when we
have abandoned the heavenly and eternal life, we reserve nothing more
for ourselves than to be *like the beasts that perish,* (<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p17.1"></span>[Ps
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p17.1"></span>.) God alone has the power of bestowing
eternal life, or of inflicting eternal death. We forget God, because we
are hurried away by the dread of men. Is it not very evident that we set
a higher value on the shadowy life of the body  <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) than on the eternal condition of the
soul; or rather, that the heavenly kingdom of God is of no estimation
with us, in comparison of the fleeting and vanishing shadow of the
present life?

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p19"></span>These words of Christ ought therefore
to be explained in this manner: *“Acknowledge* that you have received
immortal souls, which are subject to the disposal of God alone, and do
not come into the power of men. The consequence will be, that no terrors
or alarms which men may employ will shake your faith. “For how comes it
that the dread of men prevails in the struggle, but because the body is
preferred to the soul, and immortality is less valued than a perishing
life?”

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p20"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p21"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p21.2"></span>[Luke
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p21.2"></span>.** *Yea, I say to you, Fear Him* This is
an emphatic,  <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) repetition of the
statement. Christ must be viewed as saying, that when we give way to the
dread of men, we pay no respect to God; and that if on the contrary we
*fear* God, we have an easy victory in our hands, so that no efforts of
men will draw us aside from our duty. The experience of every age shows
the great necessity of this exhortation to the ministers of Christ, and
likewise to all believers in general: for there never was a period when
men did not rise furiously against God, and endeavor to overwhelm the
Gospel.  <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) All are not armed
indeed with equal power to hold out to believers the dread of death, but
the greater number are animated by that savage ferocity, which discovers
itself as soon as an opportunity occurs. Frequently, too, Satan brings
forward giants, in whose presence the servants of Christ would fall down
lifeless, were it not that this doctrine fortifies them to maintain
unshaken perseverance.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p24"></span>The two clauses being very closely
related to each other, it is an incorrect view which some unskilful
persons take, by reading separately this clause, *Fear them not* For
Christ, (as we have already said,) in order to cure that wicked *fear*
of men, which draws us aside from the right path contrasts with it a
devout and holy fear of God: otherwise the consequence would not follow
that, if we fear God, who is the Lord of body and soul, we have no
reason to fear men, whose power goes no farther than the body. With
regard to the statement that men *have power to kill the body,* Christ
made it by way of concession. God allows wicked men to enjoy such a
degree of liberty, that they are swelled with confidence in their own
power, imagine that they may attempt any thing, and even succeed in
terrifying weak minds, as if they could do whatever they pleased. Now
the proud imaginations of wicked men, as if the life of the godly were
placed at their disposal, is utterly unfounded: for God keeps them
within limits, and restrains, whenever it pleases him, the cruelty and
violence of their attacks. And yet they are said to *have power to kill*
by his permission, for he often permits them to indulge their cruel
rage. Besides, our Lord’s discourse consists of two parts. First, in
order to instruct us to bear with composure the loss of the bodily life,
he bids us contemplate both eternal life and eternal death, and then
arrives gradually at this point, that the protection of our life is in
the hand of God.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p25"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p26"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p26.2"></span>[Matthew
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p26.2"></span>.** *Are not two sparrows sold for a
farthing?* Christ proceeds farther, as I have already hinted, and
declares that tyrants, whatever may be their madness, have no power
whatever even over the body: and that therefore it is improper in any
persons to dread the cruelty of men, as if they were not under the
protection of God. In the midst of dangers, therefore, let us remember
this second consolation. As God is the guardian of our life, we may
safely rely on his providence; nay, we do him injustice, if we do not
entrust to him our life, which he is pleased to take under his charge.
Christ takes a general view of the providence of God as extending to all
creatures, and thus argues from the greater to the less, that we are
upheld by his special protection. There is hardly any thing of less
value than *sparrows,* (for *two* were then *sold for a farthing,* or,
as Luke states it, five for two farthings,) and yet God has his eye upon
them to protect them, so that nothing happens to them by chance. Would
He who is careful about the *sparrows* disregard the life of men?

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p27"></span>There are here two things to be
observed. First, Christ gives a very different account of the providence
of God from what is given by many who talk like the philosophers, and
tell us that God governs the world, but yet imagine providence to be a
confused sort of arrangement, as if God did not keep his eye on each of
the creatures. Now, Christ declares that each of the creatures in
particular is under his hand and protection, so that nothing is left to
chance. Unquestionably, the will of God is contrasted with *contingence*
or uncertainty  <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) , And yet we
must not be understood to uphold *the fate* of the *Stoics,*  <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) for it is one thing to imagine a
necessity which is involved in a complicated chain of causes, and quite
another thing to believe that the world, and every part of it, is
directed by the will of God. In the nature of things, I do acknowledge
there is uncertainty:  <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) but I
maintain that nothing happens through a blind revolution of chance, for
all is regulated by the will of God.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p31"></span>The second thing to be observed is,
that we ought to contemplate Providence, not as curious and fickle
persons are wont to do, but as a ground of confidence and excitement to
prayer. When he informs us that *the hairs of our head are all
numbered,* it is not to encourage trivial speculations, but to instruct
us to depend on the fatherly care of God which is exercised over these
frail bodies.

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p32"></span><span id="ix.lxxxvii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p33"></span>**31.** *You are of more value* This is
true in general of all men, for the *sparrows* were created for their
advantage. But this discourse relates peculiarly to the sons of God, who
possess a far higher right than what they derive from creation. Now the
rank which belongs to men arises solely from the undeserved kindness of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[595](cc31095.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p18.1"></span>La
vie de ce corps, laquelle n'est qu'une fumee;” — “the life of this body,
which is but *a vapor,”* (<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p18.2"></span>[Jas
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="fn_595"></span>[596](cc31095.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p22"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p22.1"></span>Emporte poids;” — “carries weight.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[597](cc31095.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p23"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p23.1"></span>S'esforcans d'abattre et exterminer
l'Evangile;” — “laboring to destroy and exterminate the Gospel.”

<span id="fn_597"></span>[598](cc31095.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p28.1"></span>La
volonte de Dieu est mise a l'opposite de ce que tels Philosophes
appellent Contingence: par lequel mot ils signifient un accident qui
vient de soy és choses, sans qu’il y ait une certaine conduite
d’enhaut.” — “The will of God is contrasted with what such Philosophers
call Contingence: a term by which they denote an accident which comes of
its own accord in events, without any fixed direction of it from above.”

<span id="fn_598"></span>[599](cc31095.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p29"></span> We have formerly adverted to a leading
tenet of the *Stoics,* that the distinction between pleasure and pain is
imaginary, and that consequently the highest wisdom consists in being
utterly unmoved by the events of life. The present allusion is to their
notion of *Fate,* a mysterious and irresistible necessity, over which
those beings whom they blindly worshipped were supposed to have as
little control as the inhabitants of the earth. Calvin demonstrates that
the serenity of a Christian differs not more widely from Stoical
*apathy,* than the doctrine of a special Providence which is here taught
by our Savior differs from Stoical *Fate;* that the believer in
Providence adores *the high and lofty One that inhabiteth, eternity,*
(<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.1"></span>[Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.1"></span>,) who *hath, prepared His throne in the
heavens, and whose kingdom ruleth over all,* (<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.2"></span>[Ps
103:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.2"></span>;) and, far from viewing the will of God as
swayed by a higher power, traces every event to *the purpose of Him who
worketh all things after the counsel of his own will,* (<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.3"></span>[Eph
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.3"></span>.) — *Ed*

<span id="fn_599"></span>[600](cc31095.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxvii-p29.4"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p30"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxvii-p30.1"></span>Je
confesse bien que si on regarde la nature des choses en soy, on trouvera
qu'il y a quelque Contingence;” — “I readily acknowledge that, if the
nature of things in itself be considered, it will be found that there is
some uncertainty.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 10:32-35; Mark 8:38; Luke 9:26; 12:8-9, 51-53](cc31096.md)
