[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31018)  [Next](cc31020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span>LUKE 1:56-66

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
1:56-66](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#056)<span id="ix.xi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span> **56**.** **And Mary abode with her about
three months, and returned to her own house. **57**.** **And Elisabeth's
time of bringing forth was fulfilled, and she brought forth a son.
**58**.** **And her neighbors and relatives heard, that the Lord had
wonderfully exercised his mercy toward her, and they congratulated her.
**59**.** **And it happened on the eighth day, when they came to
circumcise the child, and they called him Zacharias, by the name of his
father. **60**.** **And his mother answering said,  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) By no means, but he shall be called John.
**61**.** **And they said to her, There is none among thy kindred who is
called by that name. **62**.** **And they made signs to his father how
he wished him to be called. **63**.** **And having asked for writing
tables, he wrote, saying, John is his name: and all wondered.
**64**.** **And his mouth was instantly opened, and he spake, blessing
God. **65**.** **And fear fell upon all their neighbors, and in all the
mountainous district of Judea all these words were made known.
**66**.** **And all who had heard put them in their heart, saying, What
(or Who) shall this child be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span><span id="ix.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span>The amount of this narrative is, that the
birth of John was distinguished by various miracles, which gave reason
to expect, that something great and remarkable would appear in the child
himself at a future period. For the Lord determined to confer upon him
from the womb remarkable tokens, that he might not afterwards come
forward, as an obscure and unknown person, from the crowd, to discharge
the office of a Prophet. First Luke relates, that Mary remained about
three months with her cousin, — or, in other words, till the birth of
the child: for it is probable that she had no other reason for staying
so long, but to enjoy the exhibition of divine grace, which had been
suggested to her by the angel for the confirmation of her faith.

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span><span id="ix.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span>**58.** *And her neighbors and relatives
heard* It may admit of doubt, whether the wonderful kindness of God was
estimated by those persons from the simple fact of her being blessed
with a child, or whether they had previously heard that an angel
appeared to Zacharias, and promised to him a son. This was certainly no
ordinary divine favor, that, out of the course of nature, a barren woman
at a very advanced age had brought forth a child. It is possible that,
on this ground alone, they magnified the divine goodness. On the eighth
day, from a sense of duty or from courtesy, as is customary on such
occasions, some people assemble; but God takes occasion from it to make
them witnesses and spectators of his power and glory. There can be no
doubt but the extraordinary birth brought a greater crowd. They had
reckoned it a prodigy to see an old and barren woman suddenly become
pregnant; and now that the child is born, their astonishment is renewed
and increased. We infer from the words of Luke that, though they
circumcised their children at home, they were not wont to do so without
collecting a numerous assembly: and with good reason, for it was a
common sacrament of the church, and it was not proper to administer it
in a secret or private manner.

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span><span id="ix.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>**59.** *And they called him Zacharias, by
the name of his father* We know that names were originally given to men,
either from some occurrence, or even by prophetic inspiration, to point
out some secret work of God. After a long period, when there was such a
profusion of names, that it became inconvenient to form new ones every
day, people satisfied themselves with the old and received names, and
called their children by the names of their ancestors. Thus before the
father of John, there were many called Zacharias, and perhaps they were
the descendants of the “*son of Barachias*,” **(**<span
id="ix.xi-p11.1"></span>[Mt 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xi-p11.1"></span>**.)** Use and wont, we are aware, is generally
taken for law, and so these persons contended that the prevailing custom
should be observed as to the name of the child. Though we must not
imagine that there is any sacredness in names, yet no judicious person
will deny that, in this matter, believers ought to make a godly and
profitable selection. They ought to give their children such names as
may serve to instruct and admonish them, and consequently to take the
names of holy fathers — for the purpose of exciting their children to
imitate them — rather than adopt those of ungodly persons.

<span id="ix.xi-p12"></span><span id="ix.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p13"></span>**60.** *And his mother answering said* It
is uncertain if Elisabeth spoke this by inspiration. But when Zacharias
saw the punishment inflicted on him for being too slow in believing, he
probably informed his wife by writing what the angel had enjoined
respecting the name, (<span id="ix.xi-p13.1"></span>[Lu
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#013)<span id="ix.xi-p13.1"></span>,)
otherwise he would not have obeyed the command of God. Why this name was
given to the Baptist by divine authority, I have already explained. The
relatives, though unacquainted with the reason, are affected by the
strangeness of the occurrence, particularly as they conjecture it did
not take place without design.

<span id="ix.xi-p14"></span><span id="ix.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p15"></span>**64.** *And his mouth was instantly opened*
God puts honor on the birth of his prophet by restoring speech to his
father: for there can be no doubt that this benefit was delayed till
that day with the express object and design of fixing the eyes of men
upon John. Zacharias *spake, blessing God* He did so, not only for the
purpose of testifying his gratitude, but to inform his relatives and
neighbors, that this punishment had been inflicted on him, because he
had been too slow to believe: for he was not ashamed to unite with his
own dishonor the praises of the divine glory. Thus it became universally
known, that the birth of the child was not an accidental or ordinary
event, but had been promised by an announcement from heaven.  <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64)

<span id="ix.xi-p17"></span><span id="ix.xi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p18"></span>**65.** *And fear fell upon all* This fear
mentioned by Luke proceeded from a feeling of the divine power: for the
works of God ought to be contemplated by us with such reverence as to
affect our minds with seriousness.  <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)
God does not amuse us with his miracles, but arouses the senses of men,
which he perceives to be in a dormant state.  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) Luke says also that the report of those
things was circulated *in all the mountainous district of Judea* And yet
many derived no advantage from the temporary impression of the power of
God: for, when John began to exercise his office as an instructor, there
were few that remembered what wonders had attended his birth. It was not
merely, however, for the sake of those who heard them, that God
determined to spread abroad the report of those events, but to
establish, in all ages, the certainty of the miracle, which was then
universally known. Meanwhile, a general mirror of human ingratitude is
here placed before our eyes: for, while trifling and frivolous
occurrences remain firmly in our minds, those which ought to produce a
constant recollection of divine favors immediately fade and disappear.

<span id="ix.xi-p21"></span>Luke does not speak of stupid men, or actual
despisers of God: for he says that they *put them in their heart:* that
is, they applied eagerly to the consideration of them. Some probably
continued to remember, but the greater part rapidly shook off the fear
which they had experienced. It deserves our notice that they were far
from mistaking the design, when they interpreted the miracles which they
saw as relating to the future excellence of the child: for such, we have
said, was the design of God, that John should afterwards come forth with
the highest reputation. *And the hand of the Lord was with him* The
meaning is, that the grace of God was strikingly visible in many
respects, and showed manifestly that he was not an ordinary person. It
is a figurative mode of expression, and denotes that the power of God
was as fully manifested as if his hand had been visibly seen, so that
all readily acknowledged the presence of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc31019.htm#fr_63) <span
id="ix.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xi-p4.1"></span>Mais sa mere
print la parole;” — “but his mother took speech.”

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc31019.htm#fr_64) <span
id="ix.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xi-p16.1"></span>Mais selon
la promesse expresse de Dieu, qui avoit este apportee et revelee par
l'ange.” — “But according to the express promise of God, which had been
brought and revealed by the angel.”

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc31019.htm#fr_65) <span
id="ix.xi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.xi-p19.1"></span>Que nous en
soyons touchez et esmeus a bon escient.” — “That we may be touched and
moved by them in good earnest.”

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc31019.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ix.xi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xi-p20.1"></span>Dieu en
faisant miracles ne se joue point pour nous servir de passe- temps, mais
reveille nos sens, lesquels il voit estre abrutis et en dormis.” — “God,
in working miracles, does not amuse himself to supply us with pastime,
but arouses our senses, which he sees to be stupified and asleep.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 1:67-75](cc31020)
