[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31040)  [Next](cc31042) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 4:12, 17; MARK 1:14-15;

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p2"></span>LUKE 3:19-20; 4:14

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>[Matt.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017)<span id="ix.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p4"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>[Mark
1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p5"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>[Luke
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p6"></span>**12**.** **And when Jesus heard that
Jesus had been delivered up,  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316) he
withdrew into Galilee. **17**.** **From that time Jesus began to preach,
and to say, Repent ye: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p8"></span>**14**.** **Now after that John had been
imprisoned, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel of the kingdom
of God: **15**.** **And saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom
of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the Gospel.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p9"></span>**19**.** **Now Herod the tetrarch, when
he was reproved by him for Herodias, his brother’s wife, and for all the
wicked actions which Herod did, **20**.** **Added also this above all,
and shut up John in prison.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p11"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>[Luke
4:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p12"></span>**14**.** **And Jesus returned by the
power of the Spirit into Galilee, and a report went out through the
whole country concerning him. **15**.** **And he taught in their
synagogues, and was glorified by all.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p13"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p15"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>[Luke
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#019)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p15.2"></span>.** *Now Herod the tetrarch.* Luke alone
explains the reason why Herod threw John into prison: though we shall
afterwards find it mentioned by <span id="ix.xxxiii-p15.3"></span>[Mt
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p15.3"></span>, and <span id="ix.xxxiii-p15.4"></span>[Mr
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#017)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p15.4"></span>. Josephus says, (Ant. 18, v. 2,) that
Herod, dreading a popular insurrection and a change of the government,
shut up John in the castle of Macherus, (because he dreaded the man’s
influence;)  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) and that Herodias
was married, not to Philip, who was Salome’s husband, but to another
Herod. But as his recollection appears to have failed him in this
matter, and as he mentions also Philip’s death out of its proper place,
the truth of the history will be obtained, with greater certainty, from
the Evangelists, and we must abide by their testimony.  <span
id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) It is well known, that Herod, though
he had been married to a daughter of Aretas, King of Arabia, fell in
love with Herodias, his niece, and carried her off by fraud. This injury
might possibly enough remain unrevenged by his brother Philip, to whom
the same Josephus bears testimony, that he was a person of a mild and
gentle disposition, (18:4:6.)

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p18"></span>This history shows clearly, what sort of
reward awaits the faithful and honest ministers of the truth,
particularly when they reprove vices: for scarcely one in a hundred
bears reproof, and if it is at all severe, they break out into fury. If
pride of this sort displays itself in some of the common people, we have
no reason to wonder, that cruelty to reprovers assumes a more hideous
form in tyrants,  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319) who brook
nothing worse than to be classed with other men. We behold in John an
illustrious example of that moral courage, which all pious teachers
ought to possess, not to hesitate to incur the wrath of the great and
powerful, as often as it may be found necessary: for he, with whom there
is acceptance of persons, does not honestly serve God. When Luke says,
he *added this to all the evil actions which he did,* he means, that
Herod’s malice is become desperate, and has reached its utmost height,
when the sinner is enraged by remedies, and not only refuses correction,
but takes vengeance on his adviser, as if he had been his enemy.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p20"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p21"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p21.2"></span>[Matthew
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p21.2"></span>.** *When Jesus had heard.* These words
appear to be at variance with the narrative of the Evangelist John, who
declares, that John and Christ discharged the office of public teachers
at the same time. But we have to observe, that our three Evangelists
pass over in silence that short space of time, because John’s course was
not yet completed, and because that course was intended to be a
preparation for receiving the Gospel of Christ. And, in point of fact,
though Christ discharged the office of teacher within that period, he
did not, strictly speaking, begin to *preach the Gospel,* till he
succeeded to John. Most properly, therefore, do the three Evangelists
admit and declare, that the period, during which John prepared disciples
for Christ, belonged to his ministry: for it amounts to this, that, when
the dawn was passed, the sun arose. It is proper to observe the mode of
expression employed by Luke, that Jesus came *in the power,* or, *by the
power, of the Spirit into* Galilee: for it is of great consequence, that
we do not imagine Christ to have any thing about him that is earthly or
human, but that our minds be always occupied, and our feelings affected
by his heavenly and divine power.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p22"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p23"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p23.2"></span>[Mark
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#014)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p23.2"></span>.** *Preaching the Gospel of the kingdom of
God.* Matthew appears to differ a little from the other two: for, after
mentioning that Jesus left his own city Nazareth, and departed to
Capernaum, he says: *from that time Jesus began to preach.* Luke and
Mark, again, relate, that he taught publicly in his own country. But the
solution is easy; for the words which Matthew employs, <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p23.3"></span>ἀπὸ τότε, *from that time,* ought to be
viewed as referring, not to what immediately precedes, but to the whole
course of the narrative. Christ, therefore, entered into the exercise of
his office, when he arrived at Galilee. The summary of doctrine which is
given by Matthew is not at all different from what, we have lately seen,
was taught by John: for it consists of two parts, — *repentance,* and
the announcement of grace and salvation. He exhorts the Jews to
conversion, because *the kingdom of God is at hand:* that is, because
God undertakes to govern his people, which is true and perfect
happiness. The language of Mark is a little different, *The kingdom of
God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the Gospel* But the meaning is
the same: for, having first spoken of the restoration of the kingdom of
God among the Jews, he exhorts them to repentance and faith.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p24"></span>But it may be asked, since *repentance*
depends on the Gospel, why does Mark separate it from the *doctrine* of
the Gospel? Two reasons may be assigned. God sometimes invites us to
repentance, when nothing more is meant, than that we ought to change our
life for the better. He afterwards shows, that conversion and “newness
of life” (<span id="ix.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span id="ix.xxxiii-p24.1"></span>)
are the gift of God. This is intended to inform us, that not only is our
duty enjoined on us, but the grace and power of obedience are, at the
same time, offered. If we understand in this way the preaching of John
about repentance, the meaning will be:” The Lord commands you to turn to
himself; but as you cannot accomplish this by your own endeavors, he
promises the Spirit of regeneration, and therefore you must receive this
grace by faith.” At the same time, the faith, which he enjoins men to
give to the Gospel, ought not, by any means, to be confined to the gift
of renewal, but relates chiefly to the forgiveness of sins. For John
connects repentance with faith, because God reconciles us to himself in
such a manner, that we serve him as a Father in holiness and
righteousness.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p25"></span>Besides, there is no absurdity in
saying, that *to believe the Gospel* is the same thing as to embrace a
free righteousness: for that special relation, between faith and the
forgiveness of sins, is often mentioned in Scripture; as, for example,
when it teaches, that we are *justified by faith,* (<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p25.1"></span>[Ro
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p25.1"></span>.) In which soever of these two ways you
choose to explain this passage, it still remains a settled principle,
that God offers to us a free salvation, in order that we may turn to
him, and live to righteousness. Accordingly, when he promises to us
mercy, he calls us to deny the flesh. We must observe the designation
which Paul gives to the Gospel, *the kingdom of God:* for hence we
learn, that by the preaching of the Gospel *the kingdom of God* is set
up and established among men, and that in no other way does God reign
among men. Hence it is also evident, how wretched the condition of men
is without the Gospel.

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p26"></span><span id="ix.xxxiii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p27"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p27.2"></span>[Luke
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#015)<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p27.2"></span>.** *He was glorified by all.* This is
stated by Luke for the express purpose of informing us, that, from the
very commencement, a divine power shone in Christ, and compelled even
those, who cherished a malignant spirit of contradiction, to join in
admiring him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc31041.htm#fr_316) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxiii-p7.1"></span>Que
Jean estoit prisonnier;” — “that John was prisoner.”

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc31041.htm#fr_317) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p16"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxxiii-p16.1"></span>Pource qu'il savoit que c'estoit un homme de
grande authorite envers le peuple, et pourtant se dutoit de luy.” —
“Because he knew that he was a man of great authority among the people,
and therefore had doubts about him."

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc31041.htm#fr_318) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p17"></span> The solution usually given, we believe,
for this apparent discrepancy, is, that the name of the person in
question was *Herod-Philip.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc31041.htm#fr_319) <span
id="ix.xxxiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxiii-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxiii-p19.1"></span>Les
rois, princes, et grans tyrans.” — “Kings, princes, and great tyrants.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 4:16-22](cc31042)
