[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31023)  [Next](cc31025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span>LUKE 2:1-7

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="ix.xvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span>**1**.** **Now it happened in those days, an
edict came out from Augustus Caesar, that the whole world should be
registered.  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) **2**.** **This
first registration  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116) was made
when Cyrenius was governor of Syria. **3**.** **And all went to make the
return,  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) each in his own city.
**4**.** **And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of
Nazareth, into Judea, into the city of David, which is called Bethlehem,
(because he was of the house and lineage of David,) **5**.** **To make
the return with Mary  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) his
betrothed wife, who was pregnant. **6**.** **And it happened while they
were there, the days of bringing forth were fulfilled.  <span
id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) **7**.** **And she brought forth her
first-born son, and wrapped him in bandages,  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) and laid him in a manger;  <span
id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) because there was no room for them in
the inn.

<span id="ix.xvi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvi-p12"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p13"></span>Luke relates how it happened, that Christ
was born in the city of Bethlehem, as his mother was living at a
distance from her home, when she was approaching to her confinement. And
first he sets aside the idea of human contrivance,  <span
id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) by saying, that Joseph and Mary had
left home, and came to that place to make the return according to their
family and tribe. If intentionally and on purpose  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) they had changed their residence that
Mary might bring forth her child in Bethlehem, we would have looked only
at the human beings concerned. But as they have no other design than to
obey the edict of Augustus, we readily acknowledge, that they were led
like blind persons, by the hand of God, to the place where Christ must
be born. This may appear to be accidental, as everything else, which
does not proceed from a direct human intention, is ascribed by
irreligious men to Fortune. But we must not attend merely to the events
themselves. We must remember also the prediction which was uttered by
the prophet many centuries before. A comparison will clearly show it to
have been accomplished by the wonderful Providence of God, that a
registration was then enacted by Augustus Caesar, and that Joseph and
Mary set out from home, so as to arrive in Bethlehem at the very point
of time.

<span id="ix.xvi-p16"></span>Thus we see that the holy servants of God,
even though they wander from their design, unconscious where they are
going, still keep the right path, because God directs their steps. Nor
is the Providence of God less wonderful in employing the mandate of a
tyrant to draw Mary from home, that the prophecy may be fulfilled. God
had marked out by his prophet — as we shall afterwards see — the place
where he determined that his Son should be born. If Mary had not been
constrained to do otherwise, she would have chosen to bring forth her
child at home. Augustus orders a registration to take place in Judea,
and each person to give his name, that they may afterwards pay an annual
tax, which they were formerly accustomed to pay to God. Thus an ungodly
man takes forcible possession of that which God was accustomed to demand
from his people. It was, in effect, reducing the Jews to entire
subjection, and forbidding them to be thenceforth reckoned as the people
of God.

<span id="ix.xvi-p17"></span>Matters have been brought, in this way, to
the last extremity, and the Jews appear to be cut off and alienated for
ever from the covenant of God. At that very time does God suddenly, and
contrary to universal expectation, afford a remedy. What is more, he
employs that wicked tyranny for the redemption of his people. For the
governor, (or whoever was employed by Caesar for the purpose,) while he
executes the commission entrusted to him, is, unknown to himself, God’s
herald, to call Mary to the place which God had appointed. And certainly
Luke’s whole narrative may well lead believers to acknowledge, that
Christ was led by the hand of God *“*from his mother’s belly,” (<span
id="ix.xvi-p17.1"></span>[Ps
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010)<span id="ix.xvi-p17.1"></span>.)
Nor is it of small consequence  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)
to the certainty of faith to know, that Mary was drawn suddenly, and
contrary to her own intention, to Bethlehem, that “out of it might come
forth” (<span id="ix.xvi-p18.3"></span>[Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span id="ix.xvi-p18.3"></span>)
the Redeemer, as he had been formerly promised.

<span id="ix.xvi-p19"></span>**1.** *The whole world* This figure of
speech  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) (by which the whole is
taken for a part, or a part for the whole) was in constant use among the
Roman authors, and ought not to be reckoned harsh. That this
registration might be more tolerable and less odious, it was extended
equally, I have no doubt, to all the provinces; though the rate of
taxation may have been different. I consider *this first registration*
to mean, that the Jews, being completely subdued, were then loaded with
a new and unwonted yoke. Others read it, that this registration *was
first made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria;*  <span
id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) but there is no probability in that
view. The tax was, indeed, annual; but the registration did not take
place every year. The meaning is, that the Jews were far more heavily
oppressed than they had formerly been.

<span id="ix.xvi-p22"></span>There is a diversity as to the name of the
Proconsul. Some call him *Cyrenius,* (<span
id="ix.xvi-p22.1"></span>Κυρήνιος,) and others, *Quirinus* or
*Quirinius* But there is nothing strange in this;for we know that the
Greeks, when they translate Latin names, almost always make some change
in the pronunciation. But a far greater difficulty springs up in another
direction. Josephus says that, while Archelaus was a prisoner at Vienna,
(Ant. 17:13. 2,) Quirinus came as Proconsul, with instructions to annex
Judea to the province of Syria, (xviii. 1.1.) Now, historians are
agreed, that Archelaus reigned nine years after the death of his father
Herod. It would therefore appear, that there was an interval of about
thirteen years between the birth of Christ and this registration; for
almost all assent to the account given by Epiphanius, that Christ was
born in the thirty-third year of Herod: that is, four years before his
death.

<span id="ix.xvi-p23"></span>Another circumstance not a little
perplexing is, that the same Josephus speaks of this registration as
having happened in the thirty-seventh year after the victory at Actium,
 <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) (Ant. 18:2. 1.) If this be
true, Augustus lived, at the utmost, not more than seven years after
this event; which makes a deduction of eight or nine years from his age:
for it is plain from the third chapter of Luke’s Gospel, that he was at
that time only in his fifteenth year. But, as the age of Christ is too
well known to be called in question, it is highly probable that, in this
and many other passages of Josephus’s History, his recollection had
failed him. Historians are agreed that Quirinus was Consul nineteen
years, or thereby, before the victory over Antony, which gave Augustus
the entire command of the empire: and so he must have been sent into the
province at a very advanced age. Besides, the same Josephus enumerates
four governors of Judea within eight years; while he acknowledges that
the fifth was governor for fifteen years. That was Valerius Gratus, who
was succeeded by Pontius Pilate.

<span id="ix.xvi-p25"></span>Another solution may be offered. It might
be found impracticable to effect the registration immediately after the
edict had been issued: for Josephus relates, that Coponius was sent with
an army to reduce the Jews to subjection, (Ant. 18:2.2) from which it
may easily be inferred, that the registration was prevented, for a time,
by popular tumult. The words of Luke bear this sense, that, about the
time of our Lord’s birth, an edict came out to have the people
registered, but that the registration could not take place till after a
change of the kingdom, when Judea had been annexed to another province.
This clause is accordingly added by way of correction. *This first
registration was made when Cyrenius was governor of Syria* That is, it
was then first carried into effect.  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128)

<span id="ix.xvi-p27"></span>But the whole question is not yet answered:
for, while Herod was king of Judea, what purpose did it serve to
register a people who paid no tribute to the Roman Empire? I reply:
there is no absurdity in supposing that Augustus, by way of accustoming
the Jews to the yoke, (for their obstinacy was abundantly well-known,)
chose to have them registered, even under the reign of Herod.  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) Nor did Herod’s peculiar authority as
king make it inconsistent that the Jews should pay to the Roman Empire a
stipulated sum for each man under the name of a tax: for we know that
Herod, though he was called a king, held nothing more than a borrowed
power, and was little better than a slave. On what authority Eusebius
states that this registration took place by an order of the Roman
Senate, I know not.

<span id="ix.xvi-p29"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p30"></span>**7.** *Because there was no room for them
in the inn* We see here not only the great poverty of Joseph, but the
cruel tyranny which admitted of no excuse, but compelled Joseph to bring
his wife along with him, at an inconvenient season, when she was near
the time of her delivery. Indeed, it is probable that those who were the
descendants of the royal family were treated more harshly and
disdainfully than the rest. Joseph was not so devoid of feeling as to
have no concern about his wife’s delivery. He would gladly have avoided
this necessity: but, as that is impossible, he is forced to yield,
 <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) and commends himself to God. We
see, at the same time, what sort of beginning the life of the Son of God
had, and in what cradle  <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) he was
placed. Such was his condition at his birth, because he had taken upon
him our flesh for this purpose, that he might, “empty himself” (<span
id="ix.xvi-p32.2"></span>[Php 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xvi-p32.2"></span>) on our account. When he was thrown into a
stable, and placed in a manger, and a lodging refused him among men, it
was that heaven might be opened to us, not as a temporary lodging,
 <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) but as our eternal country and
inheritance, and that angels might receive us into their abode.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc31024.htm#fr_115) <span
id="ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p4.1"></span>Mis par
escrit;” — “put in writing.”

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc31024.htm#fr_116) <span
id="ix.xvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>Ceste
premiere description.”

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc31024.htm#fr_117) <span
id="ix.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p6.1"></span>Ut
profiteretur.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc31024.htm#fr_118) <span
id="ix.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p7.1"></span>Pour estre
enroule avec Marie;” — “to be enrolled with Mary.”

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc31024.htm#fr_119) <span
id="ix.xvi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p8.1"></span>Et comme ils
estoyent la, advint que les jours d'icelle furent accom-. plis pour
enfanter.” — “And as they were there, it happened that her days were
accomplished for bringing forth.”

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc31024.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ix.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p9.1"></span>Fasciis;” —
“<span id="ix.xvi-p9.2"></span>Bandelettes.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc31024.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ix.xvi-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p10.1"></span>Une
creiche.”

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc31024.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ix.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p14.1"></span>Il monstre
que cela ne s'est point fait par advis ou conseil humain.” —”He shows
that this was not by human advice or plan.”

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc31024.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ix.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p15.1"></span>Data opera
et consulto;” — “<span id="ix.xvi-p15.2"></span>de propos delibere;” —
“of deliberate purpose.”

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc31024.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ix.xvi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p18.1"></span>Neque
parum facit;” — “<span id="ix.xvi-p18.2"></span>ce n'est pas un poinct
de petite importance.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc31024.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ix.xvi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p20"></span> “Synecdoche.”

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc31024.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ix.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p21"></span> The reader will observe that this is the
rendering of the authorized English version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc31024.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ix.xvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p24.1"></span>Victoriae
Actiacae.” — “<span id="ix.xvi-p24.2"></span>C'est une victoire qu'ent
Auguste a la bataille sur mer contre Antoine et Cleopatra, aupres de la
ville nommee Actium.” — “That is, a victory which Augustus had in the
naval battle which he fought against Antony and Cleopatra, near the town
called Actium.”

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc31024.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ix.xvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p26.1"></span>Elle fut
lors executee, et trouva-on facon d'en venir a bout.” — “It was then
executed, and a way was found of succeeding in it.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc31024.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ix.xvi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p28.1"></span>Sub
Herode;” — “<span id="ix.xvi-p28.2"></span>combien qu'ils fussent sujets
d'Herode;” — “though they were subjects of Herod.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc31024.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ix.xvi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p31.1"></span>Il baisse
la teste;” — “he bows the head.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc31024.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ix.xvi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p32.1"></span>Comment il
a este heberge.”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc31024.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ix.xvi-p32.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p33"></span> “<span id="ix.xvi-p33.1"></span>Non modo
hospitii jure;” — “<span id="ix.xvi-p33.2"></span>non point comme un
logis pour y estre hebergez en passant.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 2:8-14](cc31025)
