[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31026)  [Next](cc31028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 2:1-6

<span id="ix.xix-p2"></span><span id="ix.xix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
2:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="ix.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p3"></span>**1**.** **Now when Jesus had been born in
Bethlehem of Judea,  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) in the
times of Herod the King, lo, Magi from the East came to Jerusalem,
**2**.** **Saying, Where is he who is born King of the Jews? for we have
seen his star in the East, and have come that we may worship him.
**3**.** **And having heard these things, Herod the King was troubled,
and all Jerusalem with him. **4**.** **And having assembled all the
chief priests and scribes of the people, he inquired at them where
Christ should be born. **5**.** **But they said to him, In Bethlehem of
Judea: for thus it has been written by the prophet: **6**.** **And thou,
Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, art by no means the least among the
princes of Judah: for out of thee shall come the leader,  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) who shall feed my people Israel.

<span id="ix.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xix-p7"></span><span id="ix.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p8"></span>**1.** *Now when Jesus had been born* How it
came about that Jesus was born in Bethlehem, Matthew does not say. The
Spirit of God, who had appointed the Evangelists to be his clerks,
 <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) appears purposely to have
regulated their style in such a manner, that they all wrote one and the
same history, with the most perfect agreement, but in different ways. It
was intended, that the truth of God should more clearly and strikingly
appear, when it was manifest that his witnesses did not speak by a
preconcerted plan, but that each of them separately, without paying any
attention to another, wrote freely and honestly what the Holy Spirit
dictated.

<span id="ix.xix-p10"></span>This is a very remarkable narrative. God
brought *Magi* from Chaldea, to come to the land of Judea, for the
purpose of adoring Christ, in the stable where he lay, amidst the
tokens, not of honor, but of contempt. It was a truly wonderful purpose
of God, that he caused the entrance of his Son into the world to be
attended by deep meanness, and yet bestowed upon him illustrious
ornaments, both of commendation and of other outward signs, that our
faith might be supplied with everything necessary to prove his Divine
Majesty.

<span id="ix.xix-p11"></span>A beautiful instance of real harmony,
amidst apparent contradiction, is here exhibited. A star from heaven
announces that he is a king, to whom a manger, intended for cattle,
serves for a throne, because he is refused admittance among the lowest
of the people. His majesty shines in the East, while in Judea it is so
far from being acknowledged, that it is visited by many marks of
dishonor. Why is this? The heavenly Father chose to appoint the star and
the Magi as our guides, to lead directly to his Son: while he stripped
him of all earthly splendor, for the purpose of informing us that his
kingdom is spiritual. This history conveys profitable instruction, not
only because God brought the *Magi* to his Son, as the first-fruits of
the Gentiles, but also because he appointed the kingdom of his Son to
receive their commendation, and that of the star, for the confirmation
of our faith; that the wicked and malignant contempt of his nation might
not render him less estimable in our eyes.

<span id="ix.xix-p12"></span>*Magi* is well known to be the name given
by the Persians and Chaldees to astrologers and philosophers: and hence
it may readily be conjectured that those men came from Persia.  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) As the Evangelist does not state what
was their number, it is better to be ignorant of it, than to affirm as
certain what is doubtful. Papists have been led into a childish error,
of supposing that they were *three* in number: because Matthew says,
that they brought *gold, frankincense, and myrrh,* (<span
id="ix.xix-p13.3"></span>[Mt 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)<span
id="ix.xix-p13.3"></span>.) But the historian does not say, that each of
them separately presented his own gift. He rather says, that those three
gifts were presented by them in common. That ancient author, whoever he
may be, whose imperfect Commentary on Matthew bears the name of
Chrysostom, and is reckoned among Chrysostom’s works, says that they
were fourteen. This carries as little probability as the other. It may
have come from a tradition of the Fathers, but has no solid foundation.
But the most ridiculous contrivance of the Papists on this subject is,
that those men were kings, because they found in another passage a
prediction, that

<span id="ix.xix-p14"></span>the kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles,
and of Sheba,  
would offer gifts to the Lord, (<span id="ix.xix-p14.2"></span>[Ps
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010)<span id="ix.xix-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xix-p15"></span>Ingenious workmen, truly, who, in order to
present those men in a new shape, have begun with turning the world from
one side to another: for they have changed the south and west into *the
east!* Beyond all doubt, they have been stupified by a righteous
judgment of God, that all might laugh at the gross ignorance of those
who have not scrupled to adulterate “and, change the truth of God into a
lie,” (<span id="ix.xix-p15.1"></span>[Ro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025)<span id="ix.xix-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xix-p16"></span>*The first* inquiry here is: Was this
*star* one of those which the Lord created *in the beginning* (<span
id="ix.xix-p16.1"></span>[Gen. 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016)<span id="ix.xix-p16.1"></span>) to
“garnish the heavens?” (<span id="ix.xix-p16.2"></span>[Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013)<span id="ix.xix-p16.2"></span>.)
*Secondly,* Were the *magi* led by their acquaintance with astrology to
conclude that it pointed out the birth of Christ? On these points, there
is no necessity for angry disputation: but it may be inferred from the
words of Matthew, that it was not a natural, but an extraordinary star.
It was not agreeable to the order of nature, that it should disappear
for a certain period, and afterwards should suddenly become bright; nor
that it should pursue a straight course towards Bethlehem, and at length
remain stationary above the house where Christ was. Not one of these
things belongs to natural stars. It is more probable that it resembled
 <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) a comet, and was seen, not in
the heaven, but in the air. Yet there is no impropriety in Matthew, who
uses popular language, calling it incorrectly a *star.*

<span id="ix.xix-p18"></span>This almost decides likewise the second
question: for since astrology is undoubtedly confined within the limits
of nature, its guidance alone could not have conducted the *Magi* to
Christ; so that they must have been aided by a secret revelation of the
Spirit. I do not go so far as to say, that they derived no assistance
whatever from the art: but I affirm, that this would have been of no
practical advantage, if they had not been aided by a new and
extraordinary revelation.

<span id="ix.xix-p19"></span><span id="ix.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p20"></span>**2.** *Where is he who has been born
King?* The notion of some commentators, that he is said to have been
*born King,* by indirect contrast with one who has been *made* or
*created* a king, appears to me too trifling. I rather suppose the
*Magi* to have simply meant, that this king had been recently born, and
was still a child, by way of distinguishing him from a king who is of
age, and who holds the reins of government: for they immediately add,
that they had been drawn, not by the fame of his exploits, or by any
present exhibitions of his greatness, but by a heavenly presage of his
future reign. But if the sight of a star had so powerful an effect on
the *Magi,* woe to our insensibility, who, now that Christ the King has
been revealed to us, are so cold in our inquiries after him!

<span id="ix.xix-p21"></span>*And have come that we may worship him* The
reason why the *star* had been exhibited was, to draw the *Magi* into
Judea, that they might be witnesses and heralds of the new King.  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) So far as respects themselves, they
had not come to render to Christ such pious worship, as is due to the
Son of God, but intended to salute him, according to the Persian custom,
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) as a very eminent King. For
their views, with regard to him, probably went no farther, than that his
power and exalted rank would be so extraordinary as to impress all
nations with just admiration and reverence. It is even possible, that
they wished to gain his favor beforehand, that he might treat them
favorably and kindly, if he should afterwards happen to possess dominion
in the east.

<span id="ix.xix-p24"></span><span id="ix.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p25"></span>**3.** *Herod the king was troubled* Herod
was not unacquainted with the predictions, which promised to the Jews a
King, who would restore their distressful and ruinous affairs to a
prosperous condition. He had lived from a child among that nation, and
was thoroughly acquainted with their affairs. Besides, the report was
spread everywhere, and could not be unknown to the neighboring nations.
Yet he is *troubled,* as if the matter had been new and unheard of;
because he put no trust in God, and thought it idle to rely on the
promises of a Redeemer; and particularly because, with the foolish
confidence incident to proud men, he imagined that the kingdom was
secure to himself and his descendants. But though, in the intoxication
of prosperity, he was formerly accustomed to view the prophecies with
scorn, the recollection of them now aroused him to sudden alarm. For he
would not have been so strongly moved by the simple tale of the *Magi,*
if he had not remembered the predictions, which he had formerly looked
upon as harmless,  <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) and of no
importance. Thus, when the Lord has permitted unbelievers to sleep, he
suddenly breaks their rest.  <span id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182)

<span id="ix.xix-p28"></span>*And all Jerusalem with him* This may be
explained in two ways. Either the people were roused, in a tumultuous
manner, by the novelty of the occurrence, though the glad tidings of a
king who had been born to them were cordially welcomed. Or the people,
accustomed to distresses, and rendered callous by long endurance,
dreaded a change which might introduce still greater calamities. For
they were so completely worn down, and almost wasted, by continued wars,
that their wretched and cruel bondage appeared to them not only
tolerable, but desirable, provided it were accompanied by peace. This
shows how little they had profited under God’s chastisements: for they
were so benumbed and stupified, that the promised redemption and
salvation almost stank  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) in their
nostrils. Matthew intended, I have no doubt, to express their
ingratitude, in being so entirely broken by the long continuance of
their afflictions, as to throw away the hope and desire of the grace
which had been promised to them.

<span id="ix.xix-p30"></span><span id="ix.xix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p31"></span>**4.** *Having assembled the priests*
Though deep silence prevailed respecting Christ in the Hall of Herod,
yet, as soon as the *Magi* have thrown out the mention of a *King,*
predictions are remembered, which formerly lay in oblivion. Herod
instantly conjectures, that the *King,* about whom the *Magi* inquire,
is the *Messiah* whom God had formerly promised, (<span
id="ix.xix-p31.1"></span>[Da 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025)<span
id="ix.xix-p31.1"></span>.) Here again it appears, that Herod is
seriously alarmed, when he puts such earnest inquiries; and no wonder.
All tyrants are cowards, and their cruelty produces stronger alarm in
their own breasts than in the breasts of others. Herod must have
trembled more than others, because he perceived that he was reigning in
opposition to God.

<span id="ix.xix-p32"></span>This new investigation shows, that the
contempt of Christ, before the arrival of the *Magi,* must have been
very deep. At a later period, the scribes and high priests labored with
fury to corrupt the whole of the Scripture, that they might not give any
countenance to Christ. But on the present occasion they reply honestly
out of the Scripture, and for this reason, that Christ and his Gospel
have not yet given them uneasiness. And so all ungodly persons find no
difficulty in giving their assent to God on general principles; but when
the truth of God begins to press them more closely, they throw out the
venom of their rebellion.

<span id="ix.xix-p33"></span>We have a striking instance of this, in our
own day, among the Papists. They freely own, that he is the
only-begotten Son of God, clothed with our flesh, and acknowledge the
one person of God-man, as subsisting in the two natures. But when we
come to the power and office of Christ, a contest immediately breaks
out; because they will not consent to take a lower rank, and much less
to be reduced to nothing. In a word, so long as wicked men think that it
is taking nothing from themselves, they will yield to God and to
Scripture some degree of reverence. But when Christ comes into close
conflict with ambition, covetousness, pride, misplaced confidence,
hypocrisy, and deceit, they immediately forget all modesty, and break
out into rage. Let us therefore learn, that the chief cause of blindness
in the enemies of truth is to be found in their wicked affections, which
change light into darkness.

<span id="ix.xix-p34"></span><span id="ix.xix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p35"></span>**6.** *And thou, Bethlehem* The scribes
quoted faithfully, no doubt, the words of the passage in their own
language, as it is found in the prophet. But Matthew reckoned it enough
to point out the passage; and, as he wrote in Greek, he followed the
ordinary reading. This passage, and others of the same kind, readily
suggest the inference, that Matthew did not compose his Gospel in the
Hebrew language. It ought always to be observed that, whenever any proof
from Scripture is quoted by the apostles, though they do not translate
word for word, and sometimes depart widely from the language, yet it is
applied correctly and appropriately to their subject. Let the reader
always consider the purpose for which passages of Scripture are brought
forward by the Evangelists, so as not to stick too closely to the
particular words, but to be satisfied with this, that the Evangelists
never torture Scripture into a different meaning, but apply it correctly
in its native meaning. But while it was their intention to supply with
milk children and “novices” (<span id="ix.xix-p35.1"></span>[1Ti
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#006)<span id="ix.xix-p35.1"></span>) in
faith, who were not yet able to endure *“*strong meat,” (<span
id="ix.xix-p35.2"></span>[Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span id="ix.xix-p35.2"></span>,)
there is nothing to prevent the children of God from making careful and
diligent inquiry into the meaning of Scripture, and thus being led to
the fountain by the taste which the apostles afford.

<span id="ix.xix-p36"></span>Let us now return to the prediction. Thus
it stands literally in the Prophet:

<span id="ix.xix-p37"></span>“And thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou
be little  
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall  
he come forth to me, who is Ruler in Israel,” (<span
id="ix.xix-p37.3"></span>[Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)<span
id="ix.xix-p37.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xix-p38"></span>For *Ephratah* Matthew has put *Judah,* but
the meaning is the same; for Micah only intended, by this mark, to
distinguish the Bethlehem of which he speaks, from another Bethlehem,
which was in the tribe of Zebulun. There is greater difficulty in what
follows: for the Prophet says, that Bethlehem is *little,* when reckoned
among the governments of Judah, while Matthew, on the contrary: speaks
highly of its rank as one of the most distinguished: *thou art by no
means the least among the princes of Judah* This reason has induced some
commentators to read the passage in the prophet as a question, *Art thou
little among the thousands of Judah?* But I rather agree with those who
think that Matthew intended, by this change of the language, to magnify
the grace of God in making an inconsiderable and unknown town the
birth-place of the highest King. Although Bethlehem received this
distinguished honor, it was of no advantage to its inhabitants, but
brought upon them a heavier destruction: for there an unworthy reception
was given to the Redeemer. For he is *to be Ruler,* Matthew has put *he
shall feed,* (<span id="ix.xix-p38.1"></span>ποιμανεῖ) But he has
expressed both, when he says, that Christ is the *leader, (*<span
id="ix.xix-p38.2"></span>ἡγούμενος*,)* and that to him is committed the
office of *feeding* his people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc31027.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ix.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p4.1"></span>(Cite) de
Judee;” — “(city) of Judea.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc31027.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ix.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p5.1"></span>Dux;” —
“<span id="ix.xix-p5.2"></span>Conducteur.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc31027.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ix.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p9.1"></span>Scribas;” —
“<span id="ix.xix-p9.2"></span>*greffiers.”*—*Clerks,* not *Authors* in
the ordinary meaning of that term, but persons who wrote to the
dictation of another. This conveys the idea of what is frequently called
*plenary inspiration.* If such a term as *Clerk,* or *Penman,* may be
supposed to lower the sacred writers, it is not by a comparison of them
with uninspired historians, the ablest of whom cannot, without
arrogance, aspire to an equal level with those who wrote by inspiration.
But when man is brought into a comparison with God, no language can
express too strongly the infinite distance between the parties. The
Evangelists do not ask the praise of invention, or judgment, or of
anything else which would imply that the work was their own production.
But they lay claim to a loftier and peculiar distinction, that they
faithfully committed to writing that history which they were honored to
receive from its Divine Author. *Holy men of God spake as they were
moved by the Holy Ghost,* (<span id="ix.xix-p9.3"></span>[2Pe
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021)<span id="ix.xix-p9.3"></span>.) —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc31027.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ix.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p13.1"></span>Le mot
Grec, (μάγαι,) <span id="ix.xix-p13.2"></span>du quel use l'Evangeliste
est celuy d'ou vient le mot de Magiciens: mais les Perses et Chaldeens
nomment ainsi leurs Astrologues et Philosophes: et pourtant nous l'avons
traduit par ce mot de Sages. Parquoy il y a grande apparence de dire
qu'ils etoyent venus du pays des Perses.” — “The Greek word, (μάγοι,)
which the Evangelist employs, is that from which the word *Magicians* is
derived: but the Persians and Chaldees give this name also to their
Astrologers and Philosophers: and therefore we have translated it by the
word *Sages,* or *Wise men.* Wherefore there is great probability in
saying that they had come from the country of the Persians.”

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc31027.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ix.xix-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p17"></span> Calvin says, not that it *was* a comet,
but that it *resembled a* comet; and it is probable enough that the
*meteor* assumed that aspect. He refutes, in a masterly and conclusive
manner, the supposition that it was “natural star,” but, with modesty
and good sense, avoids shocking the prejudices of his age. Of astrology
he speaks more doubtfully. If he had lent the countenance of his name to
that pretended science, we ought not to have blamed him severely. Long
after he had left the world, men of powerful minds, and of extensive
attainments in science, found it no easy matter to disentangle
themselves from its meshes, and to proclaim their freedom. But Calvin
needs no vindication. He has left us a treatise, <span
id="ix.xix-p17.1"></span>*Adversus Astrologiam Judiciarium*, "Against
Judicial Astrology;" which Servetus, as much his inferior in
philosophical views in sterling worth, brings forward as one of his
charges. <span id="ix.xix-p17.2"></span>*Damnatam a me fuisse
Astrologiam conqueritur*, says Calvin; "It is made a ground of complaint
against me that I have condemned astrology." — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc31027.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ix.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p22.1"></span>Que la ils
fussent comme herauts pour porter les nouvelles du nouveau Roy.” — “That
there they might be as heralds, to carry the tidings of the new King.”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc31027.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ix.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p23.1"></span>Persico
more;” — “<span id="ix.xix-p23.2"></span>selon la coustume de leur
pays;” — “according to the custom of their country.”

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc31027.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ix.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p26.1"></span>Lusoria;”
alluding to the phrase used by Seneca and others, <span
id="ix.xix-p26.2"></span>*lusoria fulmina,* “harmless thunderbolts.”

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc31027.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ix.xix-p26.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p27.1"></span>Il les
resveille tout soudain, et leur fait bien sentir leur folie.” — “He
awakes them all on a sudden, and makes them deeply feel their folly.”

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc31027.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ix.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p29"></span> “<span id="ix.xix-p29.1"></span>Quodammodo
foeteret,”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 2:7-12](cc31028)
