[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31055)  [Next](cc31057.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xlviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:33-37

<span id="ix.xlviii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xlviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p3"></span>**33**.** **Again, ye have heard that it
was said to the ancients, Thou shalt not perjure thyself: but thou shalt
perform to the Lord what thou hast sworn. **34**.** **But I charge you,
swear not at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God:
**35**.** **Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: nor by Jerusalem,
for it is the city of the great King: **36**.** **Nor shalt thou swear
by thy head: for thou canst not make one hair white or black.
**37**.** **But your speech shall be, Yes, yes; No, no for what is
beyond these comes from evil.  <span id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409.md)

<span id="ix.xlviii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlviii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xlviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p7"></span>**33.** *Thou shalt not perjure thyself*
This also is not a correction of the law, but a true interpretation of
it. For God condemned in the law not only acts of perjury, but lightness
in swearing, which lessens the reverence for his name. The man who
*perjures himself* is not the only person who *takes the name of God in
vain,* (<span id="ix.xlviii-p7.1"></span>[Ex
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p7.1"></span>.) He does so, who idly and contemptuously
pronounces the name of God on trivial occasions, or in ordinary
conversation. While the law condemns every kind of profanation of the
name of God the Jews imagined, that the guilt of it lay entirely in acts
of perjury. Christ reproves this gross error of supposing that they
might, without danger, abuse the name of God, provided they did not
swear falsely. We are, no doubt, strictly enjoined to *perform to the
Lord what we have sworn:* for he who, after employing the name of God,
cheats and deceives his neighbors, does an injury to God as well as to
man. But it is improper to confine to a single part that which has a
wider reference. Some consider the word *perform* as applying to vows,
when any thing has been promised to God on account of religion. But this
mode of expression applies very well to all promises and engagements,
which have been sanctioned by the use of the name of God: for in such
cases God is appealed to as guarantee between the parties, to secure
their fidelity.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p8"></span><span id="ix.xlviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p9"></span>**34.** *Swear not at all* Many have been
led by the phrase, *not at all,* to adopt the false notion, that every
kind of swearing is condemned by Christ. Some good men have been driven
to this extreme rigor by observing the unbridled licentiousness of
swearing, which prevailed in the world. The Anabaptists, too, have
blustered a great deal, on the ground, that Christ appears to give no
liberty to swear on any occasion, because he commands, *Swear not at
all* But we need not go beyond the immediate context to obtain the
exposition: for he immediately adds, *neither by heaven, nor by the
earth* Who does not see that those kinds of swearing were added by way
of exposition, to explain the former clause more fully by specifying a
number of cases? The Jews had circuitous or indirect ways of swearing:
and when they *swore by heaven, or by earth,* or *by the altar,* (<span
id="ix.xlviii-p9.1"></span>[Mt
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#018.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p9.1"></span>,) they reckoned it to be next to nothing;
and, as one vice springs from another, they defended, under this
pretense, any profanation of the name of God that was not openly avowed.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p10"></span>To meet this crime, our Lord declares
that they must *not swear at all,* either in this or that way, either
*by heaven,* or *by the earth* Hence we conclude, that the particle, *at
all,* relates not to the substance, but to the form, and means,
*“neither* directly nor indirectly.” It would otherwise have been
superfluous to enumerate those kinds: and therefore the Anabaptists
betray not only a rage for controversy, but gross ignorance, when they
obstinately press upon us a single word, and pass over, with closed
eyes, the whole scope of the passage. Is it objected, that Christ
permits no swearing? I reply: What the expounder of the law says, must
be viewed in connection with its design. His statement amounts to this,
that there are other ways of “taking the name of God in vain,” besides
perjury; and, therefore, that we ought to refrain from allowing
ourselves the liberty of unnecessary swearing: for, when there are just
reasons to demand it, the law not only permits, but expressly commands
us to swear. Christ, therefore, meant nothing more than this, that all
oaths are unlawful, which in any way abuse and profane the sacred name
of God, for which they ought to have had the effect of producing a
deeper reverence.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p11"></span>*Neither by heaven* It is a mistake to
explain these words as meaning, that such forms of swearing are
condemned by Christ as faulty, on the ground that we ought to swear by
God only. The reasons which he brings forward tend rather to the
opposite view, that we swear by the name of God even when we name the
*heaven,* and *the earth:* because there is no part of the world on
which God has not engraved the marks of his glory. But this statement
appears not to agree with the precept of the law, in which God expressly
commands us to “swear by his name,” (<span
id="ix.xlviii-p11.1"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p11.1"></span>;) and likewise with so many passages of
Scripture, in which he complains, that injury is done to him, if we
swear by creatures. I reply: It is a corruption allied to idolatry, when
we appeal to them either as having a right to judge, or authority to
prove testimony: for we must look at the object of swearing. It is an
appeal which men make to God to revenge falsehood, and to uphold truth.
This honor cannot be transferred to another, without committing an
outrage on the divine majesty.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p12"></span>For the same reason the Apostle says,
that we do not swear in a right manner, unless we swear by *the
greater,* and that it belongs to God alone to *swear by himself,* (<span
id="ix.xlviii-p12.1"></span>[Heb
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p12.1"></span>.) Thus any one who, in ancient times, swore
by “Moloch,” (<span id="ix.xlviii-p12.2"></span>[Le
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p12.2"></span>,) or by any other idol, withdrew something
of what belonged to God; because they put that idol in the place of God,
as possessing an acquaintance with the hearts, and as the judge of the
souls of men. And in our own times, those who swear by angels, or by
departed saints, take from God what belongs to him, and ascribe to them
a divine majesty. The case is different, when men *swear by heaven and
earth,* with a view to the Creator himself: for, in that case, the
sanctity of the oath is not founded on creatures, but God alone is
appealed to as a witness, by bringing forward the symbols of his glory.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p13"></span>*Heaven* is called in Scripture (<span
id="ix.xlviii-p13.1"></span>[Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p13.1"></span>) the *throne of God:* not that he dwells in
heaven alone, but to teach men to raise their minds upwards, whenever
they think of him, and not to form any low or earthly conceptions of
him. Again, *the earth* is called *his footstool,* (v. 35,) to inform
us, that he fills all things, and that no extent of space can contain
him. The holiness of *Jerusalem* (v. 35) depended on his promise. It was
*the holy city,* (<span id="ix.xlviii-p13.2"></span>[Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p13.2"></span>:) because God had selected it to be the
seat and residence of his empire. When men *swear by their head,* (v.
36,) they bring forward their life, which is a remarkable gift of God,
as a pledge of their sincerity.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p14"></span><span id="ix.xlviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p15"></span>**37.** *But your speech shall be, Yes,
yes; No, no* Christ now prescribes, in the second place, a remedy; which
is, that men act towards each other sincerely and honestly: for then
simplicity of speech will have quite as much weight as an oath has among
those who are not sincere. Now, this is certainly the best way of
correcting faults, to point out the sources from which they spring.
Whence comes the great propensity to swearing, but from the great
falsehood, the numerous impositions, the unsteady and light conduct, so
that hardly any thing is believed?  <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410.md) Fairness and honesty in our words are,
therefore, demanded by Christ, that there may be no longer any occasion
for an oath.

<span id="ix.xlviii-p17"></span>*“Yes, yes; No, no.”* This repetition
means, that we ought to abide by our words, so that all may be convinced
of our honesty. Now, as this is the true and lawful method of
proceeding, when men have nothing on their tongue but what is in their
heart, Christ declares, that *what is beyond these comes from evil* I do
not approve of the exposition of these words which some have given, that
the criminality of swearing ought to be charged on the man who does not
give credit to what another says. Christ teaches us, in my opinion, that
it originates in the wickedness of men, that they are compelled to
swear: for, if honesty prevailed among men, if they were not
inconsistent and hypocritical, they would maintain that simplicity which
nature dictates. And yet it does not follow, that it is unlawful to
swear, when necessity demands it: for many things are proper in
themselves, though they have had a wicked origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_409"></span>[410](cc31056.htm#fr_409.md) <span
id="ix.xlviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xlviii-p4.1"></span>Du
mal, *ou, malin, ou meschant,”* (<span id="ix.xlviii-p4.2"></span>[Jas
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md)<span
id="ix.xlviii-p4.2"></span>;)—”from evil, *or, malignant, or wicked.”*

<span id="fn_410"></span>[411](cc31056.htm#fr_410.md) <span
id="ix.xlviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlviii-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xlviii-p16.1"></span>D’ou
vient une si grande legerete en sermens, sinon qu'entre tout de
mensonges, tromperies, inconstance et babil, on ne sait qui croire, ni a
qui se fier?” — “Whence comes so great a lightness about oaths, but that
among so many lies and impositions, and so much unsteadiness and
trifling, one does not know whom to believe or whom to trust?”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:38-41;Luke 6:29-30](cc31057.md)
