[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31038)  [Next](cc31040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 4:1-4; MARK 1:12-13; LUKE 4:1-4

<span id="ix.xxxi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="ix.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012)<span id="ix.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p4"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#001)<span id="ix.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p5"></span>**1**.** **Then Jesus was led into the
wilderness by the Spirit, that he might be tempted by the devil;
**2**.** **And when he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he at
length was hungry. **3**.** **And when he who tempteth had approached to
him, he said, If thou art the Son of God, command that these stones may
become loaves.  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) **4**.** **But
he answering said, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone, but
by every word which proceedeth from the mouth of God.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p7"></span>**12**.** **And immediately the Spirit
drove him into the wilderness, **13**.** **And he was in the wilderness
forty days and forty nights; and was tempted by Satan, and was with the
wild beasts.  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301)

<span id="ix.xxxi-p9"></span>**1**.** **And Jesus, full of the Holy
Ghost, returnined from Jordan, and was driven by the Spirit into the
wilderness. **2**.** **Forty days he was tempted by the devil; and he
ate nothing in those days, afterwards he was hungry.  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) **3**.** **And the devil said to him,
If thou art the Son of God, command this stone that it may become bread.
**4**.** **And Jesus replied to him, saying, It is written, Man shall
not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p11"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxi-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p13"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxi-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#001)<span id="ix.xxxi-p13.2"></span>.**
*Then Jesus was led.* There were two reasons why Christ withdrew into
the wilderness. The first was, that, after a fast of forty days, he
might come forth as a new man, or rather a heavenly man, to the
discharge of his office. The next was, that he might be tried by
temptation and undergo an apprenticeship, before he undertook an office
so arduous, and so elevated. Let us therefore learn that, by the
guidance of the Spirit, Christ withdrew from the crowd of men, in order
that he might come forth as the highest teacher of the church, as the
ambassador of God, — rather as sent from heaven, than as taken from some
town, and from among the common people.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p14"></span>In the same way Moses, when God was about
to employ him as his agent in publishing his law, was carried into Mount
Sinai, withdrawn from the view of the people, and admitted, as it were,
into a heavenly sanctuary, (<span id="ix.xxxi-p14.1"></span>[Ex
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012)<span
id="ix.xxxi-p14.1"></span>.) It was proper that Christ should be
surrounded by marks of divine grace and power — at least equally
illustrious with those which were bestowed on Moses, that the majesty of
the Gospel might not be inferior to that of the Law. If God bestowed
singular honor on a doctrine which was “the ministration of death,”
(<span id="ix.xxxi-p14.2"></span>[2Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)<span id="ix.xxxi-p14.2"></span>,)
how much more honor is due to the doctrine of life? And if a shadowy
portrait of God had so much brightness, ought not his face, which
appears in the Gospel, to shine with full splendor?

<span id="ix.xxxi-p15"></span>Such also was the design of the *fasting:*
for Christ abstained from eating and drinking, not to give an example of
temperance, but to acquire greater authority, by being separated from
the ordinary condition of men, and coming forth, as an angel from
heaven, not as a man from the earth. For what, pray, would have been
that virtue of abstinence, in not tasting food, for which he had no more
appetite than if he had not been clothed with flesh?  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) It is mere folly, therefore, to
appoint a forty days’ fast, (as it is called,) in imitation of Christ.
There is no more reason why we should follow the example of Christ in
this matter, than there formerly was for the holy Prophets, and other
Fathers under the law, to imitate the fast of Moses. But we are aware,
that none of them thought of doing so; with the single exception of
Elijah, who was employed by God in restoring the law, and who, for
nearly the same reason with Moses, was kept in the mount fasting.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p17"></span>Those who fast daily, during all the forty
days, pretend that they are imitators of Christ. But how? They stuff
their belly so completely at dinner, that, when the hour of supper
arrives, they have no difficulty in abstaining from food. What
resemblance do they bear to the Son of God? The ancients practiced
greater moderation: but even they had nothing that approached to
Christ’s *fasting,* any more, in fact, than the abstinence of men
approaches to the condition of angels, who do not eat at all. Besides,
neither Christ nor Moses observed a solemn fast every year; but both of
them observed it only once during their whole life. I wish we could say
that they had only amused themselves, like apes, by such fooleries. It
was a wicked and abominable mockery of Christ, to attempt, by this
contrivance of fasting, to conform themselves to him as their model.
 <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) To believe that such fasting is
a meritorious work, and that it is a part of godliness and of the
worship of God, is a very base superstition.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p19"></span>But above all, it is an intolerable
outrage on God, whose extraordinary miracle they throw into the shade;
secondly, on Christ, whose distinctive badge they steal from him, that
they may clothe themselves with his spoils; thirdly, on the Gospel,
which loses not a little of its authority, if this *fasting* of Christ
is not acknowledged to be his seal. God exhibited a singular miracle,
when he relieved his Son from the necessity of eating and when they
attempt the same thing by their own power, what is it but a mad and
daring ambition to be equal with God? Christ’s *fasting* was a
distinctive badge of the divine glory: and is it not to defraud him of
his glory, and to reduce him to the ordinary rank of men, when mortals
freely mix themselves with him as his companions? God appointed Christ’s
fasting to seal the Gospel: and do those who apply it to a different
purpose abate nothing from the dignity of the Gospel? Away, then, with
that ridiculous imitation,  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305)
which overturns the purpose of God, and the whole order of his works.
Let it be observed, that I do not speak of *fastings* in general, the
practice of which I could wish were more general among us, provided it
were pure.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p21"></span>But I must explain what was the object of
Christ’s *fasting.* Satan availed himself of our Lord’s hunger as an
occasion for tempting him, as will shortly be more fully stated. For the
present, we must inquire generally, why was it the will of God that his
Son should be tempted? That he was brought into this contest by a fixed
purpose of God, is evident from the words of *Matthew* and *Mark,* who
say, that for this reason *he was led by the Spirit into the
wilderness.* God intended, I have no doubt, to exhibit in the person of
his Son, as in a very bright mirror, how obstinately and perseveringly
Satan opposes the salvation of men. For how comes it, that he attacks
Christ more furiously, and directs all his power and forces against him,
at the particular time mentioned by the Evangelists, but because he sees
him preparing, at the command of the Father, to undertake the redemption
of men? Our salvation, therefore, was attacked in the person of Christ,
just as the ministers, whom Christ has authorized to proclaim his
redemption, are the objects of Satan’s daily warfare.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p22"></span>It ought to be observed, at the same time,
that the Son of God voluntarily endured the temptations, which we are
now considering, and fought, as it were, in single combat with the
devil, that, by his victory, he might obtain a triumph for us. Whenever
we are called to encounter Satan, let us remember, that his attacks can,
in no other way, be sustained and repelled, than by holding out this
shield: for the Son of God undoubtedly allowed himself to be tempted,
that he may be constantly before our minds, when Satan excites within us
any contest of temptations. When he was leading a private life at home,
we do not read that he was tempted; but when he was about to discharge
the office of Redeemer, he then entered the field in the name of his
whole church. But if Christ was tempted as the public representative of
all believers, let us learn, that the temptations which befall us are
not accidental, or regulated by the will of Satan, without God’s
permission; but that the Spirit of God presides over our contests as an
exercise of our faith. This will aid us in cherishing the assured hope,
that God, who is the supreme judge and disposer of the combat,  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) will not be unmindful of us, but will
fortify us against those distresses, which he sees that we are unable to
meet.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p24"></span>There is a slight apparent difference in
the words of Luke, that *Jesus, full of the Holy Ghost, withdrew from
Jordan* They imply, that he was then more abundantly endued with the
grace and power of the Spirit, in order that he might be more fortified
for the battles which he had to fight: for it was not without a good
reason that *the Holy Spirit descended upon him* in a visible shape. It
has been already stated, that the grace of God shone in him the more
brightly, as the necessity arising out of our salvation became greater.
 <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) But, at first sight, it appears
strange, that Christ was liable to the temptations of the devil: for,
when temptation falls on men, it must always be owing to sin and
weakness. I reply: First, Christ took upon him *our infirmity, but
without sin,* (<span id="ix.xxxi-p25.2"></span>[Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015)<span id="ix.xxxi-p25.2"></span>.)
Secondly, it detracts no more from his glory, that he was exposed to
temptations, than that he was clothed with our flesh: for he was made
man on the condition that, along with our flesh, he should take upon him
our feelings. But the whole difficulty lies in the first point. How was
Christ surrounded by our weakness, so as to be capable of being tempted
by Satan, and yet to be pure and free from all sin? The solution will
not be difficult, if we recollect, that the nature of Adam, while it was
still innocent, and reflected the brightness of the divine image, — was
liable to temptations. All the bodily affections, that exist in man, are
so many opportunities which Satan seizes to tempt him.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p26"></span>It is justly reckoned a weakness of human
nature, that our senses are affected by external objects. But this
weakness would not be sinful, were it not for the presence of
corruption; in consequence of which Satan never attacks us, without
doing some injury, or, at least, without inflicting a slight wound.
Christ was separated from us, in this respect, by the perfection of his
nature; though we must not imagine him to have existed in that
intermediate condition, which belonged to Adam, to whom it was only
granted, that it was possible for him not to sin. We know, that Christ
was fortified by the Spirit with such power, that the darts of Satan
could not pierce him.  <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308)

<span id="ix.xxxi-p28"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p29"></span>**<span id="ix.xxxi-p29.1"></span>[Matthew
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)<span id="ix.xxxi-p29.1"></span>.**
*And when he, who tempteth, had approached to him.* This name, <span
id="ix.xxxi-p29.2"></span>ὁ πειράζων, *the tempter,* is given to Satan
by the Spirit for the express purpose, that believers may be more
carefully on their guard against him. Hence, too, we conclude, that
temptations, which solicit us to what is evil, come from him alone: for,
when God is sometimes said to *tempt* or *prove,* (<span
id="ix.xxxi-p29.3"></span>[Ge
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)<span id="ix.xxxi-p29.3"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxxi-p29.4"></span>[De
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#003)<span id="ix.xxxi-p29.4"></span>,)
it is for a different purpose, namely, to try their faith, or to inflict
punishment on unbelievers, or to discover the hypocrisy of those who do
not sincerely obey the truth.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p30"></span>*That these stones may become loaves.*
Here the ancients amused themselves with ingenious trifles. The first
temptation, they said, was to gluttony; the second, to ambition; and the
third, to covetousness. But it is absurd to suppose that it arises from
the intemperance of gluttony,  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309)
when a hungry person desires food to satisfy nature. What luxury will
they fancy themselves to have discovered in the use of bread, that one
who satisfies himself, as we say, with dry bread, must be reckoned an
epicure? But not to waste more words on that point, Christ’s answer
alone is sufficient to show, that the design of Satan was altogether
different. The Son of God was not such an unskillful or inexperienced
antagonist, as not to know how he might ward off the strokes of his
adversary, or idly to present his shield on the left hand when he was
attacked on the right. If Satan had endeavored to allure him by the
enticements of gluttony,  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) he had
at hand passages of Scripture fitted to repel him. But he proposes
nothing of this sort.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p33"></span><span id="ix.xxxi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p34"></span>**4.** *Man shall not live by bread
alone.* He quotes the statement, that men *do not live by bread alone,*
but by the secret blessing of God. Hence we conclude, that Satan made a
direct attack on the faith of Christ, in the hope that, after destroying
his faith, he would drive Christ to unlawful and wicked methods of
procuring food. And certainly he presses us very hard, when he attempts
to make us distrust God, and consult our own advantage in a way not
authorized by his word. The meaning of the words, therefore, is: “When
you see that you are forsaken by God, you are driven by necessity to
attend to yourself. Provide then for yourself the food, with which God
does not supply you.” Now, though  <span
id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311) he holds out the divine power of
Christ to turn the *stones* into *loaves,* yet the single object which
he has in view, is to persuade Christ to depart from the word of God,
and to follow the dictates of infidelity.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p36"></span>Christ’s reply, therefore, is appropriate:
*“Man shall not live by bread alone.* You advise me to contrive some
remedy, for obtaining relief in a different manner from what God
permits. This would be to distrust God; and I have no reason to expect
that he will support me in a different manner from what he has promised
in his word. You, Satan, represent his favor as confined to *bread:* but
Himself declares, that, though every kind of food were wanting, his
blessing alone is sufficient for our nourishment.” Such was the kind of
temptation which Satan employed, the same kind with which he assails us
daily. The Son of God did not choose to undertake any contest of an
unusual description, but to sustain assaults in common with us, that we
might be furnished with the same armor, and might entertain no doubt as
to achieving the victory.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p37"></span>*It is written, Man shall not live by
bread alone.* The first thing to be observed here is, that Christ uses
Scripture as his shield: for this is the true way of fighting, if we
wish to make ourselves sure of the victory. With good reason does Paul
say, that, the sword of the Spirit is the word of God,” and enjoin us to
*“*take the shield of faiths” (<span id="ix.xxxi-p37.1"></span>[Eph.
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span id="ix.xxxi-p37.1"></span>.)
Hence also we conclude, that Papists, as if they had made a bargain with
Satan, cruelly give up souls to be destroyed by him at his pleasure,
when they wickedly withhold the Scripture from the people of God, and
thus deprive them of their arms, by which alone their safety could be
preserved. Those who voluntarily throw away that armor, and do not
laboriously exercise themselves in the school of God, deserve to be
strangled, at every instant, by Satan, into whose hands they give
themselves up unarmed. No other reason can be assigned, why the fury of
Satan meets with so little resistance, and why so many are everywhere
carried away by him, but that God punishes their carelessness, and their
contempt of his word.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p38"></span>We must now examine more closely the
passage, which is quoted by Christ from Moses: *that he might make thee
know that man doth not live by bread only, but by every word that
proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man live,* (<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.1"></span>[De 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.1"></span>.) There are some who torture it to a false
meaning, as referring to spiritual life; as if our Lord had said, that
souls are not nourished by visible *bread, but by the word of God.* The
statement itself is, no doubt, true: but Moses had quite a different
meaning. He reminds them that, when no bread could be obtained, God
provided them with an extraordinary kind of nourishment in “manna, which
they knew not, neither did their fathers know,” (<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.2"></span>[De 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.2"></span>;) and that this was intended as an evident
proof, in all time coming, that the life of man is not confined to
*bread,* but depends on the will and good-pleasure of God. *The word*
does not mean *doctrine,* but the purpose which God has made known, with
regard to preserving the order of nature and the lives of his creatures.
Having created men, he does not cease to care for them: but, as “he
breathed into their nostrils the breath of life,” (<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.3"></span>[Ge 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007)<span
id="ix.xxxi-p38.3"></span>,) so he constantly preserves the life which
he has bestowed. In like manner, the Apostle says, that he “upholdeth
all things by his powerful word,” (<span id="ix.xxxi-p38.4"></span>[Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ix.xxxi-p38.4"></span>;)
that is, the whole world is preserved, and every part of it keeps its
place, by the will and decree of Him, whose power, above and below, is
everywhere diffused. Though we live on *bread,* we must not ascribe the
support of life to the power of *bread,* but to the secret kindness, by
which God imparts to bread the quality of nourishing our bodies.

<span id="ix.xxxi-p39"></span>Hence, also, follows another statement:
*by* *every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God shall men
live.* God, who now employs bread for our support, will enable us,
whenever he pleases, to live by other means. This declaration of Moses
condemns the stupidity of those, who reckon life to consist in luxury
and abundance; while it reproves the distrust and inordinate anxiety
which drives us to seek unlawful means. The precise object of Christ’s
reply is this: We ought to trust in God for food, and for the other
necessaries of the present life, in such a manner, that none of us may
overleap the boundaries which he has prescribed. But if Christ did not
consider himself to be at liberty to change *stones* into *bread,*
without the command of God, much less is it lawful for us to procure
food by fraud, or robbery, or violence, or murder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc31039.htm#fr_300) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p6.1"></span>Ut lapides
hi panes fiant;” — “<span id="ix.xxxi-p6.2"></span>Que ces pierres
devienent pains.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc31039.htm#fr_301) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p8.1"></span>Et estoit
avec les bestes sauvages.”

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc31039.htm#fr_302) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p10.1"></span>Mais
apres qu'ils furent passez, il ent faim;” — “but after that they were
past, he was hungry.”

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc31039.htm#fr_303) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p16.1"></span>Car, je
vous prie, quelle virtu d' abstinence y-eust-il eue a, ne taster point
de viande, veu qu'il n'avoit nulle faim qui le pressast? Car il est
certain, et les Evangelistes le donnent a entendre assez clairement,
qu'il s'est passe de manger tout ainsi que s'il n'eust point este
revestu de notre chair.” — “For what virtue of abstinence, pray, was
there in not tasting food, since he had no hunger that pressed him? For
it is certain, and the Evangelists give us plainly enough to understand,
that he had left off eating as completely as if he had not been clothed
with our flesh.”

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc31039.htm#fr_304) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p18.1"></span>En ce
qu'ils se sont essayez par leur jeusne, forge a leur fantasie, de se
mettre du rang de Christ, et se mesurer a luy.” — “In having attempted,
by their fast, forged according to their fancy, to place themselves in
the same rank with Christ, and to vie with him.”

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc31039.htm#fr_305) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p20"></span> “χαχοζηλία.” — “<span
id="ix.xxxi-p20.2"></span>Ceste singerie et imitation contrefaite;” —
“that apishness and counterfeit imitation.”

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc31039.htm#fr_306) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p23"></span> “Agonotheta.” This word, slightly altered
from the Greek word ἀγωνοθέτης, signifiesthe judge who presided at the
public games.” The Epistles of Paul contain many allusions to the
Olympic games, — sometimes so rapid and indirect, that they are apt to
be lost in a translation, and at other times swelling into an extended
picture, which arrests and captivates every reader. Those who are
familiar with his writings, and who have occasion to treat of the same
class of subjects, will naturally employ the same kind of illustrations,
in conveying to the minds of others those conceptions, for which they
have been indebted to this great master. While they describe the
contests of the people of God with outward foes, or their more violent
struggles with *the old man* within, they will frequently, and sometimes
unconsciously, fall into similar allusions. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc31039.htm#fr_307) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p25"></span> Here the French copy gives an additional
illustration, of which no trace is found in the Latin original. “<span
id="ix.xxxi-p25.1"></span>Le mesme S. Luc avec S. Marc enseigne que le
commencement des tentations estoit de plus loin. Car Satan avoit
assailli Christ quarante jours au paravant qu'il eust faim: mais les
principaux et plus excellens combats sont icy recitez, afin que nous
sachions que Satan veincu en plusieurs assaux, s'est finalement rue
furieusement, et de toute sa force, pour voir s'il pourroit d'aventure
veincre finalement celuy duquel il n'avoit peu venir a bout. Car
d'autant plus qu'on est exere aux combats spirituels, Dieu permet aussi
qu'on soit plus rudement assailli. Parquoy apprenons a ne nous lasser
jamais, jusqu'a ce qu' ayans paracheve tout le cours de notre guerre,
nous soyons parvenus au but.” — “The same St Luke, as well as St Mark,
informs us, that the commencement of the temptations was more distant.
For Satan had attacked Christ forty days before he was hungry: but the
most important and valuable combats are here related, in order that we
may know that Satan, vanquished in many assaults, had fallen upon him
furiously, and with all his might, to see if perhaps he might finally
vanquish him, with whom he had not been able to succeed. For the more
that we are exercised in spiritual combats, God allows us to be the more
violently attacked. Wherefore let us learn, never to become weary, till,
having finished the whole course of our war, we have reached the end.”

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc31039.htm#fr_308) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p27.1"></span>Car nous
savons que Christ a este muni d'une telle vertu de l'Esprit, que les
dards de Satan ne le pouvoyent navrer ne blesser: c'est a dire, qcu'il
estoit impossible que peche tombast en luy.” — “For we know that Christ
was fortified by such a power of the Spirit, that the darts of Satan
could not pierce or wound him: that *is,* that it was impossible for sin
to fall upon him.”

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc31039.htm#fr_309) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p31"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxxi-p31.1"></span>Friandise ou gourmandise;” — “epicurism or
gormandizing.”

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc31039.htm#fr_310) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p32.1"></span>A
friandise, ou a quelque excez de la bouche.” — “To epicurism, or any
excess of the palate.”

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc31039.htm#fr_311) <span
id="ix.xxxi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxi-p35"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxi-p35.1"></span>Combien
que pour couvrir sa malice;” — “though, to cover his malice.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 4:5-11;Mark 1:13;Luke 4:5-13](cc31040)
