[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31065)  [Next](cc31067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lviii"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 6:22-24; LUKE 11:34-36; 16:13

<span id="ix.lviii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
6:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022)<span
id="ix.lviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
11:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#034)<span
id="ix.lviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p4"></span>**22**.** **The light  <span
id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453) of the body is the eye: if therefore
thine eye shall be simple, thy whole body shall be luminous.
**23**.** **But if thine eye shall be evil, thy whole body shall be
dark. Therefore, if the light which is in thee is darkness, how great is
that darkness! **24**.** **No man can serve two masters: for either he
will hate the one, and love the other, or he will hold to one, and
neglect the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.

<span id="ix.lviii-p6"></span>**34**.** **The light  <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454) of the body is the eye: if thine eye
therefore shall be simple, thy whole body shall be luminous: but if it
shall be evil, thy whole body also shall be dark. **36**.** **If
therefore thy whole body shall be luminous, not having any part dark,
the whole shall be luminous, as when a candle enlightens thee by its
brightness.

<span id="ix.lviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.lviii-p9"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p9.1"></span>[Luke
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#013)<span id="ix.lviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p10"></span>**13. **No servant can serve two master:
for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or will hold to the
one, and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon.

<span id="ix.lviii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ix.lviii-p12"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ix.lviii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#022)<span
id="ix.lviii-p13.2"></span>.** *The light of the body is the eye* We
must bear in mind, as I have already hinted, that what we find here are
detached sentences, and not a continued discourse. The substance of the
present statement is, that men go wrong through carelessness, because
they do not keep their eye fixed, as they ought to do, on the proper
object. For whence comes it, that they so shamefully wander, or dash
themselves, or stumble, but because, having corrupted their judgment by
choosing rather to follow their own lusts than the righteousness of God,
they not only extinguish the light of reason, which ought to have
regulated their life, but change it altogether into darkness.

<span id="ix.lviii-p14"></span>When Christ calls *the eye the light of
the body,*  <span id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455) he employs a
comparison which means, that neither the hands, nor the feet, nor the
belly, serves to direct men in walking, but that the eye alone is a
sufficient guide to the rest of the members. If the hands and feet are
foolishly and improperly directed, the blame of the mistake ought to be
charged on the eyes, which do not perform their duty. We must now apply
this comparison to the mind. The affections may be regarded individually
as its members: but as they are blind in themselves, they need
direction. Now, God has given reason to guide them, and to act the part
of a *lantern* in showing them the way. But what is the usual result?
All the soundness of judgment which had been given to men is corrupted
and perverted by themselves, so that not even one spark of light
continues to dwell in them.

<span id="ix.lviii-p16"></span>*A simple eye* means an eye that has no
speck, or diseased humor, or any other defect. *An evil eye* (<span
id="ix.lviii-p16.1"></span>πονηρὸν)  <span
id="fr_456"></span>[457](#fn_456) means a *diseased eye*. A luminous
body means one that is *enlightened,* so as to have all its actions
properly regulated. A *dark* body is one which is led into numerous
mistakes by a confused movement. We see, then, as I have already said,
that these words reprove the indolence of men, who neglect to open their
eyes for the guidance of their affections.

<span id="ix.lviii-p18"></span>The inference which the Papists draw from
this passage, that men possess as much reason and wisdom, as to be free
to choose either good or evil, is mere trifling. For Christ does not
here inform us what ability we possess, but how we ought to walk, by
having our eye fixed on a certain object; and at the same time shows,
that the whole course of human life is dark, because no man proposes for
himself a proper object, but all permit themselves to pursue eagerly
what is evil. I confess, indeed, that men naturally possess reason, to
distinguish between vices and virtues; but I say that it is so corrupted
by sin, that it fails at every step. Meanwhile, it does not follow, that
men do not voluntarily bring darkness on themselves, as if they shut
their eyes to avoid the light which was offered to them, because they
are knowingly and willingly carried after their own lusts.

<span id="ix.lviii-p19"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p20"></span>**23.** *If the light which is in thee be
darkness* Light signifies that small portion of reason, which continues
to exist in men since the fall of Adam: and *darkness* signifies gross
and brutal affections. The meaning is, we ought not to wonder, if men
wallow so disgracefully, like beasts, in the filth of vices, for they
have no reason which might restrain the blind and dark lusts of the
flesh. *The light* is said to be turned into *darkness,* not only when
men permit the wicked lusts of the flesh to overwhelm the judgment of
their reason, but also when they give up their minds to wicked thoughts,
and thus degenerate into beasts. For we see how wickedly men change into
craft any measure of wisdom which had been given them, how they “dig
deep (as the prophet says) to hide their counsel from the Lords” (<span
id="ix.lviii-p20.2"></span>[Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015)<span
id="ix.lviii-p20.2"></span>,) how they trust to their own resources, and
openly dishonor God; in a word, how desirous they are to show their
ingenuity, in innumerable ways, for their own destruction. Christ has
good grounds for declaring, that thick and appalling darkness must of
necessity reign in the life of men, when they choose to be blind.

<span id="ix.lviii-p21"></span>This is also the meaning of the words
which are found in the Gospel of Luke, with this difference, that Christ
there connects the present statement with one which was formerly
explained, that *men do not light a candle, and put it under a
bushel*<span id="ix.lviii-p21.1"></span>, (<span
id="ix.lviii-p21.2"></span>[Mt
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)<span id="ix.lviii-p21.2"></span>)
and again, instead of this clause, *if the light which is in thee be
darkness,* gives the exhortation, *see that the light which is in thee
be not darkness* The meaning is, “See that thy mind, which ought to have
shone, like a candle, to guide all thy actions, do not darken and
mislead thy whole life.” He afterwards adds, that, when *the body is
enlightened by the eye,* the greatest regularity is found in all its
members, as *the light of a candle* spreads and penetrates into every
part of the room.

<span id="ix.lviii-p22"></span><span id="ix.lviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p23"></span>**24.** *No man can serve two masters*
Christ returns to the former doctrine, the object of which was to
withdraw his disciples from covetousness. He had formerly said, that the
heart of man is bound and fixed upon its tr*easure;* and he now gives
warning, that the hearts of those who are devoted to riches are
alienated from the Lord. For the greater part of men are wont to flatter
themselves with a deceitful pretense, when they imagine, that it is
possible for them to be divided between God and their own lusts. Christ
affirms that it is impossible for any man to obey God, and, at the same
time, to obey his own flesh. This was, no doubt, a proverb in common
use: *No man can serve two masters* He takes for granted a truth which
had been universally admitted, and applies it to his present subject:
where riches hold the dominion of the heart, God has lost his authority.
True, it is not impossible that those who are rich shall serve God; but
whoever gives himself up as a slave to riches must abandon the service
of God: for covetousness makes us the slaves of the devil.

<span id="ix.lviii-p24"></span>I have inserted here what is related on a
different occasion by Luke: for, as the Evangelists frequently
introduce, as opportunity offers, passages of our Lord’s discourses out
of their proper order, we ought to entertain no scruple as to the
arrangement of them. What is here said with a special reference to
riches, may be properly extended to every other description of vice. As
God pronounces everywhere such commendations of sincerity, and hates *a
double heart,* (<span id="ix.lviii-p24.1"></span>[1 Chr.
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023), [Ps.
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)<span
id="ix.lviii-p24.1"></span>,) all are deceived, who imagine that he will
be satisfied with the half of their heart. All, indeed, confess in
words, that, where the affection is not entire, there is no true worship
of God: but they deny it in fact, when they attempt to reconcile
contradictions. “I shall not cease,” says an ambitious man, “to serve
God, though I devote a great part of my mind to hunting after honors.”
The covetous, the voluptuaries, the gluttons, the unchaste, the cruel,
all in their turn offer the same apology for themselves: as if it were
possible for those to be partly employed in serving God, who are openly
carrying on war against him. It is, no doubt, true, that believers
themselves are never so perfectly devoted to obedience to God, as not to
be withdrawn from it by the sinful desires of the flesh. But as they
groan under this wretched bondage, and are dissatisfied with themselves,
and give nothing more than an unwilling and reluctant service to the
flesh, they are not said to *serve two masters:* for their desires and
exertions are approved by the Lord, as if they rendered to him a perfect
obedience. But this passage reproves the hypocrisy of those who flatter
themselves in their vices, as if they could reconcile light and
darkness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_453"></span>[454](cc31066.htm#fr_453) <span
id="ix.lviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.lviii-p5.1"></span>La
lumiere, *ou, lanterne*;” — “the light, or, *lantern* *”*

<span id="fn_454"></span>[455](cc31066.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ix.lviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.lviii-p7.1"></span>La
chandelle;” — “the candle.”

<span id="fn_455"></span>[456](cc31066.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ix.lviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p15"></span> “<span
id="ix.lviii-p15.1"></span>Appelant l'ceil le flambeau ou la lampe de
tout le corps;” — “calling the eye the torch or the lamp of the whole
body.”

<span id="fn_456"></span>[457](cc31066.htm#fr_456) <span
id="ix.lviii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lviii-p17"></span> This Greek word has two meanings, which
depend on accentuation. The *proparoxytone* πονηρὸς means *laborious,
troublesome:* but the *oxytone* πονηρὸς means *wicked* Here, when
applied to *the eye,* it cannot denote moral blame, but easily takes the
transferred sense of *faulty, defective*. — *Ed*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 6:25-30;Luke 12:22-28](cc31067)
