[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31016)  [Next](cc31018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span>LUKE 1:46-50

<span id="ix.ix-p2"></span><span id="ix.ix-p2.1"></span>[Luke
1:46-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046.md)<span id="ix.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p3"></span>**46**.** **And Mary saith, My soul
magnifieth the Lord, **47**.** **And my spirit hath rejoiced  <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md) in God my Savior. **48**.** **Because he
hath looked upon the low condition of his handmaid: for from this time
all generations shall call me blessed, **49**.** **Because he who is
mighty hath done to me wonderful  <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)
things: and holy is his name. **50**.** **And his mercy is from
generation to generation to them that fear him.

<span id="ix.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.ix-p7"></span><span id="ix.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p8"></span>Now follows a remarkable and interesting song
of the holy virgin, which plainly shows how eminent were her attainments
in the grace of the Spirit. There are three clauses in this song. First,
Mary offers solemn thanksgiving for that mercy of God which she had
experienced in her own person. Next, she celebrates in general terms
God’s power and judgments. Lastly, she applies these to the matter in
hand, treating of the redemption formerly promised, and now granted to
the church.

<span id="ix.ix-p9"></span>**46.** My *soul magnifieth* Here Mary
testifies her gratitude, as we have already said. But as hypocrites, for
the most part, sing the praises of God with open mouth, unaccompanied by
any affection of the heart, Mary says that she praises God from an
inward feeling of the mind. And certainly they who pronounce his glory,
not from the mind, but with the tongue alone, do nothing more than
profane his holy name. The words *soul* and *spirit* are used in
Scripture in various senses, but, when employed together, they denote
chiefly two faculties of the soul; *spirit* being taken for the
understanding, and *soul* for the seat of the affections. To comprehend
the meaning of the holy virgin, it must be observed that what is here
placed second is first in order; for the excitement of the will of man
to praise God must be preceded by a *rejoicing of the spirit,*  <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md) as James says, “Is any merry? let him
sing psalms,” (<span id="ix.ix-p10.2"></span>[Jas
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#013)<span id="ix.ix-p10.2"></span>..md)
Sadness and anxiety lock up the soul, and restrain the tongue from
celebrating the goodness of God. When the soul of Mary exults with joy,
the heart breaks out in praising God. It is with great propriety, in
speaking of the joy of her heart, that she gives to God the appellation
of *Savior* Till God has been recognised as a *Savior,* the minds of men
are not free to indulge in true and full joy, but will remain in doubt
and anxiety. It is God’s fatherly kindness alone, and the salvation
flowing from it, that fill the soul with joy. In a word, the first thing
necessary for believers is, to be able to rejoice that they have their
salvation in God. The next ought to follow, that, having experienced God
to be a kind Father, they may “offer to him thanksgiving,” (<span
id="ix.ix-p10.3"></span>[Ps 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.ix-p10.3"></span>.) The Greek word <span
id="ix.ix-p10.4"></span>σωτὴρ, *Savior,* has a more extensive
signification than the Latin word *Servator;* for it means not only that
he once delivers, but that he is “the Author of eternal salvations”
(<span id="ix.ix-p10.5"></span>[Heb
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#009)<span id="ix.ix-p10.5"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.ix-p11"></span><span id="ix.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p12"></span>**48.** *Because he hath looked* She
explains the reason why the joy of her heart was founded in God to be,
that out of free grace he had looked upon her. By calling herself *low*
she disclaims all merit, and ascribes to the undeserved goodness of God
every occasion of boasting. For <span
id="ix.ix-p12.1"></span>ταπείνωσις, *lowness,* does not here denote — as
ignorant and uneducated men have foolishly imagined — “submission, or
modesty, or a quality of the mind,” but signifies *“*a mean and
despicable condition.”  <span id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md) The meaning
is, *“*I was unknown and despised, but that did not prevent God from
deigning to cast his eyes upon me.” But if Mary’s *lowness* is
contrasted with excellence — as the matter itself and the Greek word
make abundantly plain — we see how Mary makes herself nothing, and
praises God alone. And this was not the loud cry of a pretended
humility, but the plain and honest statement of that conviction which
was engraven on her mind; for she was of no account in the eyes of the
world, and her estimation of herself was nothing more.

<span id="ix.ix-p14"></span>*From this time* She announces that this
kindness of God will be kept in remembrance throughout *all generations*
But if it is so remarkable, that it ought to be proclaimed every where
by the lips of all men, silence regarding it would have been highly
improper in Mary, on whom it was bestowed. Now observe, that Mary makes
her happiness to consist in nothing else, but in what she acknowledges
to have been bestowed upon her by *God,* and mentions as the gift of his
grace. *“*I shall be reckoned blessed,” she says, *“*through all ages.”
Was it because she sought this praise by her own power or exertion? On
the contrary, she makes mention of nothing but of the work of God. Hence
we see how widely the Papists differ from her, who idly adorn her with
their empty devices, and reckon almost as nothing the benefits which she
received from God.  <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) They heap up an
abundance of magnificent and very presumptuous titles, such as, *“*Queen
of Heaven, Star of Salvation, Gate of Life, Sweetness, Hope, and
Salvation.” Nay more, to such a pitch of insolence and fury have they
been hurried by Satan, that they give her authority over Christ;  <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) for this is their pretty song, *“*Beseech
the Father, Order the Son.”  <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) None
of these modes of expression, it is evident, proceeded from the Lord.
All are disclaimed by the holy virgin in a single word, when she makes
her whole glory to consist in acts of the divine kindness. If it was her
duty to praise the name of God alone, who *had done to her wonderful
things,* no room is left for the pretended titles, which come from
another quarter. Besides, nothing could be more disrespectful to her,
than to rob the Son of God of what is his own, to clothe her with the
sacrilegious plunder.

<span id="ix.ix-p18"></span>Let Papists now go, and hold us out as doing
injury to the mother of Christ, because we reject the falsehoods of men,
and extol in her nothing more than the kindness of God. Nay, what is
most of all honorable to her we grant, and those absurd worshippers
refuse.  <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) We cheerfully acknowledge
her as our teacher, and obey her instruction and commands. There
certainly is no obscurity in what she says here; but the Papists throw
it aside, trample it as it were under foot, and do all they can to
destroy the credit of her statements?  <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md) Let us remember that, in praising both
men and angels, there is a general rule laid down, to extol in them the
grace of God; as nothing is at all worthy of praise which did not
proceed from Him.

<span id="ix.ix-p21"></span>*He who is mighty hath done to me wonderful
things* She informs us, that the reason why God did not in this case
employ the assistance of others was, to make his own power more
illustrious. And here we must recall what she formerly said, that God
*had looked upon her,* though she was mean and despicable. Hence it
follows, that those praises of Mary are absurd and spurious which do not
altogether exalt the power and free grace of God.

<span id="ix.ix-p22"></span><span id="ix.ix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p23"></span>**49.** And *holy is his name* This is the
second part of the song, in which the holy virgin celebrates in general
terms the power, judgments, and mercy of God. This clause must not be
viewed as a part of the preceding one, but must be read separately. Mary
had extolled the grace of God, which she had experienced in her own
person. Hence she takes occasion to exclaim, that *holy is his name, and
his mercy endures throughout all generations* The name of God is called
*holy,* because it is entitled to the highest reverence; and whenever
the name of God is mentioned, it ought immediately to remind us of his
adorable majesty.

<span id="ix.ix-p24"></span>The next clause, which celebrates the
perpetuity of the Divine mercy, is taken from that solemn form of
covenant,

<span id="ix.ix-p25"></span>“I will establish my covenant between me and
thee, and thy seed after thee, in their generations, for an everlasting
covenant,”  
(<span id="ix.ix-p25.2"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="ix.ix-p25.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.ix-p26"></span>and again,

<span id="ix.ix-p27"></span>“who keepeth covenant and mercy with them
that love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,”
(<span id="ix.ix-p27.1"></span>[De
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#009)<span id="ix.ix-p27.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.ix-p28"></span>By these words, he not only declares, that
he will always be like himself, but expresses the favor which he
continues to manifest towards his own people after their death, loving
their children, and their children’s children, and all their posterity.
Thus he followed the posterity of Abraham with uninterrupted kindness;
for, having once received their father Abraham into favor, he had made
with him “an everlasting covenant.”

<span id="ix.ix-p29"></span>But as not all who are descended from
Abraham according to the flesh are the true children of Abraham, Mary
confines the accomplishment of the promise to the true worshippers of
God, to *them that fear him:* as David also does:

<span id="ix.ix-p30"></span>“The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting
to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto
children’s children; to such as keep his covenant, and to those that
remember his commandments to do them,”  
(<span id="ix.ix-p30.2"></span>[Ps.
103:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#018)<span id="ix.ix-p30.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.ix-p31"></span>While God promises that he will be merciful
to the children of the saints through all generations, this gives no
support to the vain confidence of hypocrites: for falsely and
groundlessly do they boast of God as their Father, who are the spurious
children of the saints, and have departed from their faith and
godliness.  <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) This exception sets
aside the falsehood and arrogance of those who, while they are destitute
of faith, are puffed up with false pretenses to the favor of God. A
universal covenant of salvation had been made by God with the posterity
of Abraham; but, as stones moistened by the rain do not become soft, so
the promised righteousness and salvation are prevented from reaching
unbelievers through their own hardness of heart. Meanwhile, to maintain
the truth and firmness of his, promise, God has preserved “a seed,”
(<span id="ix.ix-p32.2"></span>[Ro
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029)<span id="ix.ix-p32.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.ix-p33"></span>Under the *fear* of the Lord is included the
whole of godliness and religion, and this cannot exist without faith.
But here an objection may be urged. What avails it that God is called
merciful, if no man finds him to be so unless he deserves his favor?
For, if the mercy of God is *upon them that fear him,* godliness and a
good conscience procure his grace to men, and in this way men go before
his grace by their own merits. I reply, this is a part of his mercy,
that he bestows on the children of the godly fear and reverence for his
majesty. This does not point out the commencement of his grace, as if
God were idly looking down from heaven, to see who are worthy of it. All
that is intended is, to shake off the perverse confidence of hypocrites,
that they may not imagine God to be bound to them, because they are the
children of saints according to the flesh: the divine covenant having
another and very different object, that God may have always a people in
the world, by whom he is sincerely worshipped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc31017.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p4.1"></span>Exultavit;” —
“<span id="ix.ix-p4.2"></span>mon esprit s'est esiouy.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc31017.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p5.1"></span>Magnifica.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc31017.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p10.1"></span>Car avant
que la volonte de l' homme soit mise en train de louer Dieu, il faut
qu'il y ait devant une alaigrete et resiouissance d'esprit.” — “For
before the will of man is set agoing to praise God, there must be
previously a cheerfulness and rejoicing of spirit.”

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc31017.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p13.1"></span>Les Latins,
traduisans ce passage du Grec, ont us, du mot d'Humi- lite, lequel les
barbares et sots parleurs de Latin, prennent ici comme en Francois, pour
une facon de faire contraire a l'arrogance, assavoir quand une personne
s'estime rien: mais il se prend autrement, assavoir pour Petitesse;
c'est a dire, condition basse et meprisee.” — “The Latins, translating
this passage from the Greek, have used the word Humility, which
barbarians and fools talking Latin take here, as in French, for a manner
of acting opposed to pride: but it is taken differently, namely, for
Meanness, that is, a low and despicable condition.”

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc31017.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p15.1"></span>En cela nous
voyons coment les Papistes accordent mal avec elle, lesquels sans
jugement la parent de nouvelles louanges forgees en leurs cerveaux; et
cependant ne tiennent quasi conte do tous les biens que’lle a eus de
Dieu.” — “In this we see how ill the Papists agree with her, who without
judgment adorn her with new praises forged in their own brains; and yet
make no account, as it were, of all the benefits which she had from
God.”

<span id="fn_49"></span>[50](cc31017.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p16.1"></span>Qui plus
est, Satan les a transportez en une telle rage et forcenerie, qui’ls
n’ont point eu de honte du luy attributer l’authorite de commander a
Christ.” — “What is more, Satan has carried them away to such a rage and
fury, that they are not ashamed to attribute to her authority to command
Christ.”

<span id="fn_50"></span>[51](cc31017.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p17.1"></span>Roga Patrem,
jube Natum.”

<span id="fn_51"></span>[52](cc31017.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p19.1"></span>En ce
faisant, nous luy accordons ce qui luy est le plus honorable, en lieu
que ces habiles gens, qui la servent a contrepoil, l’en despouillent.” —
“In doing this we grant to her what is the most honorable, while those
clever people, who serve her the wrong way, take it from her.”

<span id="fn_52"></span>[53](cc31017.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p20.1"></span>Fidem ejus
dictis abrogant;” — “<span id="ix.ix-p20.2"></span>dementent la vierge
en tant qu'en eux est;” — “as far as lies in them, they make the virgin
a liar.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc31017.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="ix.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.ix-p32.1"></span>Car c'est a
tort et fausses enseignes qu'ils se glorifient d'avoir Dieu pour leur
Pere, puis qu’ils sont enfans bastards des saincts, et ont desvoye de
leur foy et sainctete.” — “For it is improperly and under false colors
that they boast of having God for their Father, since they are bastard
children of the saints, and have departed from their faith and
holiness.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 1:51-55](cc31018.md)
