[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31071)  [Next](cc31073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 7:12-14; LUKE 6:31

<span id="ix.lxiv-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxiv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
7:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="ix.lxiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxiv-p3.1"></span>[Luke
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#031)<span id="ix.lxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p4"></span>**12**.** **All things, therefore,
whatsoever you would wish that man should do to you, do so also to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. **13**.** **Enter in by the strait
gate: because broad is the gate, and wide is the road, which leadeth to
destruction, and there are many who enter by it. **14**.** **Because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the road, which leadeth to life, and
there are few who find it.

<span id="ix.lxiv-p5"></span>**31**.** **And as you wish that men should
do to you, do you also to them likewise.

<span id="ix.lxiv-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxiv-p7"></span><span id="ix.lxiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.lxiv-p8.2"></span>[Matthew
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)<span id="ix.lxiv-p8.2"></span>.**
*All things whatsoever you would wish* The word *therefore* (<span
id="ix.lxiv-p8.3"></span>οὖν) is superfluous, as we often find such
particles occurring, and without any addition to the sense, in detached
sentences.  <span id="fr_466"></span>[467](#fn_466) I have already said,
that Matthew does not give here a single discourse, but a summary of
doctrine collected out of many sermons. We must, therefore, read this
sentence by itself. It is an exhortation to his disciples to be just,
and contains a short and simple definition of what justice means. We are
here informed, that the only reason why so many quarrels exist in the
world, and why men inflict so many mutual injuries on each other, is,
that they knowingly and willingly trample justice under their feet,
while every man rigidly demands that it shall be maintained towards
himself.

<span id="ix.lxiv-p10"></span>Where our own advantage is concerned,
there is not one of us, who cannot explain minutely and ingeniously what
ought to be done. And since every man shows himself to be a skillful
teacher of justice for his own advantage, how comes it, that the same
knowledge does not readily occur to him, when the profit or loss of
another is at stake, but because we wish to be wise for ourselves only,
and no man cares about his neighbors? What is more, we maliciously and
purposely shut our eyes upon the rule of justice, which shines in our
hearts. Christ therefore shows, that every man may be a rule of acting
properly and justly towards his neighbors, if he do to others what he
requires to be done to him. He thus refutes all the vain pretenses,
which men contrive for hiding or disguising their injustice. Perfect
justice would undoubtedly prevail among us, if we were as faithful in
learning *active* charity, (if we may use the expression,) as we are
skillful in teaching *passive* charity.  <span
id="fr_467"></span>[468](#fn_467)

<span id="ix.lxiv-p12"></span>*For this is the law and the prophets* Our
Lord does not intend to say, that this is the only point of doctrine
laid down in *the law and the prophets,* but that all the precepts which
they contain about charity, and all the laws and exhortations found in
them about maintaining justice, have a reference to this object. The
meaning is, that the second table of the law is fulfilled, when every
man conducts himself in the same manner towards others, as he wishes
them to conduct themselves towards him. There is no need, he tells us,
of long and involved debates, if this simplicity is preserved, and if
men do not, by inordinate self-love, efface the rectitude which is
engraven on their hearts.

<span id="ix.lxiv-p13"></span><span id="ix.lxiv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p14"></span>**13.** *Enter* *in by the strait gate* As
nothing is more opposed to the flesh than the doctrine of Christ, no man
will ever make great proficiency in it who has not learned to confine
his senses and feelings, so as to keep them within those boundaries,
which our heavenly Teacher prescribes for curbing our wantonness. As men
willingly flatter themselves, and live in gaiety and dissipation, Christ
here reminds his disciples, that they must prepare to walk, as it were,
along a *narrow* and thorny *road* But as it is difficult to restrain
our desires from wicked licentiousness and disorder, he soothes this
bitterness by a joyful remuneration, when he tells us, that *the narrow
gate, and the narrow road, lead to life* Lest we should be captivated,
on the other hand, by the allurements of a licentious and dissolute
life, and wander as the lust of the flesh draws us,  <span
id="fr_468"></span>[469](#fn_468) he declares that they rush headlong to
death, who choose to walk along *the broad road, and through the wide
gate,* instead of keeping by *the strait gate, and narrow way, which
lead to life*

<span id="ix.lxiv-p16"></span>He expressly says, that *many* run along
the *broad road:* because men ruin each other by wicked examples.  <span
id="fr_469"></span>[470](#fn_469) For whence does it arise, that each of
them knowingly and wilfully rushes headlong, but because, while they are
ruined in the midst of a vast crowd, they do not believe that they are
ruined? The small number of believers, on the other hand, renders many
persons careless. It is with difficulty that we are brought to renounce
the world, and to regulate ourselves and our life by the manners of a
*few*. We think it strange that we should be forcibly separated from the
vast majority, as if we were not a part of the human race. But though
the doctrine of Christ confines and hems us in, reduces our life to a
*narrow road,* separates us from the crowd, and unites us to a *few*
companions, yet this harshness ought not to prevent us from striving to
obtain life.

<span id="ix.lxiv-p18"></span>It is sufficiently evident from Luke’s
Gospel, that the instruction, which we are now considering, was uttered
by Christ at a different time from that on which he delivered the
paradoxes,  <span id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470) which we have
formerly examined, about a *happy* life, (<span
id="ix.lxiv-p19.2"></span>[Mt
5:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span
id="ix.lxiv-p19.2"></span>,) and laid down to them the rule of prayer.
And this is what I have repeatedly hinted, that the instructions which
are related by the other Evangelists, at different times, according to
the order of the history, were here collected by Matthew into one
summary, that he might bring more fully under our view the manner in
which Christ taught his disciples. I have therefore thought it best to
introduce here the whole passage from Luke, which corresponds to this
sentence. While I have been careful to inform my readers, as to the
order of time which is observed by Luke, they will forgive me, I hope,
for not being more exact  <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471) than
Matthew in the arrangement of the doctrine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_466"></span>[467](cc31072.htm#fr_466) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p9"></span> Greek proverbs, even when exhibited in a
detached form, are frequently introduced by ἀλλὰ and γὰρ, and similar
particles, instances of which must be familiar to the classical reader.
̔Αλλ ᾿ οὐ τὸ μέγα ευ ἐστι, τὸ δὲ εὖ μέγα. *“But* not what is great is
excellent, but what is excellent is great.” ́̔Ινα γὰρ δέος, ἔνθα καὶ
αἰδὼς” *For* where fear is, there also is shame.” Πόνος γὰρ ὡς λέγουσιν,
εὐκλεϊης, πατὴρ. “For labor, as they say, is the father of glory. The
fact chiefly to be noticed here is, that such particles came to be
regarded as a part of the proverb, and were hardly ever separated from
it: though their use must originally have been elliptical, like that of
γὰρ, which opens many a reply in Greek dialogues. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_467"></span>[468](cc31072.htm#fr_467) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiv-p11.1"></span>Si nous
estions aussi bons disciples a prattiquer la charite active (si ainsi
faut dire) comme nous sommes subtils docteurs a prescher la charite
passive.” — “If we were as good scholars in practising *active* charity,
(if I may so express it,) as we are dexterous instructors in preaching
*passive* charity.”

<span id="fn_468"></span>[469](cc31072.htm#fr_468) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p15"></span> (“<span id="ix.lxiv-p15.1"></span>Comme
facilement les appetits de la chair nous tirent en leurs filets;”) —(“as
the appetites of the flesh easily draw us into their nets.”)

<span id="fn_469"></span>[470](cc31072.htm#fr_469) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiv-p17.1"></span>Pource
que les hommes se poussent les uns les autres au chemin de damnation par
mauvais exemple;” — “because men urge each other on in the road to
damnation by bad example.”

<span id="fn_470"></span>[471](cc31072.htm#fr_470) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiv-p19.1"></span>Quand il
a prononce ces sentences que nous avons veues par ci de-vant, monstrant
tout au contraire de l’opinion commune;” — “when he pronounced those
sentences which we have formerly seen, showing it to be altogether
contrary to the common opinion.”

<span id="fn_471"></span>[472](cc31072.htm#fr_471) <span
id="ix.lxiv-p19.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxiv-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.lxiv-p20.1"></span>Si je
n'ay pas este plus scrupuleux ou curieux en conferant les passages
tendans a un mesme poinct de doctrine;” — “if I have not been more
careful or exact in comparing the passages relating to the same point of
doctrine.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 13:23-24](cc31073)
