[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31073)  [Next](cc31075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p1"></span>LUKE 13:25-30

<span id="ix.lxvi-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p2.1"></span>[Luke
13:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.lxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p3"></span>**25. **And when the master of the house
shall have arisen, and shall have shut the door, and you shall begin to
stand without and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us:
and he answering shall say to you, I know not whence you are:
**26**.** **Then you shall begin to say, We have eaten and drunk in thy
presence, and thou hast taught in our streets. **27**.** **And he shall
say, I say to you, I know not whence you are: depart from me, all who
work iniquity. **28**.** **Weeping and gnashing of teeth shall be there,
when you shall see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets,
in the kingdom of God, and yourselves shut out. **29**.** **And they
shall come from the east and west, and north and south, and shall sit
down in the kingdom of God. **30**.** **And, lo, they are last who shall
be first, and they are first who shall be last.

<span id="ix.lxvi-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxvi-p5"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p6"></span>**<span id="ix.lxvi-p6.1"></span>[Luke
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.lxvi-p6.1"></span>.** *And when the master of the house shall
have arisen* Though these words, as I hinted a little before, were
spoken on a different and later occasion, I have chosen to pay more
regard to the doctrine than to the time: for it is no slight assistance
to the understanding to read, in immediate connection, those passages
which are closely related in meaning. As Christ had declared that to
many, who shall desire to enter into heaven, the door will not be open,
he now asserts, that they gain nothing by occupying a place in the
church because God will at length arise in judgment, and shut out from
his kingdom those who now lay claim to a place in his family. He employs
the comparison of the *master of a house,* who, having learned that some
wicked and dissolute persons among his own domestics steal out
unperceived during the night, and expose the house to thieves, *rises
and shuts the door,* and does not allow those night-prowlers to enter,
who have been wandering through the public streets at unseasonable
hours. By these words he warns us, that we must avail ourselves of the
opportunity, while it is offered: for so long as the Lord invites us to
himself, the *door* is, as it were, open, that we may enter into the
kingdom of heaven: but the greater part do not deign to move a step.
Christ therefore threatens, that *the door* will at length be *shut,*
and that those who are looking for companions are in danger of being
refused admission.

<span id="ix.lxvi-p7"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p8"></span>**26.** *Thou hast taught in our streets*
Christ expressly states, that it will be of no advantage to the Jews,
that he approached near to them, and permitted them to enjoy familiar
intercourse with him, if, when called, they do not answer at the
appointed day. But he does not follow out his comparison: for, after
having spoken about *the master of a house,* he now states, without a
figure, that he is himself the judge; and indeed the words, *thou hast
taught in our streets,* can apply to no one but himself. We now perceive
his design, which was, to warn the Jews not to allow themselves to lose,
by their own neglect, the salvation which it is in their power to
obtain.

<span id="ix.lxvi-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p10"></span>**28.** *When you shall see Abraham* The
Jews bore no resemblance to the holy fathers, and had no right to boast
of being descended from them: yet nothing was more customary than to
abuse the title of the Church.  <span id="fr_473"></span>[474](#fn_473.md)
Christ here assures them, that a bastard race, which has departed from
the faith and piety of the fathers, has “no inheritance in *the kingdom
of God,”* (<span id="ix.lxvi-p11.2"></span>[Eph
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span id="ix.lxvi-p11.2"></span>..md)
There is a silent but implied reproof, that those who were desirous to
have companions in seeking salvation, did not endeavor to associate
themselves with *Abraham, and the prophets,* and the holy fathers,
instead of looking around among their contemporaries, who had
degenerated greatly from their example into innumerable corruptions. “If
you neglect (says he) to *enter by the strait gate,* because you are
kept back by the great number of those who are going astray, do you not
see that you are separated from the number of believers, and become
involved with unbelievers?” If the aspect of the world now dazzles your
eyes, the last day will cure you of this folly, but it will be too late:
for you shall then know that you, and others like you, are excluded from
*the kingdom of God,* and have no part with *Abraham*

<span id="ix.lxvi-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p13"></span>**29.** *And they shall come from the
east* He now draws a larger illustration from the fact, that the Jews,
who reckoned themselves the only lawful heirs of God, were to be
rejected, and that the Gentiles were to be substituted in their room,
and obtain the life which was promised to Abraham and his posterity. He
contrasts the Gentiles with them, in order to excite them to faith by a
holy jealousy: as Paul writes, that

<span id="ix.lxvi-p14"></span>“it will be a distinguished honor of his
ministry, if he excite any of his nation and blood to such an
emulations,”  
(<span id="ix.lxvi-p14.2"></span>[Rom.
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#014)<span id="ix.lxvi-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.lxvi-p15"></span>The Jews must have been stung by it: for
they had an inordinate love of themselves, and proudly despised God and
his gifts. But as we shall, ere long, meet with this sentence again in
the Gospel by Matthew I now glance at it more slightly.

<span id="ix.lxvi-p16"></span><span id="ix.lxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p17"></span>**30.** *And, lo, they are last who shall
be first* The same words, as we shall elsewhere see, were frequently
employed by Christ, but in a different sense, (<span
id="ix.lxvi-p17.1"></span>[Matt.
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md), [Matt.
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016.md)<span id="ix.lxvi-p17.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.lxvi-p17.2"></span>[Mr
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#031.md)<span
id="ix.lxvi-p17.2"></span>.) All that he intended here was, to throw
down the vain confidence of the Jews, who, having been chosen by God in
preference to all the rest of the world, trusted to this distinction,
and imagined that God was in a manner bound to them. For this reason,
Christ threatens that their condition will soon be changed; that the
Gentiles, who were at that time cast off, would obtain the first rank;
and that the Jews, deprived of their honor, would not even occupy the
farthest corner in the Church.  <span id="fr_474"></span>[475](#fn_474.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_473"></span>[474](cc31074.htm#fr_473.md) <span
id="ix.lxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.lxvi-p11.1"></span>Et
avoyent tousjours en la bouche le titre d'Eglise, duquel ils abu-
soyent;” — “and had always in their mouth the title of Church, which
they abused.”

<span id="fn_474"></span>[475](cc31074.htm#fr_474.md) <span
id="ix.lxvi-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvi-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.lxvi-p18.1"></span>Ne
tiendront pas mesme le dernier reng, ou quelque petit coin en l'Eglise;”
— “will not hold even the lowest rank, or some small corner in the
Church.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 7:15-20; Luke 6:43-45](cc31075.md)
