[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31027)  [Next](cc31029) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span>MATTHEW 2:7-12

<span id="ix.xx-p2"></span><span id="ix.xx-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
2:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007)<span id="ix.xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p3"></span>**7**.** **Then Herod, having secretly called
the Magii inquired at them carefully at what time the star had appeared
**8**.** **And having ordered them to go to Bethlehem, he said, Go,
inquire concerning the young child; and, when ye have found him, bring
me back information, that I also may come and worship him.
**9**.** **But they, having heard the King, departed; and, lo, the star
which they had seen in the East went before them, till, having advanced,
it stood above the place in which the child was. **10**.** **And, when
they had seen the star, they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy.
**11**.** **And, entering the house, they found the young child with
Mary his mother, and, falling down, they worshipped him: and, having
opened their treasures, they presented to him gifts, gold, frankincense,
and myrrh. **12**.** **And, warned by a heavenly intimation through a
dream, that they should not return to Herod, they departed, by another
way, into their own country.

<span id="ix.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xx-p5"></span><span id="ix.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p6"></span>**7.** *Then Herod, having secretly called
the Magi* The tyrant did not dare to avow his fear and uneasiness, lest
he might give fresh courage to a people, by whom he knew that he was
hated. In public, therefore, he pretends that this matter does not
concern him, but *inquires secretly,* in order to meet immediate danger.
Though a bad conscience made him timid, there can be no doubt that God
struck his mind with an unusual fear, which for a time made him
incapable of reflection, and almost deprived him of the use of reason.
For nothing was more easy than to send one of his courtiers as an
escort, under the pretense of courtesy, who would investigate the whole
matter, and immediately return. Herod certainly was a man of no ordinary
address, and of great courage. It is the more surprising that, in a case
of extremity, and when the remedy is at hand, he remains in a state of
amazement, and almost dead. Let us learn, that a miracle was effected,
in rescuing the Son of God from the jaws of the lion. Not less at the
present day does God infatuate his enemies, so that a thousand schemes
of injuring and ruining his Church do not occur to their minds, and even
the opportunities which are at hand are not embraced. The trick which
Herod practiced on the *Magi,* by pretending that he also would come for
the purpose of worshipping Christ, was avoided by the Lord, as we shall
see, in another way. But as Herod’s dread of arousing the people against
him deprived him of the use of his reason, so again he is driven by such
madness, that he does not hesitate or shudder at the thought of
provoking God. For he knew that, if a King were born, it was ordained by
God, that he should raise up the throne “of David, which was fallen,”
(<span id="ix.xx-p6.1"></span>[Am
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)<span id="ix.xx-p6.1"></span>.) He
does not therefore attack men, but furiously dares to fight with God.
Two things claim our attention. He was seized with a spirit of
giddiness, to attack God; and, on the other hand, his manner of acting
was childish: for his design was frustrated, so that he was like a
“blind man groping in darkness.”  <span
id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="ix.xx-p8"></span><span id="ix.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p9"></span>**9.** *But they, having heard the King,
departed* It is truly an instance of base sluggishness, that not one of
the Jews offers himself as an escort to those foreigners, to go and see
the King who had been promised to their own nation. The scribes show
them the way, and point out the place where he was born; but they allow
them to depart alone: not one moves a step. They were afraid, perhaps,
of Herod’s cruelty: but it displayed wicked ingratitude that, for the
sake of the salvation which had been offered to them, they were
unwilling to undergo any risk, and cared less about the grace of God
than about the frown of a tyrant. The whole nation, I have lately
showed, was so degenerate, that they chose rather to be oppressed with
the yoke of tyranny, than to submit to any inconvenience arising from a
change. If God had not fortified the minds of the Magi by his Spirit,
they might have been discouraged by this state of things. But the ardor
of their zeal is unabated; they set out without a guide. And yet the
means of confirming their faith are not wanting; for they hear that the
King, who had been pointed out to them by a star, was long ago
described, in glowing language, by divine predictions. It would seem
that the star, which hitherto guided them in the way, had lately
disappeared. The reason may easily be *conjectured.* It was, that they
might make inquiry in Jerusalem about the new King, and might thus take
away all excuse from the Jews, who, after having been instructed about
the Redeemer who was sent to them, knowingly and willingly despise him.

<span id="ix.xx-p10"></span><span id="ix.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p11"></span>**11.** *They found the young child* So
revolting a sight might naturally have created an additional prejudice;
for Christ was so far from having aught of royalty surrounding him, that
he was in a meaner and more despised condition than any peasant child.
But they are convinced that he is divinely appointed to be a King. This
thought alone, deeply rooted in their minds, procures their reverence.
They contemplate in the purpose of God his exalted rank, which is still
concealed from outward view.  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185)
Holding it for certain, that he will one day be different from what he
now appears, they are not at all ashamed to render to him the honors of
royalty.

<span id="ix.xx-p13"></span>Their presents show whence they came: for
there can be no doubt that they brought them as the choicest productions
of their country. We are not to understand, that each of them presented
his own offering, but that the three offerings, which are mentioned by
Matthew, were presented by all of them in common. Almost all the
commentators indulge in speculations about those gifts, as denoting the
kingdom, priesthood, and burial of Christ. They make *gold* the symbol
of his *kingdom,* — *frankincense,* of his *priesthoods*, — and *myrrh,*
of his *burial*. I see no solid ground for such an opinion. It was
customary, we know, among the Persians, when they offered homage to
their kings, to bring a present in their hands. The Magi select those
three for the produce of which Eastern countries are celebrated; just as
Jacob sent into Egypt the choicest and most esteemed productions of the
soil.

<span id="ix.xx-p14"></span>“Take of the best fruits in the land in your
vessels, and carry down the man a present, a little balm, and a little
honey, spices and myrrh, nuts and almonds,”  
(<span id="ix.xx-p14.2"></span>[Ge
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011)<span id="ix.xx-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xx-p15"></span>Again, in rendering homage, according to the
custom of Persia, to him whom they still regarded as an earthly King,
they offered the productions of the soil. Our duty is, to adore him in a
spiritual manner: for the lawful and reasonable worship which he demands
is, that we consecrate first ourselves, and then all that we have, to
his service.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc31028.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ix.xx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p7"></span> Like many others of his scriptural
allusions, this is not marked by our Author. It approaches very nearly
to the language of one of the curses pronounced by Moses on the people
of Israel, “If they should not hearken unto the voice of the Lord their
God;” — “thou shalt grope at noon-day as *the blind gropeth in
darkness,”* (<span id="ix.xx-p7.1"></span>[Deut.
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029)<span id="ix.xx-p7.1"></span>.) But
it is more likely that he had in his eye a passage from the book of Job.
In the opening description of “the devices of the crafty,” *Herod,* who
is pronounced by Calvin to have been “a man of no ordinary address, and
another *Herod,* whom our Lord designates *that fox,* (<span
id="ix.xx-p7.2"></span>[Lu 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#032)<span
id="ix.xx-p7.2"></span>,) are so exactly delineated, that it might
almost be imagined they had sat for the picture. He disappointeth the
devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their
enterprise. He taketh the wise in their own craftiness; and the counsel
of the froward is carried headlong. *They meet with darkness in the
day-time, and grope in the noon-day as in the night,”* (<span
id="ix.xx-p7.3"></span>[Job
5:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012)<span id="ix.xx-p7.3"></span>.)
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc31028.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ix.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.xx-p12.1"></span>Car ils
considerent et contemplent au conseil de Dieu sa dignite et magnificence
royale, laquelle n'apparoissoit point encores;” — “for they consider and
contemplate in the purpose of God his royal dignity and splendor, which
did not yet appear,”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 2:22-32](cc31029)
