[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31086)  [Next](cc31088.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 9:27-34

<span id="ix.lxxix-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
9:27-34](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027.md)<span
id="ix.lxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p3"></span>**27**.** **And while Jesus was departing
thence, two blind men followed him, crying and saying, Have pity on us,
son of David. **28**.** **And when he had come into the house, the blind
men came to him; and Jesus saith to them, Do you believe that I can do
this? They say to him, Yes, Lord. **29**.** **Then he touched their
eyes, saying, Let it be to you according to your faith. **30**.** **And
their eyes were opened, and Jesus threatened them,  <span
id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529.md) saying, See that no man know it.
**31**.** **But when they had departed, they spread the report of it in
all that country. **32**.** **And while they were going out, lo, they
brought to him a dumb man, a demoniac. **33**.** **And when the devil
had been cast out, the dumb man spake, and the multitudes wondered,
saying, Nothing like this was ever seen in Israel. **34**.** **But the
Pharisees said, He casteth out devils by the prince of the devils.

<span id="ix.lxxix-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxix-p6"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p7"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxix-p7.1"></span>[Matthew
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027.md)<span
id="ix.lxxix-p7.1"></span>.** *And while Jesus was departing.* The other
Evangelists say nothing about these two miracles; for, as we have
already said, and as John expressly affirms, (<span
id="ix.lxxix-p7.2"></span>[Joh
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.lxxix-p7.2"></span>,) they did not intend to record every action
of Christ, but only to prove, by a brief summary, that he is the
Messiah. Now Matthew relates that sight was restored to *two blind men,*
but not so speedily as Christ was wont, on many other occasions, to
grant relief to the wretched. While they cry to him on the road, he
makes no reply, but, as if he appeared not to notice them, allows them
to follow him to his lodging. There he at length asks them what they
believe as to his power. Both by action and by words he intended to make
trial of their faith; for he holds them in suspense, — nay, passes by as
if he did not hear them, — tries their patience, and what root faith had
in their heads. When he afterwards inquires if they *believe,* he
pursues the same investigation. But it may be asked, if a man is
convinced of the power of God and of Christ, is that enough to make him
a believer? for such appears to be the meaning of the words,

<span id="ix.lxxix-p8"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p9"></span>**28.** *Do you believe that I can do
this?* But from other passages of Scripture, it is evident that our
knowledge of his power will be cold and unprofitable, if we are not
convinced of his willingness. And yet Christ is satisfied with their
reply, and applauds their faith, as if it had been all that could be
wished. I answer, they had some perception of his grace; for they had
already acknowledged him to be the *Son of David;* bestowing upon him
this title as Redeemer of their nation and author of all blessings. He
interrogates them, therefore, as to his power, and proceeds farther to
inquire if they *believe* in good earnest. Faith embraces the mercy and
fatherly love of God along with his power, and the generous design of
Christ along with his ability to save. But as men commonly ascribe less
than they ought to do to the power of God and the ability of Christ,
there was good reason for proposing this question to the blind men, if
they *believe that Christ can do* what they have professed with their
mouth. Indeed, Christ wished simply to know if they were candid in
yielding to him the honor of Messiah; and therefore he applauds their
faith, because under that low and despicable appearance they
acknowledged him to be the *Son of David*

<span id="ix.lxxix-p10"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p11"></span>**29.** *According to your faith.* Though
the subject of the narrative is a remarkable benefit conferred on *two
blind men,* yet from this declaration of Christ we may draw the general
doctrine, that if we pray in faith, we will never sustain a refusal in
our prayers. But if those two men, whose faith was small and imperfectly
formed, obtained what they wished, much more efficacious will now be the
faith of those who, endued with the Spirit of adoption, and relying on
the sacrifice of Christ, shah approach to God.

<span id="ix.lxxix-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p13"></span>**30.** *And Jesus threatened them*
Either he wished to have other persons as witnesses of the miracle, or
to delay the publication of it till another time. Their conduct in
immediately proclaiming it every where is worthy of blame: for the
notion entertained by some, that Christ forbade them for the purpose of
exciting them the more, has been already refuted. There was, no doubt,
some reason for forbidding it, which is unknown to us; and those men,
through inconsiderate zeal, spread the rumor before the proper time.

<span id="ix.lxxix-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p15"></span>**32.** *They brought to him a dumb man*
It is probable that this man was not naturally *dumb,* but that, after
he had been given up to the devil,  <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530.md) he was deprived of the use of speech:
for all *dumb* persons are not *demoniacs* He was afflicted in such a
manner as to make it evident, by visible signs, that his tongue was held
bound by a wicked spirit. The exclamation of the multitudes, on his
being cured, that *nothing like it had ever been seen in Israel,*
appears to be hyperbolica1:  <span id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531.md) for
God had formerly revealed his glory among that people by greater
miracles. But perhaps they look to the design of the miracle, as the
minds of all were at that time prepared to expect the coming of the
Messiah. They intended, no doubt, to exalt this instance of the grace of
God, without detracting any thing from what had formerly happened.
Besides, it ought to be observed, that this was not a premeditated
statement, but a sudden burst of admiration.

<span id="ix.lxxix-p18"></span><span id="ix.lxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p19"></span>**34.** *But the Pharisees said* Hence it
is evident with what rage and fury they were filled, who did not scruple
to assail with wicked slander so illustrious a work of God. We ought to
observe the contrast between the applause of the people and the
blasphemy of those men. The saying of the people, that *nothing like it
ever happened in Israel,* is a confession arising from a sense of the
divine glory: which makes it the more evident, that those persons were
utterly mad who ventured, as it were, to curse God to his face. We learn
from it also, that, when wickedness has reached the height of blindness,
there is no work of God, however evident, which it will not pervert. It
is, no doubt, monstrous and incredible that mortal men should cry
against their Creator: but there is so much the greater reason for
dreading that blindness, which arises from the Lord’s vengeance on the
wicked after long-suffering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_529"></span>[530](cc31087.htm#fr_529.md) <span
id="ix.lxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxix-p4.1"></span>Jesus
leur defendit avee menaces;” — “Jesus forbade them with threatenings.”

<span id="fn_530"></span>[531](cc31087.htm#fr_530.md) <span
id="ix.lxxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxix-p16.1"></span>Que le
diable qui le possedoit luy avoit ost, l'usage de parler;” — “that the
devil, who possessed him, had taken from him the use of speech.”

<span id="fn_531"></span>[532](cc31087.htm#fr_531.md) <span
id="ix.lxxix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxix-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxix-p17.1"></span>Il
semble que c'est une facon de parler hyperbolique et excessive;” — “it
appears to be a hyperbolical and exaggerated way of speaking.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:35-38](cc31088.md)
