[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31088)  [Next](cc31090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxi"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 8:23-27; MARK 4:35-41; LUKE
8:22-25

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
8:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
4:35-41](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#022)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p5"></span>**23**.** **And when he had entered into
the ship,  <span id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) his disciples
followed him. **24**.** **And, lo, there was a great swell in the sea,
so that the ship was covered with the billows: and he was asleep.
**25**.** **And his disiples approached and awoke him, saying, Lord,
save us, we perish. **26**.** **And he saith to them, Why are you timid,
O men of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea:
and there was a great calm. **27**.** **But the men wondered, saying,
What sort of man is this: for the winds and the sea obey him?

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p7"></span>**35**.** **And the same day, when it was
evening, he said to them, Let us cross to the opposite side.
**36**.** **And having sent away the multitude, they take him even as he
was, in the ship. But there were also other ships along with him.
**37**.** **Then ariseth a great storm of wind: and the billows dashed
into the ship, so that it was now filled. **38**.** **And he was at the
stern, sleeping upon a pillow: and they awake him, and say to him,
Master, hast thou no care that we perish? **39**.** **And he arose, and
rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, Silence, be still. And the wind
was hushed, and there was a great calm. **40**.** **And he said to them,
Why are you so timid? How have you not confidence? **41**.** **And they
feared with a great fear, and said among themselves, Who is this: for
even the wind and the sea obey him?

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p8"></span>**22**.** **And it happened on a certain
day, that he went into a ship with his disciples. And he saith to them,
Let us cross to the opposite side of the lake: and they set sail.
**23**.** **And while they were sailing, he fell asleep, and a tempest
of wind arose in the lake, and they were filled with water, and were in
danger. **24**.** **And they approached and awoke him, saying, Master,
Master, we perish. But he arose, and rebuked the wind and the tempest of
the water; and they ceased, and there was a calm. **25**.** **And he
said to them, Where is your faith? And they were afraid, and wondered,
saying among themselves, Who is this? for he commands even the winds and
the water, and they obey him.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p10"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p11"></span>As we shall soon meet again with the
mention of a lake, where it is said (<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p11.2"></span>[Mt
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#033)<span id="ix.lxxxi-p11.2"></span>)
that the swine were carried into it with violence, it is not universally
agreed whether one and the same lake is mentioned in both places. The
waters of Gennesareth, all admit,  <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) were pleasant and healthful to drink:
but the Gadarene lake, Strabo tells us, was so unwholesome and
pestilential, that the cattle which drank of it often lost their hair
and their hoofs. There is therefore no doubt that there were two
separate lakes, and that they were at a considerable distance from each
other. There is as little doubt that the lake mentioned here was the
lake of Gennesareth; and that Christ, having crossed it, came to the
Gadarenes, whom Matthew calls *Geresenes,* (<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p12.2"></span>[Mt
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p13"></span>Those who infer, from the diversity of
the names, that the narratives are different, through a desire to be
thought very acute, fall under the charge of gross ignorance: for the
country of the Gergesenes was also called Gadarene, from a celebrated
city, Gadara. In the age of Jerome, the name was changed; and,
therefore, in accordance with the prevailing custom, he calls them
*Geraseaes* That it was the Gadarene lake into which the swine were
thrown down by the devils, I have no hesitation in admitting: but when
Christ says, *let us cross to the other side,* I cannot explain the
reference as made to any other lake than that of Gennesareth.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p14"></span>It remains that we now inquire as to the
time, which cannot be learned either from Matthew or from Luke. Mark
alone mentions that it was the evening of that day on which Christ
discoursed about the preaching of the gospel under the parable of the
sower. Hence it is evident, that they did not attend to the order of
time; and, indeed, this is expressly stated by Luke, when he says that
*it happened on a certain day:* for these words show that he gives
himself little concern as to the question which of the events was
earlier or later.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p15"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p15.1"></span>[Matthew
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p15.1"></span>.** *And when he had entered into a ship*
Mark says that *other little ships* crossed *along with him:* but that
Christ entered into his own ship *with his disciples* Luke too quotes
his words: Matthew is more concise. They agree, however, as to the
leading fact, that Christ laid himself down to rest, and that, while he
was asleep, a tempest suddenly arose. First, it is certain that the
storm which agitated the lake was not accidental: for how would God have
permitted his Son to be driven about at random by the violence of the
waves? But on this occasion he intended to make known to the apostles
how weak and inconsiderable their faith still was. Though Christ’s sleep
was natural, yet it served the additional purpose of making the
disciples better acquainted with their weakness. I will not say, as many
do, that Christ pretended sleep, in order to try them. On the contrary,
I think that he was asleep in such a manner as the condition and
necessity of human nature required.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p16"></span>And yet his divinity watched over him, so
that the apostles had no reason to fear that consolation would not be
immediately provided, or that assistance would not be obtained from
heaven. Let us therefore conclude, that all this was arranged by the
secret providence of God, — that Christ was asleep, that a violent
tempest arose, and that the waves covered the ship, which was in
imminent danger of perishing. And let us learn hence that, whenever any
adverse occurrence takes place, the Lord tries our faith. If the
distresses grow to such a height as almost to overwhelm us, let us
believe that God does it with the same design of exercising our
patience, or of bringing to light in this way our hidden weakness; as we
see that, when the apostles were covered by the billows,  <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) their weakness, which formerly lay
concealed, was discovered.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p18"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p19"></span>**25.** *Lord, save us* A pious prayer
 <span id="fr_537"></span>[538](#fn_537) , one would think: for what
else had they to do when they were lost than to implore safety from
Christ? But as Christ charges them with unbelief, we must inquire in
what respect they sinned. Certainly, I have no doubt that they attached
too much importance to the bodily presence of their Master: for,
according to Mark, they do not merely pray, but expostulate with him,
*Master, hast thou no care that we perish?* Luke describes also
confusion and trembling: *Master, Master, we perish* They ought to have
believed that the Divinity of Christ was not oppressed by carnal sleep,
and to his Divinity they ought to have had recourse. But they do nothing
till they are urged by extreme danger; and then they are overwhelmed
with such unreasonable fear that they do not think they will be safe
 <span id="fr_538"></span>[539](#fn_538) till Christ is awakened. This
is the reason why he accuses them of unbelief for their entreaty that he
would assist them was rather a proof of their faith, if, in confident
reliance on his divine power, they had calmly, and without so much
alarm, expected the assistance which they asked.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p22"></span>And here we obtain an answer to a
question which might be put, and which arises out of his reproof. Is
every kind of fear sinful and contrary to faith? First, he does not
blame them simply because they fear, but because they are *timid* Mark
adds the word <span id="ix.lxxxi-p22.1"></span>οὕτω — *Why are you* so
*timid?* and by this term indicates that their alarm goes beyond proper
bounds. Besides, he contrasts *faith* with their *fear,* and thus shows
that he is speaking about immoderate dread, the tendency of which is not
to exercise their faith, but to banish it from their minds. It is not
every kind of fear that is opposed to faith. This is evident from the
consideration that, if we fear nothing, an indolent and carnal security
steals upon us; and thus faith languishes, the desire to pray becomes
sluggish, and the remembrance of God is at length extinguished  <span
id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539) Besides, those who are not affected by
a sense of calamities, so as to *fear,* are rather insensible than firm.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p24"></span>Thus we see that fear, which awakens
faith, is not in itself faulty till it go beyond bounds.  <span
id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540) Its excess lies in disturbing or
weakening the composure of faith, which ought to rest on the word of
God. But as it never happens that believers exercise such restraint on
themselves as to keep their faith from being injured, their fear is
almost always attended by sin. Yet we ought to be aware that it is not
every kind of fear which indicates a want of faith, but only that dread
which disturbs the peace of the conscience in such a manner that it does
not rest on the promise of God.

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p26"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p27"></span>**26.** *He rebuked the winds* Mark
relates also the words of Christ, by which, addressing the sea, he
enjoins *silence,* (<span id="ix.lxxxi-p27.2"></span>σιώπα,) that is,
*stillness* not that the lake had any perception, but to show that the
power of his voice reached the elements, which were devoid of feeling.
And not only the *sea and the winds,* which are without feeling, but
wicked men also, with all their obstinacy, obey the commands of God. For
when God is pleased to allay the tumults of war, he does not always
soften the fierce minds of men, and mould them to obedience, but even
while their rage continues, makes the arms to drop from their hands: And
thus is fulfilled that declaration,

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p28"></span>He maketh wars to cease to the ends of
the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in pieces, and
burneth the chariots in the fire, (<span id="ix.lxxxi-p28.1"></span>[Ps
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)<span
id="ix.lxxxi-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p29"></span><span id="ix.lxxxi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p30"></span>**27.** *But the men wondered* Mark and
Luke appear to say this in reference to the apostles; for, after having
stated that Christ reproved them, they add that they cried out with
fear, *Who is this?* It applies, however, more properly to others, who
had not yet known Christ. Whether we take the one or the other of these
views, the result of the miracle appears in the display of the glory of
Christ. If any one shall suppose that it is the apostles who speak, the
meaning of the words will be, that his divine power was sufficiently
proved by the fact that *the wind and the sea obey him* But as it is
more probable that these words were spoken by others, the Evangelists
show that the miracle made such an impression on their minds, as to
produce a certain reverence for Christ which prepared them for believing
on him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_534"></span>[535](cc31089.htm#fr_534) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p6.1"></span>La
naselle,” — “τὸ πλοῖον.“

<span id="fn_535"></span>[536](cc31089.htm#fr_535) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p11.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p12.1"></span>C'est
un poinct bien resolu entre tous ceux qui ont escrit;” — “it is a point
well agreed among all who have written.”

<span id="fn_536"></span>[537](cc31089.htm#fr_536) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p17.1"></span>Quand
les Apostres se sont trouvez assaillis et quasi couvers des riots du
lac;” — “when the Apostles found themselves assaulted, and, as it were,
covered by the waves of the lake.”

<span id="fn_537"></span>[538](cc31089.htm#fr_537) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p20.1"></span>Une
priere bonne et sainte;” — “a good and holy prayer.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[539](cc31089.htm#fr_538) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p21.1"></span>En
sorte qu'il ne leur semble oint qu'il y ait moyen de les sauver, sinon
que Christ s’eveeile; — so that they think there will be no way of
saving them till Christ is awakened.”

<span id="fn_539"></span>[540](cc31089.htm#fr_539) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p23.1"></span>Et
finalemeat la souvenance que chacun doit avoir de Dieu vient a
s'esteindre;” — and, finally, that remembrance of God which every one
ought to have, comes to be extinguished.”

<span id="fn_540"></span>[541](cc31089.htm#fr_540) <span
id="ix.lxxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxi-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxi-p25.1"></span>Jusque
ace qu'ellc passe mesurc, ct soit excessive;” — “till it go beyond
bounds, and become excessive.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 8:28-34; Mark 5:1-20; Luke 8:26-39](cc31090)
