[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31096)  [Next](cc31098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxix"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 10:37-42; MARK 9:41; LUKE
14:25-33

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
10:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p3.1"></span>[Mark
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#041.md)<span id="ix.lxxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p4.1"></span>[Luke
14:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#025.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p5"></span>**37**.** **He who loveth father or
mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loveth son or
daughter more than me is not worthy of me. **38**.** **And he who doth
not take his cross and follow me,  <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md) is not worthy of me. **39**.** **He
who findeth his life  <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md) shall lose
it; and he who loseth his life for my sake shall find it.  <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604.md) **40**.** **He who receiveth you
receiveth me: and he who receiveth me receiveth him who sent me.
**41**.** **He who receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall
receive a prophet’s reward: he who receiveth a righteous man in the name
of a righteous man, shall a righteous man’s reward. **42**.** **And
whosoever shall give to one of these little ones to drink a cup of cold
water only, in the name of a disciple, verily, I say to you, he shall
not lose his reward.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p9"></span>**41**.** **For whosoever shall give to
you to drink a cup of water in my name, because you belong to Christ,
verily I say to you, he shall not lose his reward.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p10"></span>**25**.** **And great multitudes went
with him, and he turned, and said to them, **26**.** **If any man cometh
to me,  <span id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605.md) and hateth not his
father and mother, and wife and children, and brothers and sisters, and
even his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. **27**.** **And
whosoever doth not carry his cross and come after me cannot be my
disciple. **28**.** **For who is there among you that wishes to build a
tower, and does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he have
what is necessary to finish it? **29**.** **Lest after he hath laid the
foundation, all who see him begin to mock him, **30**.** **Saying, this
man began to build, and was not able to complete it. **31**.** **Or what
king, who is setting out to make war against another king, does not
first sit down and consider whether or not he will be able, with ten
thousand, to meet him who cometh against him with twenty thousand?
**32**.** **Otherwise, while the other is still at a distance, he sends
an embassy, and requests conditions of peace. **33**.** **So then every
one of you who forsaketh not all that he possesses, cannot be my
disciple.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p12"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p13"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p14"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p14.2"></span>.** *He who loveth father or mother* As it
is exceedingly harsh, and is contrary to natural feelings, to make
enemies of those who ought to have been in closest alliance with us, so
Christ now says that we cannot be his disciples on any other condition.
He does not indeed enjoin us to lay aside human affections, or forbid us
to discharge the duties of relationship, but only desires that all the
mutual love which exists among men should be so regulated as to assign
the highest rank to piety. Let the husband then love his wife, the
father his son, and, on the other hand, let the son love his father,
provided that the reverence which is due to Christ be not overpowered by
human affection. For if even among men, in proportion to the closeness
of the tie that mutually binds us, some have stronger claims than
others, it is shameful that all should not be deemed inferior to Christ
alone. And certainly we do not consider sufficiently, or with due
gratitude, what it is to be a disciple of Christ, if the excellence of
this rank be not sufficient to subdue all the affections of the flesh.
The phrase employed by Luke is more harsh, *if any man doth not hate his
father and mother,* but the meaning is the same, “If the love of
ourselves hinder us from following Christ, we must resist it,
courageously:” as Paul says,

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p15"></span>what things were gain to me, those I
counted loss for Christ, for whom I suffered the loss of all things,
(<span id="ix.lxxxix-p15.1"></span>[Phil.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#007.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span id="ix.lxxxix-p15.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p16"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p17"></span>**38.** *He who doth not take up his
cross* From particular cases he proceeds to general views, and informs
us that we cannot be reckoned his disciples unless we are prepared to
endure many afflictions. If we are vexed and tormented by the thought,
that the gospel should set us at variance with our father, or our wife,
or our children, let us remember this condition, that Christ subjects
all his disciples to *the cross* Yet let us also bear in mind this
consolation, that, in *bearing the cross,* we are the companions of
Christ, — which will speedily have the effect of allaying all its
bitterness. The reprobates are not less firmly bound to their *cross,*
and cannot with their most violent struggles shake it off; but as to
those who are out of Christ the cross is accursed, a mournful end awaits
them. Let us therefore learn to connect these two things, that believers
must bear the cross in order to follow their Master; that is, in order
to conform to his example, and to abide by his footsteps like faithful
companions.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p18"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p19"></span>**39.** *He who findeth his life* Lest
the former doctrine, which is very difficult and troublesome to the
flesh, should have little weight with us, Christ confirms it in two ways
by this statement. He affirms that persons of excessive caution and
foresight, when they look upon themselves as having very well defended
their *life,* will be disappointed and will *lose* it; and, on the other
hand, that those who disregard their *life* will sustain no loss, for
they will recover it. We know that there is nothing which men will not
do or leave undone for the sake of *life,* (so powerful is that
attachment to it which is natural to us all;) and, therefore, it was
necessary that Christ should employ such promises and threatenings in
exciting his followers to despise death.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p20"></span>*To find the life* means here to possess
it, or to have it in safe keeping. Those who are excessively desirous of
an earthly life, take pains to guard themselves against every kind of
danger, and flatter themselves with unfounded confidence, as if they
were looking well to themselves, (<span id="ix.lxxxix-p20.1"></span>[Ps
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p20.1"></span>:) but their life, though defended by such
powerful safeguards, will pass away; for they will at last die, and
death will bring to them everlasting ruin. On the other hand, when
believers surrender themselves to die, their *soul,* which appears to
vanish in a moment, passes into a better life. Yet as persons are
sometimes found, who heedlessly lay down their life, either for the sake
of ambition or of madness, Christ expressly states the reason why we
ought to expose ourselves to death.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p21"></span>It is uncertain if the discourse, which
is related by *Luke,* was delivered on another occasion. There, too, our
Lord exhorts his followers to *bear the cross,* but does not dwell upon
it at equal length. To support this sentiment he immediately adds two
comparisons, of which Matthew takes no notice: but as the subject
treated is substantially the same, I have not scrupled to introduce in
this place what we find in Luke.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p22"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p23"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p23.2"></span>[Luke
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#028.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p23.2"></span>.** *For which of you, etc* *,* That no one
may think it hard to follow Christ on the condition of renouncing all
his desires, a useful warning is here given. We must consider beforehand
what the profession of the gospel demands. The reason why many persons
yield to very slight temptations is, that they have pictured to
themselves unmixed enjoyment, as if they were to be always in the shade
and at their ease. No man will ever become fit to serve Christ till he
has undergone a long preparation for warfare.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p24"></span>Now the comparisons are exceedingly
adapted to this object. *Building* is a tedious and vexatious matter,
and one that gives little satisfaction on account of the expense. *War,*
too, brings along with it many inconveniences, and almost threatens
destruction to the human race, so that it is never undertaken but with
reluctance. And yet the advantages of *building* are found to be
sufficient to induce men to spend their substance on it without
hesitation; while necessity drives them to shrink from no expenses in
carrying on *wars*. But a far more valuable reward awaits those who are
the *builders* of the temple of God, and who fight under the banner of
Christ: for Christians do not labor for a temporary building, or fight
for a passing triumph.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p25"></span>If a king find himself unable to endure
the burden of a war,  <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606.md) he
prevents an ignominious defeat by seeking peace with his adversary. The
statements which our Lord makes to this effect must not be applied to
the present subject, in such a manner as if we were to enter into any
compromise with our spiritual foe, when our strength and resources fail.
It would be idle to treat parables as applying in every minute point
 <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607.md) to the matter in hand. But our
Lord simply means that we ought to be so well prepared, as not to be
taken by surprise for want of a proper defense, or basely to turn our
backs: for it is not every one of us who is a *king,* to carry on *war*
under his direction.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p28"></span>This doctrine reproves the rashness of
those who foolishly proceed beyond their capacity, or flatter themselves
without thinking of *bearing the cross* Yet we must take care lest this
meditation, to which Christ exhorts us, should fill us with alarm or
retard our progress. Many persons, not having from the outset laid their
account with suffering, relax their zeal through cowardice: for they
cannot endure to be Christians on any other condition than that of being
exempted from the *cross* Others again, when a condition that is harsh
and unpleasant to the flesh is proposed to them, do not venture to
approach to Christ. But there is no good reason for being discouraged by
a knowledge of our poverty, for the Lord grants to us seasonable aid. I
readily acknowledge that, if we calculate the expense, we are all
destitute of power to lay a single stone, or to wield a sword against
the enemy. But as the materials, expense, arms, and forces, are supplied
by the Lord out of heaven, no pretext on the score of difficulty can be
offered by our indifference or sloth. The design of Christ, therefore,
is to warn his followers to *bear the cross,* that they may prepare
themselves with courage.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p29"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p30"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p30.1"></span>[Luke
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#033.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p30.1"></span>.** *So then every one of you* This clause
shows what is meant by the *calculation of expenses,* with which Christ
enjoins his followers to begin: it is to lead them to consider that they
must *forsake all* In vain do persons who are delighted with an easy,
indolent life, and with exemption from the *cross,* undertake a
profession of Christianity. Those persons are said to *forsake all* who
prefer Christ so greatly, both to their own life, and to all the wishes
of the flesh, that nothing deters them from the right course.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p31"></span>It would be absurd to insist on a
literal interpretation of the phrase, as if no man were a disciple of
Christ, till he threw into the sea all that he possessed, divorced his
wife, and bade farewell to his children. Such idle dreams led foolish
people to adopt a monastic life, as if those who intend to come to
Christ must leave off humanity. Yet no man truly forsakes all that he
possesses till he is prepared at every instant to leave all, gives
himself free and unconstrained to the Lord, and, rising above every
hindrance, pursues his calling. Thus the true self-denial which the Lord
demands from his followers does not consist so much in outward conduct
as in the affections; so that every one must employ the time which is
passing over him without allowing the objects which he directs by his
hand to hold a place in his heart.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p32"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p33"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p33.2"></span>[Matthew
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p33.2"></span>.** *He who receiveth you, receiveth me*. A
considerable portion of the world may be opposed to the disciples of
Christ, and the confession of their faith may draw upon them universal
hatred. Yet here is another consolation tending to excite a very great
number of persons to treat them with kindness. Whatever is done to them,
Christ does not hesitate to reckon as done to himself. This shows how
dearly he loves them, when he places to his own account the kind offices
which they have received. He is not speaking here about *receiving* the
doctrine, but about *receiving* the men. The latter meaning, I admit,
arises out of the former, but we must attend to the design of Christ.
Perceiving that this was exceedingly adapted to support their weakness,
he intended to assure them that, if any one would receive them in a
friendly manner, and do them kind offices, he would be as highly pleased
as if their benevolence had been exercised towards his own person; and
not only so, but that in such a sacrifice God the Father would *smell a
sweet savor,* (<span id="ix.lxxxix-p33.4"></span>[Ge
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021.md)<span
id="ix.lxxxix-p33.4"></span>)

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p34"></span><span id="ix.lxxxix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p35"></span>**41.** *He who receiveth a prophet* He
begins with the prophets, but at length comes down to the lowest rank,
and embraces all his disciples. In this manner he commends all, without
exception, who truly worship God and love the gospel. *To receive* a
person *in the name of a prophet,* or *in the name of a righteous man,*
means to do them good for the sake of honoring their doctrine, or of
paying respect to piety. Though God enjoins us to perform offices of
kindness to all mankind, yet he justly elevates his people to a higher
rank, that they may be the objects of peculiar regard and esteem.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p36"></span>*Shall receive a prophet’s reward* This
clause is variously interpreted by commentators. Some think that it
denotes a mutual compensation, or, in other words, that spiritual
benefits are bestowed on the *prophets* of God instead of temporal
benefits. But if this exposition is admitted, what shall we say is meant
by the *righteous man’s reward?* Others understand it to mean, that
those who shall be kind to them will partake of the same *reward* which
is laid up for *prophets* and *righteous* men. Some refer it to the
intercourse of saints, and suppose it to mean, that as by our kind
actions we give evidence that we are one body with the servants of
Christ, so in this way we become partakers of all the blessings which
Christ imparts to the members of his body.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p37"></span>I consider it simply as denoting the
*reward* which corresponds to the rank of the person to whom kindness
has been exercised; for Christ means that this will be a remarkable
proof of the high estimation in which he holds his *prophets,* and
indeed all his disciples. The greatness of the reward will make it
evident, that not one kind office which was ever rendered to them has
been forgotten.

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p38"></span>By way of amplification, he promises a
reward to the very meanest offices of kindness, such as *giving them a
cup of cold water,* He gives the name of *little ones* not only to those
who occupy the lowest place, or are held in least estimation in the
Church, but to all his disciples, whom the pride of the world tramples
under foot.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_602"></span>[603](cc31097.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p6.1"></span>Et
vient apres moy;” — -”and cometh after me.”

<span id="fn_603"></span>[604](cc31097.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p7.1"></span>Qui
aura trouve, *ou, garde* sa vie;” — “he who shall have found, or,
*protected,* his life.”

<span id="fn_604"></span>[605](cc31097.htm#fr_604.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p8.1"></span>La
trouvera, *ou, gardera*;” — “will find it, or, *will protect it* *”*

<span id="fn_605"></span>[606](cc31097.htm#fr_605.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p11.1"></span>Si
aucun vient avec moy;” — “if any man cometh with me.”

<span id="fn_606"></span>[607](cc31097.htm#fr_606.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p26.1"></span>Pour
soustenir une guerre, et fournir l'argent qu'il faut“ — “to support a
war, and to supply the money that is required.”

<span id="fn_607"></span>[608](cc31097.htm#fr_607.md) <span
id="ix.lxxxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxix-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxix-p27.1"></span>De
vouloir esplucher tout par le menu, et rapporter tout jusqu'aux petits
mots;” — “to wish to explain every thing minutely, and to make every
thing apply down to the smallest words.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc31098.md)
