[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31060)  [Next](cc31062) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.liii"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 6:5-8

<span id="ix.liii-p2"></span><span id="ix.liii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
6:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005)<span id="ix.liii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p3"></span>**5**.** **And when thou shalt pray, thou
shalt not be as the hypocrites: for they are wont to pray standing in
the synagogues, and in corners of the streets, that they may be seen by
men. Verily I say to you, that they have their reward. **6**.** **But
thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and, having shut thy
door, pray to thy Father who is in secret: and thyFather, who seeth
secret, shall reward thee openly. **7**.** **But praying**,** use not
vain repetitions, as the Heathen do: for they think that they shall be
heard on account of their speaking much. **8**.** **Be not you,
therefore, like them: for your Father knoweth what things ye need,
before ye ask him.

<span id="ix.liii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.liii-p5"></span><span id="ix.liii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p6"></span>**5.** *When thou shalt pray* He now gives
the same instruction as to *prayer,* which he had formerly given as to
*alms.* It is a gross and shameful profanation of the name of God, when
hypocritcs, in order to obtain glory from men, pray in public, or at
least make a pretense of praying. But, as hypocrisy is always ambitious,
we need not wonder that it is also blind. Christ, therefore, commands
his disciples, if they wish to pray in a right manner, to *enter into
their closet* Some expositors, thinking that this has the appearance of
absurdity, give it an allegorical turn, as referring to the inward
recesses of the heart: but there is no necessity for such trifling. We
are commanded, in many passages, to pray to God or to praise him, in the
public assembly, amidst a crowd of men, and before all the people: and
that for the purpose, not only of testifying our faith or gratitude, but
also of exciting others, by our example, to do the like. Christ does not
withdraw us from such an exercise, but only admonishes us to have God
always before our eyes when we engage in prayer.

<span id="ix.liii-p7"></span>We must not literally interpret the words,
*enter into thy closet:* as if he ordered us to avoid the presence of
men, or declared that we do not pray aright, except when there are no
witnesses. He speaks comparatively, and means, that we ought rather to
seek retirement than desire a crowd of men to see us praying.  <span
id="fr_427"></span>[428](#fn_427) It is advantageous, indeed, to
believers, and contributes to their pouring out, with greater freedom,
their prayers and groans before God, to withdraw from the gaze of men.
Retirement is also useful for another reason, that our minds may be more
free and disengaged from all distracting thoughts: and accordingly
Christ himself frequently chose the concealment of some retired spot for
the sake of prayer. But this is not the present subject, which is only
to correct the desire of vain-glory. To express it in a few words,
whether a man prays alone, or in the presence of others, he ought to
have the same feelings, as if he were shut up in his closet, and had no
other witness but God. When Christ says, *thy Father shall reward thee,*
he declares plainly that all the reward, which is promised to us in any
part of Scripture, is not paid as a debt, but is a free gift.

<span id="ix.liii-p9"></span><span id="ix.liii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p10"></span>**7.** *Use not vain repetitions* He
reproves another fault in prayer, a multiplicity of words. There are two
words used, but in the same sense: for <span
id="ix.liii-p10.2"></span>βαττολογία is “a superfluous and affected
repetition,” and <span id="ix.liii-p10.3"></span>πολυλογία is “unmeaning
talk.” Christ reproves the folly of those who, with the view of
persuading and entreating God, pour out a superfluity of words. This
doctrine is not inconsistent with the praises everywhere bestowed in
Scripture on earnestness in prayer: for, when prayer is offered with
earnest feeling, the tongue does not go before the heart. Besides, the
grace of God is not obtained by an unmeaning flow of words; but, on the
contrary, a devout heart throws out its affections, like arrows, to
pierce heaven. At the same time, this condemns the superstition of those
who entertain the belief, that they will secure the favor of God by long
murmurings. We find Popery to be so deeply imbued with this error, that
it believes the efficacy of prayer to lie chiefly in talkativeness. The
greater number of words that a man mutters, the more diligently he is
supposed to have prayed. Long and tedious chanting also, as if it were
to soothe the ears of God, continually resounds in their cathedrals.

<span id="ix.liii-p11"></span><span id="ix.liii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p12"></span>**8.** *For your Father knoweth* This
single remedy is sufficient for removing and destroying the superstition
which is here condemned. For whence comes this folly of thinking that
great advantage is gained, when men weary God by a multiplicity of
words, but because they imagine that he is like a mortal man, who needs
to be informed and solicited? Whoever is convinced, that God not only
cares for us, but knows all our wants, and anticipates our wishes and
anxieties before we have stated them, will leave out vain repetitions,
and will reckon it enough to prolong his prayers, as far as shall be
necessary for exercising his faith; but will reckon it absurd and
ridiculous to approach God with rhetorical embellishments, in the
expectation that he will be moved by an abundance of words.

<span id="ix.liii-p13"></span>But if God *knows what things we have need
of, before we ask him,* where lies the advantage of prayer? If he is
ready, of his own free will, to assist us, what purpose does it serve to
employ our prayers, which interrupt the spontaneous course of his
providence? The very design of prayer furnishes an easy answer.
Believers do not pray, with the view of informing God about things
unknown to him, or of exciting him to do his duty, or of urging him as
though he were reluctant. On the contrary, they pray, in order that they
may arouse themselves to seek him, that they may exercise their faith in
meditating on his promises, that they may relieve themselves from their
anxieties by pouring them into his bosom; in a word, that they may
declare that from Him alone they hope and expect, both for themselves
and for others, all good things. God himself, on the other hand, has
purposed freely, and without being asked, to bestow blessings upon us;
but he promises that he will grant them to our prayers. We must,
therefore, maintain both of these truths, that He freely anticipates our
wishes, and yet that we obtain by prayer what we ask. As to the reason
why he sometimes delays long to answer us, and sometimes even does not
grant our wishes, an opportunity of considering it will afterwards
occur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_427"></span>[428](cc31061.htm#fr_427) <span
id="ix.liii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.liii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.liii-p8.1"></span>Il parle
ici par une forme de comparaison des deux extremitez opposites,
signifiant que plustost il faut chercher d'estre seuls, que de desirer
grande compagnie qui nous voye prier.” — “He speaks here by way of
comparison of the two opposite extremes, meaning that we must rather
seek to be alone, than desire a large company to see us pray,”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 6:9-13;Luke 11:1-4](cc31062)
