[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31082)  [Next](cc31084) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p1"></span>MATTHEW 9:9-13; MARK 2:13-17; LUKE 5:27-32

<span id="ix.lxxv-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
9:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)<span id="ix.lxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p3.1"></span>[Mark
2:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#013)<span id="ix.lxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p4.1"></span>[Luke
5:27-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027)<span id="ix.lxxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p5"></span>**9**.** **And Jesus, passing on, saw a man
sitting at the custom-house, named Matthew, and saith to him, Follow me.
And he arose and followed  <span id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) him.
**10**.** **And it happened that he was reclining in that man’s house,
and, lo, many publicans and sinners who had come, reclined together with
Jesus and his disciples. **11**.** **And the Pharisees, when they saw
it, said to his disciples, Why does your Master eat with publicans and
sinners? **12**.** **But Jesus, when he had heard it, said to them, Not
they who are in health have need of a physician, but they who are
diseased. **13**.** **But rather go, and learn what that means, I wish
mercyh, and not sacrifice: for I came not to call righteous persons, but
sinners, to repentance.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p7"></span>**13**.** **And he departed again towards
the sea, and the whole multitude came to him, and he taught them.
**14**.** **And while Jesus was passing along, he saw Levi, the son of
Alpheus, sitting at the custom-house, and said to him, Follow me: and he
arose and followed him. **15**.** **And it happened, while he was
reclining in that man’s house, many publicans and sinners  <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) also reclined along with Jesus and his
disciples: for there were many who followed him. **16**.** **And the
scribes and Pharisees, when they saw him taking food with publicans and
sinners, said to his disciples, Why is it that he eateth and drinketh
with publicans and sinners? **17**.** **Jesus, having heard this, saith
to them, Not they who are in health have need of a physician, but they
who are diseased. I came not to call righteous persons, but sinners to
repentance.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p9"></span>**27**.** **And after these things he went
out, and saw a publican, named Levi, sitting at the custom-house, and
said to him, Follow me. **28**.** **And he left all, and followed him.
 <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514) **29**.** **And Levi made him a
great banquet in his house; and there was a great multitude of publicans
and others, who reclined with them. **30**.** **And the scribes and
Pharisees  <span id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) murmured against his
disciples, saying, Why do you eat and drink with publicans and sinners?
**31**.** **And Jesus answering said to them, Not they who are in health
need a physician, but they who are diseased. **32**.** **I came not to
call righteous persons, but sinners, to repentance.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p12"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxv-p13"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p14"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxv-p14.2"></span>[Matthew
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#009)<span id="ix.lxxv-p14.2"></span>.**
*Jesus saw a man sitting at the customhouse.* The *custom-house* has
usually been a place noted for plundering and for unjust exactions, and
was at that time particularly infamous. In the choice of Matthew out of
that place, not only to be admitted into the family of Christ, but even
to be called to the office of Apostle, we have a striking instance of
the grace of God. It was the intention of Christ to choose simple and
ignorant persons to that rank, in order to cast down *the wisdom of the
world,* (<span id="ix.lxxv-p14.3"></span>[1Co
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="ix.lxxv-p14.3"></span>.)
But this publican, who followed an occupation little esteemed and
involved in many abuses, was selected for additional reasons, that he
might be an example of Christ’s undeserved goodness, and might show in
his person that the calling of all of us depends, not on the merits of
our own righteousness, but on his pure kindness. Matthew, therefore, was
not only a witness and preacher, but was also a proof and illustration
of the grace exhibited in Christ. he gives evidence of his gratitude in
not being ashamed to hand down for perpetual remembrance the record of
what he formerly was, and whence he was taken, that he might more fully
illustrate in his person the grace of Christ. In the same manner Paul
says:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p15"></span>This is a faithful saying, that Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief, (<span
id="ix.lxxv-p15.1"></span>[1Ti
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)<span id="ix.lxxv-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxv-p16"></span>As to Mark and Luke calling him *Levi,* it
appears that this was his ordinary name:  <span
id="fr_516"></span>[517](#fn_516) but that his being a *publican* was
the reason why he took a foreign name.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p18"></span>*Follow me* There is no reason to doubt
that Christ explained in many words why he was called, and on what
conditions. This is more fully ascertained from Luke, who says, *that he
left all, rose up, and followed* Christ: for it would not have been
necessary for him to leave all, if he had not been a private disciple of
Christ, and called in expectation of the Apostleship. In the great
readiness and eagerness of Matthew to obey, we see the Divine power of
the word of Christ. Not that all in whose ears he utters his voice are
equally affected in their hearts: but in this man Christ intended to
give a remarkable example, that we might know that his calling was not
from man.  <span id="fr_517"></span>[518](#fn_517)

<span id="ix.lxxv-p20"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p21"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxv-p21.2"></span>[Luke
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029)<span
id="ix.lxxv-p21.2"></span>.** *And Levi made him a great banquet* This
appears to be at variance with what Luke relates, that *he left all:*
but the solution is easy. Matthew disregarded every hinderance, and gave
up himself entirely to Christ, but yet did not abandon the charge of his
own domestic affairs. When Paul, referring to the example of soldiers,
exhorts the ministers of the word to be free and disentangled from every
hinderance, and to devote their labors to the church, he says:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p22"></span>No man that warreth entangleth himself
with the affairs of life,  
that he may please the commander, (<span id="ix.lxxv-p22.2"></span>[2Ti
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#004)<span id="ix.lxxv-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxv-p23"></span>He certainly does not mean, that those who
enroll themselves in the military profession divorce their wives,
forsake their children, and entirely desert their homes; but that they
quit their homes for a time, and leave behind them every care, that they
may be wholly employed in war. In the same manner, nothing kept Matthew
from following where Christ called; and yet he freely used both his
house and his property, as far as the nature of his calling allowed. It
was necessary, indeed, that he should leave the *custom-house:* for, had
he been detained there, he would not have been a follower of Christ.
 <span id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518)

<span id="ix.lxxv-p25"></span>It is called *a great banquet,* with
reference not to the multitude of the guests, but to the abundance and
magnificence of the provisions: for we know that Christ did not practise
such austerity, as not to allow himself to be sometimes entertained more
splendidly by the rich, provided that there were no superfluity. Yet we
cannot doubt that, as he was a remarkable example of temperance, so he
exhorted those who entertained him to frugality and moderation in diet,
and would never have endured wasteful and extravagant luxuries. Matthew
says that *sinners*—*that* is, men of wicked lives and of infamous
*character*—*came* to the banquet. The reason was, that the *publicans,*
being themselves generally hated and despised, did not disdain to
associate with persons of that description; for, as moderate correction
produces shame and humiliation in transgressors, so excessive severity
drives some persons to despair, makes them leave off all shame, and
abandon themselves to wickedness. In levying custom or taxes there was
nothing wrong: but when the *publicans* saw themselves cast off as
ungodly and detestable persons, they sought consolation in the society
of those who did not despise them on account of the bad and disgraceful
reputation which they shared along with them. Meanwhile, they mixed with
adulterers, drunkards, and such characters; whose crimes they would have
detested, and whom they would not have resembled, had not the public
hatred and detestation driven them to that necessity.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p26"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p27"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxv-p27.2"></span>[Matthew
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011)<span
id="ix.lxxv-p27.2"></span>.** *Why does your Master eat with publicans
and sinners?* The scribes attack the disciples of Christ, and, with the
view of soliciting them to revolt, reproach him with what was at first
sight base and shameful.” Of what use was it that he should be their
Master, if it were not to withdraw them from the majority of men to lead
a holier life? On the contrary, he withdrew them from a respectable and
passable condition in life to ungodly licentiousness, and to pollute
themselves by wicked companions.” Ignorant and wavering disciples might
have been induced by such reproaches to desert their Master. But they
act properly when, not finding themselves sufficiently fortified against
such a calumny, they carry their complaint to their Master: for Christ,
by opposing the scribes, confirms his disciples for the future.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p28"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p29"></span>**12.** *Not they who are in health need a
physician* It is evident from Christ’s reply that the scribes erred in
two ways: they did not take into account the office of Christ; and,
while they spared their own vices, they proudly despised all others.
This deserves our particular attention, for it is a disease which has
been always very general. Hypocrites, being satisfied and intoxicated
with a foolish confidence in their own righteousness, do not consider
the purpose for which Christ was sent into the world, and do not
acknowledge the depth of evils in which the human race is plunged, or
the dreadful wrath and curse of God which lies on all, or the
accumulated load of vices which weighs them down.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p30"></span>The consequence is, that they are too
stupid to feel the miseries of men, or to think of a remedy. While they
flatter themselves, they cannot endure to be placed in their own rank,
and think that injustice is done them, when they are classed with
transgressors. Our Lord glances at this second error by replying, that
*they who are in health have no need of a physician* It is an ironical
admission,  <span id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) and is intended to
show that they are offended when they see sinners, because they claim
righteousness for themselves. Because you are *in health,* (he says,)
you despise *the sick,* are offended at them, and cannot endure the
sight of them: but a *physician* ought to be affected in a very
different manner. He afterwards points out that he must discharge the
duties of a *physician,* because he has been sent by the Father *to call
sinners*

<span id="ix.lxxv-p32"></span>Though Christ begins with reproof, yet if
we desire to make progress in his doctrine, what he has put in the
second place must receive our first consideration. He came to quicken
the dead, to justify the guilty and condemned, to wash those who were
polluted and full of uncleanness, to rescue the lost from hell, to
clothe with his glory those who were covered with shame, to renew to a
blessed immortality those who were debased by disgusting vices. If we
consider that this was his office and the end of his coming, — if we
remember that this was the reason why he took upon him our flesh, why he
shed his blood, why he offered the sacrifice of his death, why he
descended even to hell, we will never think it strange that he should
gather to salvation those who have been the worst of men, and who have
been covered with a mass of crimes.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p33"></span>He whom you detest appears to you to be
unworthy of the grace of Christ. Why then was Christ himself made a
sacrifice and a curse, but that he might stretch out his hand to
accursed sinners? Now, if we feel disgust at being associated by Baptism
and the Lord’s Supper with vile men, and regard our connection with them
as a sort of stain upon us, we ought immediately to descend into
ourselves, and to search without flattery our own evils. Such an
examination will make us willingly allow ourselves to be washed in the
same fountain with the most impure, and will hinder us from rejecting
the righteousness which he offers indiscriminately to all the ungodly,
the life which he offers to the dead, and the salvation which he offers
to the lost.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p34"></span><span id="ix.lxxv-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p35"></span>**13.** *But rather go and learn* He
dismisses and orders them to depart, because he saw that they were
obstinate and unwilling to learn. Or rather he explains to them, that
they are contending with God and the Prophet, when, in pride and
cruelty, they are offended at relief which is given to the wretched, and
at medicine which is administered to the sick. This quotation is made
from <span id="ix.lxxv-p35.2"></span>[Ho
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="ix.lxxv-p35.2"></span>:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p36"></span>For I desired mercy, and not sacrifice;  
and the knowledge of God more than burnt-offerings.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p37"></span>The subject of the prophet’s discourse had
been the vengeance of God against the Jews. That they might not excuse
themselves by saying that they were performing the outward worship of
God, (as they were wont to boast in a careless manner about their
ceremonies,) he declares that God has no delight in *sacrifices,* when
their minds are destitute of piety, and when their conduct is at
variance with uprightness and righteousness. That the statement, I
*desired not sacrifice,* must be understood comparatively, is evident
from the second clause, that *the knowledge of God is better than
burnt-offerings* By these words he does not absolutely reject
*burnt-offerings,* but places them in a rank inferior to piety and
faith. We ought to hold, that faith and spiritual worship are in
themselves pleasing to God, and that charity and the duties of humanity
towards our neighbors are in themselves required; but that *sacrifices*
are but appendages, so to speak, which are of no value or estimation,
where substantial truth is not found. On this subject I have treated
more fully at the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. It ought
to be observed that there is a *synecdoche* in the word *mercy:* for
under one head the prophet embraces all the kindness which we owe to our
brethren.

<span id="ix.lxxv-p38"></span>*For I came not* Though this was spoken
for the purpose of reproving the pride and hypocrisy of the scribes, yet
it contains, in a general form, a very profitable doctrine. We are
reminded that the grace of Christ is of no advantage to us, unless when,
conscious of our sins, and groaning under their load, we approach to him
with humility. There is also something here which is fitted to elevate
weak consciences to a firm assurance: for we have no reason to fear that
Christ will reject sinners, to call whom he descended from his heavenly
glory. But we must also attend to the expression, *to repentance:* which
is intended to inform us that pardon is granted to us, not to cherish
our sins, but to recall us to the earnestness of a devout and holy life.
He reconciles us to the Father on this condition, that, being redeemed
by his blood, we may present ourselves true sacrifices, as Paul tells
us:

<span id="ix.lxxv-p39"></span>The grace of God, which bringeth
salvation, hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, and righteously,
and devoutly in this world, (<span id="ix.lxxv-p39.1"></span>Titus
2:11,12.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_512"></span>[513](cc31083.htm#fr_512) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p6.1"></span>Surgens
assequutus est;” — “rising followed.”

<span id="fn_513"></span>[514](cc31083.htm#fr_513) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p8.1"></span>Gens de
mauvaise vie;” — “people of bad life.”

<span id="fn_514"></span>[515](cc31083.htm#fr_514) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p10"></span> There is nothing here answering to
ἀναστὰς, *rising up* But the omission must have been accidental: for the
French version runs thus: “<span id="ix.lxxv-p10.1"></span>lequel se
levant, abandonna tout, et suivit;” — “who, rising up, forsook all, and
followed.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_515"></span>[516](cc31083.htm#fr_515) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p11.1"></span>Et ceux
d'entre eux qui estoyent scribes et Pharisiens;” —”and those among them
who were scribes and Pharisees.”

<span id="fn_516"></span>[517](cc31083.htm#fr_516) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p17.1"></span>Il est
aise a voir que c'estoit son droit nom par lequel les gens du pays
l’appeloyent;” — “it is easy to see that it was his right name, by which
the people of the country called him.”

<span id="fn_517"></span>[518](cc31083.htm#fr_517) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p19.1"></span>Qu’il
n’a pas este appele par un moyen procedant de l’homme;” — “that he was
not called by a method proceeding from man.”

<span id="fn_518"></span>[519](cc31083.htm#fr_518) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p24.1"></span>Pource
qu'ayant cest empeschement, il n'eust pas peu suivre la compagnie de
Christ;” — “because, having that hinderance, he could not have followed
the company of Christ.”

<span id="fn_519"></span>[520](cc31083.htm#fr_519) <span
id="ix.lxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxv-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxv-p31.1"></span>C’est
une concession par ironie, (c’est a dire, moquerie;”)—”it is an
admission made in irony, (that is, in ridicule.”)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:14-17; Mark 2:18-22; Luke 5:33-39](cc31084)
