[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31079)  [Next](cc31081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p1"></span>LUKE 7:11-17

<span id="ix.lxxii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
7:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011)<span
id="ix.lxxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p3"></span>**11**.** **And it happened, when he
departed, that he went into a city, which was called Nain, and many of
his disciples, and a great multitude, went along with him.
**12**.** **And as he was approaching to the gate of the city, there was
carried out a dead man, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow:
and a great multitude from the city was with her. **13**.** **And when
the Lord saw her, he was moved with compassion towards her, and said to
her, Weep not. **14**.** **And approaching he touched the coffin, (and
they who were carrying it stood still,) and said, Young man, I say to
thee, Arise. **15**.** **And he who was dead sat up, and began to speak,
and he gave him to his mother. **16**.** **And fear seized all, and they
glorified God, saying, A great Prophet hath risen up among us, and God
hath visited his people. **17**.** **And this report concerning him was
spread throughout all Judea, and all the neighboring country.

<span id="ix.lxxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxii-p5"></span><span id="ix.lxxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p6"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxii-p6.1"></span>[Luke
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011)<span
id="ix.lxxii-p6.1"></span>.** *And it happened, that he went into a
city.* In all the miracles of Christ, we must attend to the rule which
Matthew lays down. We ought to know, therefore, that this young man,
whom Christ raised from the dead, is an emblem of the spiritual life
which he restores to us. The name of the city contributes to the
certainty of the history. The same purpose is served by what Luke says,
that *a great multitude* from every direction followed him: for Christ
had many attendants along with him, and many persons accompanied the
woman, as a mark of respect, to the interment of her son. The
resurrection of the young man was beheld by so many witnesses, that no
doubt could be entertained as to its truth. There was the additional
circumstance of its being a crowded place: for we know that public
assemblies were held at the gates. That the dead man was carried out of
the city was in accordance with a very ancient custom among all nations.
*Jerome* says that, in his time, the city of Nain was still in
existence, two miles below Mount Tabor, in a southerly direction.

<span id="ix.lxxii-p7"></span><span id="ix.lxxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p8"></span>**12.** *The only son of his mother.* The
reason which induced Christ to restore the young man to life was, that
he saw the *widow* bereft of her *only son,* and had compassion on her:
for he did not withhold his favor till some one requested it, as he did
on other occasions; but anticipated the prayers of all, and *restored
the son to his mother,* by whom nothing of this sort was expected. We
have here a striking emblem of his freely bestowed compassion in raising
us from death to life. *By touching the coffin* he intended perhaps to
show, that he would by no means shrink from death and the grave, in
order to obtain life for us. He not only deigns to touch us with his
hand, in order to quicken us when we are dead, but, in order that he
might raise us to heaven, himself descends into the grave.

<span id="ix.lxxii-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxxii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p10"></span>**14.** *Young man, I say to thee.* By
this word Christ proved the truth of the saying of Paul, that *God
calleth those things which are not, as they were,* (<span
id="ix.lxxii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span
id="ix.lxxii-p10.1"></span>.) He addresses the dead man, and makes
himself be heard, so that death is suddenly changed into life. We have
here, in the first place, a striking emblem of the future resurrection,
as Ezekiel is commanded to say, *O ye dry bones, hear the word of the
Lord,* \[<span id="ix.lxxii-p10.2"></span>[Eze
37:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#004)<span
id="ix.lxxii-p10.2"></span>.\] Secondly, we are taught in what manner
Christ quickens us spiritually by faith. It is when he infuses into his
word a secret power, so that it enters into dead souls, as he himself
declares,

<span id="ix.lxxii-p11"></span>The hour cometh, when the dead shall hear
the voice of  
the Son of God, and they who hear shall live, (<span
id="ix.lxxii-p11.2"></span>[Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span
id="ix.lxxii-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxii-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxxii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxii-p13"></span>**16.** *And fear seized all* A sense of
the divine presence must have brought *fear* along with it: but there is
a difference between the kinds *of fear* Unbelievers either tremble and
are dismayed; or, struck with alarm, murmur against God: while devout
and godly persons, moved by reverence, willingly humble themselves.
*Fear,* therefore, is here taken in a good sense, because they gave the
honor which was due to the power of God which they had beheld, and
rendered to God not only homage, but thanksgiving.

<span id="ix.lxxii-p14"></span>*God hath visited his people* I
understand this to refer not to every kind of *visitation,* but to that
which would restore them to their original condition. Not only were the
affairs of Judea in a depressed state, but they had sunk under a
wretched and frightful slavery, as if God were not looking at them. The
only remaining hope was, that God had promised to be their Redeemer,
after they had endured very heavy calamities. I have no doubt,
therefore, that they were excited by the miracle to expect an
approaching restoration to prosperity: only they fall into a mistake as
to the nature of the *visitation* Though they acknowledge and celebrate
the unwonted grace of God in this respect, that *a great Prophet hath
risen up among us,* yet this eulogium comes very far short of the
dignity and glory of the promised Messiah. Hence it appears that the
faith of that people was, at this time, exceedingly confused, and
involved in many unfounded imaginations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 8:19-22;Luke 9:57-62](cc31081)
