[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31030)  [Next](cc31032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 2:13-18

<span id="ix.xxiii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
2:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013.md)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p3"></span>**13**.** **And when they had departed,
lo, the angel of the Lord appeared in dreams to Joseph, saying, Arise,
and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and be
thou there until I have told thee: for Herod will seek the young child
to destroy him. **14**.** **And he, when awake, took the young child and
his mother by night, and withdrew into Egypt: **15**.** **And was there
until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the Lord through the prophet, saying, Out of Egypt have I called my Son.
**16**.** **Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the Magi, was
exceedingly enraged, and sent to slay  <span
id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) all the children that were in
Bethlehem, and all its boundaries,  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had inquired at the Magi.
**17**.** **Then was fulfilled what had been spoken by Jeremiah the
Prophet, when he says, **18**.** **A voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation, wailing, and much weeping: Rachel bewailing her children,
and refused to receive consolation, because they are not.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p8"></span>**13.** *And when they had departed* How
many days elapsed from the departure of the Magi, till Joseph was
ordered to flee into Egypt, is not known, nor is it of much importance
to inquire: only it is probable that the Lord spared Mary, till she was
so far recovered from childbirth as to be able to perform the journey.
It was a wonderful purpose of God, that he chose to preserve his Son by
flight. The mind of Joseph must have been harassed by dangerous
temptations, when he came to see that there was no hope but in flight:
for in flight there was no appearance of divine protection. Besides, it
was very difficult to reconcile the statement, that he who was to be the
Savior of all, could not be preserved without the exertion of a mortal
man. But, in preserving the life of his Son, God maintained such
reserve, as to give some indications of his heavenly power, and yet not
to make it so manifest as to prevent it from being concealed under the
appearance of weakness: for the full time of glorifying Christ openly
was not yet come. The angel predicts an event which was hidden, and
unknown to men. That is an evident proof of divine guidance. But the
angel orders him to defend the life of the child by flight and exile.
This belongs to the weakness of flesh, to which Christ was subjected.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p9"></span>We are here taught, that God has more than
one way of preserving his own people. Sometimes he makes astonishing
displays of his power; while at other times he employs dark coverings or
shadows, from which feeble rays of it escape. This wonderful method of
preserving the Son of God under the cross teaches us, that they act
improperly who prescribe to God a fixed plan of action. Let us permit
him to advance our salvation by a diversity of methods; and let us not
refuse to be humbled, that he may more abundantly display his glory.
Above all, let us never avoid the cross, by which the Son of God himself
was trained from his earliest infancy. This flight is a part of the
foolishness of the cross, but it surpasses all the wisdom of the world.
That he may appear at his own time as the Savior of Judea, he is
compelled to flee from it, and is nourished by Egypt, from which nothing
but what was destructive to the Church of God had ever proceeded. Who
would not have regarded with amazement such an unexpected work of God?

<span id="ix.xxiii-p10"></span>Joseph immediately complies with the
injunction of the Angel. This is another proof of the certainty of the
dream: for such promptitude of obedience plainly shows, that he had no
doubt whatever, that it was God who had enjoined him to take flight.
This eager haste may wear somewhat of the aspect of distrust: for the
flight *by night* had some appearance of alarm. But it is not difficult
to frame an excuse. He saw that God had appointed a method of safety
which was low and mean: and he concludes that he is at liberty to take
flight in such a state of alarm as is commonly produced by extreme
danger. Our fear ought always to be regulated by the divine intimations.
If it agrees with them, it will not be opposed to faith.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p11"></span>*Be thou there until I have told thee* By
these words the Angel declares, that the life of the child will, even in
future, be the object of the divine care. Joseph needed to be thus
strengthened, so as to conclude with certainty, that God would not only
conduct him in the journey, but that, during his banishment, God would
be his constant protector. And in this way God was pleased to allay many
anxieties, with which the heart of the good man must have been
perplexed, so that he enjoyed serenity of mind during his sojourn in
Egypt. But for this, not a moment would have passed without numerous
temptations, when he saw himself excluded not only from the inheritance
promised by God to all his saints, — but from the temple, from
sacrifices, from a public profession of his faiths, — and was living
among the worst enemies of God, and in a deep gulf of superstitions. He
carried with him, indeed, in the person of the child, all the blessings
which the Fathers had hoped to enjoy, or which the Lord had promised to
them: but as he had not yet made such proficiency in faith, and in the
knowledge of Christ, he needed to be restrained by this injunction, *Be
thou there until I have told thee,* that he might not be displeased at
languishing in banishment from his country among the Egyptians.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p13"></span>**15.** *Out of Egypt have I called my
Son* Matthew says that a prediction was fulfilled. Some have thought,
that the intention of the prophet was different from what is here
stated, and have supposed the meaning to be, that the Jews act foolishly
in opposing and endeavoring to oppress the Son of God, because the
Father *hath called him out of Egypt* In this way, they grievously
pervert the words of the prophet, (<span id="ix.xxiii-p13.1"></span>[Ho
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p13.1"></span>,) the design of which is, to establish a
charge of ingratitude against the Jews, who, from their earliest
infancy, and from the commencement of their history, had found God to be
a kind and generous Father, and yet were provoking him by fresh
offenses. Beyond all question, the passage ought not to be restricted to
the person of Christ: and yet it is not tortured by Matthew, but
skilfully applied to the matter in hand.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p14"></span>The words of the prophet ought to be thus
interpreted: “When Israel was yet a child, I brought him out of that
wretched bondage in which he had been plunged. He was formerly like a
dead man, and Egypt served him for a grave; but I drew him out of it as
from the womb, and brought him into the light of life.” And justly does
the Lord speak in this manner; for that deliverance was a sort of birth
of the nation. Then were openly produced letters of adoption, when, by
the promulgation of the law, they became “the Lord’s portion,” (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p14.1"></span>[De
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p14.1"></span>,) “a royal priesthood, and a holy nation,”
(<span id="ix.xxiii-p14.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="ix.xxiii-p14.2"></span>;.md)
when they were separated from the other nations, and when, in short, God
“set up his tabernacle” (<span id="ix.xxiii-p14.3"></span>[Le
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#011.md)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p14.3"></span>) to dwell in the midst of them. The words of
the prophet import, that the nation was rescued from Egypt as from a
deep whirlpool of death. Now, what was the redemption brought by Christ,
but a resurrection from the dead, and the commencement of a new life?
The light of salvation had been almost extinguished, when God begat the
Church anew in the person of Christ. Then did the Church come out of
Egypt in its head, as the whole body had been formerly brought out.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p15"></span>This analogy prevents us from thinking it
strange, that any part of Christ’s childhood was passed in Egypt. The
grace and power of God became more illustrious, and his wonderful
purpose was more distinctly seen, when light came out of darkness, and
life out of hell. Otherwise, the sense of the flesh might have broken
out here in contemptuous language, *“*Truly a Redeemer is to come out of
Egypt!”  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) Matthew therefore
reminds us, that it is no strange or unwonted occurrence for God to call
his Son out of that country; and that it serves rather to confirm our
faith, that, as on a former occasion, so now again, the Church of God
comes out of Egypt. There is this difference, however, between the two
cases. The whole nation was formerly shut up in the prison of Egypt;
while, in the second redemption, it was Christ, the head of the Church
alone, who was concealed there, but who carried the salvation and life
of all shut up in his own person.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p17"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p18"></span>**16.** *Then Herod when he saw* Matthew
speaks according to what Herod felt and thought about the matter. He
believed that the Magi had deceived him, because they did not choose to
take part in his wicked cruelty. He was rather taken in his own
trickery, — in his base pretense, that he too intended to pay homage to
the new King.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p19"></span>Josephus makes no mention of this
history. The only writer who mentions it is Macrobius, in the Second
Book of his *Saturnalia,* where, relating the jokes and taunts of
Augustus, he says: *When he heard that, by Herod’s command, the children
in Syria under two years of age had been slain, and that his own son had
been slain among the crowd, “I would rather,” said he, “have been
Herod’s hog than his son.”* But the authority of Matthew alone is
abundantly sufficient for us. Josephus certainly ought not to have
passed over a crime so worthy of being put on record. But there is the
less reason to wonder that he says nothing about the infants; for he
passes lightly over, and expresses in obscure language, an instance of
Herod’s cruelty not less shocking, which took place about the same time,
when he put to death all the Judges, who were called the Sanhedrim, that
hardly a remnant might remain of the stock of David. It was the same
dread, I have no doubt, that impelled him to both of these murders.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p20"></span>There is some uncertainty about the date.
 <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) Matthew says, that they were
slain *from two years old and under, according to the time which he had
inquired at the Magi:* from which we may infer that Christ had then
reached that age, or at least was not far from being two years old. Some
go farther, and conclude that Christ was about that age at the time when
the Magi came. But I contend that the one does not follow from the
other. With what terror Herod was seized when the report was widely
spread about a new king who had been borne,  <span
id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) we have lately seen. Fear prevented
him at that time from employing a traitor, in a secret manner, to make
an investigation.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) There is no
reason to wonder that he was restrained, for some time, from the
commission of a butchery so hateful and shocking, particularly while the
report about the arrival of the Magi was still *recent.* It is certainly
probable, that he revolved the crime in his mind, but delayed it till a
convenient opportunity should occur. It is even possible, that he first
murdered the Judges, in order to deprive the people of their leaders,
and thus to compel them to look upon the crime as one for which there
was no remedy.  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md)

<span id="ix.xxiii-p25"></span>We may now conclude it to be a frivolous
argument, on which those persons rest, who argue, that Christ was two
years old when he was worshipped by the Magi, because, *according to the
time when the star appeared,* Herod slew the children who were a little
below two years old. Such persons take for granted, without any proper
ground, that the star did not appear till after that the Virgin had
brought forth her child. It is far more probable, that they had been
warned early, and that they undertook the journey close upon the time of
the birth of Christ, that they might see the child when lately born, in
the cradle, or in his mother’s lap. It is a very childish imagination
that, because they came from an unknown country, and almost from another
world, they had spent about two years on the road. The conjectures
stated by Osiander  <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) are too
absurd to need refutation.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p27"></span>But there is no inconsistency in the
thread of the story which I propose, — that the Magi came when the
period of child-bearing was not yet over, and inquired after *a king who
had been born,* not after one who was already two years old; that, after
they had returned to their own country, Joseph fled by night, but still
in passing discharged a pious duty at Jerusalem, (for in so populous a
city, where there was a constant influx of strangers from every quarter,
he might be secure from danger;) that, after he had departed to Egypt,
Herod began to think seriously about his own danger, and the ulcer of
revenge, which he had nourished in his heart for more than a year and
half, at length broke out. The adverb *then* (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p27.1"></span>τότε) does not always denote in Scripture
uninterrupted time,  <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) but
frequently occurs, when there is a great distance between the events.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p29"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p30"></span>**18.** A *voice was heard in Ramah* It
is certain that the prophet describes (<span
id="ix.xxiii-p30.1"></span>[Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.xxiii-p30.1"></span>) the destruction of the tribe of Benjamin,
which took place in his time: for he had foretold that the tribe of
Judah would be cut off, to which was added the half of the tribe of
Benjamin. He puts the mourning into the mouth of Rachel, who had been
long dead. This is a *personification, (*<span
id="ix.xxiii-p30.2"></span>προσωποποιϊα*,)* which has a powerful
influence in moving the affections. It was not for the mere purpose of
ornamenting his style, that Jeremiah employed rhetorical embellishments.
There was no other way of correcting the hardness and stupidity of the
living, than by arousing the dead, as it were, from their graves, to
bewail those divine chastisements, which were commonly treated with
derision. The prediction of Jeremiah having been accomplished at that
time, Matthew does not mean that it foretold what Herod would do, but
that the coming of Christ occasioned a renewal of that mourning, which
had been experienced, many centuries before, by the tribe of Benjamin.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p31"></span>He intended thus to meet a prejudice
which might disturb and shake pious minds. It might be supposed, that no
salvation could be expected from him, on whose account, as soon as he
was born, infants were murdered; nay more, that it was an unfavorable
and disastrous omen, that the birth of Christ kindled a stronger flame
of cruelty than usually burns amidst the most inveterate wars. But as
Jeremiah promises a restoration, where a nation has been cut off, down
to their little children, so Matthew reminds his readers, that this
massacre would not prevent Christ from appearing shortly afterwards as
the Redeemer of the whole nation: for we know that the whole chapter in
Jeremiah, in which those words occur, is filled with the most delightful
consolations. Immediately after the mournful complaint, he adds,

<span id="ix.xxiii-p32"></span>“Refrain thy voice from weeping, and
thine eyes from tears: for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord,
and they shall come again from the land of the enemy. And there is hope
in thine end, saith the Lord, that thy children shall come again to
thine own border,” (<span id="ix.xxiii-p32.1"></span>[Jer.
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#017)<span id="ix.xxiii-p32.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xxiii-p33"></span>Such was the resemblance between the
former calamity which the tribe of Benjamin had sustained, and the
second calamity, which is here recorded. Both were a prelude of the
salvation which was shortly to arrive.  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc31031.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p4.1"></span>Mittens
interfecit;” — “sending slew.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc31031.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>Et en
toutes les marches d'icelle;” — “and in all the marches thereof.”

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc31031.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p16.1"></span>Qui
croira que le Redempteur viene d'Egypte?” — “Who will believe that a
Redeemer will come out of Egypt?“

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc31031.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p21"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxiii-p21.1"></span>Toutefois on ne sait pas certainement si ce
fut en mesme temps.” — “However, it is not known certainly if it was at
the same time.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc31031.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p22.1"></span>Quand
les premieres nouvelles vindrent de la naissance du nouveau Roy, et que
le bruit en commenca a courir;” — “when the first news arrived of the
birth of the new King, and when the noise about it began to spread.”

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc31031.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p23.1"></span>La
crainte l'empescha lors d'envoyer secretement quelque traistre pour
espier comme tout alloit;” — “fear prevented him at that time from
employing some traitor to spy how all went.”

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc31031.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p24"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p24.1"></span>Et
pent estre qu'il a premierement mis a mort les Juges, afin qu'apres
avoir oste au poure peuple ses conducteurs, il peust sans contredit luy
tenir le pie sui la gorge, et en faire a son plaisir.” — “And perhaps he
first put the Judges to death, that, after having deprived the wretched
people of their leaders, he might without opposition, set his foot on
their throat, and do with them at his pleasure.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc31031.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p26"></span> *Andrew Osiander,* (grandfather of Dr
Andrew Osiander, a Lutheran divine,) author of several works which
gained him not a little celebrity, among which is <span
id="ix.xxiii-p26.1"></span>*Harmonia Evangelica* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc31031.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p28.1"></span>Sans
qu'il y ait rien entre-deux;” — “without there being anything between
the two,”

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc31031.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.xxiii-p34.1"></span>C'est
que l'une et l'autre a est, comme le message apportant les nouvelles du
salut qui approchoit.” — “It is, that both were, as it were, the message
bringing the tidings of the salvation which was approaching.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 2:19-23](cc31032.md)
