[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31053)  [Next](cc31055.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:27-30

<span id="ix.xlvi-p2"></span><span id="ix.xlvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027.md)<span id="ix.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p3"></span>**27**.** **You have heard that it was said
to the ancients, Thou shalt not commit adultery. **28**.** **But I say
to you, That whoever shall look upon a woman to lust after her, hath
already committed adultery with her in his heart. **29**.** **And if thy
right eye shall be a stumbling block  <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404.md) to thee, pluck it out, and cast it
from thee: for it is better for thee that one of thy members perish, and
that thy whole body be not thrown into hell. **30**.** **And if thy
right hand shall be a hindrance to thee, cut it off, and cast it from
thee: for it is better that one of thy members perish, and that thy
whole body be not thrown into hell.

<span id="ix.xlvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xlvi-p6"></span><span id="ix.xlvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p7"></span>**<span id="ix.xlvi-p7.1"></span>[Matthew
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027.md)<span id="ix.xlvi-p7.1"></span>.**
*Thou shalt not commit adultery.* Christ proceeds with his subject, and
shows, that the law of God not only has authority over the life, in a
political view, to form the outward manners, but that it requires pure
and holy affections of the heart. We must remember what I have already
stated, that though Christ quotes the very words of the law, it is the
gross and false meaning, which had been put upon it by dishonest
interpreters, that he blames. He has already told us, that he did not
come as a new Legislator, but as the faithful expounder of a law which
had been already given. It might be objected that, through long
practice, that interpretation had grown old. Christ expressly admits
this, but meets it by saying, that the antiquity of an error ought not
to be allowed to plead in its favor.

<span id="ix.xlvi-p8"></span><span id="ix.xlvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p9"></span>**28.** *Whoever shall look upon a woman.*
The design of Christ was to condemn generally the lust of the flesh. He
says, that not only those who have seduced their neighbors’ wives, but
those who have polluted their eyes by an immodest look, are adulterers
before God. This is a *synec-doche:*  <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405.md) for not only the eyes, but even the
concealed flames of the heart, render men guilty of adultery.
Accordingly, Paul makes chastity (<span id="ix.xlvi-p10.2"></span>[1Co
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)<span id="ix.xlvi-p10.2"></span>.md)
to consist both in body and in mind. But Christ reckoned it enough to
refute the gross mistake which was prevalent: for they thought that it
was only necessary to guard against outward adultery. As it is generally
by the wantonness of the eyes that temptations are presented to the
mind, and as lust enters, as it were, by that door, Christ used this
mode of speaking, when he wished to condemn lust: which is evident from
the expression, *to lust after her.* This teaches us also, that not only
those who form a deliberate purpose of fornication, but those who admit
any polluted thoughts, are reckoned adulterers before God. The hypocrisy
of the Papists, therefore, is too gross and stupid, when they affirm
that lust is not a sin, until it gain the full consent of the heart. But
we need not wonder, that they make sin to be so small a matter: for
those who ascribe righteousness to the merit of works must be very dull
and stupid in judging of their sins.

<span id="ix.xlvi-p11"></span><span id="ix.xlvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p12"></span>**29.** *If thy right eye shall be a
stumbling-block to thee.* It might be thought that, considering the
weakness of the flesh and of nature, Christ pressed too severely on men,
and therefore he anticipates all such complaints. The general meaning
is, that however difficult, or severe, or troublesome, or harsh, any
commandment of God may be, yet no excuse ought to be pleaded on those
grounds, because the justice of God ought to stand higher in our
estimation, than all that we reckon most precious and valuable. “You
have no right to object to me, that you can scarcely turn your eyes in
any direction, without being suddenly drawn away by some temptation: for
you ought rather to part with your eyes, than to depart from the
commandments of God.” And yet Christ does not mean, that we must
mutilate our body, in order to obey God: but as all would readily wish,
that they should not be restrained from the free use of their senses,
Christ employs an exaggerated  <span id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406.md)
form of speech to show, that whatever hinders us from yielding that
obedience to God which he requires in his law, ought to be cut off. And
he does so expressly, because men allow themselves too much liberty in
that respect. If the mind were pure, the eyes and hands would be
obedient to it; for it is certain, that they have no movement of their
own. But here we are deeply to blame. We are so far from being as
careful as we ought to be, to avoid allurements, that we rather provoke
our senses to wickedness by allowing them unbounded liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_404"></span>[405](cc31054.htm#fr_404.md) <span
id="ix.xlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xlvi-p4.1"></span>Si ton
ceil dextre to fait chopper.” — “If thy right eye makes thee stumble.”

<span id="fn_405"></span>[406](cc31054.htm#fr_405.md) <span
id="ix.xlvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.xlvi-p10.1"></span>C'est
une facon de parler qu'on appelle Synecdoche, quand on prend une artie
our le tout.” — “It is a way of speaking which is called Synecdoche,
when a part is taken for the whole.”

<span id="fn_406"></span>[407](cc31054.htm#fr_406.md) <span
id="ix.xlvi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xlvi-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xlvi-p13.1"></span>Par une
facon de parler *hyperbolique,* (c’est a dire, *excessive:”)* — “by a
*hyperbolical*, that is, an *excessive* mode of speaking.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:31-32;Luke 16:18](cc31055.md)
