[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31057)  [Next](cc31059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.l"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:42; LUKE 6:34-35

<span id="ix.l-p2"></span><span id="ix.l-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042.md)<span id="ix.l-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p3"></span><span id="ix.l-p3.1"></span>[Luke
6:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034.md)<span id="ix.l-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p4"></span>**42**.** **Give to him that asketh of thee:
and from him who desires to borrow from thee, turn not thou away.

<span id="ix.l-p5"></span>**34**.** **If you shall lend to those from
whom you hope that you will receive, what kindness will it be in you?
for sinners also lend to sinners, that they may receive the like.
**35**.** **Lend ye, expecting nothing again, and your reward shall be
great.

<span id="ix.l-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.l-p7"></span><span id="ix.l-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.l-p8.2"></span>[Matthew
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042.md)<span id="ix.l-p8.2"></span>.**
*Give to him that asketh of thee.* Though the words of Christ, which are
related by Matthew, appear to command us to give to all without
discrimination, yet we gather a different meaning from Luke*,* who
explains the whole matter more fully. First, it is certain, that it was
the design of Christ to make his disciples generous, but not prodigals
and it would be a foolish prodigality to scatter at random what the Lord
has given us. Again, we see the rule which the Spirit lays down in
another passage for liberality. Let us therefore hold, first, that
Christ exhorts his disciples to be liberal and generous; and next, that
the way of doing it is, not to think that they have discharged their
duty when they have aided a few persons, but to study to be kind to all,
and not to be weary of giving, so long as they have the means.

<span id="ix.l-p9"></span>Besides, that no man may cavil at the words of
Matthew, let us compare what is said by Luke. Christ affirms that when,
in lending or doing other kind offices, we look to the mutual reward, we
perform no part of our duty to God. He thus draws a distinction between
charity and carnal friendship. Ungodly men have no disinterested
affection for each other, but only a mercenary regard: and thus, as
Plato judiciously observes, every man draws on himself that affection
which he entertains for others. But Christ demands from his own people
disinterested beneficence, and bids them study to aid the poor, from
whom nothing can be expected in return. We now see what it is, to have
an open hand to petitioners. It is to be generously disposed to all who
need qur assistance, and who cannot return the favor.

<span id="ix.l-p10"></span><span id="ix.l-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p11"></span>**<span id="ix.l-p11.2"></span>[Luke
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035.md)<span id="ix.l-p11.2"></span>.**
*Lend, expecting nothing again.* It is a mistake to confine this
statement to usury, as if Christ only forbade his people to be usurers.
The preceding part of the discourse shows clearly, that it has a wider
reference. After having explained what wicked men are wont to do, — to
love their friends, — to assist those from whom they expect some
compensations, — to lend to persons like themselves, that they may
afterwards receive the like from them, — Christ proceeds to show how
much more he demands from his people, — to love their enemies, to show
disinterested kindness, to lend without expecting a return. We now see,
that the word *nothing* is improperly explained as referring to usury,
or to any interest that is added to the principal:  <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417.md) whereas Christ only exhorts us to
perform our duties freely, and tells us that mercenary acts are of no
account in the sight of God.  <span id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418.md)
Not that he absolutely condemns all acts of kindness which are done in
the hope of a reward; but he shows that they are of no weight as a
testimony of charity; because he alone is truly beneficent to his
neighbors, who is led to assist them without any regard to his own
advantage, but looks only to the necessities of each. Whether it is ever
lawful for Christians to derive profit from lending money, I shall not
argue at greater length under this passage, lest I should seem to raise
the question unseasonably out of a false meaning which I have now
refuted. Christ’s meaning, as I have already explained, is simply this:
When believers lend, they ought to go beyond heathens; or, in other
words, they ought to exercise pure liberality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_417"></span>[418](cc31058.htm#fr_417.md) <span
id="ix.l-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p12"></span> “<span id="ix.l-p12.2"></span>De l’usure et
accroissement qui vient outre le principal;” — “of usury and increase
which comes beyond the principal.” On the lawfulnesss of lending money
at interest, the most enlightened men, at the time when our author
wrote, were strangley divded in sentiment. His own views were unfolded
in a small work, which has been admired by competent judges for the
purity of French style, and for enlarged views of *Political Economy.*
After suffering not a little obloquy for his manner of applying the law
of God to commercial questions, he has been vindicated by the unanimous
opinion of posterity; and his performance, having served its purpose,
has been quietly laid on the shelf. We allude to it only to account for
the rapid and cursory manner in which he disposes here of a question, on
which all who wish to know his opinions may satisfy themselves by
perusing his own complete and elaborate statement of the argument. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_418"></span>[419](cc31058.htm#fr_418.md) <span
id="ix.l-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ix.l-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.l-p13.1"></span>Que les
plaisirs lesquels les hommes se font les uns aux autres, sous esperance
de recompense, ne viennent point en conte devant Dieu.” — “That the
gratifications which men give to each other, in expectation of reward,
come not into reckoning before God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:43-48;Luke 6:27-36](cc31059.md)
