[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31069)  [Next](cc31071) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 7:6

<span id="ix.lxii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="ix.lxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxii-p3"></span>**6**.** **Give not that which is holy to
the dogs, and do not throw down your pearls before swine, lest these
trample them under their feet, and those turn and tear you.

<span id="ix.lxii-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxii-p5"></span><span id="ix.lxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxii-p6"></span>**6.** *Give not that which is holy* It is
unnecessary to repeat oftener, that Matthew gives us here detached
sentences, which ought not to be viewed as a continued discourse. The
present instruction is not at all connected with what came immediately
before, but is entirely separate from it. Christ reminds the Apostles,
and, through them, all the teachers of the Gospel, to reserve the
treasure of heavenly wisdom for the children of God alone, and not to
expose it to unworthy and profane despisers of his word.

<span id="ix.lxii-p7"></span>But here a question arises: for he
afterwards commanded to *preach the Gospel to every creature,* (<span
id="ix.lxii-p7.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="ix.lxii-p7.1"></span>;)
and Paul says, that the preaching of it is *a deadly savor to wicked
men,* (<span id="ix.lxii-p7.2"></span>[2Co
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ix.lxii-p7.2"></span>;)
and nothing is more certain than that it is every day held out to
unbelievers, by the command of God, for a testimony, that they may be
rendered the more inexcusable. I reply: As the ministers of the Gospel,
and those who are called to the office of teaching, cannot distinguish
between the children of God and *swine,* it is their duty to present the
doctrine of salvation indiscriminately to all. Though many may appear to
them, at first, to be hardened and unyielding, yet charity forbids that
such persons should be immediately pronounced to be desperate. It ought
to be understood, that *dogs* and *swine* are names given not to every
kind of debauched men, or to those who are destitute of the fear of God
and of true godliness, but to those who, by clear evidences, have
manifested a hardened contempt of God, so that their disease appears to
be incurable. In another passage, Christ places the *dogs* in contrast
with the elect people of God and the household of faith, *It is not
proper to take the children’s bread, and give it to dogs,* (<span
id="ix.lxii-p7.3"></span>[Mt
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027)<span id="ix.lxii-p7.3"></span>.)
But by *dogs* and *swine* he means here those who are so thoroughly
imbued with a wicked contempt of God, that they refuse to accept any
remedy.

<span id="ix.lxii-p8"></span>Hence it is evident, how grievously the
words of Christ are tortured by those who think that he limits the
doctrine of the Gospel to those only who are teachable and
well-prepared. For what will be the consequence, if nobody is invited by
pious teachers, until by his obedience he has anticipated the grace of
God? On the contrary, we are all by nature unholy, and prone to
rebellion. The remedy of salvation must be refused to none, till they
have rejected it so basely when offered to them, as to make it evident
that they are reprobate and *self-condemned, (*<span
id="ix.lxii-p8.1"></span>αὐτοκατάκριτοι*,)* as Paul says of *heretics,*
(<span id="ix.lxii-p8.2"></span>Titus 3:11.)

<span id="ix.lxii-p9"></span>There are two reasons, why Christ forbade
that the Gospel should be offered to lost despisers. It is an open
profanation of the mysteries of God to expose them to the taunts of
wicked men. Another reason is, that Christ intended to comfort his
disciples, that they might not cease to bestow their labors on the elect
of God in teaching the Gospel, though they saw it wantonly rejected by
wicked and ungodly men. His meaning is lest this inestimable treasure
should be held in little estimation, *swine* and *dogs* must not be
permitted to approach it. There are two designations which Christ
bestows on the doctrine of salvation: he calls it *holy,* and compares
it to *pearls*. Hence we learn how highly we ought to esteem this
doctrine.

<span id="ix.lxii-p10"></span>*Lest these trample them under their feet*
Christ appears to distinguish between the *swine* and the *dogs:*
attributing brutal stupidity to the *swine,* and rage to the *dogs* And
certainly, experience shows, that there are two such classes of
despisers of God. Whatever is taught in Scripture, for instance, about
the corrupt nature of man, free justification, and eternal election, is
turned by many into an encouragement to sloth and to carnal indulgence.
Such persons are fitly and justly pronounced to be *swine* Others,
again, *tear* the pure doctrine, and its ministers, with sacrilegious
reproaches, as if they threw away all desire to do well, all fear of
God, and all care for their salvation. Although he employs both names to
describe the incurable opponents of the Word of God, yet, by a twofold
comparison, he points out briefly in what respect the one differs from
the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 7:7-11; Luke 11:5-13](cc31071)
