[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31044)  [Next](cc31046) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 4:18-25; MARK 1:16-20; LUKE
5:1-11

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
4:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
1:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p4"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
5:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p5"></span>**18**.** **And Jesus, walking near the
sea of Galilee, saw two brothers, Simon surnamed Peter, and Andrew his
brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishers.
**19**.** **And he saith to them, Follow me, and I will make you fishers
of men. **20**.** **And they, having left their nets, immediately
followed him. **21**.** **And advancing thence, he saw other two
brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the ship
with Zebedee their father, mending their nets: and he called them.
**22**.** **And they immediately, having left the ship and their father,
followed him. **23**.** **And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in
their synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and healing
every disease, and every illness among the people. **24**.** **And the
report of him spread into the whole of Syria: and they brought to him
all who were ill and afflicted with various diseases and torments, and
demoniancs, and lunatics, and those that had palsy, and he healed them.
**25**.** **And great multitudes followed him from Galilee, and from
Decapolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and from the country
beyond Jordan.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p6"></span>**16**.** **Now, as he was walking near
the sea of Galilee, he seeth Simon and Andrew his brother, casting a net
into the sea: for they were fishers. **17**.** **And Jesus said to them,
Follow me, and I will make you to become fishers of men. **18**.** **And
immediately having left their nets, they followed him. **19**.** **And
advancing thence a little, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his
brother, who themselves also were mending their nets in the ship.
**20**.** **And immediately he called them: and they, having left their
father Zebedee in the ship with the workmen,  <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332) followed him.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p8"></span>**1**.** **And it happened, while the
crowd was pressing upon him, that they might hear the word of God, and
he stood near the lake of Gennesaret, **2**.** **And he saw two ships
standing  <span id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333) at the lake: and the
fishers had gone down out of them, and were washing their nets.
**3**.** **And entering into one of the ships, which was Simon’s, he
asked him to draw it a little from the land: and sitting down, he taught
the multitudes out of the ship. **4**.** **And when he ceased to speak,
he said to Simon, Pull out to the deep, and loose your nets for
catching. **5**.** **And Simon answering said to him, Master, laboring
through the whole night, we have taken nothing: yet at thy word I will
loose the net. **6**.** **And when they had done this, they inclosed a
great multitude of fishes: and their net was broken. **7**.** **And they
made signs to their companions, who were in the other ship, that they
might come and help them. And they came, and filled both the ships, so
that they were sinking. **8**.** **Which when Simon Peter had seen, he
fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a
sinful man.  <span id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334) **9**.** **For
astonishment had overpowered him, and all were with him, on account of
the draught of fishes which they had taken: **10**.** **And in like
manner James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were companions of Simon.
And Jesus saith to Simon, Fear not: for henceforth thou shalt catch men.
**11**.** **And having brought the ships to land, and having left all,
they followed him.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p11"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p12"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p13"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>[Matthew
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p13.2"></span>.** *And Jesus walking.* As this history is
placed by Luke after the two miracles, which we shall afterwards see, an
opinion has commonly prevailed, that the miracle, which is here related
by him, was performed some time after that they had been called by
Christ.  <span id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) But the reason, which
they allege, carries little weight: for no fixed and distinct order of
dates was observed by the Evangelists in composing their narratives. The
consequence is, that they disregard the order of time, and satisfy
themselves with presenting, in a summary manner, the leading
transactions in the life of Christ. They attended, no doubt, to the
years, so as to make it plain to their readers, in what manner Christ
was employed, during the course of three years, from the commencement of
his preaching till his death. But miracles, which took place nearly
about the same time, are freely intermixed: which will afterwards appear
more clearly from many examples.  <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336)

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p16"></span>That it is the same history, which is
given by the three Evangelists, is proved by many arguments: but we may
mention one, which will be sufficient to satisfy any reader, who is not
contentious. All the three agree in stating, that Peter and Andrew,
James and John, were made apostles. If they had been previously called,
it would follow that they were apostates, who had forsaken their Master,
despised their calling, and returned to their former occupation. There
is only this difference between Luke and the other two, that he alone
relates the miracle, which the others omit. But it is not uncommon with
the Evangelists, to touch slightly one part of a transaction, and to
leave out many of the circumstances. There is, therefore, no absurdity
in saying, that a miracle, which is related by one, has been passed over
by the other two. And we must bear in mind what John says, that, out of
the innumerable miracles “which Jesus did*,”* (<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>[Joh
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>,) a part only has been selected, which was
sufficient to prove his divine power, and to confirm our faith in him.
There is therefore no reason to wonder, if the calling of the four
apostles is slightly touched by Matthew and Mark, while the occasion of
it is more fully explained by Luke.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p17"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p18"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>[Luke
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>.** *He stood near the lake.* Matthew and
Mark, according to the usual custom of their language, call it *the sea
of Galilee.* The proper name of this lake among the ancient Hebrews was
<span id="ix.xxxvii-p18.3"></span>כנרת, (*Chinnereth*;)  <span
id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) but, when the language became
corrupted, the word was changed to *Gennesaret.* Profane authors call it
*Gennesar;* and that part, which lay towards Galilee, was called by them
*the sea of Galilee.* The bank, which adjoined to Tiberias, received its
name from that city. Its breadth and situation will be more
appropriately discussed in another place. Let us now come to the fact
here related.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p20"></span>Luke says, that Christ entered into a
ship which belonged to Peter, and *withdrew to a moderate distance from
the land,* that he might more conveniently address from it the
multitudes, who flocked from various places to hear him; and that, after
discharging the office of teaching, he exhibited a proof of his divine
power by a miracle. It was no unusual thing, indeed, that fishers cast
their nets, on many occasions, with little advantage: and that all their
fruitless toil was afterwards recompensed by one successful throw. But
it was proved to be a miracle by this circumstance, that they had taken
nothing during the whole night, (which, however, is more suitable for
catching fish,) and that suddenly *a great multitude of fishes* was
collected into their nets, sufficient to fill the ships. Peter and his
companions, therefore, readily conclude that a *take,* so far beyond the
ordinary quantity, was not accidental, but was bestowed on them by a
divine interposition.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p21"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p22"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>[Luke
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#005)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p22.1"></span>.** *Master, toiling all the night, we have
taken nothing.* The reason why Peter calls him *Master* unquestionably
is, that he knows Christ to be accustomed to discharge the office of a
*Teacher,* and is moved with reverence toward him. But he has not yet
made such progress as to deserve to be ranked among his disciples: for
our sentiments concerning Christ do not render him sufficient honor,
unless we embrace his doctrine by the obedience of faith, and know what
he requires from us. He has but a slender perception — if he has any at
all — of the value of the Gospel; but the deference which he pays to
Christ is manifested by this, that, when worn out by fruitless toil, he
commences anew what he had already attempted in vain. Yet it cannot be
denied, that he highly esteemed Christ, and had the highest respect for
his authority. But a particular instance of faith, rendered to a single
command of Christ, would not have made Peter a Christian, or given him a
place among the sons of God, if he had not been led on, from this first
act of submission, to a full obedience. But, as Peter yielded so readily
to the command of Christ, whom he did not yet know to be a Prophet or
the Son of God, no apology can be offered for our disgraceful conduct,
if, while we call him our *Lord,* and *King,* and *Judge,* (<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p22.2"></span>[Isa
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p22.2"></span>*,)* we do not move a finger to perform our
duty, to which we have ten times received his commands.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p23"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p24"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>[Luke
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#006)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p24.1"></span>.** *They inclosed a great multitude of
fishes.* The design of the miracle undoubtedly was, to make known
Christ’s divinity, and thus to induce Peter and others to become his
disciples. But we may draw from this instance a general instruction,
that we have no reason to be afraid lest our labor should not be
attended by the blessing of God and desirable success, when it is
undertaken by the authority and guidance of Christ. Such was the
*multitude of fishes,* that *the ships were sinking,* and the minds of
the spectators were thus excited to admiration: for it must have been in
consequence of the divine glory of Christ manifested by this miracle,
that his authority was fully acknowledged.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p25"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p26"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>[Luke
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#008)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p26.1"></span>.** *Depart from me, O Lord.* Although men
are earnest in seeking the presence of God, yet, as soon as God appears,
they must be struck with terror, and almost rendered lifeless by dread
and alarm, until he administers consolation. They have the best reason
for calling earnestly on God, because they cannot avoid feeling that
they are miserable, while he is absent from them: and, on the other
hand, his presence is appalling, because they begin to feel that they
are nothing, and that they are overpowered by an immense mass of evils.
In this manner, Peter views Christ with reverence in the miracle, and
yet is so overawed by his majesty, that he does all he can to avoid his
presence. Nor was this the case with Peter alone: for we learn, from the
context, that *astonishment had overpowered all who were with him.*
Hence we see, that it is natural to all men to tremble at the presence
of God. And this is of advantage to us, in order to humble any foolish
confidence or pride that may be in us, provided it is immediately
followed by soothing consolation. And so Christ relieves the mind of
Peter by a mild and friendly reply, *saying to him, Fear not.* Thus
Christ sinks his own people in the grave, that he may afterwards raise
them to life.  <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338)

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p28"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p29"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>[Luke
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#010)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>.** *For afterwards thou shalt catch men.*
The words of Matthew are, *I will make you fishers of men;* and those of
Mark are, *I will cause that you may become fishers of men.* They teach
us, that Peter, and the other three, were not only gathered by Christ to
be his disciples, but were made apostles, or, at least, chosen with a
view to the apostleship. It is, therefore, not merely a general call to
faith, but a special call to a particular office, that is here
described. The duties of instruction, I do admit, are not yet enjoined
upon them; but still it is to prepare them for being instructors,  <span
id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339) that Christ receives and admits them
into his family. This ought to be carefully weighed; for all are not
commanded to leave their parents and their former occupation, and
literally  <span id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340) to follow Christ.
There are some whom the Lord is satisfied with having in his flock and
his Church, while he assigns to others their own station. Those who have
received from him a public office ought to know, that something more is
required from them than from private individuals. In the case of others,
our Lord makes no change as to the ordinary way of life; but he
withdraws those four disciples from the employment from which they had
hitherto derived their subsistence, that he may employ their labors in a
nobler office.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p32"></span>Christ selected rough mechanics, —
persons not only destitute of learning, but inferior in capacity, that
he might train, or rather renew them by the power of his Spirit, so as
to excel all the wise men of the world. He intended to humble, in this
manner, the pride of the flesh, and to present, in their persons, a
remarkable instance of spiritual grace, that we may learn to implore
from heaven the light of faith, when we know that it cannot be acquired
by our own exertions. Again, though he chose unlearned and ignorant
persons, he did not leave them in that condition; and, therefore, what
he did ought not to be held by us to be an example, as if we were now to
ordain pastors, who were afterwards to be trained to the discharge of
their office. We know the rule which he prescribes for us, by the mouth
of Paul that none ought to be called to it, unless they are *“*apt to
teach,” (<span id="ix.xxxvii-p32.1"></span>[1Ti
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p32.1"></span>.) When our Lord chose persons of this
description it was not because he preferred ignorance to learning as
some fanatics do, who are delighted with their own ignorance, and fancy
that, in proportion as they hate literature, they approach the nearer to
the apostles. He resolved at first, no doubt, to choose contemptible
persons, in order to humble the pride of those who think that heaven is
not open to the unlearned; but he afterwards gave to those fishers, as
an associate in their office, Paul, who had been carefully educated from
his childhood.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p33"></span>As to the meaning of the metaphor,
*fishers of men,* there is no necessity for a minute investigation. Yet,
as it was drawn from the present occurrence, the allusion which Christ
made to *fishing,* when he spoke of the preaching of the Gospel, was
appropriate: for men stray and wander in the world, as in a great and
troubled sea, till they are gathered by the Gospel. The history related
by the Evangelist John (<span id="ix.xxxvii-p33.1"></span>[Joh
1:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#037)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p33.1"></span>) differs from this: for Andrew, who had
been one of John’s disciples, was handed over by him to Christ, and
afterwards brought his brother along with him. At that time, they
embraced him as their master, but were afterwards elevated to a higher
rank.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p34"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p35"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p35.2"></span>[Matthew
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#022)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p35.2"></span>.** *And they immediately left the ship.*
The *first* thing that strikes us here is the power of Christ’s voice.
Not that his voice alone makes so powerful an impression on the hearts
of men: but those whom the Lord is pleased to lead and draw to himself,
are inwardly addressed by his Spirit, that they may obey his voice. The
*second* is, the commendation bestowed on the docility and ready
obedience of his disciples, who prefer the call of Christ to all worldly
affairs. The ministers of the Word ought, in a particular manner, to be
directed by this example, to lay aside all other occupations, and to
devote themselves unreservedly to the Church, to which they are
appointed.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p36"></span><span id="ix.xxxvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p37"></span>**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p37.1"></span>[Matthew
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p37.1"></span>.** *And Jesus went about all Galilee.* The
same statement is again made by Matthew in another place, **(**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p37.2"></span>[Mt
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p37.2"></span>**.)** But though Christ was constantly
employed in performing almost innumerable miracles, we ought not to
think it strange, that they are again mentioned, twice or thrice, in a
general manner. In the words of Matthew we ought, first, to observe,
that Christ never remained in one place, but scattered every where the
seed of *the Gospel.* Again, Matthew calls it *the Gospel of the
kingdom,* by which *the kingdom* of God is established among men for
their salvation. True and eternal happiness is thus distinguished from
the prosperity and joys of the present life.

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p38"></span>When Matthew says, that Christ *healed
every disease,* the meaning is, that he healed every *kind* of disease.
We know, that all who were diseased were not cured; but there was no
class of diseases, that was ever presented to him, which he did not
*heal.* An enumeration is given of particular kinds of *diseases,* in
which Christ displayed his power. *Demoniacs* (<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p38.1"></span>διαμονιζομένοι) is a name given in
Scripture, not to all indiscriminately who are tormented by the devil,
but to those who, by a secret vengeance of God, are given up to Satan,
so that he holds possession of their minds and of their bodily senses.
*Lunatics* (<span id="ix.xxxvii-p38.2"></span>σεληνιαζομένοι)  <span
id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341) is the name given to those, in whom
the strength of the disease increases or diminishes, according to the
waxing or waning of the moon, such as those who are afflicted with
epilepsy,  <span id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) or similar diseases.
As we know, that diseases of this sort cannot be healed by natural
means, it follows that, when Christ miraculously *healed them,* he
proved his divinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_332"></span>[333](cc31045.htm#fr_332) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p7"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>Avec
les ouvriers.”

<span id="fn_333"></span>[334](cc31045.htm#fr_333) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p9"></span> **“**<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>Stantes;” — “<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p9.2"></span>et voyant deux nasselles qui estoyent pres du
lac;” — “and seeing two ships which were near the lake.”

<span id="fn_334"></span>[335](cc31045.htm#fr_334) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p10"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>Homo
peccator;” — “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p10.2"></span>homme pecheur;” — “a man
a sinner.”

<span id="fn_335"></span>[336](cc31045.htm#fr_335) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p14.1"></span>Quelque temps apresque Jesus Christ ent
appelle a soy Pierre, Andre, Jean, et Jaques.” — “Some time after that
Jesus Christ had called to himself Peter, Andrew, John, and James.”

<span id="fn_336"></span>[337](cc31045.htm#fr_336) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>Ils
ne s'amusent pas, esplucher de pres lequel est le premier, ou le
*second.”* — *“They* do not give themselves the trouble of investigating
closely which is first or second.”

<span id="fn_337"></span>[338](cc31045.htm#fr_337) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p19"></span> *Chinnereth* occurs in Joshua, (<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>[Jos
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#035)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>,) as the name of an adjoining city, from
which the lake probably derived its name. In the French copy, our author
gives it *Cinerot,* or, as we have it, (<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>[Jos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002)<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p19.2"></span>,) *Chinneroth.* But that word contains a
*Vau,* which is here wanting: though it must be owned that, when it is
connected with a *Cholem* point, that letter is often inserted, or left
out, according to the pleasure of the writer. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_338"></span>[339](cc31045.htm#fr_338) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>Et
c'est la coustume du Seigneur d'abbattre les siens, et comme les plonger
dedans le sepulcher, afin de les vivifier puis apres.” — “And it is
customary with the Lord to strike down his own people, and, as it were,
to sink them in the grave, that he may raise them to life afterwards.”

<span id="fn_339"></span>[340](cc31045.htm#fr_339) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p30"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p30.1"></span>Il
les prend en sa compagnie et conversation domestique, afin de les
faconner a enseigner puis apres les autres.” — “He takes them into his
society and private conversation, in order to prepare them afterwards to
instruct others.”

<span id="fn_340"></span>[341](cc31045.htm#fr_340) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p31"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>Pour
suivre Christ des pieds, c'est a dire exterieurement;” — “to follow
Christ with the feet, that is to *say,* externally.”

<span id="fn_341"></span>[342](cc31045.htm#fr_341) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p39"></span> Σεληνιάζομαι, like the adjective
σεληνιαχὸς, is derived from σελήνη, *the moon.* Among, the Greeks and
Romans, as well as among the Jews, certain violent diseases, the
variations of which could not be easily explained, were supposed to be
affected by the phases of *the moon.* Till lately, mental derangement
was universally believed among ourselves to be influenced by similar
causes; if indeed there be not some who still defend that opinion by
plausible arguments. Scripture was not. intended to determine questions
of physical science, in which inductive reasoning is a sufficient guide,
but to declare those truths, which could never have been known without
an express revelation. The term σεληνιαζομένοι, in this and similar
passages, does not imply, that the sacred writers supported the common
opinion, any more than the English word *lunatic,* used with equal
freedom by philosophers and by the unlearned, countenances an exploded
theory, — any more, in short, than the popular use of the phrases, *the
rising and setting of the sun,* expresses a belief that it is the motion
of the sun, and not of the earth, that produces the succession of day
and night. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_342"></span>[343](cc31045.htm#fr_342) <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxvii-p40"></span> “<span
id="ix.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>Comitiali morbo.” The Romans gave the name
of <span id="ix.xxxvii-p40.2"></span>*comitialis morbus* to this
disease, in consequence of the singular fact, that their <span
id="ix.xxxvii-p40.3"></span>*comitia,* or public assemblies, were
instantly broken up, when any one present was seized with a fit of
*epilepsy.* — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark 1:21-28;Luke 4:31-36](cc31046)
