[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31000)  [Next](cc31002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>THE

<span id="ii-p2"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p3"></span>All the writings of John Calvin are marked by
extraordinary vigor, learning, and judgment. Few of them are so well
known as the institutes of the christian religion — a systematic
treatise, which, though written at the early age of twenty-four, was
universally acknowledged to be a production of the highest ability.
Concise and luminous, powerful in argument, scriptural, devout and
practical, it has not been superseded by any later work. But the fame
which he acquired by the institutes was fully sustained by his
expository writings, which possess at least equal claims on the
attention of divines. They contributed powerfully to diffuse the pure
Gospel of Christ, commanded the applause of all the Reformed Churches,
and received even from enemies no mean commendation. More than a century
after his valuable life had closed, they occupied a place in every
theological library. The learned Matthew Poole, in the preface to his
Synopsis, apologizes for the small number of his quotations from them,
on the express ground that the Commentaries themselves, he had every
reason to believe, were in the hands of all his readers.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>This reputation, after having suffered a partial
eclipse, will soon, in all probability, regain its former brightness.
The first tendency to this improvement was discovered in a neighboring
country, where the distinguishing doctrines of Christianity had long
been supplanted by a creed little removed from infidelity. In Germany,
Biblical criticism is almost a national pursuit. That unconquerable
industry which had already crowned her scholars with laurels in Greek
and Roman literature, has given them as unquestionable a pre-eminence in
the field of sacred philology. Had such rare attainments been always
consecrated to the honor of the Redeemer, every good man would have
rejoiced. Unhappily, they were but too frequently employed in
maintaining the most dangerous errors, in opposing every inspired
statement which the mind of man is unable fully to comprehend, in
divesting religion of its spiritual and heavenly character, and in
undermining the whole fabric of revealed truth. But a gracious
Providence has raised up other men, whom, though we may not feel
ourselves at liberty to subscribe to all their views, we cannot but hail
as the friends of evangelical truth, and admire for their holy fortitude
in coming

<span id="ii-p5"></span>to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty,  
(<span id="ii-p5.2"></span>[Jud
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#023)<span id="ii-p5.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii-p6"></span>At the head of this illustrious band it is
almost superfluous to name Professor Tholuck of Halle, admitted by the
most competent judges, both in Britain and on the Continent, to be one
of the first biblical scholars of the age. Having been led by his own
researches, and by public events, to examine the writings of the
Reformer, he hastened to draw the attention of his countrymen to the
neglected treasures. His own Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans
afforded an opportunity which was eagerly embraced. Not satisfied with
this brief notice, he wrote an elaborate and masterly dissertation on
“The merits of Calvin as an Interpreter of the Holy Scriptures,” a
translation of which appeared shortly afterwards in the (American)
“Biblical Repository.” He superintended a handsome octavo edition of
Calvin’s Commentaries on the New Testament, printed at Berlin, and sold
at a moderate price. To another eminent interpreter he candidly awards
the honor of having led the way in this undertaking.  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) But he was one of the earliest to follow in
the path which had been marked out, and has labored, beyond all his
contemporaries, to make the Commentaries of Calvin more extensively
known, and more highly esteemed.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>Our Author has exerted a powerful influence on
all succeeding expositors. They have found their interest in listening
to his instructions, and have been more deeply indebted to him than is
generally known. Many valuable interpretations of passages of Scripture
appeared for the first time in his writings, and have ever since been
warmly approved. In other cases, the views which had been previously
held are placed by him in so strong a light as to remove every doubt,
and satisfy the most cautious inquiry. And yet the stores, from which so
much has been drawn, are far from being exhausted, nor is their value
greatly lowered by improvements which have been subsequently made. The
department of History presents an analogous case. Documents which had
been overlooked are carefully examined. Conflicting evidence is more
accurately weighed. Important transactions assume a new aspect, or, at
least, are altered in their subordinate details. Still, there are
historians, in whose narrative the great lines of truth are so
powerfully drawn, that the feebler, though more exact, delineations of
other men cannot supply their place.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>In the chief moral requisite for such a work
Calvin is excelled by none. He is an honest interpreter. No
consideration would have induced him to wrest the words of Scripture
from their plain meaning. Those who may question his conclusions cannot
trace them to an unworthy motive. Timid theologians will be occasionally
startled by his expositions. Though they may not absolutely impeach the
soundness of his doctrine, they will tremble for the fate of some
favorite theory or ingenious argument. With such minds he has no
sympathy. He examines the Scriptures with the humility of one who
*inquires at the oracle of God,* (<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>[2Sa
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023)<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>,.md) and
proclaims the reply with the faith of one who knows that the *word of
the Lord is tried,* (<span id="ii-p9.2"></span>[Ps
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030)<span id="ii-p9.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii-p10"></span>Intimately connected with this integrity of
purpose is the Catholic spirit which he constantly breathes. His labors
are dedicated to no sect, but to the cause of divine truth. If his
opinions do not find equal favor with all true Christians, they are made
to feel that he addresses them as brethren in Christ Jesus. In his eye
the Church of Christ is one. He never forgets the ties which unite all
believers to each other and to their exalted Head. Are there any whose
sentiments are hardly distinguishable from *those things which are most
surely believed among us,* (<span id="ii-p10.1"></span>[Lu
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001)<span id="ii-p10.1"></span>,.md) and
yet who associate with the name of *Calvinism* all that is stern and
repulsive? Let them follow the expositions of this *master in Israel.*
They will find the most remarkable peculiarities of his creed boldly
avowed, but accompanied by other revealed truths to which they had
supposed him to be indifferent, and by no ordinary earnestness of
practical exhortation. Amidst his severest denunciations of doctrinal
error, they will not fail to discover the same enlarged views and
Christian forbearance which animated the great apostle of the Gentiles.
Rarely will they behold that sentiment more beautifully exemplified,

<span id="ii-p11"></span>Grace be to all them that love our Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity,  
(<span id="ii-p11.2"></span>[Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024)<span id="ii-p11.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii-p12"></span>*Learning* ought not to be a prominent feature
in a work essentially popular. But the learning of Calvin manifests
itself in the most desirable manner, and adds great weight to his
interpretations. Of his acquaintance with Hebrew it is unnecessary now
to speak. His familiarity with the Greek language appears less in
observations on phrases, or allusions to the various renderings of some
passages, than in a close adherence to those shades of meaning which no
translation of the Scriptures can convey. Even when he appears to have
overlooked or mistaken the words, a reference to the original, which had
been studiously kept out of view, will justify the unexpected remark.
 <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

<span id="ii-p14"></span>Origen, Chrysostom, and other Greek Fathers,
were among his familiar authors. Classical writers are introduced on
every proper occasion, for illustrating a term, or a custom, or the
general principles of reasoning. Quotations are made from these writers,
and from some of their philosophical treatises, which are seldom even
consulted except by those who can read the language with considerable
freedom. To say nothing of the Stagyrite, every scholar knows, for
example, that no Greek prose offers more serious difficulties than the
idiomatic, though fascinating, style of Plato.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

<span id="ii-p16"></span>In that minute analysis which is peculiar to
modern criticism, Calvin may have been deficient. That he wanted the
skill necessary for such investigations is not so manifest. The absence
of those processes by which he arrived at his conclusions makes it
difficult to determine how far the subtle elements of language had
undergone his scrutiny. If we shall suppose him to have neglected these
matters, our astonishment must be the greater that the deductions of
recent inquirers should have been so largely anticipated. Conjectures
thrown out by Sir Isaac Newton were long afterwards verified by
experiments of extreme labor and delicacy. But Calvin speaks habitually
with a tone of confidence. We must therefore conclude that, like the
shrewd remarks to which the philosopher was pleased to give the name of
*conjectures,* his discoveries were reached by a shorter route, which
other minds could with difficulty follow.  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md)

<span id="ii-p18"></span>This extraordinary sagacity was accompanied by
another quality not less needed in an interpreter, a sound judgment,
which leaned neither to ancient usage nor to ingenious novelties, which
refused to bow to the authority of great names, and sternly rebuked the
most plausible sophistry when opposed to the plain and obvious meaning
of Scripture. He took a dispassionate and wide survey, not only of the
passage immediately under consideration, but of kindred expressions or
sentiments that were found in any of the inspired writers. It was left
to the industry of later times to collect parallels, and arrange them on
the margin of our Bibles, as an invaluable aid to interpretation. But
his own perusal of the sacred volume supplied him largely with such
materials, and enabled him to draw them out with instinctive readiness
as occasion required.

<span id="ii-p19"></span>As we pass along, we meet with direct
quotations, largely but appositely introduced, and tending to confirm
the views which he had adopted. Still more frequently we observe a
copious use of that phraseology which is peculiar to the sacred writers,
and which falls on the pious ear with refreshing melody. In him it rises
higher than that felicitous application of Scripture which our more
elegant writers have cultivated for the purpose of imparting a literary
charm to their compositions; for those beauties came to him unsought
while he was aiming at something higher than the mere ornaments of
diction, and the language of Scripture had been so thoroughly interwoven
with his ordinary style, that he must have been frequently unconscious
of its presence. To aid the reader in discovering those allusions, the
passages from which they have been taken are generally marked. The
references made by our Author himself may be supposed to be abundant,
and must have struck many persons as a prominent feature of his
writings; but in far more numerous cases, no clue was given to his
authorities, and some pains have been taken to supply the omissions.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>The Latin original has been scrupulously
followed. His own vernacular version gives us some idea of the freedom,
spirit, and elegance, with which he would have accommodated himself to
the taste of the English reader, if it had been executed in our
language. But a translator is not permitted to use the same liberties as
the author, and faithfulness demands that he shall adhere strictly to
the copy which is set before him. The meaning has been given without
addition or omission, and even the structure of the sentences has been
followed, so far as that could be done without violating the purity of
English idiom. To exhibit the peculiar excellencies of such a writer,
or, where that could not be done, to find in a modern tongue a suitable
equivalent, was no easy task. His admirably concise diction, and rapid
but masterly transitions, and above all, that rare felicity of
expression for which his severest judges have given him credit, render
it difficult to represent the style and manner of so great a master of
composition.

<span id="ii-p21"></span>All the assistance that could be derived from
our Author’s French version has been thankfully accepted. It would have
been unwise as well as ungrateful to leave out of view so authoritative
an exposition of his meaning, or to disregard the production of one
whose command of his native tongue is acknowledged by the ablest critics
to have anticipated the elegancies of a later age. “He wrote in Latin,”
says D’Alembert, “as well as is possible in a dead language, and in
French with a purity which was extraordinary for his time. This purity,
which is to the present day admired by our skillful critics, renders his
writings greatly superior to almost all of the same age; as the works of
Messieurs de Port Royal are still distinguished on the same account from
the barbarous rhapsodies of their opponents and contemporaries.” Amidst
the driest details of verbal criticism, there are frequent glimpses of
that eloquence which De Thou and other great men regarded with
admiration, and which, when aided by the living voice, must have told
powerfully on his hearers.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>It must be observed, however, that the Latin
and French texts have been treated apart, as if they had not proceeded
from the same pen, and have been separated by a broad line which meets
the eye of the reader. The old translators sometimes proceeded as if
they had not been aware of the vernacular copy, and at other times
blended it with the original in so strange a manner, that they appear to
follow a path of their own, while they are faithfully tracking the
Author’s footsteps. In the new translations prepared for the Calvin
Society, care has been taken to adhere scrupulously to the Latin text,
and at the same time to give the English reader the full benefit of
those illustrations which the Author thought fit to employ in submitting
the work to the perusal of his countrymen. The French translation has
been all along collated with the original; and whenever it contained
additional matter, or removed obscurity by greater copiousness of
language, or even when a striking phrase occurred, the passages have
been exhibited and translated at the bottom of the page.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>*Notes,* partly selected, but chiefly original,
have been added. Some are intended to illustrate a remote allusion, to
prevent a casual expression from being misunderstood, or to bring out
more clearly the Author’s meaning. Others are devoted to history, or to
biblical criticism. Those which have been written by myself, and for
which I must be held responsible, are marked. *Ed. All questions of a
doctrinal nature have been excluded from these Notes.* The publications
of the Calvin Translation Society are addressed to the whole Church of
Christ, and ought not to wear the badge of any of the sections into
which that Church is unhappily divided. In every thing that relates to
doctrine the Author has been left in full possession of the field.

<span id="ii-p24"></span>It will scarcely be supposed that every
interpretation contained in this work has my entire concurrence. The
great principles inculcated in the writings of Calvin have my cordial
approbation; and, indeed, I could scarcely name a writer with whose
views of Divine truth I more fully coincide. As a Commentator, ever
since I became acquainted with him, I have been accustomed to assign to
him the highest rank, and to receive his expositions with the deepest
respect. My labors on this and on a former occasion  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) led me to examine his opinions more closely
than before, and have raised him still more highly in my estimation.
There are some points on which I feel assured that he mistook the
meaning of Scripture; but almost all of them had been little
investigated in his day, and do not appear to have been subjected to his
usual severity of judgment. Many will wonder that he should contend so
earnestly for the identity of John’s baptism with Christ’s baptism,
instead of representing them to be two distinct ordinances, instituted
for separate purposes, and placed under totally different regulations:
but on this question the followers of Christ may agree to differ. It
will excite more general surprise to find the great Reformer maintaining
the right of the civil magistrate to punish heretics, and even to
inflict on them the last sentence of the law. Men far inferior to him in
learning and ability have avoided mistakes from which his powerful and
enlightened mind was not exempted. They ought to regard with admiration
and gratitude the conduct of a gracious Providence, which preserved his
creed so remarkably free from Romish errors, and enabled him to approach
so closely to the mind of the Holy Spirit.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>A may be expected to resemble other works which
bear the same title. Our Author’s delight in brevity, and his extreme
aversion to repeat what he had said before, would aid the influence of
other reasons for adopting this plan, which are stated by himself
towards the conclusion of *The Argument.* To meet one obvious
disadvantage of this arrangement, a Table of the passages expounded,
which may enable the reader easily to discover where the exposition is
to be found, becomes necessary. Such a Table, together with a list of
the passages taken from other books of Scripture which are quoted or
illustrated in this work, and a copious Index to the subjects of which
it treats, will be given in the Third volume.

<span id="ii-p27"></span>The old translator of the Harmony, Eusebius
Paget, deserves to be honored by the admirers of Calvin. It was indeed
to be expected that, after the lapse of nearly three centuries, his
version would be found unsuitable to modern taste. But it is highly
creditable to his scholarship, and to his scrupulous fidelity to the
original, for which his well known integrity, and his warm attachment to
the writings of the Reformer, were a sufficient guarantee. His name has
come down to us in connection with sermons and other works, which appear
to have been much esteemed, but are now little known. “The History of
the Bible, briefly collected, by way of Question and Answer,” was one of
his productions, and was printed at the end of several of the old
editions of the Bible.

<span id="ii-p28"></span>This volume is adorned by a well-authenticated
likeness of the Reformer.  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) Many will
be surprised to trace the lines of extreme old age in the countenance of
one who died at the age of fifty-five. But all his biographers agree in
stating that, ere he had concluded his fortieth year, the white locks,
shrivelled features, and bent shoulders, bespoke Calvin to be already an
old man;  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) and that long before other
fifteen years had run their course, he seemed as if *threescore years
and ten,* or rather *fourscore* years, had passed over him, and brought
their usual attendants of *labor and sorrow, (*<span
id="ii-p30.2"></span>[Ps 90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii-p30.2"></span>.) His friends observed with grief the forerunners
of an event which, when it arrived, they could not but mourn as the
premature close of a life so highly valued.

<span id="ii-p31"></span>The quaint title-pages of two editions of the
French version, together with the “Epistle Dedicatory” of Eusebius
Paget, and a *fac-simile* of his title-page, immediately follow this
Preface.

<span id="ii-p32"></span>It may be proper to state, in conclusion, that,
throughout this work, Calvin’s own version of the three evangelists is
adopted, as nearly as the difference of the languages would allow, in
preference to our Authorized Version, which would not have rendered
equal assistance to the reader in understanding the expositions. Yet the
singular coincidence between the two Versions, interrupted chiefly by
verbal differences which do not affect the sense, lends countenance to
the suggestion of an esteemed friend and fellow-laborer, that King
James’s Translators have been more deeply indebted to the labors of
Calvin than is generally believed.

<span id="ii-p33"></span>W. P.  
Auchterarder,  
4th January, 1845.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc31001.htm#fr_0.md) <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> “To Lucke belongs the honor of having first
referred, in the department of exigesis, to Luther, Beza, Calvin,
Camerarius, and many other excellent interpreters of the period of the
Reformation. He was followed by the writer of these pages in his
Commentary on the Epistle to the Romans.” — <span
id="ii-p7.1"></span>*Literarischer Anzeiger fur* 1831. Biblical
Repository, July 1832.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc31001.htm#fr_1.md) <span id="ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p13"></span> The observation might be extended to some
other expositors, who, with little parade of any kind, are qualified to
instruct every class of readers. Those only who have subjected them to a
close comparison with the Hebrew and Greek originals can judge of their
attainments in criticism. Matthew Henry, though deservedly the most
popular of this class, receives less credit than he deserves for the
extent and variety of his learning.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc31001.htm#fr_2.md) <span id="ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p15"></span> This statement may require both explanation
and defense. Many of those who have devoted their attention to Greek
literature would be more likely to name Thucydides as an author who had
cost them long and severe application. But the difficulties of that
historian, though more obvious, are in reality less formidable, and will
be found not to arise so directly from any peculiarities of style as
from a singular condensation of thought which demands the close and
sustained attention of his readers, and sometimes from an affectation of
conciseness on the part of the author which leads him into obscurity.
The difficulties of Plato are chiefly idiomatic, and do not lie on the
surface. Like those noble performances which are said to indicate the
hand of a master in the higher walks of art, in which the uninitiated
hardly discover any meaning, but which reveal to the cultivated eye or
ear the highest beauty or magnificence of conception, the masterly
strokes of Plato are not perceived by ordinary readers, and can only be
appreciated by the accomplished scholar. He who reads with case the
original Greek of Plato, following out all the windings of his subtle
argument, (and Calvin appears to have accomplished this task,) must have
previously unraveled the most perplexing intricacies of that language.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc31001.htm#fr_3.md) <span id="ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p17"></span> It may be proper to mention, that a
considerable part of this Preface has already appeared in *The Biblical
Cabinet,* Vol. XXX., prefixed to a translation of *Calvin’s Commentaries
on the Epistles to the* *Galatians and Ephesians.* With the kind
permission of my friend, the publisher of that series, I have
transferred it to a place where it is not less appropriate than in its
former situation. Some remarks on Calvin’s excellencies as a
Commentator, and on the estimation in which he is now held, might be
expected to precede the first volume of a modem version of his
Commentaries, that has been brought out by the Calvin Translation
Society. No change having taken place in the carefully matured views
which were formerly expressed, it has been judged advisable to present
them in their original form, rather than to leave them out, or to
undergo the labor of fresh writing.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc31001.htm#fr_4.md) <span id="ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p25"></span> Biblical Cabinet, vol. xxx.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc31001.htm#fr_5.md) <span id="ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p29"></span> It is taken from a rare etching by *Pierre
Woieiriot,* goldsmith, and engraver on copper and wood. This artist was
born at Bar-le-duc in 1510. He was established at Lyons about the middle
of the sixteenth century. His engravings are all distinguished by the
monogram which may be observed on the etching itself, surmounted by the
small cross of Lorraine. This engraving was issued previous to the death
of Calvin, and probably during his last illness, as the likeness bears
evident marks of premature decrepitude and debility.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc31001.htm#fr_6.md) <span id="ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p30"></span> A letter of Calvin to his dear friends, Farel
and Viret, dated 30th May, 1540, *when he had not comp1eted his
thirty-first year,* contains the following remarkable passage: “<span
id="ii-p30.1"></span>Car si nous voulons bien pourvoir aux profits de
l’Eglise, il nous faut appeller a l’office de Pasteurs tels gens, qu’ils
puissent quelque iour soustenir la charge apres nous. Combien que ie
soye ieune, toutesfois quand ie voy ma debilite et indisposition de mon
corps, i’ay soin de ceux qui seront apres nous, comme si i’estoye desia
vieil.” — “For if we are desirous to provide for the advantage of the
Church, we must call to the office of Pastors such persons as may one
day hold the office after us. *Though I am young,* yet when I perceive
my debility and my bodily indisposition, I have anxiety about those who
shall come after us, *as if I were already old*.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Facsimile of the Title Page to the 1558 French Edition](cc31002.md)
