[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31050)  [Next](cc31052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xliii"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:17-19; LUKE 16:17

<span id="ix.xliii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xliii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p3"></span><span id="ix.xliii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#017.md)<span id="ix.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p4"></span>**17**.** **Think not that I am come to
destroy  <span id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380.md) the Law or the
Prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. **18**.** **Verily, I
say to you, Till heaven and earth pass, one iota or one point  <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381.md) shall not pass from the Law, till all
are fulfilled. **19**.** **Whoever then shall break on of these least
commandments, and shall so teach men, shall be called the least in the
kingdom of heaven: but whoever shall have done and taught them, he shall
be called great in the kingdom of heaven.

<span id="ix.xliii-p7"></span>**17**.** **Now it is easier for heaven
and earth to pass, than for one point of the law to fail.

<span id="ix.xliii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xliii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xliii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p10"></span>**<span
id="ix.xliii-p10.2"></span>[Matthew
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p10.2"></span>.** *Think not.* With regard to the
perfection of his life, Christ might justly have maintained that he
*came to fulfill the law:* but here he treats of doctrine, not of life.
As he afterwards exclaimed, that “*the kingdom of God is come*,” (<span
id="ix.xliii-p10.3"></span>[Mt
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p10.3"></span>,) and raised the minds of men with unusual
expectation, and even admitted disciples by baptism, it is probable,
that the minds of many were in a state of suspense and doubt, and were
eagerly inquiring, what was the design of that novelty. Christ,
therefore, now declares, that his doctrine is so far from being at
variance with *the law,* that it agrees perfectly with *the law and the
prophets,* and not only so, but brings the complete *fulfillment* of
them.

<span id="ix.xliii-p11"></span>There appear to have been chiefly two
reasons, which induced him to declare this agreement between *the law*
and the Gospel. As soon as any new method of teaching makes its
appearance, the body of the people immediately look upon it, as if
everything were to be overturned. Now the preaching of the Gospel, as I
mentioned a little ago, tended to raise the expectation, that the Church
would assume a totally different form from what had previously belonged
to it. They thought that the ancient and accustomed government was to be
abolished. This opinion, in many respects, was very dangerous. Devout
worshippers of God would never have embraced the Gospel, if it had been
a revolt from *the law;* while light and turbulent spirits would eagerly
have seized on an occasion offered to them for entirely overthrowing the
state of religion: for we know in what insolent freaks rash people are
ready to indulge when there is any thing new.

<span id="ix.xliii-p12"></span>Besides, Christ saw that the greater part
of the Jews, though they professed to believe the Law, were profane and
degenerate. The condition of the people was so decayed, every thing was
filled with so many corruptions, and the negligence or malice of the
priests had so completely extinguished the pure light of doctrine, that
there no longer remained any reverence for the Law. But if a new kind of
doctrine had been introduced, which would destroy the authority of *the
Law and the Prophets,* religion would have sustained a dreadful injury.
This appears to be the first reason, why Christ declared that *he had
not come to destroy the Law.* Indeed, the context makes this abundantly
clear: for he immediately adds, by way of confirmation, that it is
impossible for *even one point of the Law to fail,* — and pronounces a
curse on those teachers who do not faithfully labor to maintain its
authority.

<span id="ix.xliii-p13"></span>The second reason was, to refute the
wicked slander which, he knew was brought against him by the ignorant
and unlearned. This charge, it is evident, had been fastened on his
doctrine by the scribes: for he proceeds immediately to direct his
discourse against them. We must keep in mind the object which Christ had
in view. While he invites and exhorts the Jews to receive the Gospel, he
still retains them in obedience to *the Law;* and, on the other hand, he
boldly refutes the base reproaches and slanders, by which his enemies
labored to make his preaching infamous or suspected.

<span id="ix.xliii-p14"></span>If we intend to reform affairs which are
in a state of disorder, we must always exercise such prudence and
moderation, as will convince the people, that we do not oppose the
eternal Word of God, or introduce any novelty that is contrary to
Scripture. We must take care, that no suspicion of such contrariety
shall injure the faith of the godly, and that rash men shall not be
emboldened by a pretense of novelty. In short, we must endeavor to
oppose a profane contempt of the Word of God, and to prevent religion
from being despised by the ignorant. The defense which Christ makes, to
free his doctrine from slanders, ought to encourage us, if we are now
exposed to the same calumnies. That crime was charged against Paul, that
he was an apostate from the law of God, (<span
id="ix.xliii-p14.1"></span>[Ac
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p14.1"></span>) and we need not, therefore, wonder, if the
Papists endeavor, in the same manner, to render us odious. Following the
example of Christ, we ought to clear ourselves from false accusations,
and, at the same time, to profess the truth freely, though it may expose
us to unjust reproaches.

<span id="ix.xliii-p15"></span>*I am not come to destroy.* God had,
indeed, promised a *new covenant* at the coming of Christ; but had, at
the same time, showed, that it would not be different from *the first,*
but that, on the contrary, its design was, to give a perpetual sanction
to the covenant, which he had made from the beginning, with his own
people.

<span id="ix.xliii-p16"></span>“I will write my law, (says he,) in their
hearts,  
and I will remember their iniquities no more,”  
(<span id="ix.xliii-p16.3"></span>[Jer.
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033.md),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034)<span id="ix.xliii-p16.3"></span>..md)
 <span id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382.md)

<span id="ix.xliii-p18"></span>By these words he is so far from
departing from the former covenant, that, on the contrary, he declares,
that it will be confirmed and ratified, when it shall be succeeded by
the new. This is also the meaning of Christ’s words, when he says, that
*he came to fulfill the law:* for he actually fulfilled it, by
quickening, with his Spirit, the dead letter, and then exhibiting, in
reality, what had hitherto appeared only in figures.

<span id="ix.xliii-p19"></span>With respect to doctrine, we must not
imagine that the coming of Christ has freed us from the authority of the
law: for it is the eternal rule of a devout and holy life, and must,
therefore, be as unchangeable, as the justice of God, which it embraced,
is constant and uniform. With respect to ceremonies, there is some
appearance of a change having taken place; but it was only the use of
them that was abolished, for their meaning was more fully confirmed. The
coming of Christ has taken nothing away even from ceremonies, but, on
the contrary, confirms them by exhibiting the truth of shadows: for,
when we see their full effect, we acknowledge that they are not vain or
useless. Let us therefore learn to maintain inviolable this sacred tie
between the law and the Gospel, which many improperly attempt to break.
For it contributes not a little to confirm the authority of the Gospel,
when we learn, that it is nothing else than *a fulfillment of the law;*
so that both, with one consent, declare God to be their Author.

<span id="ix.xliii-p20"></span><span id="ix.xliii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p21"></span>**18.** *Till heaven and earth pass* Luke
expresses it a little differently, but to the same import, that *it is
easier for heaven and earth to pass, than for one point of the law to
fail* The design of Christ, in both passages, was to teach, that the
truth of the law and of every part of it, is secure, and that nothing so
durable is to be found in the whole frame of the world. Some persons
indulge in ingenious refinements on the word *till, (*<span
id="ix.xliii-p21.1"></span>ἓως ἂ ν*,)* as if *the passing away of the
heaven and earth,* which will take place on the last day, the day of
judgment, were to put an end to *the law and the prophets* And
certainly, as

<span id="ix.xliii-p22"></span>“tongues shall then cease, and prophecies
shall be abolished,”  
(<span id="ix.xliii-p22.2"></span>[1Co
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p22.2"></span>,)

<span id="ix.xliii-p23"></span>I think that the written law, as well as
the exposition of it, will come to an end; but, as I am of opinion that
Christ spoke more simply, I do not choose to feed the ears of readers
with such amusements. Let it suffice for us to hold, that sooner shall
heaven fall to pieces, and the whole frame of the world become a mass of
confusion, than the stability of the law shall give way. But what does
it mean, that every part of the law shall be fulfilled down to the
smallest *point?* for we see, that even those, who have been regenerated
by the Spirit of God, are very far from keeping the law of God in a
perfect manner. I answer, the expression, *shall not pass away,* must be
viewed as referring, not to the life of men, but to the perfect truth of
the doctrine. *“*There is nothing in the law that is unimportant,
nothing that was put there at, random; and so it is impossible that a
single letter shall perish.”

<span id="ix.xliii-p24"></span><span id="ix.xliii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p25"></span>**19.** *Whoever then shall break* Christ
here speaks expressly of the commandments of life, or the ten words,
which all the children of God ought to take as the rule of their life.
He therefore declares, that they are false and deceitful teachers, who
do not restrain their disciples within obedience to the law, and that
they are unworthy to occupy a place in the Church, who weaken, in the
slightest degree, the authority of the law; and, on the other hand, that
they are honest and faithful ministers of God, who recommend, both by
word and by example, the keeping of the law. *The least commandments* is
an expression used in accommodation to the judgment of men: for though
they have not all the same weight, (but, when they are compared
together, some are less than others,) yet we are not at liberty to think
any thing *small,* on which the heavenly Legislator has been pleased to
issue a command. For what sacrilege is it to treat contemptuously any
thing which has proceeded from his sacred mouth? This is to sink his
majesty to the rank of creatures. Accordingly, when our Lord calls them
*little commandments,* it is a sort of concession. *He shall be called
the least* This is an allusion to what he had just said about the
*commandments:* but the meaning is obvious. Those who shall pour
contempt on the doctrine of the law, or on a single syllable of it, will
be rejected as the lowest of men.  <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383.md)

<span id="ix.xliii-p27"></span>*The kingdom of heaven* means the
renovation of the Church, or the prosperous condition of the Church,
such as was then beginning to appear by the preaching of the Gospel. In
this sense, Christ tells us, that *“*he who is least *in the kingdom of
God* is greater than John,” (<span id="ix.xliii-p27.1"></span>[Lu
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028.md)<span
id="ix.xliii-p27.1"></span>.) The meaning of that phrase is, that God,
restoring the world by the hand of his Son, has completely established
his kingdom. Christ declares that, when his Church shall have been
renewed, no teachers must be admitted to it, but those who are faithful
expounders of the law, and who labor to maintain its doctrine entire.
But it is asked, were not ceremonies among *the commandments* of God,
the *least of which* we are now required to observe? I answer, We must
look to the design and object of the Legislator. God enjoined
ceremonies, that their outward use might be temporal, and their meaning
eternal. That man does not *break* ceremonies, who omits what is
shadowy, but retains their effect. But if Christ banishes from his
*kingdom* all who accustom men to any contempt of the law how monstrous
must be their stupidity, who are not ashamed to remit, by a sacrilegious
indulgence, what God strictly demands, and, under the pretense of venial
sin, to overthrow the righteousness of the law.  <span
id="fr_384"></span>[385](#fn_384.md) Again, we must observe the description
he gives of good and holy teachers: that not only by words, but chiefly
by the example of life, they exhort  <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385.md) men to keep the law.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_380"></span>[381](cc31051.htm#fr_380.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xliii-p5.1"></span>Pour
abolir;” — “to abolish.”

<span id="fn_381"></span>[382](cc31051.htm#fr_381.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xliii-p6.1"></span>Un iota
ou un seul poinct;” — “one iota or a single point.”

<span id="fn_382"></span>[383](cc31051.htm#fr_382.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p17"></span> The reader will find a copious
illustration of this remarkable passage in Jeremiah, and of its bearing
on the Christian system, in the author's commentary on the eighth
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_383"></span>[384](cc31051.htm#fr_383.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p26"></span> “<span id="ix.xliii-p26.1"></span>Comme
1es plus inutiles du monde;” — “as the most useless in the world.”

<span id="fn_384"></span>[385](cc31051.htm#fr_384.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p28"></span> “<span id="ix.xliii-p28.1"></span>De
mettre la justice de la Loy sous les pieds;” — “to trample the justice
of the law under their feet.”

<span id="fn_385"></span>[386](cc31051.htm#fr_385.md) <span
id="ix.xliii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xliii-p29"></span> “<span id="ix.xliii-p29.1"></span>Ils
exhortent et incitent les hommes;” — “they exhort and incite men.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 5:20-22](cc31052.md)
