[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31042)  [Next](cc31044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p1"></span>LUKE 4:23-30

<span id="ix.xxxv-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p2.1"></span>[Luke
4:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023)<span id="ix.xxxv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p3"></span>**23**.** **And he saith to them, Ye will
altogether  <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322) say to me this
comparison, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever things we have heard
done in Capernaum, do thou also here in thy country. **24**.** **And he
saith, Verily, I say to you, No prophet is acceptable in his own
country. **25**.** **But in truth I say to you, There were many widows,
in the days of Elijah, in Israel, when heaven was shut up three years
and six months, so that there was great famine through all the land;
**26**.** **And to none of them was Elijah sent, but to a woman, a
widow, in Zarephath of Zidon. **27**.** **And there were many lepers in
Israel, in the time of Elisha the prophet, and not one of them was
cleansed, but Naaman, a Syrian. **28**.** **And all were filled with
wrath in the synagogue, hearing these things, **29**.** **And rose up,
and drove him out of the city, and led him to the brow of the hill on
which their city was built, that they might throw him down.  <span
id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323) **30**.** **And he, passing through
the midst of them, went away.  <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324)

<span id="ix.xxxv-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxxv-p8"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p9"></span>**23.** *Physician, heal thyself* From the
words of Christ it may be easily inferred, that he was treated with
contempt by the inhabitants of Nazareth: for he states publicly those
thoughts, which he knew to exist in their minds. He afterwards imputes
to them the blame of his declining to work miracles among them, and
charges them with malice, in bestowing no honor on a prophet of God. The
objection, which he anticipates, is this: “There is no reason to wonder,
if his countrymen hold him in little estimation, since he does not
dignify his own country, as he does other places, by working miracles;
and, consequently, it is but a just revenge, if his own countrymen, whom
he treats with less respect than all others, are found to reject him.”
Such is the meaning of the common proverb, that a physician ought to
begin with himself, and those immediately connected with him, before he
exhibits his skill in healing others. The amount of the objection is,
that Christ acts improperly, in paying no respect to his own country,
while he renders other cities of Galilee illustrious by his miracles.
And this was regarded by the inhabitants of Nazareth as a fair excuse
for rejecting him in their turn.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p10"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p11"></span>**24.** *Verily, I say to you* He
reproaches them with the blame of preventing him from exerting his power
among them as he did in other places, by working miracles: for the
unbelief of men presents an obstruction to God, and hinders him from
working, as might be desired, for their salvation, (<span
id="ix.xxxv-p11.1"></span>[Mt
13:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#058)<span id="ix.xxxv-p11.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxxv-p11.2"></span>[Mr
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#005)<span id="ix.xxxv-p11.2"></span>.)
Christ could not perform any miracle among them, because “they did not
believe on him,” (<span id="ix.xxxv-p11.3"></span>[Joh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)<span
id="ix.xxxv-p11.3"></span>.) Not that it is in the power of men to bind
the hands of God, but that he withholds the advantage of his works from
those who are rendered unworthy of them by their infidelity. The answer
given by Christ amounts to this: “If you wish to have a share in
miracles, why do you not give place to God? or rather, why do you
proudly reject the minister of his power? You receive, therefore, a just
reward for your contempt, when I pass by you, and give a preference to
other places, for proving by miracles, that I am the Messiah of God, who
have been appointed to restore the church.”

<span id="ix.xxxv-p12"></span>And, certainly, it was intolerable
ingratitude that, when God was pleased to have his Son brought up in
their city, such a person, who had been among them from his infancy, was
despised. Justly, therefore, did he withdraw his hand, that it might not
be exposed to the derision of those wicked despisers.  <span
id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325) Hence we learn what value the Lord
puts on his word, when, in order to punish for the contempt of it, he
takes from the midst of us those favors, which are the testimonies of
his presence. With respect to that saying, *no prophet is acceptable in
his own country,* the reader may consult what I have said on a saying of
the same import, recorded by the Evangelist John: “A prophet hath no
honor in his own country,” (<span id="ix.xxxv-p13.2"></span>[Joh
4:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#044)<span id="ix.xxxv-p13.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxxv-p14"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p15"></span>**25.** *There were many widows* After
throwing back upon themselves the blame of their being deprived of
miracles, he produces two examples to prove, that they ought not to
think it strange, if God prefers strangers to the inhabitants of the
country, and that they ought not to find fault with him for obeying the
call of God, as was formerly done by Elijah and Elisha. He throws out an
indirect hint as to their vanity and presumption, in entertaining a
dislike of him, because he had been brought up among them. *When there
was a great famine for three years and a half, there were many widows in
Israel,* whose want of food Elijah was not commanded to relieve, but *he
was sent to a woman,* who belonged to a foreign nation, *Zidon,* (<span
id="ix.xxxv-p15.1"></span>[1Ki
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)<span id="ix.xxxv-p15.1"></span>.)
In like manner, *Elisha* healed no *lepers* among his countrymen, but he
healed *Naaman, a Syrian,* (<span id="ix.xxxv-p15.2"></span>[2Ki
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#010)<span id="ix.xxxv-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxxv-p16"></span>Though his reproofs strike the inhabitants
of Nazareth with peculiar severity, yet he charges the whole nation with
ingratitude, because, for a long period, almost all of them had
proceeded to more shameful contempt of the Lord, in proportion as he had
approached nearer to them. For how did it come about, that a woman, who
was a foreigner, was preferred by God to all the Israelites, but because
the prophet had been rejected by them, and compelled to seek refuge in a
heathen land? And why did God choose that *Naaman, a Syrian,* should be
healed by *Elisha,* but to put a disgrace on the nation of Israel? The
meaning, therefore, is, that the same thing happens now as in former
times, when God sends his power to a great distance among foreigners,
because he is rejected by the inhabitants of the country.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p17"></span>Meanwhile, Christ intimates that, though
he is despised by his countrymen, his glory is in no degree diminished:
because God will still be able, to their shame and confusion, to dignify
and exalt his Son, as he formerly gave honor to his prophets in the
midst of the Gentiles. In this way the foolish glorying in the flesh is
repressed, when we see the Lord rain, not only where and when he
pleases, but in distant corners, to the neglect of that country which he
had chosen for his residence. Hence, also, may be collected the general
doctrine that we have no right to prescribe any rule to God in disposing
his benefits, so as to prevent him from rejecting those who hold the
highest rank, and conferring honor on the lowest and most contemptible;
and that we are not at liberty to oppose him, when he entirely subverts
that order, which would have approved itself to our judgment. Our
attention is, no doubt, drawn to a contrast between Israel and the
heathen nations: but still we ought to hold, that none are chosen, in
preference to others, for their own excellence, but that it proceeds
rather from the wonderful purpose of God, the height and depth of which,
though the reason may be hidden from us, we are bound to acknowledge and
adore.

<span id="ix.xxxv-p18"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p19"></span>**28.** *Were filled with wrath* They
perceived that the object of those two examples, which Christ had
produced, was to show, that the grace of God would be removed from them
to others:  <span id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326) and therefore they
considered that he had spoken to their dishonor. But, instead of having
their consciences stung to the quick, and seeking a remedy for their
vices by correcting them, they are only driven to madness. Thus ungodly
men not only resist, with obstinacy, the judgments of God, but rise into
cruelty against his servants. Hence it is evident, how forcible are the
reproofs which proceed from the Spirit of God: for the minds of those
who would willingly evade them,  <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327)
are inflamed with rage. Again, when we see that the minds of men are so
envenomed, that they become mad against God, whenever they are treated
with some degree of roughness, we ought to implore the Spirit of
meekness, (<span id="ix.xxxv-p21.2"></span>[Ga
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)<span id="ix.xxxv-p21.2"></span>,)
that we may not be driven, by the same fury, into such a destructive
war.  <span id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328)

<span id="ix.xxxv-p23"></span><span id="ix.xxxv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p24"></span>**30.** *But he, passing through the midst
of them* When Luke says, that Jesus passed through the middle of the
crowd, and so escaped out of their hands, he means that God rescued him,
by an extraordinary miracle, from immediate death. This example teaches
us that, though our adversaries may prevail so far, that our life may
seem to be placed at their disposal, yet that the power of God will
always be victorious to preserve us, so long as he shall be pleased to
keep us in the world, either by tying their hands, or by blinding their
eyes, or by stupifying their minds and hearts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_322"></span>[323](cc31043.htm#fr_322) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p4.1"></span>Omnino.” —
“<span id="ix.xxxv-p4.2"></span>Tout a plein.”

<span id="fn_323"></span>[324](cc31043.htm#fr_323) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p5.1"></span>Pour le
jetter du haut en bas;” — “to throw him from top to bottom.”

<span id="fn_324"></span>[325](cc31043.htm#fr_324) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p6.1"></span>Mais il
passa par le milieu d'eux, et s'en alla.” — “But he passed through the
midst of them, and went away.”

<span id="fn_325"></span>[326](cc31043.htm#fr_325) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p13.1"></span>Afin de
n.e servir de passe temps a de si meschans contempteurs des graces de
Dieu.” — “That it might not serve for amusement to such wicked despisers
of God's favors.”

<span id="fn_326"></span>[327](cc31043.htm#fr_326) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p20.1"></span>Que la
grace de Dieu leur seroit ostee, et envoyee a autres;” — “that the grace
of God would be taken from them, and sent to others.”

<span id="fn_327"></span>[328](cc31043.htm#fr_327) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p21.1"></span>Qui les
laisseroyent volontiers escouler sans y penser;” — “who would willingly
allow them to steal away, without thinking of them.”

<span id="fn_328"></span>[329](cc31043.htm#fr_328) <span
id="ix.xxxv-p21.3"></span>

<span id="ix.xxxv-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xxxv-p22.1"></span>Afin que
ne soyons transportez a entreprendre une guerre si folle, a nostre
grande confusion;” — “in order that we may not be hurried away, to
undertake a war so foolish, to our great confusion.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 4:13-16](cc31044)
