[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31083)  [Next](cc31085.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxvi"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 9:14-17; MARK 2:18-22; LUKE
5:33-39

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
9:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>[Mark
2:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#018.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>[Luke
5:33-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#033.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p5"></span>**14**.** **Then come to him the disciples
of John, saying, For what reason do we and the Pharisees fast often,
while thy disciples do not fast? **15**.** **And Jesus said to them, Can
the children of the bridegroom  <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520.md)
mourn, so long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come,
when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.
**16**.** **And no man putteth a piece of fresh cloth on an old garment:
for that which fills up takes from the garment, and the rent is made
worse. **17**.** **Nor do they put new wine into old bottles; otherwise
the bottles burst, and the wine is spilt, and the bottles are lost: but
they put new wine into new bottles, and both are at the same time
preserved.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p7"></span>**18**.** **And the disciples of John and
of the Pharisees were in the habit of fasting; and they come and say to
him, Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, and thy
disciples do not fast? **19**.** **And Jesus saith to them, Can the
children of the nuptial bed  <span id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521.md)
fast, while the bridegroom is with them? So long as they have the
bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. **20**.** **But the days will
come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall they
fast in those days. **21**.** **And no person seweth a piece of fresh
cloth on an old garment: otherwise the new addition taketh from the old,
and the rent is made worse. **22**.** **And no person putteth new wine
into old bottles; otherwise the new wine bursts the bottles, and the
wine is spilt, and the bottles are lost: but new wine must be put into
new bottles.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p9"></span>**33**.** **And they said to him, Why do
the disciples of John fast often, and make prayers, and in the same
manner the disciples of the Pharisees, while thine eat and drink?
**34**.** **To whom he saith, Can you make the children of the marriage
bed to fast while the bridegroom is with them? **35**.** **But the days
will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken from them: then shall they
fast in those days. **36**.** **And he spoke a parable to them: No
person putteth a piece of a new garment on an old garment; otherwise
what is new is torn, and what is added of the new agreeth not with the
old. **37**.** **And no person putteth new wine into old bottles:
otherwise the new wine will burst the bottles, and will be spilt, and
the bottles will be lost. **38**.** **But new wine must be put into new
bottles, and both are preserved. **39**.** **And no person who has drunk
old wine immediately desires the new: for he saith, The old is better.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p11"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p12"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p12.2"></span>[Matthew
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#014.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p12.2"></span>.** *Then come to him the disciples of John.*
Luke represents the *Pharisees* as speaking: Mark appears to connect
both. And, indeed, there is no room to doubt that the *Pharisees*
maliciously endeavored, by this stratagem, to draw *the disciples of
John* to their party, and to produce a quarrel between them and the
disciples of Christ. A resemblance in *prayers and fastings* was a
plausible pretext for associating at this time: while the different
manner in which Christ acted was an occasion of enmity and dislike to
men whose temper was unamiable, and who were excessively devoted to
themselves.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p13"></span>This example reminds us, that prudence
and caution are necessary to prevent wicked and cunning men from sowing
divisions among us on any slight grounds. Satan has a wonderful
dexterity, no doubt, in laying those snares; and it is an easy matter to
distress us about a trifle.  <span id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522.md) But
we ought especially to beware lest the unity of faith be destroyed, or
the bond of charity broken, on account of outward ceremonies. Almost all
labor under the disease of attaching undue importance to the ceremonies
and *elements of the world,* as Paul calls them, (<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p14.2"></span>[Ga
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003.md)<span id="ix.lxxvi-p14.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.lxxvi-p14.3"></span>[Col
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="ix.lxxvi-p14.3"></span>;.md)
and accordingly they do not hesitate, for the most part, to prefer the
merest rudiments to the highest perfection. This is followed by another
evil arising out of fastidiousness and pride, when every man would
willingly compel the whole world to copy his example. If any thing
pleases us, we forthwith desire to make it a law, that others may live
according to our pleasure.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p15"></span>When we read that *the disciples of John*
were caught by these snares of Satan, let us first learn not to place
holiness in outward and indifferent matters, and at the same time to
restrain ourselves by moderation and equity, that we may not desire to
restrict others to what we approve, but may allow every one to retain
his freedom. As to *fasting* and *prayers,* it ought to be understood,
that *John* gave his *disciples* a particular training, and that for
this purpose they had stated days for *fastings,* a settled form, and
fixed hours of prayer. Now, I reckon those *prayers* among outward
observances. For, though calling on God holds the first rank in
spiritual worship, yet that method of doing it was adapted to the
unskilfulness of men, and is justly reckoned among ceremonies and
indifferent matters, the observance of which ought not to be too
strictly enjoined. Of the reason why John’s discipline was more severe
than that of Christ we have already spoken, and a more convenient
opportunity for treating of it will again occur.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p16"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p17"></span>**15.** *Can the children of the
bridegroom mourn?* Christ apologizes for his disciples on the score of
the season, alleging that God was still pleased to indulge them in
joyous feelings, as if they were present at a marriage: for he compares
himself to *the bridegroom,* who enlivens his friends by his presence.
*Chrysostom* thinks that this comparison was taken from the testimony of
John the Baptist, *He that hath the bride is the bridegroom,* (<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p17.2"></span>[Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p17.2"></span>.) I have no objection to that view, though I
do not think that it rests on solid grounds. Let us be satisfied with
Christ’s declaration, that he spares his disciples, and treats them with
gentleness, so long as he is with them. That none may envy them
advantages which are of short duration, he gives warning that they will
very soon be treated with greater harshness and severity.

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p18"></span>The apology rests on this consideration,
that fasting and *prayers* are adapted to sorrow and adversity:
extraordinary prayers I mean, such as are here mentioned. Christ
certainly intended to accustom them, by degrees, to greater patience,
and not to lay on them a heavy burden, till they gained more strength.
Hence we ought to learn a twofold instruction. When the Lord sometimes
endures the weakness of our brethren, and acts towards them with
gentleness, while he treats us with greater severity, we have no right
to murmur. Again, when we sometimes obtain relief from sorrow and from
vexations, let us beware of giving ourselves up to enjoyments; but let
us, on the contrary, remember that the nuptials will not always last.
*The children of the bridegroom,* or *of the nuptial bed,* is a Hebrew
phrase, which denotes the guests at a marriage.  <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523.md)

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p20"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p21"></span>**16.** *And no man putteth a piece of
fresh cloth.* He supports the preceding statement by two comparisons,
one of which is taken from *garments,* and the other from vessels of
*wine* Those who think that he compares worn-out garments and decayed
bottles to the Pharisees, and new wine and fresh cloth to the doctrine
of the gospel, have no probability on their side. The comparison is
beautifully adapted to the matter in hand, if we explain it as referring
to the weak and tender disciples of Christ, and to a discipline more
strict than they were able to bear. Nor is it of any consequence that
the idea of being *old* does not agree with scholars who were only
commencing: for, when Christ compares his disciples to *old bottles* and
*torn garments,* he does not mean that they were wasted by long use, but
that they were weak and wanted strength. The amount of the statement is,
that all must not be compelled indiscriminately to live in the same
manner, for there is a diversity of natural character, and all things
are not suitable to all; and particularly, we ought to spare the weak,
that they may not be broken by violence, or crushed by the weight of the
burden. Our Lord speaks according to the custom of the country, when he
uses the word *bottles* instead of *tuns* or *casks*  <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524.md)

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p23"></span><span id="ix.lxxvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p24"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxvi-p24.2"></span>[Luke
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#039.md)<span
id="ix.lxxvi-p24.2"></span>.** *And no person who has drunk old wine.*
This statement is given by Luke alone, and is undoubtedly connected with
the preceding discourse. Though commentators have tortured it in a
variety of ways, I take it simply as a warning to the Pharisees not to
attach undue importance to a received custom. For how comes it that
wine, the taste of which remains unaltered, is not equally agreeable to
every palate, but because custom and habit form the taste? Hence it
follows, that Christ’s manner of acting towards his disciples is not
less worthy of approbation, because it has less show and splendor: as
*old wine,* though it does not foam with the sharpness of n*ew wine,* is
not less agreeable on that account, or less fitted for the nourishment
of the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_520"></span>[521](cc31084.htm#fr_520.md) <span
id="ix.lxxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxvi-p6.1"></span>Filii
sponsi.” — “<span id="ix.lxxvi-p6.2"></span>Les gens de la chambre du
marie peuvent ils mener dueil, pendant que le marie est avec eux?” —
“Can the children of the married man's chamber be in mourning, while the
married man is with them?”

<span id="fn_521"></span>[522](cc31084.htm#fr_521.md) <span
id="ix.lxxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxvi-p8.1"></span>Les gens
de nopces;” — “the marriage party.”

<span id="fn_522"></span>[523](cc31084.htm#fr_522.md) <span
id="ix.lxxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxvi-p14.1"></span>Pour
des choses qui ne valent pas le parler;” — “for things that are not
worth talking about.”

<span id="fn_523"></span>[524](cc31084.htm#fr_523.md) <span
id="ix.lxxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p19"></span> *“*<span id="ix.lxxvi-p19.1"></span>*Les
fils de l’espoux,* (comme il y a en tournant de mot a mot,) par une
facon de parler des Hebrieux signifient ceux qui sont appelez au banquet
des nopces.” — “*The children of the bridegroom,* (as the words may be
literally rendered,) by a mode of speaking among the Hebrews, denote
those who were invited to the marriage banquet.”

<span id="fn_524"></span>[525](cc31084.htm#fr_524.md) <span
id="ix.lxxvi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvi-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxvi-p22.1"></span>Au
reste, le mot Grec dont use l'Evangeliste signifie proprement des
vaisseaux faits de cuir, desquels on usoit pour mettre le vin: comme au-
jourdhui nous avons des muids ou des pipes.” — “Besides, the Greek word,
which the Evangelist employs, literally signifies vessels made of
leather,which were used for containing wine: as in the present day we
*have hogsheads* or *butts* *”*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:18-22; Mark 5:22-34; Luke 8:40-48](cc31085.md)
