[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31084)  [Next](cc31086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 9:18-22; MARK 5:22-34; LUKE
8:40-48

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
9:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
5:22-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:40-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#040)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p5"></span>**18**.** **While he was speaking these
things to them, a certain ruler came, and worshipped him,  <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) saying, My daughter is now dead; but
come and lay thy hand upon her, and she will live. **19**.** **And Jesus
arose, and followed him, and likewise his disciples, **20**.** **And,
lo, a woman, who had been afflicted with a bloody flux for twelve years
came behind him, and touched the tuft of his cloak: **21**.** **For she
said within herself, If I shall only touch his cloak, I shall be cured.
**22**.** **But Jesus turned round, and, when he saw her, he said, Take
courage, my daughter; thy faith hath cured thee. And the woman was cured
from that time.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p7"></span>**22**.** **And, lo, one of the rulers of
the synagogue, by name Jarius, came: and when he had seen him, he fell
at his feet. **23**.** **And he besought him earnestly, saying, My
daughter is at the point of death: I entreat that thou wilt come, and
lay thy hands upon her, that she may be cured, and she shall live.
**24**.** **And Jesus went away with him: and a great multitude followed
him, and they pressed upon him. **25**.** **And a certain woman, who had
been subject to a bloody flux for twelve years, **26**.** **And had
suffered much from many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and
had not at all recovered, but had rather grown worse, **27**.** **When
she had heard of Jesus, came in the crowd behind him, and touched his
cloak. **28**.** **For she said, If I shall touch but his cloak, I shall
be cured. **29**.** **And immediately the fountain of her blood was
dried up, and she felt in her body that she had been delivered from the
scourge. **30**.** **And Jesus suddenly knowing in himself that power
had gone out from him, turned round in the crowd, and said, Who touched
my clothes? **31**.** **And his disciples said to him, Thou seest the
crowd on all sides pressing upon thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me?
**32**.** **And he looked around to see her who who had done this.
**33**.** **But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been
done in her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
**34**.** **And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith hath cured thee: go
in peace, and be delivered from thy scourge.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p8"></span>**40**.** **And it happened, while Jesus
was returning, the multitude received him: for they were all waiting for
him. **41**.** **And, lo, a man came, whose name was Jairus, and he was
a ruler of the synagogue, and fell at the feet of Jesus, beseeching him
to enter into his house. **42**.** **For he had an only daughter, about
twelve years of age, and she was dying. But while he was going, the
multitudes pressed upon him. **43** And a woman, who had been subject to
a bloody flux for twelve years, who had spent all her substance on
physicians, and could not be cured by an one, **44**.** **Approached
behind, and touched the tuft of his cloak, and immediately her issue of
blood was stopped. **45**.** **And Jesus said, Who is it that touched
me? And while all were denying, Peter, and those who were with him,
said, Master, the multitudes press upon and distress thee, and sayest
thou, Who touched me? **46**.** **And Jesus said, Some person hath
touched me: for I know that power hath gone out form me. **47**.** **And
the woman seeing that she was not concealed, came trembling, and fell
down before his feet, and told him before all the people for what reason
she had touched him, and in what manner she had been immediately cured.
**48**.** **And he said to her, Take courage, my daughter: thy faith
hath cured; go in peace.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p10"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p11"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p11.2"></span>[Matthew
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#018)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p11.2"></span>.** *While he was speaking these things to
them.* Those who imagine that the narrative, which is here given by Mark
and Luke, is different from that of Matthew, are so clearly refuted by
the passage itself, that there is no necessity for a lengthened debate.
All the three agree in saying that Christ was requested by *a ruler of
the synagogue to enter his house* for the purpose of curing *his
daughter* The only difference is, that the name of *Jairus,* which is
withheld by Matthew, is mentioned by Mark and Luke; and that he
represents the father as saying, *My daughter is dead,* while the other
two say that she was in her last moments, and that, while he was
bringing Christ, her death was announced to him on the road. But there
is no absurdity in saying that Matthew, studying brevity, merely glances
at those particulars which the other two give in minute detail. But
since all the other points agree with such exactness, since so many
circumstances conspire as to give it the appearance of three fingers
stretched out at the same time to point out a single object, there is no
argument that would justify us in dividing this history into various
dates. The Evangelists agree in relating, that while Christ, at the
request of *a ruler of the synagogue,* was coming to his house, a woman
on the road was secretly cured of *a bloody flux* by *touching his
cloak;* and that afterwards Christ came into the ruler’s house, and
raised a dead young woman to life. There is no necessity, I think, for
circuitous language to prove that all the three relate the same event.
Let us now come to details.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p12"></span>*Lo, a certain ruler.* Though it is
evident from the other two, that his confidence had not advanced so far
as to hope that his daughter’s life could be restored, there is no room
to doubt that, after having been reproved by Christ, he entertained a
stronger hope than when he left his house. But Matthew, as we have said,
studies brevity, and puts down at the very beginning of his narrative
what took place at various times. The manner in which the history must
be arranged is this: *Jairus* first requested that his daughter might be
cured of her disease, and afterwards that she might be restored from
death to life; that is, after that Christ had given him courage to do
so. *Worship,* or *adoration,* is here put for k*neeling,* as is evident
from the words of Mark and Luke: for Jairus did not render divine honor
to Christ,  <span id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) but treated him with
respect as a prophet of God; and we all know how common a practice
*kneeling* was among eastern nations.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p14"></span>*Come and lay thy hand.* We have here a
bright mirror in which the divine condescension towards us is beheld. If
you compare the *ruler of the synagogue* with the centurion, who was a
heathen, (<span id="ix.lxxvii-p14.1"></span>[Mt
8:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p14.1"></span>,) you will say that the full brightness of
faith shone in the centurion, while scarcely the smallest portion of it
was visible in the *ruler* He ascribes to Christ no power except through
his touching the person; and, when he has received information of her
death, he trembles as if there were no farther remedy. We see, then,
that his faith was feeble and nearly exhausted. Yet Christ yields to his
prayers, and encourages him to expect a favorable result, and thus
proves to us that his faith, however small it might be, was not wholly
rejected. Though we have not such abundance of faith as might be
desired, there is no reason why our weakness should drive away or
discourage us from prayer.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p15"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p16"></span>**20.** *And, lo, a woman who had been
afflicted with a bloody flux.* For *twelve successive years* the *bloody
flux* had lasted, and the woman was so far from being negligent in
seeking remedies, that *she had spent all her substance on physicians*
All this is expressly stated by the Evangelists, that the miracle may
shine with brighter glory. When an incurable disease was removed so
suddenly, and by the mere touch of a garment, it is perfectly obvious
that it was not accomplished by human power. The thought of the woman
that, *if she only touched* Christ’s garment, she would immediately be
cured, arose from an extraordinary impulse of the Holy Spirit, and ought
not to be regarded as a general rule. We know how eagerly superstition
is wont to sport in foolish and thoughtless attempts to copy the saints;
but they are apes, and not imitators, who take up some remarkable
example without the command of God, and are led rather by their own
senses than by the direction of the Spirit.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p17"></span>It is even possible that there was a
mixture of sin and error in the woman’s *faith,* which Christ graciously
bears and forgives. Certainly, when she afterwards thinks that she has
done wrong, and *fears and trembles,* there is no apology for that kind
of doubt: for it is opposed to faith. Why did she not rather go straight
to Christ? If her reverence for him prevented, from what other source
than from his mercy did she expect aid? How comes it, then, that she is
afraid of offending him, if she was convinced of his favorable regard?

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p18"></span>Yet Christ bestows high commendation on
her faith. This agrees with what I have lately noticed, that God deals
kindly and gently with his people, — accepts their faith, though
imperfect and weak, — and does not lay to their charge the faults and
imperfections with which it is connected. It was by the guidance of
faith, therefore, that the woman approached to Christ. When she stopped
at the garment, instead of presenting herself in prayers that she might
be cured, inconsiderate zeal may have drawn her a little aside from the
right path; particularly as she soon afterwards shows that she had made
the attempt with some degree of doubt and uncertainty. Were we even to
grant that this was suggested to her by the Spirit, it still remains a
fixed rule, that our faith must not be driven hither and thither by
particular examples, but ought to rest wholly on the word of God,
according to the saying of Paul, *Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing
by the word of God,* (<span id="ix.lxxvii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p18.1"></span>.) This is a highly necessary warning, that
we may not dignify with the name of faith any opinion which has been
rashly embraced.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p19"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p20"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p20.2"></span>[Luke
8:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#045)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p20.2"></span>.** *Who is it that touched me,* Mark
expresses it still more clearly, when he says that Christ *looked around
to see* who she was. It does appear to be absurd that Christ should pour
out his grace without knowing on whom he was bestowing a favor. There is
not less difficulty in what he shortly afterwards says, that *he
perceived that power had gone out from him:* as if, while it flowed from
him, it was not a free gift bestowed at those times, and on those
persons, whom he was pleased to select. Beyond all question, he
knowingly and willingly cured the woman; and there is as little doubt
that he drew her to himself by his Spirit, that she might obtain a cure:
but he puts the question to her, that she may freely and publicly make
it known. If Christ had been the only witness of his miracle, his
statements might not perhaps have been believed: but now, when the
woman, struck with dread, relates what happened to her, greater weight
is due to her confession.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p21"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p22"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p22.2"></span>[Matthew
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#022)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p22.2"></span>.** *Take courage, my daughter.* This
expression shows the weakness of her faith for, had there been no
impropriety in her *trembling,* Christ would not have corrected it by
exhorting her to *take courage* Yet, at the same time, he commends her
*faith;* and this supports the view which I have already stated, that,
while she sought Christ by the guidance of the Spirit, and from a
sincere and pious desire, she hesitated in such a manner as to need to
be strengthened. Thus we see that faith, in order to please God, needs
forgiveness, and is at the same time sustained by new aid, that it may
acquire additional strength. We may here draw a comparison from the
health of the body to that of the soul: for, as Christ says that the
woman’s deliverance from her disease was the consequence of her *faith,*
so it is certain, that we obtain by faith the forgiveness of sins, which
reconciles us to God.

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p23"></span><span id="ix.lxxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p24"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p24.2"></span>[Mark
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p24.2"></span>.** *Go in peace, and be delivered from thy
scourge.* From this exhortation we infer that the benefit which she had
obtained was fully ratified, when she heard from the lips of Christ what
she had already learned from experience: for we do not truly, or with a
safe conscience, enjoy God’s benefits in any other way than by
possessing them as contained in the treasury of his promises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_525"></span>[526](cc31085.htm#fr_525) <span
id="ix.lxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p6"></span> *“*<span
id="ix.lxxvii-p6.1"></span>Lequel s'enclina devant lui;” — “who bowed
down before him.”

<span id="fn_526"></span>[527](cc31085.htm#fr_526) <span
id="ix.lxxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxvii-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxvii-p13.1"></span>Car
Jairus ne pretendoit pas d'attribuer a Christ un honneur appar-tenant a
la majeste Divine;” — “for Jairus did not profess to ascribe to Christ
an honor belonging to the Divine majesty.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:23-26; Mark 5:35-43; Luke 8:49-56](cc31086)
