[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31066)  [Next](cc31068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lix"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p1"></span>MATTHEW 6:25-30; LUKE 12:22-28

<span id="ix.lix-p2"></span><span id="ix.lix-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
6:25-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="ix.lix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p3"></span><span id="ix.lix-p3.1"></span>[Luke
12:22-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022)<span id="ix.lix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p4"></span>**25**.** **Therefore I say to you, Do not
be anxious about your life, what you shall eat and drink, or for you
body, what clothes you shall wear: is not the life of more value than
food, and the body of more value than clothing? **26**.** **Look at the
fowls of heaven, for they neither sow nor reap, nor collect into
granaries, and your heavenly Father feedeth them: are you not more
excellent than they are? **27**.** **And which of you, by anxious care,
can add to his stature one cubit? **28**.** **And why are you anxious
about clothing? Con sider the lilies of the field, how they grow: they
neither toil nor spin. **29**.** **But I say to you, That even Solomon
in all hs glory  <span id="fr_457"></span>[458](#fn_457) was not clothed
like one of these. **30**.** **But if God so clothes the grass of the
field, which is today, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not
much more clothe you, O you of little faith?

<span id="ix.lix-p6"></span>**22**.** **And he said to his disciples,
Therefore I say to you, be not anxious about your life, what you shall
eat, nor for the body, with what you shall be clothed. **23**.** **The
life is of more value than food, and the body is of more value than
clothing. **24**.** **Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor
reap, which neither have granary nor barn, and God feedeth them: how
much more are ye better than the fowls? **25**.** **And which of you, by
anxious care, can add to your stature on cubit? **26**.** **If therefore
you cannot do even that which is least, why are ye anxious about the
rest? **27**.** **Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil
or spin. And I say to you, Even Solomon in all his glory was not clothed
like one of these. **28**.** **And if God thus clothes the grass, which
is today in the field, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much
more shall he clothe you, O you of little faith?

<span id="ix.lix-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.lix-p8"></span><span id="ix.lix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p9"></span>Throughout the whole of this discourse,
Christ reproves that *excessive* anxiety, with which men torment
themselves, about food and clothing, and, at the same time, applies a
remedy for curing this disease. When he forbids them to be *anxious,*
this is not to be taken literally, as if he intended to take away from
his people all care. We know that men are born on the condition of
having some care; and, indeed, this is not the least portion of the
miseries, which the Lord has laid upon us as a punishment, in order to
humble us. But immoderate care is condemned for two reasons: either
because in so doing men tease and vex themselves to no purpose, by
carrying their anxiety farther than is proper or than their calling
demands; or because they claim more for themselves than they have a
right to do, and place such a reliance on their own industry, that they
neglect to call upon God. We ought to remember this promise: though
unbelievers shall “rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of
sorrows,” yet believers will obtain, through the kindness of God, rest
and sleep, (<span id="ix.lix-p9.2"></span>[Ps
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002)<span id="ix.lix-p9.2"></span>.)
Though the children of God are not free from toil and anxiety, yet,
properly speaking, we do not say that they are anxious about life:
because, through their reliance on the providence of God, they enjoy
calm repose.

<span id="ix.lix-p10"></span>Hence it is easy to learn, how far we ought
to be *anxious about food* Each of us ought to labor, as far as his
calling requires and the Lord commands; and each of us ought to be led
by his own wants to call upon God. Such anxiety holds an intermediate
place between indolent carelessness and the unnecessary torments by
which unbelievers kill themselves. But if we give proper attention to
the words of Christ, we shall find, that he does not forbid every kind
of care, but only what arises from distrust. Be *not anxious,* says he,
*what you shall eat, or what you shall drink* That belongs to those who
tremble for fear of poverty or hunger, as if they were to be in want of
food every moment.

<span id="ix.lix-p11"></span>**<span id="ix.lix-p11.1"></span>[Matthew
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#025)<span id="ix.lix-p11.1"></span>.**
*Is not the life of more value than food?* He argues from the greater to
the less. He had forbidden them to be excessively anxious about the way
in which life might be supported; and he now assigns the reason. The
Lord, who has given life itself, will not suffer us to want what is
necessary for its support. And certainly we do no small dishonor to God,
when we fail to trust that he will give us necessary food or clothing;
as if he had thrown us on the earth at random. He who is fully
convinced, that the Author of our life has an intimate knowledge of our
condition, will entertain no doubt that he will make abundant provision
for our wants. Whenever we are seized by any fear or anxiety about food,
let us remember, that God will take care of the life which he gave us.

<span id="ix.lix-p12"></span><span id="ix.lix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p13"></span>**26.** *Look at the fowls of the air* This
is the remedy I spoke of, for teaching us to rely on the providence of
God: for of all cares, which go beyond bounds, unbelief is the mother.
The only cure for covetousness is to embrace the promises of God, by
which he assures us that he will take care of us. In the same manner,
the Apostle, wishing to withdraw believers from *covetousness,* confirms
that doctrine: *for he hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee,* (<span id="ix.lix-p13.2"></span>[Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005)<span id="ix.lix-p13.2"></span>.)
The substance of the exhortation is, that we ought to trust in God, by
whom none of his own people, however mean their condition may be, are
disregarded.

<span id="ix.lix-p14"></span>*Your heavenly Father feedeth them* This
deserves careful attention: for, though we are unable to explain the
manner in which their life is supported, which of us is in the habit of
considering that their life depends on the providence of God, which he
is pleased to extend even to them? But if it is thoroughly fixed in our
minds, *that the fowls* are supplied with food by the hand of God, there
will be no difficulty in expecting it for ourselves, who are formed
after his image, and reckoned among his children. *They neither sow nor
reap* By these words it is far from being our Lord’s intention to
encourage us to indolence and sluggishness. All that he means is, that,
though other means fail, the providence of God is alone sufficient for
us, for it supplies the animals abundantly with every thing that they
need.

<span id="ix.lix-p15"></span>Instead *of fowls, (*<span
id="ix.lix-p15.1"></span>τὰ πετεινὰ*,*) Luke uses the word *ravens,*
(<span id="ix.lix-p15.2"></span>τοὺς κόρακας,) alluding perhaps to that
passage in the Psalms, *who giveth food to the young ravens that call
upon him,* (<span id="ix.lix-p15.3"></span>[Psalm
67](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#000)<span id="ix.lix-p15.3"></span>: 9.)
Some think that David expressly mentioned *the ravens,* because they are
immediately deserted by their parents,  <span
id="fr_458"></span>[459](#fn_458) and therefore must have their food
brought to them by God. Hence it is evident, that Christ intended
nothing more than to teach his people to throw all their cares on God.

<span id="ix.lix-p17"></span><span id="ix.lix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p18"></span>**27.** *Which of you by anxious care, etc*
*?* Here our Lord condemns another fault, which is almost always
connected with immoderate anxiety about food: and that is, when a mortal
man, claiming more than he has a right to do, does not hesitate, in
sacrilegious hardihood, to go beyond his limits.

<span id="ix.lix-p19"></span>“O Lord, I know (says Jeremiah) that the
way of man is not in himself it is not in man that walketh to direct his
steps,”  
(<span id="ix.lix-p19.2"></span>[Jer
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#023)<span id="ix.lix-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lix-p20"></span>You scarcely meet with one person in a
hundred, who does not venture to make any promises that he thinks fit on
his own industry and power. The consequence is, that those who take
credit to themselves for their prosperity, do not hesitate to lose sight
of God, when they enter into any undertaking. To restrain this mad
rashness, Christ tells us, that whatever contributes to the support of
our life depends wholly on the blessing of God. The meaning is: “It is
foolish in men to weary themselves, because all our labors are
unnecessary and fruitless, and all our anxieties are to no purpose,
unless so far as God blesses them.” This is more clearly expressed by
Luke, *If you cannot do even that which is least, why are you anxious
about the rest?* These words show plainly, that Christ reproves not only
distrust, but pride, because men ascribe much more than they ought to
their own skill.

<span id="ix.lix-p21"></span><span id="ix.lix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p22"></span>**29.** *Not even Solomon in all his glory*
This means, that the kindness of God, which is gloriously displayed in
herbs and flowers, exceeds all that men can accomplish by their wealth
or power, or in any other way. Believers ought to be convinced that,
though all means fail, they will want nothing that is necessary for
their full satisfaction, provided they continue to enjoy the blessing of
God alone. *O you of little faith* In this respect Christ justly accuses
us of deficiency or weakness of faith: for the more powerfully we are
affected, according to our own grovelling views, by anxiety about the
present life, the more do we show our unbelief, if every thing does not
happen to our wish. Many persons, accordingly, who in great prosperity
appear to possess faith or at least to have a tolerable share of it,
tremble when any danger of poverty presents itself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_457"></span>[458](cc31067.htm#fr_457) <span
id="ix.lix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.lix-p5.1"></span>En toute sa
gloire, *ou, avec toute sa gloire*;” — “in all his glory, or, *with all
his glory* *”*

<span id="fn_458"></span>[459](cc31067.htm#fr_458) <span
id="ix.lix-p15.4"></span>

<span id="ix.lix-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.lix-p16.1"></span>Pource que
le pere et 1a mere les abandonnent incontinent qu'ils sont nais;” —
“because their parents forsake them as soon as they are born.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 6:31-34;Luke 12:29-32](cc31068)
