[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31005)  [Next](cc31007) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii"></span>

<span id="vii-p1"></span>THE

<span id="vii-p2"></span>AUTHOR’S EPISTLE DEDICATORY

<span id="vii-p3"></span>TO

<span id="vii-p4"></span>The Very Noble And Illustrious Lords,

<span id="vii-p5"></span>THE BURGOMASTERS AND COUNCIL

<span id="vii-p6"></span>OF THE NOBLE CITY OF FRANKFORT,

<span id="vii-p7"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="vii-p8"></span>If virtuous examples were ever necessary to be
held out for imitation, in order to stimulate lazy, sluggish, or
inactive persons, the sloth, and—what is more—the indifference of this
very corrupt age makes it necessary that the greater part of men, who do
not of their own accord advance, but rather fall back, should at least
be compelled by shame to discharge their duty. All, indeed, are seen to
be influenced, both in public and in private, by a disgraceful
emulation. There is not a king who does not labor to show that he is
equal to his neighbors in the address, or perseverance, or energy, or
courage, necessary for extending, by every possible method, the bounds
of his dominion. There is not a state or commonwealth that yields the
preference to others for cunning and all the arts of deception, nor a
single individual among the ranks of the ambitious who will acknowledge
his inferiority to others in wicked contrivances. In short, we would
almost say that they had entered into a silent but mutual conspiracy to
challenge each other to a contest of vices, and every man who carries
wickedness to an extreme easily ruins a vast multitude by his example;
so that, amidst the general prevalence of crimes, very few persons are
to be found who exhibit a pattern of uprightness.

<span id="vii-p9"></span>For these reasons I reckon it to be the more
advantageous that those uncommon excellencies, by which eminent persons
are distinguished, should receive the commendations which they deserve,
and should be raised to an elevated situation so as to be seen at a
great distance, that the desire of imitating them may be awakened in
many breasts. And this I acknowledge, most honorable Lords, to be the
principal reason why I am desirous that this work of mine should be
given to the world under the sanction of your name. For though my
undertaking will be regarded by me as having obtained a distinguished
reward, if your readiness to do good shall derive from it any increase,
yet I have had more particularly in my eye the other object which has
been mentioned, namely, that others may equal your progress, or at least
may follow the same course.

<span id="vii-p10"></span>I have no intention, however, to frame a
catalogue of all the excellencies by which you are distinguished, but
shall satisfy myself for the present with mentioning, in terms of
commendation, one excellence which has bound to you myself and a great
number of the servants of Christ by what may be called a more sacred
tie. It was a great matter that, more than five years ago, when all were
seized with dreadful alarm, when a fearful devastation of the churches
of Germany, and almost the destruction of the Gospel, was threatened by
the calamity which had occurred, you, on whom the first shower of darts
fell, stood firm in an open profession of the faith which was at that
time extremely odious, and steadily maintained the pure doctrine of
godliness which you had embraced, so as to make it evident that, amidst
the greatest anxieties and dangers, there is nothing which you value
more highly than to fight under the banner of Christ. But it is still
more remarkable, and more worthy of being put on record, that you not
only maintain the pure worship of God among yourselves, and faithfully
endeavor to keep your fellow-citizens within the fold of Christ, but
that you collect as torn members those fragments of a dispersed church
which had been thrown out in other countries.

<span id="vii-p11"></span>In the present melancholy state of affairs, it
has given me no small consolation to learn that devout worshippers of
God, who had come to you as exiles from England and from other places,
were received by you with warm hospitality; and that you not only opened
your gates to them in their wretched exile, but rendered deserved honor
to the Son of God, by making his Gospel to be distinctly heard in your
city in foreign languages. A similar instance of distinguished kindness
was recently showed to the unhappy natives of *Locarno* by the Council
of Zurich, who not only threw open their city to them, (when they were
not permitted to worship Christ at home according to their consciences)
but even assigned to them a church for holding their religious
assemblies, and were not prevented by a diversity of language from
desiring to hear Christ talk Italian in their own city.

<span id="vii-p12"></span>To return to yourselves: as soon as I heard
that you had had the kindness to allow persons who speak our language to
found a church amongst you, I considered that you had laid me under
private obligations, and resolved to take this opportunity of testifying
my gratitude. For while there is good reason for deploring the state of
our nation to be such, that the sacrilegious tyranny of Popery has made
a residence in our own country to be little else than a banishment from
the kingdom of God, so, on the other hand, it is a distinguished favor
to have a habitation granted to us on a foreign soil, where the lawful
worship of God may be observed. This truly sacred hospitality—which was
rendered not to men, but rather to Christ himself—will, I trust, add to
your already prosperous condition fresh acts of the divine kindness, and
secure them to you in uninterrupted succession.

<span id="vii-p13"></span>For my own part at least, as I have just now
declared, such were my inducements to dedicate to you this work of mine.
It is a *Harmony arranged out of Three Evangelists,* and has been
prepared by me with the greatest fidelity and diligence. What toil I
have bestowed on it would serve no purpose to detail; and how far I have
succeeded must be left to others to decide. The readers to whom I refer
are those honest, learned, and well-disposed persons, whose desire of
making progress is not retarded by a barbarous shame at receiving
instruction, and who feel an interest in the public advantage. I do not
trouble myself with mean and wicked scoundrels; and such I call not only
the hooded monks, who, in defending the tyranny of the Pope, carry on
open war with us, but those useless drones  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) who, mixing with us, seize on every pretense
for concealing their ignorance, and would wish to have the light of
doctrine wholly extinguished. Let them impudently bark at me as much as
they please: my reply will be always ready. Neither divine nor human
obligation subjects me to the judgment of those who deserve the lash for
their most disgraceful ignorance, as much as they deserve the whip for
their obstinate and hardened malice and insolence.

<span id="vii-p15"></span>I may be allowed at least to say, without the
imputation of boasting, that I have faithfully endeavored to be of
service to the Church of God. Two years ago, *John* was published along
with my Commentary, which, I trust, was not without advantage. And thus
like one of the heralds,  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) I have
endeavored, to the utmost extent that my ability allowed, to do honor to
Christ riding magnificently in his royal chariot drawn by four horses;
and feel assured that candid readers, who have derived advantage from my
labors, will not be ashamed to acknowledge that the success has, in some
measure, corresponded to my wish. The evangelical history, related by
four witnesses divinely appointed, is justly compared by me to a chariot
drawn by four horses: for by this appropriate and just harmony God
appears to have expressly prepared for his Son a triumphal chariot, from
which he may make a magnificent display to the whole body of believers,
and in which, with rapid progress, he may review the world. Augustine,
too, makes an apt comparison of the Four Evangelists to trumpets, the
sound of which fills every region of the world, so that the Church,
gathered from the East, and West, and South, and North, flows into a
holy unity of faith. So much the more intolerable is the curiosity of
those who, not satisfied with the heavenly heralds, obtrude upon us,
under the name of a Gospel, disgusting tales, which serve no other
purpose than to pollute the purity of faith, and to expose the name of
Christ to the sneers and ridicule of the ungodly.

<span id="vii-p17"></span>With regard to yourselves, most noble Lords,
as you detest every kind of leaven, by which the native purity of the
Gospel is corrupted, and show that you have nothing more at heart than
to defend and maintain the pure doctrine, as it was delivered by Christ,
I feel assured that this production, which opens up the treasure of the
Gospel, will receive your warmest approbation, and trust that my
dedication of it to you will be accepted as a mark of my regard.
Farewell, most illustrious Lords. May Christ always direct you by his
Spirit, support you by his power, defend you by his protection, and
enrich your city and commonwealth with all abundance of blessings.

<span id="vii-p18"></span>Geneva, 1st August, M.D.LV.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc31006.htm#fr_7) <span
id="vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p14"></span> “<span id="vii-p14.1"></span>Mais aussi de
ces vermines, lesquels meslez entre nous comme bourdons entre abeilles;”
— “but likewise those wretches who mixing with us like drones among
bees.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc31006.htm#fr_8) <span
id="vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii-p16"></span> “<span id="vii-p16.1"></span>Comme estant un
de la compagnie de ceux qui vont devant pour faire place a leur Roy;” —
“as being one of the company of those who go before to make way for
their King.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc31007)
