[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31020)  [Next](cc31022.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span>LUKE 1:76-80

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
1:76-80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#076.md)<span id="ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p3"></span>**76**.** **And thou, child, shalt be
called the Prophet of the Highest. for thou shalt go before the face of
the Lord to prepare his ways, **77**.** **To give knowledge of salvation
to his people by the forgiveness of their sins: **78**.** **Through the
bowels of the mercy of our God, by which the Eastern sky  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) hath visited us, **79**.** **That he
might give light to those who were sitting in darkness and the shadow of
death, to guide our feet into the way of peace. **80**.** **And the
child grew, and became strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the
day of his showing unto Israel.

<span id="ix.xiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xiii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p7"></span>**76.** *And thou, child* Zacharias again
returns to commend the grace of Christ, but does this, as it were, in
the person of his son, by describing briefly the office to which he had
been appointed as an instructor. Though in a little infant eight days
old he does not yet observe prophetical endowments, yet turning his eyes
to the purpose of God, he speaks of it as a thing already known. *To be
called* means here to be *considered and openly acknowledged* as the
prophet of God. A secret calling of God had already taken place. It only
remained that the nature of that calling should be manifested to men.
But as the name *Prophet* is general, Zacharias, following the
revelation brought to him by the angel, affirms that he would be the
usher  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) or herald of Christ. He
says, *thou shalt go before the face of the Lord:* that is, thou shalt
discharge the office of turning men by thy preaching to hear the Lord.
The reason why John, when he had nearly finished his course, affirmed
that he was not a *prophet* of God, is explained by me at the proper
place, (<span id="ix.xiii-p8.3"></span>[Joh
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021)<span id="ix.xiii-p8.3"></span>,.md)
and in what manner he was *to prepare his ways* we shall afterwards see.

<span id="ix.xiii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p10"></span>**77.** *To give knowledge of salvation*
Zacharias now touches the principal subject of the gospel, when he says
that the *knowledge of salvation* consists in *the forgiveness of sins*.
As we are all “by nature the children of wraths” (<span
id="ix.xiii-p10.1"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span id="ix.xiii-p10.1"></span>,.md)
it follows, that we are by nature condemned and ruined: and the ground
of our condemnation is, that we are chargeable with unrighteousness.
There is, therefore, no other provision for escaping eternal death
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) but by God

<span id="ix.xiii-p12"></span>“reconciling us unto himself, not imputing
our trespasses unto us,”  
(<span id="ix.xiii-p12.2"></span>[2Co
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)<span id="ix.xiii-p12.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xiii-p13"></span>That this is the only righteousness which
remains to us before God, may be easily gathered from the words of
Zacharias. For whence comes salvation, but from righteousness? But if
the children of God have no other way of obtaining the *knowledge of
salvation* except *through the forgiveness of sins,* it follows, that
righteousness must not be sought in any other quarter. Proud men attempt
to forge and manufacture a righteousness out of the merits of good
works. True righteousness is nothing else than the imputation of
righteousness, when God, out of free grace, acquits us from guilt.
Besides, it ought to be observed that Zacharias is not speaking of
*“*strangers from the covenants of promise,” (<span
id="ix.xiii-p13.1"></span>[Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012)<span id="ix.xiii-p13.1"></span>.md)
but of the people of God. Hence it follows, that not only does the
commencement of righteousness depend on the *forgiveness of sins,* but
it is by imputation  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) that believers
are righteous before God to the very end: for they cannot appear before
his tribunal in any other way than by betaking themselves daily to a
free reconciliation.

<span id="ix.xiii-p15"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p16"></span>**78.** *Through the bowels*  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) *of mercy* In so great a benefit
Zacharias justly extols the mercy of God, and not satisfied with merely
calling it the salvation which was brought by Christ, he employs more
emphatic language, and says that it proceeded from the very *bowels of
the mercy* of God. He then tells us metaphorically, that the great mercy
of God has made the day to *give light to those who were sitting in
darkness* *Oriens,* in the Latin version of this passage, is not a
participle: for the Greek word is <span
id="ix.xiii-p17.2"></span>ἀνατολή*,* that is, the Eastern region, as
contrasted with the West. Zacharias extols the *mercy* of God, as
manifested in dispelling the darkness of death, and restoring to the
people of God the light of life. In this way, whenever our salvation is
the subject, we ought to raise our minds to the contemplation of the
divine mercy. There appears to be an allusion to a prediction of
Malachi, in which Christ is called “the Sun of Righteousness,” and is
said to “arise with healing in his wing,” (<span
id="ix.xiii-p17.3"></span>[Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)<span id="ix.xiii-p17.3"></span>,.md)
that is, to bring health in his rays.

<span id="ix.xiii-p18"></span><span id="ix.xiii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p19"></span>**79.** *That he might give light to those
who were sitting in darkness* As to *light* and *darkness,* there are
similar modes of expression in Isaiah: such as,

<span id="ix.xiii-p20"></span>“The people that walked in darkness have
seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of death,
upon them hath the light shined,”  
(<span id="ix.xiii-p20.2"></span>[Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)<span id="ix.xiii-p20.2"></span>;.md)

<span id="ix.xiii-p21"></span>and in many other passages. These words
show, that out of Christ there is no life-giving light in the world, but
every thing is covered by the appalling darkness of death. Thus, in
another passage, Isaiah testifies that this privilege belongs peculiarly
to the church alone.

<span id="ix.xiii-p22"></span>“Behold, the darkness shall cover the
earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee,”  
(<span id="ix.xiii-p22.2"></span>[Isa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#002)<span id="ix.xiii-p22.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xiii-p23"></span>But how could it be said that the
Israelites, on whose hearts the Lord always shone by faith, *were
sitting in the shadow of death?* I reply, the godly, who lived under the
law were surrounded on every side by the darkness of death, and beheld
at a distance, in the coming of Christ, the light that cheered and
preserved them from being overwhelmed by present death. Zacharias may
have had in view the wretched condition of his own age. But it is a
general truth, that on all the godly, who had ever lived, or who were
afterwards to live, there arose in the coming of Christ a light to
impart life: for it even diffused life over the dead. To *sit* is of the
same import as to *lie:*  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) and so
Isaiah enjoins the Church, “Arise, for thy light is come,” (<span
id="ix.xiii-p24.2"></span>[Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001)<span id="ix.xiii-p24.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xiii-p25"></span>*To guide our feet* By this expression
Zacharias points out, that the highest perfection of all excellence and
happiness is to be found in Christ alone. The word *Peace* might indeed
be taken in its literal sense, which would not be unsuitable: for the
illumination brought by Christ tends to pacify the minds of men. But as
the Hebrew word <span id="ix.xiii-p25.1"></span>שלום, *peace,* denotes
every kind of prosperity, Zacharias intended, I doubt not, to represent
Christ as the author of perfect blessedness, that we may not seek the
smallest portion of happiness elsewhere, but may rest on Christ alone,
from a full conviction that in him we are entirely and completely happy.
To this purpose are those words of Isaiah,

<span id="ix.xiii-p26"></span>“The sun shall be no more thy light by
day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but the
Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory,”
(<span id="ix.xiii-p26.1"></span>[Isa
60:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#019.md)<span
id="ix.xiii-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xiii-p27"></span>But if the mere sight of his Son, while
still a child, led Zacharias to discourse in so lofty a strain
respecting the grace and power of Christ, before he was born, are not
they so much the more ungrateful, who, now that Christ has died, and
risen, and ascended to heaven, and sat down at his Father’s right hand,
speak disrespectfully of him and of his power, to which the Holy Spirit
bore testimony, while he was still in his mother’s womb? We must bear in
mind what I have already mentioned, that Zacharias spake not from
himself, but that the Spirit of God directed his tongue.

<span id="ix.xiii-p28"></span>*And the child grew* This is added by Luke
for continuing the thread of the history. *First,* he mentions that John
*became strong in spirit:* which implies that the great and uncommon
excellence of the child gave proof that there dwelt in him a Heavenly
Spirit. Next, he tells us, that John remained unknown in the deserts
*till the day of his showing,* that is, till the day on which the Lord
had pur-posed to bring him into public view. Hence we conclude, that
John, though he was fully aware of his calling, made no advances before
the appointed time, but awaited the call of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc31021.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xiii-p4.1"></span>Oriens ex
alto.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc31021.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p8"></span> “<span
id="ix.xiii-p8.1"></span>Apparitorem.” — “<span
id="ix.xiii-p8.2"></span>Heraut.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc31021.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p11"></span> “<span
id="ix.xiii-p11.1"></span>Mortis*;”* — *“*<span
id="ix.xiii-p11.2"></span>La mort mortelle.”

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc31021.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p14"></span> “<span
id="ix.xiii-p14.1"></span>Imputative, ut italoquar.” — “<span
id="ix.xiii-p14.2"></span>Par imputation, c'est a dire, d'autant que la
justice de Christ laur est imputee.” — “By imputation, that is to say,
in so far as the righteousnes of Christ is imputed to them”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc31021.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p17"></span> “<span id="ix.xiii-p17.1"></span>Par les
entrailles de la misericorde, ou, par l'affection misericordieuse.” —
“By the bowels of mercy, or, by the merciful affection.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc31021.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="ix.xiii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p24"></span> *“*<span id="ix.xiii-p24.1"></span>*Estre
assis* emporte autant comme estre couch, ou veautre.”— “To *sit* is of
the same import as to be lying or wallowing.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 1:1-17;Luke 3:23-38](cc31022.md)
