[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31085)  [Next](cc31087.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxviii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 9:23-26; MARK 5:35-43; LUKE
8:49-56

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p2"></span><span
id="ix.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
9:23-26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
5:35-43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
8:49-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#049.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p5"></span>**23**.** **And when Jesus came into the
house of the ruler, and saw the musicians and the multitude making a
noise, **24**.** **He saith to them, Withdraw: for the young woman is
not dead, but sleepeth: and they ridiculed him. **25**.** **And when the
multitude was put out, he entered and took hold of her hand, and the
girl arose. **26**.** **And this report spread into all that country.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p6"></span>**35**.** **While he is still speaking,
there come from the ruler of the synagogue persons who say, Thy daughter
is dead: why dost thou trouble the Master any farther? **36**.** **And
immediately on hearing the word which was said, he saith to the ruler of
the synagogue, Fear not, only believe. **37**.** **And he did not permit
any one to follow him, except Peter, and James, and John the brother of
James. **38**.** **And he came into the house of the ruler of the
synagogue, and saw the tumult, and persons who wept and lamented much.
**39**. And he entered, and said to them, Why do you vex yourselves and
lament? the girl is not dead, but sleepeth. **40**.** **And they
ridiculed him. But, having put them all out, he taketh the father and
mother of the girl, and those who were with him, and entereth where the
girl is lying. **41**.** **And he took hold of the hand of the girl, and
said to her, Talitha-cumi: which is, if one interpret it, Girl, I say to
thee, Arise. **42**.** **And immediately the girl arose, and walked: for
she was twelve years of age. And they were astonished with a great
astonishment. **43**.** **And he charged them earnestly, that no man
should know it: and commanded them to give her something to eat.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p7"></span>**49**.** **While he was still speaking,
one came from the house of the ruler of the synagogue, saying to him,
Thy daughter is dead, do not trouble the Master. **50**.** **But Jesus,
having heard this, replied to the ruler, saying, Fear not, only believe,
and she shall be cured. **51**.** **And when he came into the house, he
did not permit any one to enter, except Peter, and James, and John, and
the father and mother of the girl. **52**.** **And all were weeping and
bewailing her. But he said, Weep not: she is not dead, but sleepeth.
**53**.** **And they ridiculed him, knowing that she was dead.
**54**.** **And he having put them all out, took hold of her hand, and
cried out, saying, Girl, arise. **55**.** **And her spirit returned, and
she immediately arose: and he commanded to give her something to eat.
**56**.** **And her parents were astonished: but he charged them to tell
no man what had been done.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p10"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p10.2"></span>[Mark
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#036.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p10.2"></span>.** *Fear not, only believe.* The message
about her death had induced despair: for he had asked nothing from
Christ but relief to the diseased young woman. Christ therefore bids him
take care lest, by fear or distrust, he shut out that grace, to which
death will be no hindrance. By this expression, *only believe,* he means
that he will not want power, provided Jairus will allow him; and, at the
same time, exhorts him to enlarge his heart with confidence, because
there is no room to fear that his faith will be more extensive than the
boundless power of God. And truly this is the case with us all: for God
would be much more liberal in his communications to us, if we were not
so close; but our own scanty desires hinder him from pouring out his
gifts upon us in greater abundance.  <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527.md) In general, we are taught by this
passage, that we cannot go beyond bounds in believing: because our
faith, however large, will never embrace the hundredth part of the
divine goodness.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p13"></span>**37.** *And did not permit any one to
follow him.* He forbade that they should be allowed to enter, either
because they were unworthy to be his witnesses of the miracle, or
because he did not choose that the miracle should be overpowered by a
noisy crowd around him. It was better that the young woman, whose dead
body they had beheld, should suddenly go out before the eyes of men,
alive and full of rigor. *Mark* and *Luke* tell us that not more than
three of the disciples were admitted, and both mention also the parents.
*Mark* alone states that those who had accompanied Jairus when he came
to supplicate Christ were admitted. Matthew, who is more concise, takes
no notice of this circumstance.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p15"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p15.2"></span>[Luke
8:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#052.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p15.2"></span>.** *And all were weeping.* The Evangelists
mention the lamentation, that the resurrection may be more fully
believed. *Matthew* expressly states that *musicians* were present,
which was not usually the case till the death had been ascertained, and
while the preparations for the funeral were going forward. The flute, he
tells us, was heard in plaintive airs. Now, though their intention was
to bestow this sort of honor on their dead, and as it were to adorn
their grave, we see how strongly inclined the world is not only to
indulge but to promote its faults. It was their duty to employ every
method for allaying grief; but as if they had not sinned enough in
disorderly lamentation, they are eager to heighten it by fresh
excitements. The Gentiles even thought that this was a way of soothing
departed spirits; and hence we see how many corruptions were at that
time spread throughout Judea.  <span id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528.md)

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p17"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p18"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p18.2"></span>[Mark
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#039.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p18.2"></span>** *The girl sleepeth. Sleep* is everywhere
in Scripture employed to denote *death;* and there is no doubt but this
comparison, taken from temporal rest, points out a future resurrection.
But here Christ expressly makes a distinction between *sleep* and
*death,* so as to excite an expectation of life. His meaning is, “You
will presently see her raised up whom you suppose to be dead.” That he
was *ridiculed* by thoughtless and ignorant people, who were wholly
engrossed with profane lamentation, and who did not comprehend his
design, ought not to awaken surprise. And yet this very circumstance was
an additional confirmation of the miracle, that those persons
entertained no doubt whatever as to her death.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p19"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p20"></span>**41.** *And he took hold of her hand,
and said to her* **<span id="ix.lxxviii-p20.2"></span>[Luke
8:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#054.md)<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p20.2"></span>.** *And he took hold of her hand, and
cried* Though naturally this *cry* was of no avail for recalling the
senses of the deceased young woman, yet Christ intended to give a
magnificent display of the power of his voice, that he might more fully
accustom men to listen to his doctrine. It is easy to learn from this
the great efficacy of the voice of Christ, which reaches even to the
dead, and exerts a quickening influence on death itself. Accordingly,
Luke says that *her spirit returned,* or, in other words, that
immediately on being called, it obeyed the command of Christ.

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p21"></span><span id="ix.lxxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p22"></span>**43.** *And he charged them* Though
Christ did not admit all indiscriminately to behold this resurrection,
yet the miracle might not have remained long concealed. And it would
indeed have been improper to suppress that power of God, by which the
whole world ought to be prepared for life. Why then does he enjoin
silence on the young woman’s parents? Perhaps it was not so much about
the fact itself, as about the manner of it, that he wished them to be
silent, and that only for a time; for we see that there were other
instances in which he sought out a proper occasion. Those who think that
they were forbidden to speak for the purpose of whetting their desire,
resort to a solution which is unnatural. I do acknowledge that Christ
did not perform this miracle without the intention of making it known,
but perhaps at a more fitting time, or after the dismission of a crowd
among whom there was no prudence or moderation. He therefore intended to
allow some delay, that they might in quietness and composure revolve the
work of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_527"></span>[528](cc31086.htm#fr_527.md) <span
id="ix.lxxviii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p11"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p11.1"></span>Mais la petitesse, et (par maniere de dire)
la chicete de nostre foy, l'empesche de faire decouler plus abondamment
ses biens sur nous;” — “But the smallness and (so to speak) the
niggardliness of our faith, hinders him from making his benefits flow
more abundantly on us.”

<span id="fn_528"></span>[529](cc31086.htm#fr_528.md) <span
id="ix.lxxviii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxviii-p16"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxviii-p16.1"></span>Dont nous pouvons recueillir comment le
pays de Judee estoit lots reinply de beaucoup de corruptions, et
diverses sortes d'abus;” — “whence we may infer how much the country of
Judea was then filled with many corruptions, and various sorts of
abuses.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:27-34](cc31087.md)
