[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31074)  [Next](cc31076.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxvii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 7:15-20; LUKE 6:43-45

<span id="ix.lxvii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
7:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
6:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#043.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p4"></span>**15**.** **But beware of false prophets,
who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
**16**.** **From their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes
from thorns, or figs from thistles? **17**.** **So every good tree
yields good fruits, and a rotten tree yields bad fruits. **18**.** **A
good tree cannot yield evil fruits, nor can a rotten tree yield good
fruits. **19**.** **Every tree, which does not yield good fruit, is cut
down, and is thrown into the fire. **20**.** **Therefore from their
fruits you shall know them.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p5"></span>**43**.** **For the tree is not good which
yields rotten fruit; and the tree is not rotten which yields good fruit.
**44**.** **For every tree is known from its fruit: for men do not
gather figs from thorns, nor from thorns do they gather grapes.
**45**.** **A good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth
forth what is good, and a bad man, out of the bad treasure of his heart,
bringeth forth what is bad. For out of the abundance of the heart his
mouth speaketh.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxvii-p7"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.lxvii-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p8.1"></span>.** *But beware of false prophets* These words
were intended to teach, that the Church would be exposed to various
impositions, and that consequently many would be in danger of falling
from the faith, if they were not carefully on their guard. We know what
a strong propensity men have to falsehood, so that they not only have a
natural desire to be deceived, but each individual appears to be
ingenious in deceiving himself. Satan, who is a wonderful contriver of
delusions, is constantly laying snares to entrap ignorant and heedless
persons. It was a general expectation among the *Jews* that, under the
reign of Christ, their condition would be delightful, and free from all
contest or uneasiness. He therefore warns his disciples that, if they
desire to persevere, they must prepare themselves to avoid the snares of
Satan. It is the will of the Lord, (as has been already said,) that his
Church shall be engaged in uninterrupted war in this world. That we may
continue to be his disciples to the end, it is not enough that we are
merely submissive, and allow ourselves to be governed by his Word. Our
faith, which is constantly attacked by Satan, must be prepared to
resist.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p9"></span>It is of the greatest consequence,
undoubtedly, that we should suffer ourselves to be directed by good and
faithful ministers of Christ: but as false teachers, on the other hand,
make their appearance, if we do not carefully watch, and if we are not
fortified by perseverance, we shall be easily carried off from the
flock. To this purpose also is that saying of Christ:

<span id="ix.lxvii-p10"></span>*“*The sheep hear the voice of the
shepherd; and a stranger  
they do not follow, but flee from him*,”* (<span
id="ix.lxvii-p10.2"></span>[John 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#005)<span id="ix.lxvii-p10.2"></span>.md)

<span id="ix.lxvii-p11"></span>Hence too we infer, that there is no
reason why believers should be discouraged or alarmed, when wolves creep
into the fold of Christ, when *false prophets* endeavor to corrupt the
purity of the faith by false doctrines. They ought rather to be aroused
to keep watch: for it is not without reason that Christ enjoins them to
be on their guard. Provided that we are not led astray through our own
sluggishness, we shall be able to avoid every kind of snares; and,
indeed, without this confidence, we would not have the courage necessary
for being on our guard. Now that we know that the Lord will not fail to
perform his promises, whatever may be the attacks of Satan, let us go
boldly to the Lord, asking from him the Spirit of wisdom, by whose
influences he not only seals on our hearts the belief of his truth, but
exposes the tricks and impositions of Satan, that we may not be deceived
by them. When Christ says, that they *come to us in sheep’s clothing,
but inwardly are ravening wolves,* his meaning is, that they do not want
a very plausible pretense, if prudence be not exercised in subjecting
them to a thorough examination.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p12"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p13"></span>**16.** *From their fruits you shall know
them* Had not this mark of distinction been added, we might have called
in question the authority of all teachers without exception. If there is
a mortal danger to be dreaded in teachers, and if we see no way of
avoiding it, we shall be under the necessity of holding them all
suspected: and there will be no better or shorter method than to keep
our ears shut against them all. We see that ungodly men, to screen
themselves when rejecting every kind of doctrine, hold out this danger,
and that weak and ill-informed persons remain in a state of perplexity.
That our reverence for the Gospel, and for its faithful ministers and
teachers, may not be diminished, Christ enjoins us to form our opinion
of the *false prophets from their fruits* It is with a very bad grace
that the Papists, in order to excite hatred against us, quote directly
this exhortation of Christ, *Beware of false prophets,* and by their
clamors induce ignorant people to avoid us, without knowing why. But
whoever desires to follow our Lord’s advice must judge wisely and with
just discretion. For ourselves, we not only acknowledge freely that men
ought to *beware of false prophets,* but we carefully and earnestly
exhort simple people to *beware* of them. Only we warn them that,
agreeably to the rule which Christ has laid down, they should first make
a strict examination, that simple people may not reject the pure Word of
God, and suffer the punishment of their own rashness. There is a wide
difference between wise caution and perverse squeamishness.  <span
id="fr_475"></span>[476](#fn_475.md) It is a heinous wickedness in the
Papists to repeal the command of Christ, by infusing into unhappy
persons an unfounded dread,  <span id="fr_476"></span>[477](#fn_476.md)
which deters them from making inquiry. Let this be regarded by us as a
first principl that those who tremblingly reject or avoid a doctrine
unknown to them, act improperly, and are very far from obeying the
command of Christ.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p16"></span>It now remains to be seen, what are the
*fruits* which Christ points out. Those who confine them to the life
are, in my opinion, mistaken. As pretended sanctity, and I know not what
masks belonging to greater austerity of life, are frequently held out by
some of the worst impostors, this would be a very uncertain test. Their
hypocrisy, I do own, is at length discovered; for nothing is more
difficult than to counterfeit virtue. But Christ did not intend to
submit his doctrine to a decision so unjust in itself, and so liable to
be misunderstood, as to have it estimated by the life of men. Under the
*fruits* the *manner of teaching* is itself included, and indeed holds
the chief place: for Christ proves that he was sent by God from this
consideration, that

<span id="ix.lxvii-p17"></span>*“*he seeketh not his own glory,  
but the glory of the Father who sent him*,”* (<span
id="ix.lxvii-p17.2"></span>[Joh
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxvii-p18"></span>Is it objected, that few persons are
endued with such acuteness, as to distinguish *good fruits* from *bad?*
I answer, as I have already said: Believers are never deprived of the
Spirit of wisdom, where his assistance is needful, provided they
distrust themselves, renounce their own judgment, and give themselves up
wholly to his direction. Let us remember, however, that all doctrines
must be brought to the Word of God as the standard, and that, in judging
*of false prophets,* the rule of faith holds the chief place. We must
also consider what God enjoins on his prophets and the ministers of his
word: for in this way their faithfulness may be easily ascertained. If,
for example, we place before our minds what Paul requires in *bishops,*
(<span id="ix.lxvii-p18.1"></span>[1Ti
3:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#001.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p18.1"></span>; <span id="ix.lxvii-p18.2"></span>Titus
1:6-9,) that description will be sufficient of itself to condemn the
whole mass of Popery: for the Popish priests seem as if they purposely
intended to present an opposite picture. There is no reason to wonder,
therefore, if they forbid men to form a judgment of false prophets. But
this passage clearly shows, that their titles ought to go for nothing,
and that not much regard ought to be had even to their calling, if those
who receive the name of pastors, and are called to the office of
teachers, do not faithfully answer to their charge.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p19"></span>*Do men gather grapes from thorns, or
figs from thistles?* By these proverbs, which were then in common use
and universally received, Christ confirms his statement, that no man can
be deceived by *false prophets,* unless he is wilfully blind: for the
*fruits* as plainly discover upright servants of God, and unfaithful
workmen, as the *fruits* point out the nature of the tree.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p20"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p21"></span>**<span id="ix.lxvii-p21.2"></span>[Luke
6:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#043.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p21.2"></span>.** *For the tree is not good* This
statement, as related by Luke, appears to be a general instruction given
by Christ, that by the *fruits* our opinion of every man ought to be
formed, in the same manner as *a tree is known by its fruit* After
having inserted the reproof to hypocrites, who “*perceive a straw in the
eye of another, but do not see a beam in their own*,” (verses 41,42,) he
immediately adds, *For the tree is not good which beareth rotten fruit,
nor is the tree rotten which beareth good fruit* The illative particle
<span id="ix.lxvii-p21.3"></span>γὰρ, *for,* appears to connect these
two sentences. But as it is certain that Luke, in that sixth chapter,
records various discourses of Christ, it is also possible that he may
have briefly glanced at what is more fully explained by Matthew. I
attach no great importance to the word *for,* which in other passages is
often superfiuous, and appears obviously to be so from the concluding
statement.

<span id="ix.lxvii-p22"></span><span id="ix.lxvii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p23"></span>**<span id="ix.lxvii-p23.1"></span>[Luke
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#045.md)<span
id="ix.lxvii-p23.1"></span>.** *A good man, out of the good treasure of
his heart, bringeth forth good* Such is the statement with which Luke
concludes the discourse; and I have no doubt that he intended to
describe, without a figure, the kind of judgment which Christ orders us
to make from the *fruits* Believers ought to examine carefully what kind
of doctrine is taught by those who profess to be the servants of God.
“Titles (he says) are of little value, till the speaker give actual
evidence that he is sent by God.” Yet I am far from saying, that this
passage may not be applied to a general doctrine, And certainly the last
clause, *out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh,* has a
more extensive reference than to false prophets: for it is a common
proverb. Is it objected, that the tongues of men lie, and that men of
the worst hearts are often the best speakers? I reply: Christ merely
points out here what is a very ordinary occurrence. For, though
hypocrites express in words what is different from the feelings of their
hearts, that is no reason why we may not justly and appropriately call
the tongue the *portrait* of the mind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_475"></span>[476](cc31075.htm#fr_475.md) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.lxvii-p14.1"></span>Il y a
grande difference entre une bonne facon de se donner garde d'estre
trompe, et un deboutement temeraire sans savoir pourquoy.” — “There is a
great difference between a proper method of guarding against being
deceived, and a hasty rejection without knowing, why.”

<span id="fn_476"></span>[477](cc31075.htm#fr_476.md) <span
id="ix.lxvii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxvii-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.lxvii-p15.1"></span>Par
une vaine crainte, qu'ils leur proposent;” — “by a vain dread which they
hold out to them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 7:21-23; Luke 6:46](cc31076.md)
