[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31058)  [Next](cc31060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.li"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p1"></span>MATTHEW 5:43-48; LUKE 6:27-36

<span id="ix.li-p2"></span><span id="ix.li-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
5:43-48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)<span id="ix.li-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p3"></span><span id="ix.li-p3.1"></span>[Luke
6:27-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#027)<span id="ix.li-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p4"></span>**43**.** **Ye have heard that it hath been
said, Thou shalt love they neighbor, and thou shalt hate thy enemy.
**44**.** **But I say to you, Love your enemies: bless those who curse
you: do good to those that hate you: and pray for those who injure and
persecute you: **45**.** **That you may be the children of your Father
who is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and the
good, and sendeth rain upon the just and unjust. **46**.** **For if you
shall love those who love you, what reward shall you have?
**47**.** **And if you shall embrace your brethren only, what do you
more? Do not the publicans thus? **48**.** **You shall, therefore, be
perfect, as your Father who is in heaven is perfect.

<span id="ix.li-p5"></span>**27**.** **But I say to you who hear, Love
your enemies: do good to those who hate you. **28**.** **Bless those who
curse you, and pray for those who injure you. (A little after.)
**32**.** **And if you love those who love you, what good-will shall it
be in you? for sinners also love those by whom they are loved.
**33**.** **And if you shall do good to those who do good to you, what
good-will shall it be in you? for sinners also do this. (Again a little
after.) **35**.** **But love your enemies. (Again.) And ye shall be the
children of the Highest: for he is kind to the unthankful and evil.
**36**.** **Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful.

<span id="ix.li-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.li-p7"></span><span id="ix.li-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p8"></span>**<span id="ix.li-p8.1"></span>[Matthew
5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)<span id="ix.li-p8.1"></span>.**
*Thou shalt love thy neighbor.* It is astonishing, that the Scribes fell
into so great an absurdity, as to limit the word *neighbor* to
benevolent persons: for nothing is more obvious or certain than that
God, in speaking of our neighbors, includes the whole human race. Every
man is devoted to himself; and whenever a regard to personal convenience
occasions an interruption of acts of kindness, there is a departure from
that mutual intercourse, which nature itself dictates. To keep up the
exercise of brotherly love, God assures us, that all men are our
brethren, because they are related to us by a common nature. Whenever I
see a man, I must, of necessity, behold myself as in a mirror: for he is
my *bone and my flesh,* (<span id="ix.li-p8.2"></span>[Ge
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014)<span id="ix.li-p8.2"></span>.)
Now, though the greater part of men break off, in most instances, from
this holy society, yet their depravity does not violate the order of
nature; for we ought to regard God as the author of the union.

<span id="ix.li-p9"></span>Hence we conclude, that the precept of the
law, by which we are commanded to love our neighbor, is general. But the
Scribes, judging of *neighborhood* from the disposition of the
individual, affirmed that no man ought to be reckoned a *neighbor,*
unless he were worthy of esteem on account of his own excellencies, or,
at least, unless he acted the part of a friend. This is, no doubt,
supported by the common opinion; and therefore the children of the world
are not ashamed to acknowledge their resentments, when they have any
reason to assign for them. But the charity, which God requires in his
law, looks not at what a man has deserved, but extends itself to the
unworthy, the wicked, and the ungrateful. Now, this is the true meaning
which Christ restores, and vindicates from calumny; and hence it is
obvious, as I have already said, that Christ does not introduce new
laws, but corrects the wicked glosses of the Scribes, by whom the purity
of the divine law had been corrupted.

<span id="ix.li-p10"></span><span id="ix.li-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p11"></span>**44.** *Love your enemies.* This single
point includes the whole of the former doctrine: for he who shall bring
his mind to love those who hate him, will naturally refrain from all
revenge, will patiently endure evils, will be much more prone to assist
the wretched. Christ presents to us, in a summary view, the way and
manner of fulfilling this precept, *Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself,* (<span id="ix.li-p11.2"></span>[Mt
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039)<span id="ix.li-p11.2"></span>.)
For no man will ever come to obey this precept, till he shall have given
up self-love, or rather denied himself, and till men, all of whom God
has declared to be connected with him, shall be held by him in such
estimation, that he shall even proceed to love those by whom he is
regarded with hatred.

<span id="ix.li-p12"></span>We learn from these words, how far believers
ought to be removed from every kind of revenge: for they are not only
forbidden to ask it from God, but are commanded to banish and efface it
from their minds so completely, as to *bless their enemies.* In the
meantime, they do not fail to commit their cause to God, till he take
vengeance on the reprobate: for they desire, as far as lies in them,
that the wicked should return to a sound mind, that they may not perish;
and thus they endeavor to promote their salvation. And there is still
this consolation, by which all their distresses are soothed. They
entertain no doubt, that God will be the avenger of obstinate
wickedness, so as to make it manifest, that those who are unjustly
attacked are the objects of his care. It is very difficult, indeed, and
altogether contrary to the disposition of the flesh, to render good for
evil. But our vices and weakness ought not to be pleaded as an apology.
We ought simply to inquire, what is demanded by the law of charity: for,
if we rely on the heavenly power of the Spirit, we shall encounter
successfully all that is opposed to it in our feelings.

<span id="ix.li-p13"></span>This is undoubtedly the reason why monks,
and other bawlers of the same class, imagined that these were *advices,*
and not precepts, given by Christ: for they took the strength of men as
the standard, for ascertaining what they owe to God and to his law. And
yet the monks were not ashamed to claim perfection for themselves,
having voluntarily bound themselves to attend to his advices. How
faithfully they support the title to which they lay claim I do not now
say:  <span id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) but the folly and
absurdity of alleging, that they are only advices, will appear from many
considerations. First, to say that he *advised* his disciples, but did
not authoritatively command them, to do what was right, is to dishonor
Christ. Secondly, to represent the duties of charity, which depend on
the law, as matters on which they are left at liberty, is highly
foolish.  <span id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) Thirdly, the words
<span id="ix.li-p15.2"></span>ἐγὼ δὲ λέγω ὑμῖν*, but I say to you,* mean
in this passage, “I denounce,” or “I command,” and cannot, with
propriety, be rendered, *“I* advise.” Lastly, that it is an express
command of what must necessarily be obeyed, is proved, without any
difficulty, from the words of Christ: for he immediately adds,

<span id="ix.li-p16"></span><span id="ix.li-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p17"></span>**45.** *That ye may be the children of your
Father who is in heaven.* When he expressly declares, that no man will
be a child of God, unless he *loves those who hate him,* who shall dare
to say, that we are not bound to observe this doctrine? The statement
amounts to this, “Whoever shall wish to be accounted a Christian, let
him *love his enemies.”* It is truly horrible and monstrous, that the
world should have been covered with such thick darkness, for three or
four centuries, as not to see that it is an express command, and that
every one who neglects it is struck out of the number of the children of
God.

<span id="ix.li-p18"></span>It ought to be observed that, when the
example of God is held out for our imitation, this does not imply, that
it would be becoming in us to do whatever God does. He frequently
punishes the wicked, and drives the wicked out of the world. In this
respect, he does not desire us to imitate him: for the judgment of the
world, which is his prerogative, does not belong to us. But it is his
will, that we should imitate his fatherly goodness and liberality. This
was perceived, not only by heathen philosophers, but by some wicked
despisers of godliness, who have made this open confession, that in
nothing do men resemble God more than in doing good. In short, Christ
assures us, that this will be a mark of our adoption, if we are *kind to
the unthankful and evil.* And yet you are not to understand, that our
liberality makes us the children of God: but the same Spirit, who is the
*witness,* (<span id="ix.li-p18.1"></span>[Ro
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016)<span id="ix.li-p18.1"></span>,)
*earnest,* (<span id="ix.li-p18.2"></span>[Eph
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#014)<span id="ix.li-p18.2"></span>,)
and *seal,* (<span id="ix.li-p18.3"></span>[Eph
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#030)<span id="ix.li-p18.3"></span>,)
of our free adoption, corrects the wicked affections of the flesh, which
are opposed to charity. Christ therefore proves from the effect, that
none are the children of God, but those who resemble him in gentleness
and kindness.

<span id="ix.li-p19"></span>Luke says, *and you shall be the children of
the Highest.* Not that any man acquires this honor for himself, or
begins to be a *child of God,* when he *loves his enemies;* but because,
when it is intended to excite us to do what is right, Scripture
frequently employs this manner of speaking, and represents as a reward
the free gifts of God. The reason is, he looks at the design of our
calling, which is, that, in consequence of the likeness of God having
been formed anew in us, we may live a devout and holy life. *He maketh
his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and the unjust.* He quotes two instances of the divine kindness toward
us, which are not only well known to us, but common to all: and this
very participation excites us the more powerfully to act in a similar
manner towards each other, though, by a *synecdoche,*  <span
id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) he includes a vast number of other
favors.

<span id="ix.li-p21"></span><span id="ix.li-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p22"></span>**46.** *Do not even the publicans the
same?* In the same sense, Luke calls them *sinners,* that is, wicked and
unprincipled men. Not that the office is condemned in itself; for the
*publicans* were collectors of taxes, and as princes have a right to
impose taxes, so it is lawful to levy them from the people. But they are
so called, because men of this class are usually covetous and rapacious,
nay, deceitful and cruel; and because among the Jews they were the
agents of a wicked tyranny. If any one shall conclude from the words of
Christ, that *publicans* are the basest of all men, he will argue ill,
for our Lord employs the ordinary phraseology. His meaning is: those who
are nearly devoid of humanity have some appearance of discharging mutual
duties, when they see it to be for their own advantage.

<span id="ix.li-p23"></span><span id="ix.li-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p24"></span>**48.** *You shall therefore be perfect.*
This *perfection* does not mean *equality,* but relates solely to
resemblance.  <span id="fr_422"></span>[423](#fn_422) However distant we
are from the perfection of God, we are said to be *perfect, as he is
perfect,* when we aim at the same object, which he presents to us in
Himself. Should it be thought preferable, we may state it thus. There is
no comparison here made between God and us: but the *perfection* of God
means, *first,* that free and pure kindness, which is not induced by the
expectation of gain; — and, *secondly,* that remarkable goodness, which
contends with the malice and ingratitude of men. This appears more
clearly from the words of Luke, *Be ye therefore merciful, as your
Father also is merciful:* for *mercy* is contrasted with a mercenary
regard, which is founded on private advantage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_419"></span>[420](cc31059.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ix.li-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.li-p14.1"></span>Je ne touche
point pour le present combien ils s'acquittent vaillament et fidelement
de ce dont ils se vantent de paroles.” — “I say nothing, for the
present, as to the valiant and faithful manner in which they accomplish
what they boast of in words.”

<span id="fn_420"></span>[421](cc31059.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ix.li-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p15"></span> “<span id="ix.li-p15.1"></span>C'est une
chose tant et plus absurde, que les devoirs de charite, qui dependent de
la Loy, soyent mis en la liberte des hommes, de les faire, ou de les
laisser.” — “It is an exceedingly absurd thing, that the duties of
charity, which depend on the Law, should be put in the power of men to
do them, or to let them alone.”

<span id="fn_421"></span>[422](cc31059.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ix.li-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p20"></span> “<span id="ix.li-p20.1"></span>Combien
qu'il comprend sous ces deux d'autres infinis tesmoignages, par une
figure dont nous avons souvent parle, nommee Synecdoche.” — “Though,
under these two, he includes innumerable other testimonies, by a figure,
of which we have frequently spoken, called *Synecdoche.”*

<span id="fn_422"></span>[423](cc31059.htm#fr_422) <span
id="ix.li-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ix.li-p25"></span> “<span id="ix.li-p25.1"></span>Ceste
perfection ne signifie pas qu'il y ait une.equalite et mesme mesure,
mais elle se rapporte seulement a quelque ressemblance ou ap-proche.” —
“That perfection does not mean that there is an equality or thee same
measure, but it relates solely to some resemblance or approach.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 6:1-4](cc31060)
