[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31080)  [Next](cc31082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 8:19-22; LUKE 9:57-62

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
8:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p3.1"></span>[Luke
9:57-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#057)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p4"></span>**19**.** **And a scribe approaching said
to him, Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou shalt go.
**20**.** **And Jesus saith to him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the
air have nests: but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head.
**21**.** **And another of his disciples said to him, Lord, permit me
first to go and bury my father. **22**.** **And Jesus said to him,
Follow me, and allow the dead to bury their dead.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p5"></span>**57**.** **And it happened, while they
were walking in the way, one said to him, I will follow thee
withersoever thou shalt go. **58**.** **Jesus said to him, Foxes have
holes, and birds of the air have nests: but the Son of man hath not
where to lay his head. **59**.** **And he said to another, Follow me.
And he said, Lord, permit me to go first and bury my father.
**60**.** **And Jesus said to him, Allow the dead to bury their dead:
but go thou and proclaim the kingdom of God. **61**.** **And another
said to him, I will follow thee, Lord, but permit me first to bid
farewell to those who are in my house. **62**.** **Jesus said to him, No
man who, having put his hand to the plough, shall look back, is fit for
the kingdom of God.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p7"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p8"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>[Matthew
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p8.2"></span>.** *And a scribe approaching.* Two men are
here presented to us by Matthew, and three by Luke, all of whom were
prepared to become disciples of Christ, but who, having been prevented
by a diversity of vices from following the right course, receive a
corresponding variety of replies. It might at first sight appear
strange, that Christ sends back, and does not admit into his family, one
who offers to follow him immediately and without delay: while he detains
another along with him who, by asking leave for a time, showed himself
to be slower and less willing. But there are the best reasons for both.
Whence arose the great readiness of the *scribe* to prepare himself
immediately to accompany Christ, but from his not having at all
considered the hard and wretched condition of his followers? We must
bear in mind that he was a *scribe,* who had been accustomed to a quiet
and easy life, had enjoyed honor, and was ill-fitted to endure
reproaches, poverty, persecutions, and the cross. He wishes indeed to
follow Christ, but dreams of an easy and agreeable life, and of
dwellings filled with every convenience; whereas the disciples of Christ
must walk among thorns, and march to the cross amidst uninterrupted
afflictions. The more eager he is, the less he is prepared. He seems as
if he wished to fight in the shade and at ease, neither annoyed by sweat
nor by dust, and beyond the reach of the weapons of war. There is no
reason to wonder that Christ rejects such persons: for, as they rush on
without consideration, they are distressed by the first uneasiness of
any kind that occurs, lose courage at the first attack, give way, and
basely desert their post. Besides, this scribe might have sought a place
in the family of Christ, in order to live at his table without expense,
and to feed luxuriously without toil. Let us therefore look upon
ourselves as warned, in his person, not to boast lightly and at ease,
that we will be the disciples of Christ, while we are taking no thought
of the cross, or of afflictions; but, on the contrary, to consider early
what sort of condition awaits us. The first lesson which he gives us, on
entering his school, is to *deny ourselves, and take up his cross,*
(<span id="ix.lxxiii-p8.3"></span>[Mt
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p8.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p9"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p10"></span>**20.** *Foxes have holes.* The Son of
God describes by these words what was his condition while he lived on
the earth, but, at the same time, informs his disciples what sort of
life they must be prepared to expect. And yet it is strange that Christ
should say, that he had not a foot of earth on which he could *lay his
head,* while there were many godly and benevolent persons, who would
willingly receive him into their houses. But this was spoken, it ought
to be observed, as a warning to the scribe, not to expect an abundant
and rich hire, as if he had a wealthy master, while the master himself
receives a precarious subsistence in borrowed houses.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p11"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p12"></span>**21.** *Lord, permit me to go first and
bury my father.* We have said, that the scribe was rejected by Christ as
a follower, because he made his offer without consideration, and
imagined that he would enjoy an easy life. The person whom Christ
retains had an opposite fault. He was prevented from immediately obeying
the call of Christ by the weakness of thinking it a hardship to leave
his father. It is probable that his father was in extreme old age: for
the mode of expression, *Permit me to bury,* implies that he had but a
short time to live. Luke says that Christ ordered him to *follow;* while
*Matthew* says that he was *one of his disciples* But he does not refuse
the calling: he only asks leave for a time to discharge a duty which he
owes to his father.  <span id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) The excuse
bears that he looked upon himself as at liberty till his father’s death.
From Christ’s reply we learn, that children should discharge their duty
to their parents in such a manner that, whenever God calls them to
another employment, they should lay this aside, and assign the first
place to the command of God. Whatever duties we owe to men must give
way, when God enjoins upon us what is immediately due to himself. All
ought to consider what God requires from them as individuals, and what
is demanded by their particular calling, that earthly parents may not
prevent the claims of the highest and only Father of all from remaining
entire.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p15"></span>**22.** *Allow the dead to bury their
dead.* By these words Christ does not condemn burial: for it would have
been shameful and cruel to throw away the bodies of the dead unburied,
and we know that the custom of burying originated in a divine command,
and was practiced by the saints, in order to strengthen the hope of the
last resurrection. He intended only to show, that what ever withdraws us
from the right course, or retards us in it, deserves no other name than
*death* Those only live, he tells us, who devote all their thoughts, and
every part of their life, to obedience to God; while those who do not
rise above the world, — who devote themselves to pleasing men, and
forget God, — are like *dead men,* who are idly and uselessly employed
in taking care of the dead.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p16"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p17"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p17.2"></span>[Luke
9:60](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#060)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p17.2"></span>.** *But go thou and proclaim the kingdom of
God.* Matthew has only the words, *Follow me:* but Luke states more
fully the reason why he was called, which was, that he might be a
minister and preacher of the Gospel. Had he remained in a private
station, there would have been no absolute necessity for leaving his
father, provided he did not forsake the Gospel on his father’s account.
 <span id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) But the preaching of the Gospel
does not allow him to remain at home, and therefore Christ properly
takes him away from his father. While the amazing goodness of Christ
appears in bestowing so honorable an office on a man who was still so
weak, it deserves our notice, that the fault which still cleaved to him
is corrected, and is not overlooked and encouraged.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p19"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p20"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p20.1"></span>[Luke
9:61](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#061)<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p20.1"></span>.** *And another said.* Matthew does not
mention this third person. It appears that he was too strongly attached
to the world, to be ready and prepared to follow Christ. True, he offers
to join the family of Christ, but with this reservation, *after he has
bid farewell to those who are in his house;* that is, after he has
arranged his business at home, as men are wont to do when preparing for
a journey. This is the true reason why Christ reproves him so severely:
for, while he was professing in words that he would be a follower of
Christ, he turned his back upon him, till he had despatched his worldly
business.

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p21"></span><span id="ix.lxxiii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p22"></span>**62.** *He who, after having put his
hand to the plough, shall look back, is unfit for the kingdom of God.*
We must carefully inquire what this declaration of Christ means. They
are said to *look back,* who become involved in the cares of the world,
so as to allow themselves to be withdrawn from the right path;
particularly, when they plunge themselves into those employments which
disqualify them to follow Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_505"></span>[506](cc31081.htm#fr_505) <span
id="ix.lxxiii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p13"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxiii-p13.1"></span>Jusque a ce qu'il se soit acquitte envers
son pere du devoir que nature commande;” — “until he has discharged that
duty to his father which nature requires.”

<span id="fn_506"></span>[507](cc31081.htm#fr_506) <span
id="ix.lxxiii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxiii-p18"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxiii-p18.1"></span>Pour
faire son devoir envers son pere;” — “to do his duty to his father.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 9:1-8;Mark 2:1-12;Luke 5:17-26](cc31082)
