[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31006)  [Next](cc31008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii"></span>

<span id="viii-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="viii-p2"></span>ON THE GOSPEL OF JESUS CHRIST

<span id="viii-p3"></span>ACCORDING TO MATTHEW, MARK, AND LUKE

<span id="viii-p4"></span>In order to read with profit the Evangelical
history, it is of great importance to understand the meaning of the word
*Gospel.*  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) We shall thus be enabled
to ascertain what design those heavenly witnesses had in writing, and to
what object the events related by them must be referred. That their
histories did not receive this name from others, but were so denominated
by the Authors, is evident from Mark, who expressly says (<span
id="viii-p5.3"></span>[Mr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)<span
id="viii-p5.3"></span>) that he relates *the beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ.* There is one passage in the writings of Paul, from which
above all others a clear and certain definition of the word *Gospel* may
be obtained, where he tells us that it ...

<span id="viii-p6"></span>was promised by God in the Scriptures, through
the prophets, concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made of
the seed of David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of
God with power, according to the Spirit of sanctification, by the
resurrection from the dead,  
(<span id="viii-p6.2"></span>[Ro
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#002)<span id="viii-p6.2"></span>.)

<span id="viii-p7"></span>First, this passage shows that the Gospel is a
testimony of the revealed salvation, which had been formerly promised to
the Fathers in an uninterrupted succession of ages. It points out, at
the same time, a distinction between the *promises* which kept the hope
of the people in suspense, and this joyful message, by which God
declares that he has accomplished those things which he had formerly
required them to expect.  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) In the
same manner he states a little afterwards, that in the Gospel

<span id="viii-p9"></span>the righteousness of God is openly manifested,
which was testified by the Law and the Prophets, (<span
id="viii-p9.1"></span>[Ro 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)<span
id="viii-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii-p10"></span>The same apostle calls it, in another
passage, an *Embassy* by which the reconciliation of the world to God,
once accomplished by the death of Christ, is daily offered to men,
(<span id="viii-p10.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span id="viii-p10.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii-p11"></span>Secondly, Paul means not only that Christ is
the pledge of all the blessings that God has ever promised, but that we
have in him a full and complete exhibition of them; as he elsewhere
declares that *all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him amen,*
(<span id="viii-p11.1"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span id="viii-p11.1"></span>.)
And, indeed, the freely bestowed adoption, by which we are made sons of
God, as it proceeds from the good pleasure which the Father had from
eternity, has been revealed to us in this respect, that Christ (who
alone is the Son of God by nature) has clothed himself with our flesh,
and made us his brethren. That satisfaction by which sins are blotted
out, so that we are no longer under the curse and the sentence of,
death, is to be found nowhere else than in the sacrifice of his death.
Righteousness, and salvation, and perfect happiness, are founded on his
resurrection.

<span id="viii-p12"></span>The *Gospel,* therefore, is a public
exhibition of the Son of God *manifested in the flesh,* (<span
id="viii-p12.1"></span>[1Ti 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="viii-p12.1"></span>,) to deliver a ruined world, and to restore men
from death to life. It is justly called a *good* and *joyful message,*
for it contains perfect happiness. Its object is to commence the reign
of God, and by means of our deliverance from the corruption of the
flesh, and of our renewal by the Spirit, to conduct us to the heavenly
glory. For this reason it is often called *the kingdom of heaven,* and
the restoration to a blessed life, which is brought to us by Christ, is
sometimes called *the kingdom of God:* as when Mark says that *Joseph
waited for the kingdom of God,* (<span id="viii-p12.2"></span>[Mr
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043)<span id="viii-p12.2"></span>,)
he undoubtedly refers to the coming of the Messiah.

<span id="viii-p13"></span>Hence it is evident that the word *Gospel*
applies properly to the New Testament, and that those writers are
chargeable with a want of precision,  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) who say that it was common to all ages,
and who suppose that the Prophets, equally with the Apostles, were
ministers of the Gospel. Widely different is the account which Christ
gives us, when he says, that

<span id="viii-p15"></span>the law and the prophets were till John, and
that since that time the kingdom of God began to be preached, (<span
id="viii-p15.1"></span>[Lu 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span
id="viii-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="viii-p16"></span>Mark, too, as we mentioned a little ago,
declares that the preaching of John was *the beginning of the Gospel,*
(<span id="viii-p16.1"></span>[Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii-p16.1"></span>.)
Again, the four histories, which relate how Christ discharged the office
of Mediator, have with great propriety received this designation. As the
birth, death, and resurrection of Christ contain the whole of our
salvation, and are therefore the peculiar subject of the *Gospel,* the
name of *Evangelists* is justly and suitably applied to those who place
before our eyes Christ who has been sent by the Father, that our faith
may acknowledge him to be the Author of a blessed life.

<span id="viii-p17"></span>The power and results of his coming are still
more fully expressed in other books of the New Testament. And even in
this respect John differs widely from the other three Evangelists: for
he is almost wholly occupied in explaining the power of Christ, and the
advantages which we derive from him; while they insist more fully on one
point, that our Christ is that Son of God who had been promised to be
the Redeemer of the world. They interweave, no doubt, the doctrine which
relates to the office of Christ, and inform us what is the nature of his
grace, and for what purpose he has been given to us; but they are
principally employed, as I have said, in showing that in the person of
Jesus Christ has been fulfilled what God had promised from the
beginning.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) They had no intention
or design to abolish by their writings *the law and the prophets;* as
some fanatics dream that the Old Testament is superfluous, now that the
truth of heavenly wisdom has been revealed to us by Christ and his
Apostles. On the contrary, they point with the finger to Christ, and
admonish us to seek from him whatever is ascribed to him by *the law and
the prophets.* The full profit and advantage, therefore, to be derived
from the reading of the Gospel will only be obtained when we learn to
connect it with the ancient promises.

<span id="viii-p19"></span>With regard to the three writers of the
Evangelical history, whom I undertake to expound, *Matthew* is
sufficiently known. *Mark* is generally supposed to have been the
private friend and disciple of Peter. It is even believed that he wrote
the Gospel, as it was dictated to him by Peter, and thus merely
performed the office of an amanuensis or clerk.  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) But on this subject we need not give
ourselves much trouble, for it is of little importance to us, provided
only we believe that he is a properly qualified and divinely appointed
witness, who committed nothing to writing, but as the Holy Spirit
directed him and guided his pen. There is no ground whatever for the
statement of Jerome, that his Gospel is an abridgment of the Gospel by
Matthew. He does not everywhere adhere to the order which Matthew
observed, and from the very commencement handles the subjects in a
different manner. Some things, too, are related by him which the other
had omitted, and his narrative of the same event is sometimes more
detailed. It is more probable, in my opinion — and the nature of the
case warrants the conjecture — that he had not seen Matthew’s book when
he wrote his own; so far is he from having expressly intended to make an
abridgment.

<span id="viii-p21"></span>I have the same observation to make
respecting *Luke:* for we will not say that the diversity which we
perceive in the three Evangelists was the object of express arrangement,
but as they intended to give an honest narrative of what they knew to be
certain and undoubted, each followed that method which he reckoned best.
Now as this did not happen by chance, but by the direction of Divine
Providence, so under this diversity in the manner of writing the Holy
Spirit suggested to them an astonishing harmony, which would almost be
sufficient of itself to secure credit to them, if there were not other
and stronger evidences to support their authority.

<span id="viii-p22"></span>Luke asserts plainly enough that he is the
person who attended Paul. But it is a childish statement which Eusebius
makes, that Paul is the Author of the Gospel which bears the name of
Luke, because in one passage he mentions *his Gospel,*  <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) (<span id="viii-p23.2"></span>[2Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span id="viii-p23.2"></span>.) As
if what follows did not make it clear that Paul is speaking of his whole
preaching, and not of a single book: for he adds, *for which I suffer
trouble, even to bonds,* (<span id="viii-p23.3"></span>[2Ti
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#009)<span id="viii-p23.3"></span>.)
Now, it is certain that he was not held guilty  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) of having written a book, but of having
administered and preached with the living voice the doctrine of Christ.
Eusebius, whose industry was great, discovers here a singular want of
judgment in collecting without discrimination such gross absurdities. On
this head I have thought it necessary to warn my readers, that they may
not be shocked at fooleries of the same description which occur in every
part of his history.

<span id="viii-p25"></span>Of that method of interpretation which I have
chosen to adopt, and which it may be many persons, at first sight, will
not approve, it will be proper to give some account for the satisfaction
of pious and candid readers. First, it is beyond all dispute, that it is
impossible to expound, in a proper and successful manner, any one of the
Evangelists, without comparing him with the other two; and, accordingly,
faithful and learned commentators spend a very great portion of their
labor on reconciling the narratives of the three Evangelists. But as it
frequently happens that persons of ordinary abilities find the
comparison to be no easy matter, when it is necessary to pass at every
turn from the one to the other, I thought that it might prove to be a
seasonable and useful abridgment of their labor, if I were to arrange
the three histories in one unbroken chain, or in a single picture, in
which the reader may perceive at a glance the resemblance or diversity
that exists. In this way I shall leave out nothing that has been written
by any of the three Evangelists; and whatever may be found in more than
one of them will be collected into one place.

<span id="viii-p26"></span>Whether or not I have succeeded to my
expectation, the reader must decide by his own experience. So far from
claiming the praise of having brought out something new, I readily
acknowledge, as becomes an honest man, that I have adopted this method
in imitation of others. *Bucer, a* man of revered memory, and an eminent
teacher of the Church of God, who above all others appears to me to have
labored successfully in this field, has been especially my model. As he
availed himself of the labors of the ancients who had traveled this road
before him, so my toils have been not a little alleviated by his
industry and application. Where I use the liberty of differing from him,
(which I have freely done, whenever it was necessary,) Bucer himself, if
he were still an inhabitant of the earth, would not be displeased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc31007.htm#fr_9) <span
id="viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p5"></span> <span id="viii-p5.1"></span>*Evangelium* in
Latin, <span id="viii-p5.2"></span>*Evangile* in French, and *Evangell*
in old English, are derived, with little alteration, from the Greek word
εὐαγγέλιον, which is compounded of εὖ, *well,* and ἀγγελία*, a message,*
and signifies *glad news.* The English word *Gospel is* of Saxon
derivation, and is determined by its etymology to signify *God’s word;*
but must have acquired, at a very early period, the meaning of the Greek
word for which it has been adopted as a translation. In the margin of
the celebrated Geneva Testament, printed A.D. 1557, *Gospel* is thus
defined: — “This worde signifieth good tidinges, and is taken here for
the storie which conteineth the joyful message of the comming of the
Sonne of God.” — *Ed*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc31007.htm#fr_10) <span
id="viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p8"></span> “<span id="viii-p8.1"></span>Ce qu’il avoit
auparavant commande a tous fideles d’attendre et esperer;” — “which he
had formerly commanded all believers to expect and hope.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc31007.htm#fr_11) <span
id="viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p14"></span> “<span id="viii-p14.1"></span>Que c’est
aucunement confondre les termes;” — “that it is in a manner a
confounding of words.”

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc31007.htm#fr_12) <span
id="viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p18"></span> “<span id="viii-p18.1"></span>Des le
commencement du monde;” — “from the beginning of the world.”

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc31007.htm#fr_13) <span
id="viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p20"></span> “<span id="viii-p20.1"></span>En sorte qu il
ait seulement este escrivain sous luy;” — “so that he was only a writer
under him.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc31007.htm#fr_14) <span
id="viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii-p23"></span> “<span id="viii-p23.1"></span>Se fondant sur
une passage ou il fait mention de son Evangile;” — “founding on a
passage in which he makes mention of his Gospel,” *(according to my
gospel.)*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc31007.htm#fr_15) <span
id="viii-p23.4"></span>

<span id="viii-p24"></span> “<span id="viii-p24.1"></span>Il n’avoit
este accuse, et emprisonne;” — “he was not accused and imprisoned.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary](cc31008)
