[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc31029)  [Next](cc31031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p1"></span>LUKE 2:33-39

<span id="ix.xxii-p2"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p2.1"></span>[Luke
2:33-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#033.md)<span id="ix.xxii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p3"></span>**33**.** **And his father and mother were
wondering about those things which were spoken of him. **34**.** **And
Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Lo, this (child) has
been set for the ruin, and for the resurrection of many in Israel, and
for a sign, which is spoken against. **35**.** **But also a sword shall
pierce thy own soul: that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.
**36**.** **And there was Anna, a prophetess, daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Asher: she had advanced to a great age, and had lived with
her husband seven years from her virginity. **37**.** **And she was a
widow of about eighty-four years, who departed not from the temple
worshipping (God) with fastings and prayer day and night.
**38**.** **And she, coming in at that hour, made acknowledgments also
to God,  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) and spake of him to all
who looked for redemption in Jerusalem. **39**.** **And when they had
completed all things according to the Law of the Lord, they returned to
Galilee, to their own city Nazareth.

<span id="ix.xxii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxii-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p7"></span>**33.** *And his father and mother were
wondering* Luke does not say, that they were astonished at it as a new
thing, but that they contemplated with reverence, and embraced with
becoming admiration, this prediction of the Spirit uttered by the lips
of Simeon, so that they continued to make progress in the knowledge of
Christ. We learn from this example that, when we have once come to
possess a right faith, we ought to collect, on every hand, whatever may
aid in giving to it additional strength. That man has made great
proficiency in the word of God, who does not fail to admire whatever he
reads or hears every day, that contributes to his unceasing progress in
faith.

<span id="ix.xxii-p8"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p9"></span>**34.** *And Simeon blessed them* If you
confine this to Joseph and Mary, there will be no difficulty. But, as
Luke appears to include Christ at the same time, it might be asked, What
right had Simeon to take upon him the office of blessing Christ?
“Without all contradiction,” says Paul, “the less is blessed of the
greater,” (<span id="ix.xxii-p9.1"></span>[Heb
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#007)<span id="ix.xxii-p9.1"></span>..md)
Besides, it has the appearance of absurdity, that any mortal man should
offer prayers in behalf of the Son of God. I answer: The Apostle does
not speak there of every kind of blessing, but only of the priestly
blessing: for, in other respects, it is highly proper in men to pray for
each other. Now, it is more probable that *Simeon blessed them,* as a
private man and as one of the people, than that he did so in a public
character: for, as we have already said, we nowhere read that he was a
priest. But there would be no absurdity in saying, that he prayed for
the prosperity and advancement of Christ’s kingdom: for in the book of
Psalms the Spirit prescribes such a <span
id="ix.xxii-p9.2"></span>εὐλογία*,*—*a blessing* of this nature to all
the godly.

<span id="ix.xxii-p10"></span>“Blessed is he that cometh in the name of
the Lord;  
we have blessed you in the name of the Lords”  
(<span id="ix.xxii-p10.3"></span>[Ps
118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026.md)<span
id="ix.xxii-p10.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxii-p11"></span>*Lo, this has been set* This discourse
was, no doubt, directly addressed by Simeon to Mary; but it has a
general reference to all the godly. The holy virgin needed this
admonition, that she might not (as usually happens) be lifted up by
prosperous beginnings, so as to be less prepared for enduring afflictive
events. But she needed it on another account, that she might not expect
Christ to be received by the people with universal applause, but that
her mind, on the contrary, might be fortified by unshaken courage
against all hostile attacks. It was the design, at the same time, of the
Spirit of God, to lay down a general instruction for all the godly. When
they see the world opposing Christ with wicked obstinacy, they must be
prepared to meet that opposition, and to contend against it undismayed.
The unbelief of the world is—we know it—a great and serious hinderance;
but it must be conquered, if we wish to believe in Christ. There never
was a state of human society so happily constituted, that the greater
part followed Christ. Those who will enlist in the cause of Christ must
learn this as one of their earliest lessons, and must “put on” this
“armor,” (<span id="ix.xxii-p11.1"></span>[Eph
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#011)<span id="ix.xxii-p11.1"></span>,.md)
that they may be steadfast in believing on him.

<span id="ix.xxii-p12"></span>It was by far the heaviest temptation,
that Christ was not acknowledged by his own countrymen, and was even
ignominiously rejected by that nation, which boasted that it was the
Church of God; and, particularly, that the priests and scribes, who held
in their hands the government of the Church, were his most determined
enemies. For who would have thought, that he was the King of those, who
not only rejected him, but treated him with such contempt and outrage?

<span id="ix.xxii-p13"></span>We see, then, that a good purpose was
served by Simeon’s prediction, that Christ was *set for the ruin of many
in Israel* The meaning is, that he was divinely appointed to cast down
and destroy many. But it must be observed, that the ruin of unbelievers
results from their striking against him. This is immediately afterwards
expressed, when Simeon says that Christ is *a sign, which is spoken
against* Because unbelievers are rebels against Christ, they clash
themselves against him, and hence comes their *ruin* This metaphor is
taken from a mark shot at by archers,  <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) as if Simeon had said, Hence we
perceive the malice of men, and even the depravity of the whole human
race, that all, as if they had made a conspiracy, rise in murmurs and
rebellion against the Son of God. The world would not display such
harmony in opposing the Gospel, if there were not a natural enmity
between the Son of God and those men. The ambition or fury of the
enemies of the Gospel carries them in various directions, faction splits
them into various sects, and a wide variety of superstitions
distinguishes idolaters from each other. But while they thus differ
among themselves, they all agree in this, to oppose the Son of God. It
has been justly observed, that the opposition everywhere made to Christ
is too plain an evidence of human depravity. That the world should thus
rise against its Creator is a monstrous sight. But Scripture predicted
that this would happen, and the reason is very apparent, that men who
have once been alienated from God by sin, always fly from him. Instances
of this kind, therefore, ought not to take us by surprise; but, on the
contrary, our faith, provided with this armor, ought to be prepared to
fight with the contradiction of the world.

<span id="ix.xxii-p15"></span>As God has now gathered an Israel to
himself from the whole world, and there is no longer a distinction
between the Jew and the Greek, the same thing must now happen as, we
learn, happened before. Isaiah had said of his own age,

<span id="ix.xxii-p16"></span>*“*The Lord will be for a stone of
stumbling, and for a rock of offense, to both the houses of Israel,”
(<span id="ix.xxii-p16.1"></span>[Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="ix.xxii-p16.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xxii-p17"></span>From that time, the Jews hardly ever
ceased to dash themselves against God, but the rudest shock was against
Christ. The same madness is now imitated by those who call themselves
Christians; and even those, who lay haughty claims to the first rank in
the Church, frequently employ all the power which they possess in
oppressing Christ. But let us remember, all that they gain is, to be at
length crushed and *“*broken in pieces,” (<span
id="ix.xxii-p17.1"></span>[Isa
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#009)<span id="ix.xxii-p17.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ix.xxii-p18"></span>Under the word *ruin* the Spirit denounces
the punishment of unbelievers, and thus warns us to keep at the greatest
possible distance from them; lest, by associating with them, we become
involved in the same destruction. And Christ is not the less worthy of
esteem, because, when he appears, many are ruined: for the “savor” of
the Gospel is not less “sweet” and delightful to God, (<span
id="ix.xxii-p18.1"></span>[2 Cor.
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016)<span id="ix.xxii-p18.1"></span>,.md)
though it is destructive to the ungodly world. Does any one inquire, how
Christ occasions the *ruin* of unbelievers, who without him were already
lost? The reply is easy. Those who voluntarily deprive themselves of the
salvation which God has offered to them, perish twice. *Ruin* implies
the double punishment which awaits all unbelievers, after that they have
knowingly and wilfully opposed the Son of God.

<span id="ix.xxii-p19"></span>*And for the resurrection* This
consolation is presented as a contrast with the former clause, to make
it less painful to our feelings: for, if nothing else were added, it
would be melancholy to hear, that Christ is *“*a stone of stumbling,”
which will break and crush, by its hardness, a great part of men.
Scripture therefore reminds us of his office, which is entirely
different: for the salvation of men, which is founded on it, is secure;
as Isaiah also says, *“*Sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him
be your fear, and let him be your dread; and he shall be for a
sanctuary,” or fortress of defense, (<span
id="ix.xxii-p19.1"></span>[Isa. 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014)<span id="ix.xxii-p19.1"></span>..md)
And Peter speaks more clearly:

<span id="ix.xxii-p20"></span>*“*To whom coming, as unto a living stone,
disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, ye also, as
lively stones, are built up a spiritual house. Wherefore also it is
contained in Scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion the head-stone of the
corner, elect, precious, and he that believeth in him shall not be
confounded. Unto you, therefore, which believe, he is precious: but unto
them who are disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the
same is made the head of the corner,” (<span
id="ix.xxii-p20.1"></span>[1Pe
2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md)<span id="ix.xxii-p20.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.xxii-p20.2"></span>[Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md)<span
id="ix.xxii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxii-p21"></span>That we may not be terrified by the
designation bestowed on Christ, “a stone of stumbling,” let it be
instantly recollected, on the other hand, that he is likewise called the
“corner-stone,” on which rests the salvation of all the godly.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md)

<span id="ix.xxii-p23"></span>Let it be also taken into account, that
the former is accidental, while the latter is properly and strictly his
office. Besides, it deserves our notice, that Christ is not only called
the support, but the *resurrection* of the godly: for the condition of
men is not one in which it is safe for them to remain. They must *rise
from death,* before they begin to live.

<span id="ix.xxii-p24"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p25"></span>**35.** *But also a sword shall pierce thy
own soul* This warning must have contributed greatly to fortify the mind
of the holy virgin, and to prevent her from being overwhelmed with
grief, when she came to those distressing struggles, which she had to
undergo. Though her faith was agitated and tormented by various
temptations, yet her sorest battle was with the cross: for Christ might
appear to be utterly destroyed. She was not overwhelmed with grief; but
it would have required a heart of stone not to be deeply wounded: for
the patience of the saints differs widely from stupidity.

<span id="ix.xxii-p26"></span>*That the thoughts of many hearts may be
revealed* There are some who connect this clause with a part of the
former verse, that Christ is *set for the ruin and for the resurrection
of many in Israel;* and who include in a parenthesis what we have just
now explained about the *sword:* but it is better, I think, to refer it
to the whole passage. The particle *that,* <span
id="ix.xxii-p26.1"></span>ὅπως ἄν, in this passage, does not strictly
denote a cause, but merely a consequence. When the light of the Gospel
arises, and persecutions immediately spring up, there is, at the same
time, a disclosure of affections of the heart, which had been hitherto
concealed: for the lurking-places of human dissimulation are so deep,
that they easily remain hidden till Christ comes.  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) But Christ, by his light, discloses
every artifice, and unmasks hypocrisy; and to him is properly ascribed
the office of laying open the secrets of the heart. But when the cross
is added to doctrine it tries the hearts more to the quick. For those
who have embraced Christ by outward profession, often shrink from
bearing the cross, and, when they see the Church exposed to numerous
calamities, easily desert their post.

<span id="ix.xxii-p28"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p29"></span>**36.** *And there was Anna, a prophetess*
Luke mentions not more than two persons who received Christ; and this is
intended to teach us, that whatever belongs to God, however small it may
*be,* ought to be preferred by us to the whole world. The scribes and
priests, no doubt, were then surrounded by great splendor; but, as the
Spirit of God, whose *presence* was not at all enjoyed by those rulers,
 <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md) dwelt in *Simeon* and *Anna,*
those two persons are entitled to greater reverence than an immense
multitude of those whose pride is swelled by nothing but empty titles.
For this reason, the historian mentions Anna’s *age,* gives her the
designation of *prophetess,* and, thirdly, bears a remarkable testimony
to her piety, and to the holiness and chastity of her life. These are
the qualities that justly give to men weight and estimation. And
certainly none are led astray by the dazzling and empty magnificence of
outward show, but those who are drawn, by the vanity of their own minds,
to take pleasure in being deceived.

<span id="ix.xxii-p31"></span>*She had lived with her husband seven
years from her virginity* This is intended to inform us, that she was a
widow in the very prime of life. She had married young, and shortly
afterwards lost her husband; and the circumstance of her not entering
into a second marriage while she was in the rigor of her bodily frame,
 <span id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) is mentioned with the view of
heightening the commendation of her chastity. What follows, that *she
was a widow of about eighty-four years,* may be explained in two ways.
Either that time had passed in her unmarried state,  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) or it was the whole period of her
life. If you reckon the *eighty-four years* as the time of her
widowhood, it will follow that she was more than a hundred years old:
but I leave that matter doubtful. The Spirit of prophecy still shone in
a very few, who served as tokens to attest the doctrine of the Law and
the Jewish religion, till the coming of Christ. In a state of society so
dissolute, the elect of God needed such aids to prevent them from being
carried away.

<span id="ix.xxii-p34"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p35"></span>**37.** *She departed not from the temple*
This is a hyperbolical expression; but the meaning is plain, that Anna
was almost constantly in the temple. Luke adds, that she *worshipped God
with fastings and prayers day and night* Hence we infer, that she did
not visit the temple for the mere purpose of performing the outward
service, but that she added to it the other exercises of piety. It
deserves our attention, that the same rule is not enjoined on all, and
that all ought not to be led indiscriminately to copy those
performances, which are here commended in a widow. Each person ought to
make a judicious inquiry, what belongs to his own calling. Silly
ambition has filled the world with apes, from superstitious persons
seizing, with more “zeal” than “knowledges” (<span
id="ix.xxii-p35.1"></span>[Ro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002)<span id="ix.xxii-p35.1"></span>,.md)
every thing that they hear praised in the saints: as if the distinction
of rank did not render a selection of employments necessary, that each
person may answer to his own calling. What is here related of *Anna,*
Paul applies in a particular manner to widows, (<span
id="ix.xxii-p35.2"></span>[1Ti
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span id="ix.xxii-p35.2"></span>;.md)
so that married people act a foolish part, if they regulate their life
by an unsuitable model.

<span id="ix.xxii-p36"></span>But there still remains another doubt.
Luke appears to make *fastings* a part of divine *worship* But we must
observe, that of the acts which relate to worship, some are simply
required, and, as we are accustomed to say, are in themselves necessary;
while others are accessory, and have no other design than to aid the
former class. Prayers belong strictly to the worship of God. Fasting is
a subordinate aid, which is pleasing to God no farther than as it aids
the earnestness and fervency of prayer. We must hold by this rule, that
the duties of men are to be judged according as they are directed to a
proper and lawful end. We must hold, also, by this distinction, that
*prayers* are a direct worship of God; while *fastings* are a part of
worship only on account of their consequences. Nor is there any reason
to doubt, that the holy woman employed *fastings* as an excitement to
bewail those calamities of the Church which then existed.

<span id="ix.xxii-p37"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p38"></span>**38.** *Made acknowledgment also to God*
 <span id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) The holy melody, which
proceeded from the lips of Simeon and Anna, is praised by Luke, in order
that believers may exhort each other to sing with one mouth the praises
of God, and may give mutual replies. When he says, that Anna *spake of
him to all who looked for redemption in Jerusalem,* he again points out
the small number of the godly. For the substance of faith lay in this
expectation; and it is evident, that there were few who actually
cherished it in their minds.

<span id="ix.xxii-p40"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p41"></span>**39.** *They returned to Galilee* The
departure to Egypt, I readily acknowledge, came between those events;
and the fact mentioned by Luke, that they dwelt in *their own city
Nazareth,* is later, in point of time, than the flight into Egypt, which
Matthew relates, (<span id="ix.xxii-p41.1"></span>[Mt
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)<span id="ix.xxii-p41.1"></span>..md)
But if there was no impropriety in one Evangelist leaving out what is
related by another, there was nothing to prevent Luke from overleaping
the period which he did not intend to mention, and passing at once to
the following history. I am very far from agreeing with those who
imagine that Joseph and Mary, after having finished the sacrifice of
purification, returned to Bethlehem, to live there. Those persons are
foolish enough to believe, that Joseph had a settled abode in a place
where he was so little known, that he was unable to find a temporary
lodging. Nor is it without a good reason that Luke says, with respect
both to Joseph and Mary, that *Nazareth* was *their own city* We infer
from it, that he never was an inhabitant of Bethlehem, though it was the
place of his extraction.  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) As to
the order of time, I shall presently give a more full explanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc31030.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p4.1"></span>Louoit
aussi le Seigneur;” — “praised also the Lord.”

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc31030.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p14"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p14.1"></span>Ceste
facon de parler contient une metaphore prise des arbalestiers, ou autres
qui visent au blanc.” — “This way of speaking contains a metaphor, taken
from archers, or others who aim at a mark.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc31030.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p22"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p22.1"></span>La
maitresse Pierre du coin, sur laquelle est fonde le salut de tous les
enfans de Dieu.” — “The head-stone of the corner, on which is founded
the salvation of all the children of God.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc31030.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p27"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p27.1"></span>Extra
Christum;” — “<span id="ix.xxii-p27.2"></span>jusqu'a ce que Jesus
Christ viene.”

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc31030.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p30"></span> The word *rulers (*<span
id="ix.xxii-p30.1"></span>*principes)* appears to be here used
sarcastically; for his own translation is,” <span
id="ix.xxii-p30.2"></span>duquel estoyent du tout destituez les autres,
combien que ce fussent les gouverneurs;” — “of which the others were
entirely destitute, though they were rulers.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc31030.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p32"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p32.1"></span>Quum
adhuc vegeto esset corpore.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc31030.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p33"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p33.1"></span>Il y
avoit tant de temps que son mari estoit mort;” — “it was so long since
her husband died.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc31030.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p39"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p39.1"></span>Louoit
aussi le Seigneur;” — “praised also the Lord.”

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc31030.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="ix.xxii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p42"></span> “<span id="ix.xxii-p42.1"></span>Combien
que ce fust le pays de ses ancestres;” — “though it was the country of
his ancestors.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 2:13-18](cc31031.md)
