[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31090)  [Next](cc31092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p1"></span>MATTHEW 10:1-8; MARK 6:7; LUKE 9:1-2

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p2"></span><span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
10:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p3.1"></span>[Mark
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p4"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p4.1"></span>[Luke
9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p5"></span>**1**.** **And having called the twelve
disciples,  <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) he gave them power
against the unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to cure any disease
and any sickness. **2**.** **Now the names of the twelve apostles are
these: The first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother;
James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; **3**.** **Philip and
Bartholomew; Thomas, and Matthew the publican; James the son of Alpheus,
and Lebbeus, surnamed Thaddeus; **4**.** **Simon the Canaanite, and
Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. **5**.** **These, twelve in
number, Jesus sent out, and commanded them, saying, Go not into the way
of the Gentiles,  <span id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561) and enter not
into a city of the Samaritans: **6**.** **But go rather to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel.  <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562)
**7**.** **And when you have departed, preach, saying, The kingdom of
heaven is at hand. **8**.** **Cure the diseased, cleanse the lepers,
raise the dead, cast out devils: freely you have received, freely give.
 <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563)

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p10"></span>**7**.** **And he calleth the twelve,
and began to send them out two and two, and gave them power against
 <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564) the unclean spirits.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p12"></span>**1**.** **And having called the
twelve,  <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565) Jesus gave them power
and authority over all devils and to cure diseases. **2**.** **And sent
them to preach the kingdom of God, and to cure the diseased.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p14"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p15"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p16"></span>The calling of the Apostles is here
described to us, not as on a former occasion, when the Lord Jesus
Christ, intending to prepare them for their office, selected them for
admission into his private circle. They are now called to immediate
performance, are ordered to prepare themselves for the work, receive
injunctions, and, that there may be no want of authority, are endued
with the power of the Holy Spirit. Formerly, they were held in
expectation of future labor: now, Christ announces that the hour is come
when they must put their hands to the work. It is proper to observe,
however, that he does not as yet speak of perpetual apostleship, but
only of temporary preaching, which was fitted to awaken and excite the
minds of men, that they might be more attentive to hear Christ. So then
they are now sent to proclaim throughout Judea that the time of the
promised restoration and salvation is at hand at a future period, Christ
will appoint them to spread the Gospel through the whole world. Here, he
employs them as assistants only, to secure attention to him where his
voice could not reach afterwards, he will commit into their hands the
office of teaching which he had discharged. It is of great importance to
observe this, that we may not suppose it to be a certain and fixed rule
laid down for all ministers of the word, when our Lord gives
instructions to the preachers of his doctrine as to what he wishes them
to do for a short time. From inattention to this point many have been
led astray, so as to demand from all ministers of the word, without
distinction, conformity to this rule.  <span
id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566)

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p18"></span>**<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p18.1"></span>[Matthew
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p18.1"></span>.** *And having called the twelve
disciples* The number, *twelve,* was intended to point out the future
restoration of the Church. As the nation was descended from *twelve*
patriarchs, so its scattered remains are now reminded by Christ of their
origin, that they may entertain a fixed hope of being restored. Although
the kingdom of God was not in so flourishing a state in Judea, as to
preserve the nation entire, but, on the contrary, that people, which
already had miserably fallen, deserved doubly to die on account of
ingratitude in despising the grace which had been offered to them, yet
this did not prevent a new nation from afterwards springing up. At a
future period, God extended far beyond Zion the scepter of the power of
his Son, and caused rivers to flow from that fountain, to water
abundantly the four quarters of the world. Then God assembled his Israel
from every direction, and united into one body not only the scattered
and torn members, but men who had formerly been entirely alienated from
the people of God.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p19"></span>It was not without reason, therefore,
that the Lord, by appointing, as it were, twelve patriarchs, declared
the restoration of the Church. Besides, this number reminded the Jews of
the design of his coming; but, as they did not yield to the grace of
God, he begat for himself a new Israel. If you look at the beginnings,
it might appear ridiculous that Christ should bestow such honorable
titles on persons who were mean and of no estimation: but their
astonishing success, and the wide extension of the Church, make it
evident that, in honorable rank and in numerous offspring, the apostles
not only are not inferior to the patriarchs, but greatly excel them.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p20"></span>*Gave them power* The apostles had
almost no rank among men, while the commission which Christ gave them
was divine. Besides, they had neither ability nor eloquence, while the
excellence and novelty of their office required more than human
endowments,  <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) It was therefore
necessary that they should derive authority from another source. By
enabling them to perform miracles, Christ invests them with the badges
of heavenly power, in order to secure the confidence and veneration of
the people. And hence we may infer what is the proper use of miracles.
As Christ gives to them at the same time, and in immediate connection,
the appointment to be preachers of the gospel and ministers of miracles,
it is plain that miracles are nothing else than seals of his doctrine,
and therefore we are not at liberty to dissolve this close connection.
The Papists, therefore, are guilty of forgery, and of wickedly
corrupting the works of God, by separating his word from miracles.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p22"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p23"></span>**2.** *The first, Simon, who is called
Peter* The Church of Rome displays extreme folly in drawing from this
passage their doctrine of the primacy. That Simon Peter was the first
among the apostles we readily allow, but what was true in reference to a
few persons, cannot, on any proper grounds, be extended to the whole
world. Besides, the circumstance of his being mentioned first, does not
imply that he possessed authority over his companions. Granting all that
they ask regarding Peter, his rank will be of no avail to the Roman See,
till they prove that wicked and sacrilegious apostles are Peter’s
successors.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p24"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p25"></span>**5.** *Into the tray of the Gentiles*
This makes still more evident what I have lately hinted, that the
office, which was then bestowed on the apostles, had no other object
than to awaken in the Jews the hope of an approaching salvation, and
thus to render them more attentive to hear Christ. On this account, he
now confines within the limits of Judea their voice, which he afterwards
commands to sound everywhere to the farthest limits of the world. The
reason is, that he had been sent by the Father to be

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p26"></span>the minister of circumcision, to
fulfill the promises, which had anciently been given to the fathers,
(<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p26.1"></span>[Ro
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#008)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p27"></span>Now God had entered into a special
covenant with the family of Abraham, and therefore Christ acted properly
in confining the grace of God, at the outset, to the chosen people, till
the time for publishing it were fully come. But after his resurrection,
he spread over all nations the blessing which had been promised in the
second place, because then *the veil of the temple had been rent,*
(<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p27.1"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p27.1"></span>,) and *the middle wall of partition* had
been *thrown down,* (<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p27.2"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p27.2"></span>.) If any one imagine that this prohibition
is unkind, because Christ does not admit the Gentiles to the enjoyment
of the gospel, let him contend with God, who, to the exclusion of the
rest of the world, established with the seed of Abraham alone his
covenant, on which the command of Christ is founded.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p28"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p29"></span>**6.** *But go rather to the lost
sheep* The first rank, as we have said, is assigned to the Jews, because
they were the firstborn; or rather, because at that time they alone were
acknowledged by God to belong to his family, while others were excluded.
 <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) He calls them *lost sheep,*
partly that the apostles, moved by compassion, may more readily and with
warmer affection run to their assistance, and partly to inform them that
there is at present abundant occasion for their labors. At the same
time, under the figure of this nation, Christ taught what is the
condition of the whole human race. The Jews, who were near to God, and
in covenant with him, and therefore were the lawful heirs of eternal
life, are nevertheless pronounced to be *lost,* till they regain
salvation through Christ. What then remains for us who are inferior to
them in honor?  <span id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) Again, the word
*sheep* is applied even to the reprobate, who, properly speaking, did
not belong to the flock of God, because the adoption extended to the
whole nation; as those who deserved to be rejected, on account of their
treachery, are elsewhere called *the children of the kingdom,* (<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p31.2"></span>[Mt
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p31.2"></span>.) In a word, by the term *sheep,* Christ
recommends the Jews to the apostles, that they may dedicate their labors
to them, because they could recognize as the flock of God none but those
who had been gathered into the fold.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p32"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p33"></span>**7.** *Preach, saying* This is the
*preaching,*  <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570) I spoke of, by
which Christ intended to arouse the minds of the nation to expect an
approaching redemption. *The kingdom of heaven is at hand* For *the
kingdom of heaven* Luke substitutes *the kingdom of God;* but the
meaning is the same. It was to inform the Jews, first, that they owed
their restoration to divine agency, and not to the kindness of men;
secondly, that under the reign of God their condition would be
prosperous; and, thirdly, that the happiness which had been promised to
them was not earthly and fading, but heavenly and eternal.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p35"></span><span id="ix.lxxxiii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p36"></span>**8.** *Cure the diseased* As he has
bestowed on them power, so he enjoins them to be faithful and liberal in
dispensing it, and charges them not to suppress that power, which had
been lodged with them for the common benefit of all. By those miracles
he shows why he was sent by the Father, and what was the design of his
Gospel. It is not without design that he enjoins them to *raise the
dead* and *heal the sick,* instead of bringing diseases on the healthy
and inflicting death on the living. There is an analogy and resemblance,
therefore, which those miracles bear to the office of Christ; and this
is intended to inform us, that he came to bestow upon us every blessing,
to rescue us from the tyranny of Satan and of death, to *heal our
diseases* and sins, and to relieve us from all our miseries.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p37"></span>*Freely you have received*  <span
id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571) That they may be more willing to
communicate the gifts which he had bestowed on them, he declares that
they were not entrusted to them for their own individual renown, but in
order that they might be, as it were, a sort of channels for
transmitting the *free* bounty of God. “Consider whence you derived this
power. As it flowed without any merit of yours from the pure grace of
God, it is proper that, through your agency, it should flow *freely* to
others.”

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p39"></span>We know how unwilling every man is to
communicate to others what he considers to belong to himself, and how
any one who excels the rest of the brethren is apt to despise them all.
No higher commendation could have been given to a liberal communication
of spiritual gifts, than by the warning which Christ gives them, that no
man surpasses another through his own industry, but through the
undeserved kindness of God. Now Christ has presented to us in his
ministers a proof of that grace which had been predicted by Isaiah,
(<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p39.1"></span>[Isa
55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001)<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p39.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p40"></span>Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye
to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy and eat; yea,
come, buy wine and milh without money and without price.

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p41"></span>At the same time he shows, that no man
will be a sincere minister of his word or dispenser of his grace, till
he is prepared to bestow his labor *gratuitously,*  <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572) and that all hirelings basely corrupt
and profane the sacred office of teaching. Yet it is not inconsistent
with this gratuitous dispensation, that the teachers of the church
receive public salaries, provided that they willingly and generously
serve Christ and his church, and that their support is, in some sort, an
accessory of their labor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_560"></span>[561](cc31091.htm#fr_560) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p6"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p6.1"></span>Lors
ayant appel, a soy ses douze disciples;” — “then having called to
himself his twelve disciples.”

<span id="fn_561"></span>[562](cc31091.htm#fr_561) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p7"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p7.1"></span>N'allez point vers les Gentils;” — “go not
towards the Gentiles.”

<span id="fn_562"></span>[563](cc31091.htm#fr_562) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p8"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p8.1"></span>Mats
plustost allez aux ouailles de la matson d'Israel, qui sontperies;” —
“but rather go to the flocks of the house of Israel, which are lost.”

<span id="fn_563"></span>[564](cc31091.htm#fr_563) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p9"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p9.1"></span>Vous
l'avez receu pour neant, donnez-le pour neant;” — “you have received it
for nothing, give it for nothing.”

<span id="fn_564"></span>[565](cc31091.htm#fr_564) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p11"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p11.1"></span>Sur les esprits immondes;” — “over the
unclean spirits.”

<span id="fn_565"></span>[566](cc31091.htm#fr_565) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p13"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p13.1"></span>Puis apres avoir appel, ses douze disciples
ensemble;” — “then after having called his twelve disciples together.”

<span id="fn_566"></span>[567](cc31091.htm#fr_566) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p17"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p17.1"></span>Voulant reigler indifferemment tous
ministres de la parole selon ee qui est ici dk;” — “wishing to regulate
indiscriminately all ministers of the word according to what is here
said.”

<span id="fn_567"></span>[568](cc31091.htm#fr_567) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p21"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p21.1"></span>Et
cependant une charge si excellente et nouvelle requeroit des graces plus
grandes qu'on n'en pent trouver en l'homme;” — “and yet an office so
excellent and new demanded higher graces than can be found in man.”

<span id="fn_568"></span>[569](cc31091.htm#fr_568) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p30"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p30.1"></span>Les autres en estans eslogncz et bannis;” —
“the others being removed and banished from it.”

<span id="fn_569"></span>[570](cc31091.htm#fr_569) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p31"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p31.1"></span>Qui n'avons point une telle prerogative;” —
“who have not such a prerogative.”

<span id="fn_570"></span>[571](cc31091.htm#fr_570) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p34.1"></span>La
predication, ou publication;” — “the preaching, or publication.”

<span id="fn_571"></span>[572](cc31091.htm#fr_571) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p38"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p38.1"></span>Vous l'avez receu pour neant;” — “you have
received it for nothing.”

<span id="fn_572"></span>[573](cc31091.htm#fr_572) <span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxxiii-p42"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxxiii-p42.1"></span>S'il n'est prest de s'y employer, et d'y
mettre son labor gratuitement, et sans consideration de son profit;” —
“if he is not ready to be employed in it, and to bestow his labor on it
gratuitously, and without regard to his own gain.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew 10:9-15; Mark 6:8-11; Luke 9:3-5](cc31092)
