[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc31078)  [Next](cc31080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 31: Matthew, Mark and Luke, Part I*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.lxxi"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p1"></span>MATTHEW 8:5-13; LUKE 7:1-10

<span id="ix.lxxi-p2"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p2.1"></span>[Matthew
8:5-13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)<span id="ix.lxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p3"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p3.1"></span>[Luke
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001)<span id="ix.lxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p4"></span>**5**.** **And when Jesus had entered into
Capernaum, a centurion came to him, beseeching him, **6**.** **And
saying, Lord, my servant is lying at home afflicted with palsy, and is
grievously tormented. **7**.** **And Jesus saith to him, When I shall
come, I will heal him. **8**.** **And the centurion answering him said,
Lord, I do not deserve that thou shouldst come under my roof: but only
say the word, and my servant will be healed. **9**.** **For I am a man
subject to the power of another, and I have soldiers under me: and I say
to this man, Go, and he goeth: and to another, Come, and he cometh: and
to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. **10**.** **And when Jesus had
heard these things, he wondered, and said to those who followed, Verily
I say to you, not even in Israel have I found so great faith.
**11**.** **And I say to you, That many will come from the east and
west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom
of heaven: **12**.** **But the children of the kingdom shall be cast
into the darkness that is without: weeping and gnashing of teeth will be
there. **13**.** **And Jesus said to the centurion, Go, and as thou
believest, so may it be done to thee: and his servant was healed in that
hour.  <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497)

<span id="ix.lxxi-p6"></span>**1**.** **Now, when he had finished all
his words in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
**2**.** **And a servant of a certain centurion, who was very dear to
him, was ill and near death. **3**.** **And when he had heard about
Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, to entreat him, that he would
come and heal his servant. **4**.** **And when they had come to him,
they entreated him earnestly, saying, He deserves that though shouldest
do this for him: **5**.** **For he loveth our nation, and himself hath
built a synagogue. **6**.** **And Jesus went with them. And when he was
already not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, and
they said to him, Lord, do not trouble thyself: for I do not deserve
that thou shouldest enter under my roof. **7**.** **And for this reason
I did not reckon myself worthy to come to thee: but say in a word, and
my servant will be healed. **8**.** **For I am a man placed under
authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go, and he
goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh: and to my servant, Do this,
and he doeth it. **9**.** **And having heard these things, Jesus
wondered at him, and he turned and said to the crowd that followed him,
I say to you, not even in Israel have I found so great faith.
**10**.** **And when those who had been sent returned to the house, they
found the servant, who had been sick, in good health.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.lxxi-p8"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p9"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxi-p9.2"></span>[Matthew
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)<span id="ix.lxxi-p9.2"></span>.**
*And when Jesus had entered* Those who think that Matthew and Luke give
different narratives, are led into a mistake by a mere trifle. The only
difference in the words is, that Matthew says that *the centurion came
to him,* while Luke says that he sent some of the Jews to plead in his
name. But there is no impropriety in Matthew saying, that the centurion
did what was done in his name and at his request. There is such a
perfect agreement between the two Evangelists in all the circumstances,
that it is absurd to make two miracles instead of one.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p10"></span>The band of soldiers, which the centurion
had under his command, was stationed, I have no doubt, in the town of
Capernaum, in the same manner as garrisons were usually appointed for
the protection of the towns. Though he perceived the morals of the
people to be very vicious and depraved, (for we know that Capernaum,
being on the seacoast, must have been more dissolute  <span
id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) than other towns,) yet this did not
prevent him from condemning the superstitions of his country, and
acquiring a taste for true and sincere piety. He had not built a
synagogue for the Jews without exposing himself to some hatred and to
some risk: and the only reason why *he loved that nation* was, that he
had embraced the worship of one God. Before Christ healed his servant,
he had been healed by the Lord.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p12"></span>This was itself a miracle. One who
belonged to the military profession, and who had crossed the sea with a
band of soldiers, for the purpose of accustoming the Jews to endure the
yoke of Roman tyranny, submits willingly, and yields obedience to the
God of Israel. Luke says that this *servant was very dear to him;* and
thus anticipates a doubt which might have arisen in the mind of the
reader: for we know that slaves  <span id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499)
were not held in such estimation, as to make their masters so solicitous
about their life, unless by extraordinary industry, or fidelity, or some
other virtue, they had secured their favor. By this statement Luke
means, that this was not a low or ordinary slave, but a faithful
servant, distinguished by many excellencies, and very highly esteemed by
his master; and that this was the reason why he was so anxious about his
life, and recommended him so earnestly. From both Evangelists it is
evident that it was a sudden palsy, which, from the first attack, took
away all hope of life: for slow palsies are not attended by severe pain.
Matthew says, that he was *grievously tormented,* and Luke, that he was
*near death* Both descriptions — pain or agony, and extreme danger —
serve to enhance the glory of the miracle: and for this reason I am the
more unwilling to hazard any absolute assertion as to the nature of the
disease.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p14"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p15"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxi-p15.2"></span>[Luke
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#005)<span id="ix.lxxi-p15.2"></span>.**
*For he loveth our nation* This was, no doubt, a commendation given him
by the Jews on account of his piety:  <span
id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) for his *love of a nation* universally
hated could proceed only from zeal for the Law, and from reverence for
God. By *building a synagogue,* he showed plainly that he favored the
doctrine of the Law. The Jews had therefore good grounds for saying
that, as a devout worshipper of God, he had claims on Christ for
receiving such a favor. They discover, at the same time, a marvellous
stupidity in admitting, by their own acknowledgment, that a Gentile
possesses that grace of God which they despise and reject. If they
consider Christ to be the minister and dispenser of the gifts of God,
why do they not receive the grace offered to them before bringing
foreigners to enjoy it? But hypocrites never fail to manifest such
carelessness and presumption, as not to hesitate to look upon God as
under some sort of obligations to them, and to dispose of his grace at
their pleasure, as if it were in their own power; and then, when they
are satisfied with it, or rather because they do not deign to taste it,
they treat it as useless, and leave it to others.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p17"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p18"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxi-p18.2"></span>[Matthew
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)<span id="ix.lxxi-p18.2"></span>.**
*Lord, I do not deserve that thou shouldest come under my roof*
Matthew’s narrative is more concise, and represents the man as saying
this; while Luke explains more fully, that this was a message sent by
his friends: but the meaning of both is the same. There are two leading
points in this discourse. The centurion, sparing Christ by way of
honoring him, requests that Christ will *not trouble himself,* because
he reckons himself unworthy to receive a visit from him. The next point
is, that he ascribes to Christ such power as to believe, that by the
mere expression of his will, and by a word, his servant may recover and
live. There was astonishing humility in exalting so highly above himself
a man who belonged to a conquered and enslaved nation. It is possible,
too, that he had become accustomed to the haughty pretensions of the
Jews, and, being a modest man, did not take it ill to be reckoned a
heathen, and therefore feared that he would dishonor a Prophet of God,
if he pressed him to enter the house of a polluted Gentile. However that
may be, it is certain that he speaks sincerely, and entertains such
reverence for Christ, that he does not venture to invite him to his
house, nay, as is afterwards stated by Luke, he reckoned himself
unworthy to converse with him.  <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501)

<span id="ix.lxxi-p20"></span>But it may be asked, what moved him to
speak of Christ in such lofty terms? The difficulty is even increased by
what immediately follows, *only say the word, and my servant will be
healed,* or, as Luke has it, *say in a word:* for if he had not
acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God, to transfer the glory of God
to a man would have been superstition. It is difficult to believe, on
the other hand, that he was properly informed about Christ’s divinity,
of which almost all were at that time ignorant. Yet Christ finds no
fault with his words,  <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) but
declares that they proceeded from faith: and this reason has forced many
expositors to conclude, that the centurion bestows on Christ the title
of the true and only God. I rather think that the good man, having been
informed about the uncommon and truly divine works of Christ, simply
acknowledged in him the power of God. Something, too, he had undoubtedly
heard about the promised Redeemer. Though he does not distinctly
understand that Christ is *God manifested in the flesh,* (<span
id="ix.lxxi-p21.2"></span>[1Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span id="ix.lxxi-p21.2"></span>,)
yet he is convinced that the power of God is manifested in him, and that
he has received a commission to display the presence of God by miracles.
He is not therefore chargeable with superstition, as if he had ascribed
to a man what is the prerogative of God: but, looking at the commission
which God had given to Christ, he believes that by a word alone he can
heal his servant.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p22"></span>Is it objected, that nothing belongs more
peculiarly to God than to accomplish by a word whatever he pleases, and
that this supreme authority cannot without sacrilege be yielded to a
mortal man? The reply is again easy. Though the centurion did not enter
into those nice distinctions, he ascribed this power to the word, not of
a mortal man, but of God, whose minister he fully believed Christ to be:
on that point he entertained no doubt. The grace of healing having been
committed to Christ,  <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) he
acknowledges that this is a heavenly power, and does not look upon it as
inseparable from the bodily presence, but is satisfied with the word,
from which he believes such a power to proceed.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p24"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p25"></span>**<span id="ix.lxxi-p25.2"></span>[Matthew
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009)<span id="ix.lxxi-p25.2"></span>.**
*For I am a man subject to the power of another* This comparison does
not imply equality between the two cases, but is taken from the less to
the greater. He forms a higher conception of the divine power, which is
manifested in Christ, than of the authority which was possessed by
himself over servants and soldiers.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p26"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p27"></span>**10.** *Jesus wondered.* Wonder cannot
apply to God, for it arises out of what is new and unexpected: but it
might exist in Christ, for he had clothed himself with our flesh, and
with human affections. *Not even in Israel have I found so great faith*
This is not spoken absolutely, but in a particular point of view. For,
if we consider all the properties of faith, we must conclude that the
faith of Mary was greater, in believing that she would be with child by
the Holy Ghost, and would bring forth the only-begotten Son of God, and
in acknowledging the son whom she had borne to be her God, and the
Creator of the whole world, and her only Redeemer.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p28"></span>But there were chiefly two reasons why
Christ preferred the faith of a Gentile to the faith of all the Jews.
One was, that a slight and inconsiderable acquaintance with doctrine
yielded so sudden and abundant fruit. It was no small matter to declare,
in such lofty terms, the power of God, of which a few rays only were yet
visible in Christ. Another reason was, that while the Jews were
excessively eager to obtain outward signs, this Gentile asks no visible
sign, but openly declares that he wants nothing more than the bare word.
Christ was going to him: not that it was necessary, but to try his
faith; and he applauds his faith chiefly on the ground of his resting
satisfied with the bare word. What would another have done, and he too
one of the Apostles? Come, Lord, see and touch. This man asks no bodily
approach or touch, but believes the word to possess such efficacy as
fully to expect from it that his servant will be cured.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p29"></span>Now, he ascribes this honor to the word,
not of a man, but of God: for he is convinced that Christ is not an
ordinary man, but a prophet sent by God. And hence may be drawn a
general rule. Though it was the will of God that our salvation should be
accomplished in the flesh of Christ, and though he seals it daily by the
sacraments, yet the certainty of it must be obtained from the word.
Unless we yield such authority to the word, as to believe that, as soon
as God has spoken by his ministers, our sins are undoubtedly forgiven,
and we are restored to life, all confidence of salvation is overthrown.

<span id="ix.lxxi-p30"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p31"></span>**11.** *Many will come from the east and
west* In the person of the servant, Christ gave to the Gentiles a taste
and a kind of first-fruits of his grace. He now shows, that the master
is an example of the future calling of the Gentiles, and of the spread
of faith throughout the whole world: for he says that *they will come,*
not only from the neighboring countries, but from the farthest bounds of
the world. Though this had been clearly foretold by many passages of the
prophets, it appeared at first strange and incredible to the Jews, who
imagined that God was confined to the family of Abraham. It was not
without astonishment that they heard, that those who were at that time
strangers, would be citizens and heirs of the kingdom of God: and not
only so, but that the covenant of salvation would be immediately
proclaimed, that the whole world might be united in one body of the
Church. He declares, that the Gentiles, who shall come to the faith,
will be partakers of the same salvation *with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob*
Hence we draw the certain conclusion, that the same promise, which has
been held out to us in Christ, was formerly given to the fathers; for we
would not have had an inheritance in common with them, if the faith, by
which it is obtained, had not been the same. The word <span
id="ix.lxxi-p31.1"></span>ἀνακλιθήσονται, *shall recline,* contains an
allusion to a banquet: but as we know, that the heavenly life does not
require meat and drink, this phrase has the same meaning as if he had
said, *they shall enjoy the same life*

<span id="ix.lxxi-p32"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p33"></span>**12.** *But the children of the kingdom*
Why does he call those persons *children of the kingdom,* who were
nothing less than children of Abraham? for those who are aliens from the
faith have no right to be considered a part of God’s flock. I answer:
Though they did not actually belong to the Church of God, yet, as they
occupied a place in the Church, he allows them this designation.
Besides, it ought to be observed that, so long as the covenant of God
remained in the family of Abraham, there was such force in it, that the
inheritance of the heavenly kingdom belonged peculiarly to them. With
respect to God himself, at least, they were *holy branches from a holy
root,* (<span id="ix.lxxi-p33.2"></span>[Ro
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#016)<span id="ix.lxxi-p33.2"></span>)
and the rejection of them, which afterwards followed, shows plainly
enough, that they belonged, at that time, to the family of God.
Secondly, it ought to be observed, that Christ does not now speak of
individuals, but of the whole nation. This was still harder to endure
than the calling of the Gentiles. That the Gentiles should be admitted,
by a free adoption, into the same body with the posterity of Abraham,
could scarcely be endured: but that the Jews themselves should be driven
out, to make way for their being succeeded by the Gentiles, appeared to
them altogether monstrous. Yet Christ declares that both will happen:
that God will admit strangers into the bosom of Abraham, and that he
will exclude *the children* There is an implied contrast in the phrase,
*the darkness that is without* It means that out of the kingdom of God,
which is the kingdom of light, nothing but darkness reigns. By
*darkness* Scripture points out that dreadful anguish, which can neither
be expressed nor conceived in this life.  <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504)

<span id="ix.lxxi-p35"></span><span id="ix.lxxi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p36"></span>**13.** *Go away, and as thou believest,
so may it be to thee* Hence it is evident how graciously Christ pours
out his grace, when he finds the vessel of faith open. Though he
addresses these words to the centurion, there can be no doubt that, in
his person, he invites us all to strong hope. Hence we are also taught
the reason why God is, for the most part, so limited in his
communications to us: it is because our unbelief does not permit him to
be liberal. If we open up the entrance to him by faith, he will listen
to our wishes and prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_497"></span>[498](cc31079.htm#fr_497) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p5"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p5.1"></span>Et en ce
mesme instant son garcon fut gairi;” — “and at that very instant his
servant was healed.”

<span id="fn_498"></span>[499](cc31079.htm#fr_498) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p11"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p11.1"></span>Plus
pleines de dissolutions et de desbauches;” — “more full of dissoluteness
and debauchery.”

<span id="fn_499"></span>[500](cc31079.htm#fr_499) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p13"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p13.1"></span>Qu'on ne
tenoit pas si grande conte de serfs;” — “that they did not set so great
value on slaves.”

<span id="fn_500"></span>[501](cc31079.htm#fr_500) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p15.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p16"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p16.1"></span>Il n’ y
a point de doute que les Juifs recommandent cest homme pour l'affection
et le bon zele qu'il avoit a la crainte de Dieu.” — “There is no doubt
that the Jews recommend this man for the affection and the good zeal
which he had for the fear of God.”

<span id="fn_501"></span>[502](cc31079.htm#fr_501) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p19"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p19.1"></span>Il ne
s'est pas estime digne d'aller parler a Christ;” — “he did not think
himself worthy to go and talk to Christ.”

<span id="fn_502"></span>[503](cc31079.htm#fr_502) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p21"></span> “<span
id="ix.lxxi-p21.1"></span>Toutefois Christ ne prend pas ces paroles
comme dites de l'aventure et sans intelligence.” — “Yet Christ does not
take these words as spoken at random and without understanding.”

<span id="fn_503"></span>[504](cc31079.htm#fr_503) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p23"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p23.1"></span>Pource
que Christ avoit receu la vertu de donner gairison;”— “because Christ
had received the power of giving healing.”

<span id="fn_504"></span>[505](cc31079.htm#fr_504) <span
id="ix.lxxi-p33.3"></span>

<span id="ix.lxxi-p34"></span> “<span id="ix.lxxi-p34.1"></span>Laquelle
la bouche de l'homme ne sauroit exprimer, ni ses sens comprendre en ce
monde;” — “which the mouth of man cannot express, nor his senses
comprehend, in this world.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke 7:11-17](cc31080)
