[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tl05)  [Next](tl07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

<span id="img_03100"></span>

[![THE PORCELAIN PAGODA, &lt;i&gt;Chin-ling,
China&lt;/i&gt;](tn/03100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03100.jpg.md)  
THE PORCELAIN PAGODA, *Chin-ling, China*  

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

### THE MOON THAT SHONE ON THE PORCELAIN PAGODA

THE mid-autumn moon was shining on the high pagoda that stood outside
the Red Bird Gate, the southern entrance to Chin-ling, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) China. Wing Ling (Peaceful Forest.md), a
wide-awake boy, had just this moment remarked that he hoped the moon
would shine bright enough to drop down money for heaps of moon-cakes. He
and his brother, Li Sun (Pear-tree, Son-of-Li), were sitting on the
lowest of the four wide steps leading to the broad, octagonal base of
the Porcelain Pagoda. "Liu li t’a" was its real name, that is,
Vitreous-substance-of-liquid-gems-pagoda. Early in the fifteenth
century, the emperor, Yung-lo (Eternal Joy), had the pagoda erected as a
token of gratitude to his mother, the Heart-of-kindness-showing,
Ever-gracious Em-press. The people of Chin-ling sometimes called it "The
Temple of Gratitude," but to Wing Ling and Li Sun it was always the
Porcelain Pagoda, because of the colored slabs of glazed
porcelain--green, yellow, and red--which covered the brick-work.

Wing Ling and his brother had often seen the pagoda in the daytime when
it looked gay and airy, especially when glittering sunshine fell upon
the painted balconies, the delicately carved balustrades and porcelain
slabs. Only once a year, were the boys allowed to see it at night--the
night of the moon-festival. When the mid-autumn moon was biggest and
roundest, a festival, all the moon's own, was celebrated by

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

everyone, and, on this night of nights, Chinese children had the fun of
eating delectable moon-cakes *if* the moon showered down money enough to
buy the cakes. Li Sun said now that he noticed the moon was shining
brighter than usual and probably the brightness would make a bigger
moon-shower! The two boys, seated on the pagoda step, were easily
unobserved, for men, women, and children in holiday dress were coming
and going in such throngs that no one paid any attention to them. The
moon--the splendid, round moon with the rabbit at its lower edge--was
the only important thing tonight.

Moonlight and lantern light were vying with each other in illuminating
the Porcelain Pagoda. By moonlight, the slender, octagonal building,
mounting story by story far toward the sky, looked mysterious,
fantastic, unreal. As if moonlight were not enough, a hundred and forty
lights were gleaming from top to bottom of the pagoda. The seventy-two
windows, eight in each story, were now ablaze with lantern light. As if
gayety and mystery and lights were not enough, two hundred little bells,
some of brass, some of porcelain, were softly tinkling in the slight
breeze. For, from the golden ball and pine-apple that crowned the metal
spire, chains of bells hung down to the angles of the highest roof, and
more bells hung from all the corners and edges of the nine roofs.
Tonight, the melody of the bells was like the melody the Great
River--the Yangtze River--makes at its source where it flows, in
rippling beauty, over golden sands.

"Li Sun," abruptly said Wing Ling, "do you know this Porcelain Pagoda
never throws any shadow toward the west?

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The priests say
so, and they must know, because they have charge of the pagoda and they
protect all the images of the idols and saints--two thousand of
them--here in the pagoda. And the priests know all about . . ."

"*I* know it's time for the moon-cakes to be eaten," interrupted Li Sun.

"I'll tell the moon-tale first," said Wing Ling, "or perhaps there'll
not be any moon-cakes." Yet, as he spoke, the rascal knew that luscious
moon-cakes were, this minute, in the large, inner pocket of his
sleeveless jacket, and in Li Sun's pocket, too. Moon-cakes with
glistening, round, sticky places on them! Moon-cakes that had on them
little, sugar rabbits! Moon-cakes that had a bulging sugar toad! No
wonder Li Sun thought it time to eat the moon-cakes! No wonder Wing Ling
felt happy at the mere thought of them!

"Tell the tale, then," said Li Sun, cheerfully laying aside his great
hunger, because he knew that his older brother who liked so much to talk
wouldn't eat till the story was told.

"Here it is," began Wing Ling, as he and Li Sun wriggled themselves back
into the corner of the step to be out of the way of people's feet. "Once
the Emperor, Ming Wong, was walking in the moonlight--moonlight just
like this; and he was on a terrace . . . "

"The Feng Huang terrace? Where the three phoenix birds sang, one
springtime, so wonderfully all the other birds came to listen?" asked Li
Sun eagerly.

"I forget. Perhaps it was that terrace--perhaps another. He was walking
up and down, and his courtiers were with him . . ."

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

"How many courtiers?" broke in Li Sun.

"Interrupt me not, O Small-Devil," said Wing Ling, "or I stop telling
the tale. The Emperor, with his flute in his hand, was walking up and
down, when he asked one of his courtiers this question, 'Of what is the
moon made, Noble-Servant?'

"The courtier said to the courtier standing nearest him, 'His Highness,
the Emperor, asks of what the moon is made.'

"The second courtier quickly turned to another courtier, saying, 'His
Highness, the Emperor, asks of what the moon is made.' The third
courtier asked a fourth courtier; the fourth asked a fifth; the fifth, a
sixth; the sixth, a seventh; and the seventh courtier ran as fast as the
men ran who were sent by the Great Ch'in to find the dragon. I tell you,
Li Sun, they ran fast! The seventh courtier ran, like the red fire, to
catch up with a magician walking toward the city wall, and he did catch
up with him, and seized the magician's garment. Out of breath he was,
after that run, but he panted these words, 'The Emperor, His Royal
Highness . . . would know . . . of what . . . the moon is made.' Without
a word, the magician turned at once and ran back all the way to the
terrace where the Emperor was still walking, still looking at the moon.
Prostrating himself on the ground before the Emperor's feet, the
magician said, 'Would His Highness, the Emperor, like to visit the moon
and see of what it is made?'

'Let it be so!' replied the Emperor.

"The magician instantly threw his staff into the air toward the moon,
and, lo, a rainbow bridge from earth to moon! As soon as the Emperor and
the magician had stepped upon

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the bridge it rose beyond reach of the astonished courtiers and became
like a wisp of cloud.

"The Emperor and his guide walked as easily as anything right along the
rainbow bridge toward the moon, and I tell you, Li Sun, the moon shone
amazingly bright, the nearer they went. When they stepped from the
bridge to the surface of the moon, the Emperor noticed that most of the
golden shining came from the thick groves of cassia trees--yes, Li Sun,
the moonlight came straight from the cassia trees which were in full
flowering. At the foot of a tall cassia, near the end of the bridge,
crouched a little, white jade hare.

'Who is he?' asked the Emperor.

'That is He-who-pounds-drugs-for-the-Genii,' answered the magician. 'He
uses the cinnamon bark for the drugs. On clear nights in mid-autumn you
can see him from the earth.'

"The Emperor and the magician then walked along the broad avenues of the
pale yellow cassia trees and saw, on either side, radiant palaces,
sparkling towers and twinkling streams. Fair ladies, in rainbow-colored
robes, came out to meet them, and, after bowing and smiling and saying
welcoming words, passed on their way. Strange flowers, that looked far
away though they were near at hand, covered the fields with silver-white
or golden bloom. Snowy-white birds, with eyes like stars, flew in and
out the golden cassia branches. Ah, it was a great glory, there, on the
moon, Li Sun! And it's the same moon that shines down here tonight on
this pagoda. But there's more to the story."

"Tell it," said Li Sun, sleepily.

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span id="img_03800"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/03800.jpg) |

"The magician said to the Emperor," went on Wing Ling, 'Do you see that
frog?'

'Yes,' said the Emperor.

"Then the magician told him this story: Once the Pearl-of-Heaven, the
Moon, was about to be swallowed by a dragon, when an Archer Lord shot
arrows into the sky, and so saved the moon from destruction. The Archer
Lord was rewarded by a gift of a pill which would make him live forever.
But, afterwards, his wife stole the magic pill and fled to the moon.
That didn't help her any, for, as soon as she stepped upon the - grass
of the moon, she was turned into a frog. Here in the moon she still
lives. Are you awake, Li Sun?" suddenly asked Wing Ling.

"By the Moon-Toad, Heng-O, I *am*! Go on!" answered Li Sun, briskly.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

"Hear now the ending," said Wing Ling. "When the Emperor and the
magician left the moon and were coming down the rainbow bridge, the
Emperor spoke not a single word, but he played on his flute. As he
played, lovely strains fell to earth. Then he took coins, from the pouch
on his girdle, and threw them from the bridge, and the money dropped at
the feet of children. Wasn't that fine, Li Sun?--Don't you wish . . .?"

But just then a man and a woman, dressed in brightest of embroidered
silk robes, bent over the two boys, who jumped to their feet as the
man's words carne like a swift stream pelting down a steep mountainside.

"O wicked boy, Wing Ling!" exclaimed the man. "O abominable urchin, Li
Sun! Why, oh, why, have you been hiding from your honorable parents all
this long time? What have you been doing? Where have you been? We have
walked hour after hour searching for you. We have called on metal, wood,
water, fire, earth. We have earnestly petitioned them all to direct us
to the greatly-desired-place-of-hiding of our disobedient and
much-to-be-despised sons. We have begged them, implored them, to lead us
to that hiding-place wherever it might be--whether on the bank of the
Great River or in some spot in our pride-of-the-heart city of Chin-ling,
our wide city that lies between the dragon's paws. ’Tis well I
propitiated the deities by my worthy contribution toward the expense of
the wonder-of-darkness lights on this pagoda. For, as the streams of
light, from the cassia branches in the moon, fell upon this
lantern-lighted pagoda--this
Vitreous-substance-of-liquid-gems-pagoda--and as we saw the pagoda

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

lights that illumine the thirty-three heavens, that detect the good and
evil among men, that ward off human miseries, we quickened our steps
hither, and lo, in this Temple-of-Gratitude pagoda, here we find you! We
find you at last--our always-cherished, always-beloved sons!"

The father paused, breathless; and the mother said to the boys quietly,
"Sons, have you eaten your moon-cakes yet?"

 

Late in the evening, the moon still shone down upon the city of
Chin-ling. The light from the waving branches of the cassia trees in the
moon streamed upon the Porcelain Pagoda, while the bells of the tower
tinkled in the breeze from the Heaven-High Mountains. The moonlight
shone, also, on the silent avenue, bordered with statues, outside the
T’ai’ping Gate. It shone on the wall that meandered for miles around
Chin-ling, and on the throngs of people strolling homeward through the
Red Bird Gate; and it shone on the home of Wing Ling (Peaceful Forest)
and Li Sun (Pear-tree, Son of Li).

As the boys were going to bed, the little jade hare looked down at the
glistening earth. Li Sun, looking up at the moon, said to his brother,
"Wing Ling, I can see the white-jade hare tonight--I see him pounding
the moon-drugs!"

<span id="img_04000"></span> ![](img/04000.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[33:\*](tl06.htm#fr_0.md) Now Nanking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Brahman's Star](tl07.md)
