[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tl06)  [Next](tl08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

<span id="img_04300"></span>

[![Kutb Minar, &lt;i&gt;Delhi, India&lt;/i&gt;](tn/04300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04300.jpg.md)  
Kutb Minar, *Delhi, India*  

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

### THE BRAHMAN'S STAR

*A Tale of Kutb Minar*

LATE one afternoon, a few centuries ago, a Brahman, who was toiling
along the hot plain south of Delhi in North India, kept his eyes fixed
upon the distant tower of Kutb Minar. This solitary tower was the only
break in the wide stretch before him. Occasionally, the Brahman stopped
to rest, leaning on his staff, but, even then, his eyes hardly glanced
away from Kutb Minar.

"Nearer," once he muttered aloud; "nearer! I'll make it yet!" On he
went, mile after mile, over the hot ground, leaving, far behind him, the
magnificence of Delhi, where he had allowed himself to rest a very
little while in the course of his long journey on foot from the north.
He had the air of one making a pilgrimage--of an iron-willed man who
would let nothing come between him and his goal. No wind should check
his gait, nor burning sun delay him. Never did soldier, merchant, or
slave go on more steadily whether driven by his own will or by
another's. One clear thought was in the Brahman's mind--that if he
didn't stop, he would reach Kutb Minar before nightfall. As he trudged
along, he nodded complacently at the thought. Yes, this steady pace
would certainly bring him to the tower before dark.

Now Kutb Minar was a good eleven miles from Delhi, and the Brahman was
no longer young, but the growing nearness of the tower had added
strength to him each hour, especially

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

during the last mile. For some time, his eyes had been gladdened by the
nearer view of the domes and minarets of the stately mosque, beside
which the tower rose. At length, he began to see more clearly the tower
itself, as it stood gleaming in the sunset light, a tapering shaft of
sunset glory. For the modulated shades of sandstone--purplish red at the
base, pink in the second story, dark orange at the summit--glowed in the
yellow radiance of the setting sun with such dazzling reflection that
anyone less wise than a Brahman would have found it hard to tell which
light was of earth and which of the sky. The two upper stories,
glistening with white marble, appeared to his eyes like the portal of
heaven, concealing the mystery of all Hindu thought.

As the Brahman, absorbed in his meditations, slowly walked along, a
tiger, limping, approached him. When the Brahman was aware of the tiger
he stopped, not through fear, but sympathy.

"You have hurt your paw," he said, kindly.

"Sir," said the tiger deferentially, "if your heart prompts you to help
me I will repay you at some future time in any way that I can."

"No payment do I want," replied the Brahman. "Let me see your paw!"

The tiger, sitting on his haunches, lifted his right forepaw from which
a splinter of wood protruded. With deft fingers the Brahman extracted
the bit, and, before the tiger could utter his thanks, said, smiling,
"If *your* heart prompts you to help me and all mankind, see that the
rest of your days and nights you make not too free use of that great

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

strength given in the beginning to your ancestors and thereby to you.
Remember you owe your life to man's kindness, because man's skill is
ahead of all your strength. I must now go on my way."

<span id="img_04700"></span> ![](img/04700.jpg)

"Sir," said the tiger, "I owe you great thanks, and I will remember."
With that, he bounded away across the plain.

The Brahman plodded on with quicker steps to make up for the
interruption. "Before the sun reaches that low cloud," he said to
himself, "I shall be at the tower." And before the sun entered the cloud
he was by the base of the tower. Standing near it for some moments, with
bowed head and folded arms, he might have been a statue--a statue with
turban and robe that seemed a part of the sunset light.

Then he looked up with interest at the picturesque Arabic characters cut
in the five dark bands around the lower stories. In the lowest band he
saw five separate divisions of hieroglyphics, giving the titles of
*Kutab-ad-din* 

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> --the first of the
shepherd kings of Delhi--and Kutab's proclamation of himself as Sultan
of all India; also, the name of Kutab's master, Muhammed Ghori, with
words in praise of him. There were verses from the Koran, and an
invocation to Visna Karma, "the celestial architect of the Hindus." Part
of the higher inscription, too, the Brahman read:--"Kutb Minar commenced
in 1200 by the Amir, the Commander of the Army . . . of the Sultan
Muhammed Ghori, to celebrate the great victory."

As the rest of the inscription was becoming hard to make out in the
lessening light, the Brahman walked around to the door of the tower.
Within the doorway sat a man weaving a small tapestry.

"Good-evening to you, O guardian of the Tower of Victory!" said the
Brahman, pleasantly.

The doorkeeper, on seeing the Brahman, rose immediately with a word of
greeting and added, "Sir, you arrive late in the day!"

"Day and night are one for me," answered the Brahman. "Have you many
travelers, nowadays, to see the tower?"

"But few," said the doorkeeper. "You, sir, are the first for six days."

"A lonely life for you," remarked the Brahman. "No, sir," replied the
man, quietly. "I have the sky both day and night."

The Brahman gave a keen glance at the doorkeeper's calm face, but made
no comment. Taking a coin from his belt, he put it into the man's hand,
and, with a look toward

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the west where the flaming sun was just now dropping below the horizon,
he entered the doorway.

"I shall spend the night on the tower," he said, as he began to climb
the stairs.

"A good night be yours, sir!" answered the guardian of the tower.

For a man no longer in his prime, the stairs were very many. Three
hundred and seventy-eight steps at the end of an eleven mile walk from
Delhi! Was the Brahman mad that he thought he could climb them? Old or
young, mad or sane, up he climbed, stopping whenever his breath gave
out, and improving those wasted moments by uttering prayers. Many a
prayer there had to be during his climb, for, in truth, he went up more
and more slowly. Not even a view from the tower did he have, for two
excellent reasons: the stairway was dark, and he climbed with his eyes
closed, just as the Indian saint of old climbed the mountain. Up, up,
up,--steps, pauses, prayers; up, up, up,--more rests, more prayers, more
steps, until, finally, the top!

Breathing heavily after his climb, the Brahman stepped out upon the
narrow platform at the fifth story and looked westward. The brilliant
clearness of the sky had already become dull and metallic-looking,
except for a single, quivering star. He looked toward the northeast, in
the direction of the lofty Himalayas, the overwhelming mountains that
belonged, he knew, to the sky-dwellers--their snow-covered tops always
as billowy as ocean wave-crests. Presently he became absorbed in the
majestic scene before him; the river

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jamna, flowing
slowly near Delhi, saffron in the twilight; the tomb of the ancient
sultan, Altamsh, now a dark spot on the sand; the iron pillar--that old
East Indies pillar--in the courtyard of the mosque. At a distance, he
could make out the shadowy, blurred clumps of pomegranate and banyan
trees, and could barely see the outlines of the temples of Delhi. Far
beyond, he knew the mighty Ganges was forging along, ever protected by
those sky-dwelling mountains. With folded arms he stood quietly for a
long time, watching the light in the sky turn from copper color to deep
bluish gray, until stars filled all space. Plain, rivers, mountain-tops
vanished, but stars were overhead and all around--multitudes of stars.
The Brahman, with a whimsical smile, suddenly looked directly up to the
very bright star over his head, and began talking softly.

"Mother Star," he said, in a happy voice, "I've come back. You know why.
You know how my father brought me to the top of this tower when I was a
boy, and told me your story. Mother Star, once, when you were sick, your
two sons, the Sun and the Wind, and your daughter, the Moon, went to a
feast. You lay on your couch, hour after hour. The elder son came home
first. 'What have you brought me, Son?' you asked. 'Nothing, Mother,'
answered the Sun; 'don't you suppose I wanted the good time for myself?'

"Soon the second son came in. 'Have you brought home anything for me,
Son?' you asked. 'Nothing whatever, Mother,' the Wind replied; 'the
feast was for the young.'

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

"Then the daughter came singing down a shaft of light. 'See, Mother,'
she called out gaily, before you could speak; 'see what I have brought
you--fruits and sweet cakes!'

<span id="img_05100"></span> ![](img/05100.jpg)

"She made you glad, Mother Star; the Moon-daughter made you glad. And as
my father finished telling me the old tale he said to me, 'Son, you are
a descendant of Mother Star, even as the king of Delhi was a descendant
of the moon. When you are no longer young, come back to this tower if
you have brought from the feast of life any blessings for others.'

"Mother Star, I am here. No one but you may ever know."

Taking, from an inner pouch, a pomegranate and a sweet cake, the Brahman
laid them on the highest bit of ledge he could reach. Then he raised his
hands toward the luminous star overhead. Presently, he let his hands
drop, folded, upon his breast, and he stood almost as motionless as the
star itself.

After a while, he sat down on the stone platform, and was lost in
thought. He thought of King Bharata, that famous,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

early king of Delhi, who was descended from the moon; he thought of the
tale of the Ganges--how the river had been brought, as a maiden, to
earth and had never regretted leaving her heavenly home. As he glanced
in the direction of the Khyber Pass, he recalled the hordes of invaders
who had come like strong winds into the land of India--Greeks, Persians,
Afghans, Tartars, savage chieftains--always pushing on and on, while the
stars, then as now, were serenely shining over the plain. Most of all,
he thought of Mother Star, because the vivid remembrance of that night
on the tower long ago, and the clear vision of the star, had possessed
him throughout his long life. He had been a traveler in many lands and
was a learned man besides. Many languages he knew, and under-stood the
arts, astronomy, medicine, the winds that swept the ocean, and the talk
of all animals and birds. Year after year, men in cities, and animals in
the jungle, had sought his counsel. His life had been spent largely out
of doors, so that he deeply revered the sun and the lightning, the
mountains and the winds, and, especially, the cloudless sky and its
presiding god, Indra. Yet, in his heart, from boyhood to manhood, he had
always seen the star as he had seen it when his father told him the
tale. Nothing on earth or in the sky had ever held for him such beauty,
such reality, such inspiration, as Mother Star. To Mother Star he owed
all that he was himself and all that he had brought to others. His
offering, to-night, then, was more, far more, than a pomegranate and a
sweet cake--it contained the blessings for others which he had brought
from the feast of life.

 

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

At dawn, an old Brahman was making his slow way across the plain toward
Delhi. Behind him, the tower of Kutb Minar, catching the first rays of
the sun, shone like a rainbow flame.

Suddenly a tiger bounded toward the Brahman and on reaching him said,
"Sir, I owe you great thanks, and I have remembered all night." Then,
together, the Brahman and the tiger walked toward the sunrise, talking
agreeably as they went.

<span id="img_05300"></span> ![](img/05300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dragon of Ghent](tl08.md)
