[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tl11)  [Next](tl13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<span id="img_10500"></span>

[![ARDMORE TOWER, Ardmore, Ireland](tn/10500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10500.jpg.md)  
ARDMORE TOWER, Ardmore, Ireland  

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### THE LEPRECHAUN OF ARDMORE TOWER

THE Leprechaun--that flash from elf-land--was perched comfortably upon
the west window ledge, high up in Ardmore Tower. Dawn was just beginning
to send misty, gray lights over the rolling land. Winds that have blown
since the world began were blowing around the old Irish tower. It was
the south wind, this morning, that was blowing the strongest--the wind
from the good sea that washed the coast of Ardmore and the high-lands of
Ireland. The strong, stone tower, tapering skyward, stood, as it stands
today, like a silent sentinel on the "hill of the sheep"--the "great
hill." Below its conical top, two windows, east and west, looked out,
and it's on the ledge of the west one--mind you--that the Leprechaun was
sitting. He had been sitting there since sundown. An iron bar, inside
the tower, goes from the top of the west window to the top of the east
window, and once, no one knows how long ago, seven small bells hung from
this bar under the pinnacle. They are gone now, but in the old days they
used to ring often.

("That's so," said the Leprechaun. He was always saying "That's so," to
agree with himself or other people--himself oftenest.)

This little elf, in red jacket and green breeches who spends most of his
days and some of his nights making shoes for the fairy folk, has been
working the past night on a pair of riding boots for the fairy prince
who wants the boots by

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

sunrise. Tap, tap, tap--goes the Leprechaun's tiny hammer. Whish, whish,
go his swift fingers. Hum, hum-m-m-m-, goes his little singing tune, for
the Leprechaun could no more work without singing than you could sleep
without shutting your eyes.

("That's so!" said the Leprechaun.)

He is only six inches high, and harder to catch than a will-o'-the-wisp.
If one *could* ever succeed in catching him, and then could keep looking
at him, he *might* tell--though not a bit willingly--where a wonderful
crock of gold is. But do you think you could keep looking at him and at
him alone? Why, just as you think you are looking at nothing else, he,
somehow, makes you look away from him, and, ochone, he is gone! He's
that clever.

<span id="img_10800"></span> ![](img/10800.jpg)

("That's so," said the Leprechaun.)

Many an enchantment the Leprechaun can perform, for all he appears so
simple as he pegs away at the riding boots. Yes, himself it is that can
blight the corn or snip off hair most

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

unexpectedly. When he sits, crosslegged at his work, whether on a
cornice of a roof or on a twig of the low bushes, it's just as well not
to let him know you are watching him. The Irish fairy folk are all like
that, and draw magic out of earth and sea and sky, or else draw it out
of nothing at all.

("Do you hear that?" said the Leprechaun.)

Now this misty, windy dawn of a morning, thousands of days and nights
ago, as the Leprechaun, up there on the gray, stone tower, tapped,
tapped with his hammer, to finish the prince's boots, promised by
sunrise, his elfin mind capered around with many thoughts. The mists
were beginning to shine in the dim light of early morning, and the
Leprechaun's thoughts, freshened by the south wind, were wafted over the
whole land of Erin that stretched beyond the bogs and swamps, beyond the
mounds and cromlechs, beyond the hills. He could tell you the colors of
all the winds of Ireland. This south wind was white; the north wind,
full of blackness; the west wind pale yellow, and the east wind was
always a stirring, purple wind. The lesser winds, too, had their
colors--yellow of furze, red of fire, gray of fog, green of meadow,
brown of autumn leaves, and three more colors that mortals could not
see. The Leprechaun, whenever he wished, could travel lightly on
whatever wind was blowing and sing a tune as loud as any of them. This
morning, in the misty dawn, it was his heart that did the traveling and
it was his thoughts that sang tunes to match. When his eyes glanced from
his work, toward the sea, his thoughts flew to Manannan Mac Lir, the old
sea-god, riding along in his chariot, with thousands of his steeds
shaking their manes as

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

they galloped with him. For many a century, the great, slender, round
tower had watched these steeds and the spirited charioteer. On many a
moonlit night, it had seen invading bands crawl quietly to shore and
stealthily march right up to the base of the tower with bad plans to
surprise the unprotected people. Again and again the men of Ardmore had
gathered their families, with provisions, safely, into the tall tower,
barring the narrow door that was many feet high above the ground. There
the weak ones and the women and children had lived, for days, until the
invaders had been driven away. The Leprechaun laughed aloud as he
thought of one stormy day when the old sea-god, Manannan Mac Lir, had
bidden his horses keep the invaders from reaching the shore and the
tower. The lively horses shook their manes and obeyed--ochone, but they
obeyed!

Tap, tap, tap! The south wind, thought the Leprechaun, will be a strong
one, this day! And the wind will draw music from the harps of all the
Little Good Folk throughout Erin. As the Leprechaun, between his taps,
looked westward, there was a break in the light morning vapor, like the
gay snatch of song a maiden sings in the midst of her work; and, through
the break, the elf's long gaze swept across the river Blackwater, and
beside Watergrasshill, over the moor-land to the Bochragh Mountains, and
even as far as Mt. Mish. There was a tale about Mt. Mish that rushed in
now upon his thinking--a tale about his ancestors, the Tuatha-de-Danann
"the folk of the god whose mother is Dana."

On a day, in the early age of the world, when gray moor-land and steep
mountains began to blaze brilliant with purple

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

heather and yellow furze, the Danaans, covering themselves with a fog,
crept along the east coast to possess the country near Mt. Mish.
Fiercely they fought with the inhabitants, the Firbolgs, and won. For a
thousand years they held sway--these tall, fair-haired men of Greek
descent who had come from the North. After the thousand years and one
day more, new invaders, the Milesians, entering along the bank of the
Inverskena River, swept up into the land, like the knowing conquerors
that they were, to overcome the Danaans.

The Leprechaun now sang, with a little humming chant, the words that
Amergin, chief druid of the Milesians, sang when he set his right foot
on the soil of Erin:

I am the Wind that blows over the sea,  
I am the Wave of the ocean;  
I am the Murmur of the billows;  
I am the Ox of the seven combats;  
I am the Vulture upon the rock;  
I am a Ray of the Sun;  
I am the fairest of Plants;  
.    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .    .

When the Danaans had been conquered by the Milesians, they promised that
they would dwell inside the hills or under the lakes, and that they
would be invisible to mortals, except on rare occasions. This promise
they had kept.

("That's so," said the Leprechaun.)

The Leprechaun liked what the Danaans, his ancestors, had done next. The
chief druid of the Danaans had raised his golden harp in the dazzling
sunlight, the other druids had lifted their silver harps in the
glittering morning air, and all

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the druids had played such deliciously enchanting melodies that the
Danaans, in a long procession that seemed like a living green, had
followed their leaders, laughing as they went, and singing like merry
brooks or happy children. Into the mountains they had gone, disappearing
before the very eyes of the Milesians. Forever afterwards they lived
within the mountains and became the Ever-Living Living Ones in the Land
of Youth.

The Leprechaun knew well that he, and all his elf kin, were descendants
of those very Danaans, who still lived in their underground palaces that
blazed with light and laughter. Hadn't the *drean*--the wise, small
wren--that druid of

birds, often told him what was going on down there? Hadn't he himself
been below the tower of Ardmore, where, in a glorious hall that belonged
to the Ever-Living Living Ones, the Danaans held many a gay carousal?
Didn't he hear, at times, their bells ringing under the bog, on a quiet
evening? And hadn't he, more times than once, rung the sweet bells of
Ardmore--these bells which never had been rung except by one whose real
home was in the Land of Youth? In the Land of Youth was the Leprechaun's
home. (Ochone, I should say!) There it had been since the day that
Oisin, son of Finn, journeyed to that land. For, on the same day,
without Oisin's knowledge, the Leprechaun had sped from the green hills
of Erin, through a golden haze, to the country of the Ever-Living Living
Ones. Oisin was his hero, his great hero, whom he had helped, invisibly,
more than he had helped anyone else. The most valiant Danaan of all was
Oisin, and Oisin he would follow to the world's end.

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

("That's so," said the Leprechaun, as he began the fancy stitching on
the prince's riding boots.)

Now, for the thousandth time, he told himself the story of Oisin, for he
liked this tale best of all: how Oisin, when

<span id="img_11300"></span> ![](img/11300.jpg)

hunting, met the maiden, Niam of the Golden Hair, riding her snow-white
steed; how, after she sang to him a song of the enchanting "land beyond
dreams," Oisin had ridden with her to the Land of Youth (and the
Leprechaun, in the shape of a butterfly, had perched on the horse's
mane); how, in the realm of her father, the king, fearless Oisin had had
brave adventures. He rescued a princess from a giant; subdued the three
Hounds of Erin (helped by the Leprechaun who confused the hounds), and
found the magic harp--a harp next in wonder to the Dagda's harp whose
strings, when touched, would sing the story of the one who last touched
them. He had even tilted with the king's cupbearer to win

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

a gold-hilted sword, and had done other worthy deeds. No time at all, it
seemed to Oisin, that magical time, in the Land of Youth, but, at last,
his heart longed to see his old home. So Niam of the Golden Hair gave
him her snow-white steed to ride, but charged him three times that, when
he should reach the familiar places of Erin, he must not, once, set foot
upon the ground or he would never be able to return to the Land of
Youth. Oisin bade her farewell and, with the Leprechaun as a butterfly
still on the horse's mane, he began his homeward journey.

As he was riding along, once more, through a beautiful vale of Erin, he
saw men, much smaller than himself, trying in vain to push aside a huge
boulder that had rolled from the hillside down upon their tilled land.
In pity for these weaklings, he instantly jumped from his saddle to the
ground (not heeding the Leprechaun who, in his own form, clung with all
his might, to remind him of Niam's warning) and, with one push, he sent
the boulder out of the way. Alas! Even as the men were shouting praises
to their god-like helper, it seemed to Oisin that darkness bore him to
the earth. When he opened his eyes, lo, he was an old man, feeble,
gray-headed, gray-bearded! The men whom he had helped, had with one
accord run away; but the Leprechaun, astride a twig close by, whispered
words of cheer and sang part of the song of the Danaans when they went
into the mountains. Oisin then roused himself and said faintly, "I hear
the voice of bells." Then he added in a resolute tone, "Whenever I shall
hear sweet bells ring, young will be my heart." Since that day, the
Leprechaun had often rung bells, especially the bells of

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ardmore Tower,
because he knew that Oisin would hear them and feel young again.

 

Tap, tap, tap,--and the Leprechaun's work is done. It's little that
anyone can tell about him making shoes, or about Ireland's heroes, or
about its grassy mounds of mystery. He stands up now and stretches
himself. If he felt like it, he could blow a blast on the tiny, curved
horn, hanging at his side, and call, from the Underland, as many
merry-hearted Danaans as he chose. He could cast spells, too, on the
sea, beyond the ninth wave from shore. Instead, he whisks

<span id="img_11500"></span> ![](img/11500.jpg)

from the west window into the tower and out again, through the east
window. There he stands for a few moments--his feet braced on the
highest circular cornice, his back leaning against the sloping roof
top--watching the rim of the sun

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

rise over a mountainous cloud. The sky of gold is changing to the pink
of a wild rose. The gray mists, over moorland and mound, are scattering
as quickly as the men whom Oisin helped.

The Round Tower of Ardmore again greeted the sun, as the Leprechaun,
hugging tightly the riding boots promised to the fairy prince at
sunrise, swiftly slid down a sunbeam to the top of the oak tree, where
the prince was waiting.

"Here they are, Your Highness," said the elf, with a bow.

The prince smiled, as he took the boots, and gave the Leprechaun a piece
of gold. "You've kept your promise," he said.

"That's so," answered the Leprechaun. Then he sprang up on the
rollicking south wind and flew away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tower That Sings](tl13.md)
