[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16000)  [Next](cc16002.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 49.

<span id="ii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p1"></span><span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
49:1-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md)<span id="ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Listen, O isles, unto me; and hearken,
ye people, from far; The LORD hath called me from the womb; from the
bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name.

<span id="ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite me, Insulae, et attendite populi
e longinquo. Iehova ex utero vocavit me, e ventre matris meae habuit in
memoria nomen meum.

<span id="ii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And he hath made my mouth like a sharp
sword; in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me, and made me a polished
shaft; in his quiver hath he hid me;

<span id="ii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et posuit os meum quasi gladium acutum;
in umbra manus suae protexit me, et posuit me in sagittam tersam, in
pharetra sua abscondit me.

<span id="ii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And said unto me, Thou *art* my
servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified.

<span id="ii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et dixit mihi, Servus meus es, Israel,
in to gloriabor.

<span id="ii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Then I said, I have laboured in vain, I
have spent my strength for nought, and in vain; *yet* surely my judgment
*is* with the LORD, and my work with my God.

<span id="ii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ego autem dixi, Frustra laboravi;
inaniter et vane fortitudinem meam consumpsi. At judicium meum coram
Iehova, et opus meum coram Deo meo.

<span id="ii.i-p10"></span>**5.** And now, saith the LORD that formed me
from the womb *to be* his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though
Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the LORD,
and my God shall be my strength.

<span id="ii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et nunc dicit Iehova, qui formavit me
ab utero in servum sibi, ut reducam ad se Iacob. Atque ut Israel non
colligatur, tamen gloriosus ero in oculis Iehovae, et Deus meus erit
fortitudo mea.

<span id="ii.i-p12"></span>**6.** And he said, It is a light thing that
thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the
earth.

<span id="ii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et ait, Leve est ut tu mihi sis servus
ad suscitandas tribus Iacob, et desolationes Israel ut restituas. Itaque
constitui to in lucem Gentium, ut sis salus mea ad extremum terrae.

<span id="ii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Thus saith the LORD, the Redeemer of
Israel, *and* his Holy One, to him whom man despiseth, to him whom the
nation abhorreth, to a servant of rulers, Kings shall see and arise,
princes also shall worship, because of the LORD that is faithful, *and*
the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee.

<span id="ii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Sic dicit Iehova redemptor Israel,
Sanctus ejus, ad contemptibilem anima, ad gentem abominabilem, ad servum
dominantium. Reges videbunt, et consurgent Principes, et adorabunt
propter Iehovam, quia fidelis est Sanctus Israel, et qui elegit to.

<span id="ii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Thus saith the LORD, In an acceptable
time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee:
and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to
establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages;

<span id="ii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Sic dicit Iehova: In tempore placiti
exaudivi to, in die salutis auxiliatus sum tibi; et servabo to, et dabo
to in foedus populi, ut suscites terram, ut haereditate obtineas
haereditates desolatas.

<span id="ii.i-p18"></span>**9.** That thou mayest say to the prisoners,
Go forth; to them that *are* in darkness, Shew yourselves. They shall
feed in the ways, and their pastures *shall be* in all high places.

<span id="ii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ut dicas vinctis, Exite; iis qui sunt
in tenebris, Ostendite vos. Super vias pascentur, in omnibus verticibus
pascua eorum.

<span id="ii.i-p20"></span>**10.** They shall not hunger nor thirst;
neither shall the heat nor sun smite them: for he that hath mercy on
them shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide them.

<span id="ii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Non esurient, neque sitient; non
percutiet eos aestus et sol; quia miserator eorum diriget eos, et super
scaturigines aquarum ducet eos.

<span id="ii.i-p22"></span>**11.** And I will make all my mountains a
way, and my highways shall be exalted.

<span id="ii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et ponam omnes montes meos in viare,
et semitae meae elevabuntur.

<span id="ii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Behold, these shall come from far:
and, lo, these from the north and from the west; and these from the land
of Sinim.

<span id="ii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Ecee, isti e longinquo venient; et
ecee, isti ab Aquilone, et a mari; et isti e terra Sinis, *(vel,
Sinim.)*

<span id="ii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Sing, O heavens; and be joyful, O
earth; and break forth into singing, O mountains: for the LORD hath
comforted his people, and will have mercy upon his afflicted.

<span id="ii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Laudate, coeli; et exulta, terra; et
erumpite, montes, in laudera; quia consolatus est Iehova populum suum,
et pauperum suorum miserebitur.

<span id="ii.i-p28"></span>**14.** But Zion said, The LORD hath forsaken
me, and my Lord hath forgotten me.

<span id="ii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Atqui dixit Sion, Dereliquit me
Iehova, et Dominus meus oblitus est mei.

<span id="ii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they
may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

<span id="ii.i-p31"></span>**15.** An obliviscetur mulier foetus sui, ut
non misereatur filii uteri sui? Etiam si istae oblitae fuerint, ego
tamen non obliviscar tui.

<span id="ii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Behold, I have graven thee upon the
palms of, *my* hands; thy walls *are* continually before me.

<span id="ii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Ecce, super palmas sculpsi to; muri
tui coram me sunt semper.

<span id="ii.i-p34"></span>**17.** Thy children shall make haste; thy
destroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.

<span id="ii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Festinant structores tui;
destructores tui et vastatores tui procul abs to discedent.

<span id="ii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Lift up thine eyes round about, and
behold: all these gather themselves together, *and* come to thee. *As* I
live, saith the LORD, thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all, as
with an ornament, and bind them *on thee,* as a bride *doeth.*

<span id="ii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Leva per circuitum oculos tuos, et
vide. Omnes congregati sunt. venerunt tibi. Vivo ego, dicit Iehova, quod
omnibus quasi ornamento vestieris, et circumligaberis illis tanquam
sponsa.

<span id="ii.i-p38"></span>**19.** For thy waste and thy desolate
places, and the land of thy destruction, shall even now be too narrow by
reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up shall be far
away.

<span id="ii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Quoniam desolationes tuis, et
vastitates tuae, et terra tua deserta, nunc tamen angusta erit ob
multitudinem habitantium; et procul abscedent consumptores tui.

<span id="ii.i-p40"></span>**20.** The children which thou shalt have,
after thou hast lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place
*is* too strait for me: give place to me that I may dwell.

<span id="ii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Adhuc dicent in auribus tuis filii
orbitatis tuae: Angustus mihi locus est; secede alio mihi, ut habitem.

<span id="ii.i-p42"></span>**21.** Then shalt thou say in thine heart,
Who hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children, and am
desolate, a captive, and removing to and fro? and who hath brought up
these? Behold, I was left alone; these, where *had* they *been?*

<span id="ii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et dices in corde tuo: Quis genuit
mihi istos? Nam ego orba *(vel, sterilis)* et solitaria demigrans, et
exul. Quis ergo istos educavit? Ecce, ego relicta eram sola; isti unde
sunt?

<span id="ii.i-p44"></span>**22.** Thus saith the Lord GOD, Behold, I
will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my standard to the
people: and they shall bring thy sons in *their* arms, and thy daughters
shall be carried upon *their* shoulders.

<span id="ii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Sic dicit Dominus Iehova: Ecce levabo
ad Gentes manum meam, et ad populos extollam vexillum meum; et adducent
filios tuos in sinu, et filiae tuae super humeram ferentur.

<span id="ii.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p47"></span>**23.** And kings shall be thy nursing
fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers: they shall bow down to
thee with *their* face toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
feet; and thou shalt know that I *am* the LORD: for they shall not be
ashamed that wait for me.

<span id="ii.i-p48"></span>**23.** Et erunt reges nutritii tui, et
reginae eorum nutrices tuae; prono in terram vultu adorabunt to, et
pulverem pedum tuorum lingent. Et scies quod ego sum Iehova, quia non
pudefient qui me expectant.

<span id="ii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Shall the prey be taken from the
mighty, or the lawful captive delivered?

<span id="ii.i-p50"></span>**24.** An anferetur forti praeda? An
captivitas justi *(vel, justa)* liberabitur?

<span id="ii.i-p51"></span>**25.** But thus saith the LORD, Even the
captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible
shall be delivered: for I will contend with him that contendeth with
thee, and I will save thy children.

<span id="ii.i-p52"></span>**25.** Atqui sic dicit Iehova, Etiam
captivitas fortis auferetur, et praeda tyranni liberabitur; quia cum eo
qui contendit tecum ego contendam, et filios tuos ego servabo.

<span id="ii.i-p53"></span>**26.** And I will feed them that oppress
thee with their own flesh; and they shall be drunken with their own
blood, as with sweet wine: and all flesh shall know that I the LORD *am*
thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob.

<span id="ii.i-p54"></span>**26.** Et pascam spoliatores tuos carnibus
tuis, et quasi musto sanguine suo inebriabuntur; et sciet omnis caro
quod ego sum Iehova servator tuus, et redemptor tuus fortis Iacob.

<span id="ii.i-p55"></span> 

<span id="ii.i-p56"></span><span id="ii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p57"></span>**1.** *Hear me, O islands!* After having
treated of the future deliverance of the people, he comes down to
Christ, under whose guidance the people were brought out of Babylon, as
they had formerly been brought out of Egypt. The former prophecy must
have been confirmed by this doctrine; because they would scarcely have
hoped that the Lord would deliver them, if they had not placed Christ
before their eyes, by whom alone desponding souls can be comforted and
strengthened; for from him they ought not only to expect eternal
salvation, but ought equally to expect temporal deliverance. Besides, it
is customary with the prophets, when they discourse concerning the
restoration of the Church, to bring Christ into view, not only because
he would be the minister of the Church, but because on him was founded
the adoption of the people. The Jews also, or, at least, such of them as
have any soundness of understanding, admit that this passage cannot be
understood as relating to any other person than Christ. But still the
train of thought which we have pointed out has not been perceived by
every interpreter; for the Prophet does not, by a sudden transition,
mention Christ, but interweaves this with the former subject, because in
no other manner could the people entertain the hope of deliverance,
since on him depended their reconciliation with God. And in order that
the style might be more energetic, he introduces Christ as speaking, and
addresses not only the Jews but nations that were beyond the sea, and
foreign nations who were at a great distance from Judea, to whom, as we
have formerly remarked,  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) he gives the
name of “Islands.”

<span id="ii.i-p59"></span>*Jehovah hath called me from the womb.* A
question arises, What is the nature of this calling? For, seeing that we
were

<span id="ii.i-p60"></span>“chosen in Christ before the creation of the
world,”  
(<span id="ii.i-p60.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="ii.i-p60.2"></span>,.md)

<span id="ii.i-p61"></span>it follows that election goes before this
calling; for it is the commencement and foundation of our election.
Accordingly, it might be thought that Isaiah says far less than the
occasion demands, when he says that he was “called from the womb;” for
he had been called long before. But the answer is easy; for the subject
here treated of is not eternal election, by which we are adopted to be
his sons, but only the appointment or consecration by which Christ is
set apart to that office, that no man may think that he intruded into it
without being duly authorized. “For no man,” as the Apostle says,

<span id="ii.i-p62"></span>“taketh this honor upon himself, but he who
is called by God, as Aaron was. So also Christ glorified not himself to
be made a high priest, but he who spake to him, Thou art my Son; this
day have I begotten thee.” (<span id="ii.i-p62.1"></span>[Heb.
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#005)<span id="ii.i-p62.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p63"></span>Moreover, the Prophet does not describe the
commencement of the period, as if it were only from the womb that God
began to call him; but it is as if he had said, “Before I came out of
the womb, God had determined that I should hold this office.” In like
manner Paul also says that he was “set apart from the womb,” (<span
id="ii.i-p63.1"></span>[Ga 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#015.md)<span
id="ii.i-p63.1"></span>,) though he had been “elected before the
creation of the world.” (<span id="ii.i-p63.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="ii.i-p63.2"></span>..md) To
Jeremiah also it is said, “Before thou camest out of the womb, I knew
thee.” (<span id="ii.i-p63.3"></span>[Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005)<span id="ii.i-p63.3"></span>..md) In
short, the meaning is, that Christ was clothed with our flesh by the
appointment of the Father, in order that he might fulfill the office of
Redeemer, to which he had been appointed.

<span id="ii.i-p64"></span>*From my mother’s belly he hath had my name
in remembrance.* This has the same import as the former clause; for by
“the remembrance of the name” is meant familiar acquaintance. He
therefore distinguishes himself from the ordinary rank of men, because
he was elected to an uncommon and remarkable office.

<span id="ii.i-p65"></span><span id="ii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p66"></span>**2.** *And he hath placed my mouth as a
sharp sword,* he employs a twofold comparison, that of “a sword” and of
“a quiver,” in order to denote the power and energy of the doctrine; and
he shews why he was called, and why he was honored by a name so
excellent and illustrious, namely, that he may teach; for this is what
he means by the word “mouth.” Christ hath therefore been appointed by
the Father, not to rule, after the manner of princes, by the force of
arms, and by surrounding himself with other external defences, to make
himself an object of terror to his people; but his whole authority
consists in doctrine, in the preaching of which he wishes to be sought
and acknowledged; for nowhere else will he be found. He asserts the
power of his “mouth,” that is, of the doctrine which proceeds from his
mouth, by comparing it to “a sword;” for

<span id="ii.i-p67"></span>“the word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing of
the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intentions of the heart.” (<span
id="ii.i-p67.1"></span>[Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.i-p67.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p68"></span>*And hath made me as a polished arrow.* He
now compares his mouth to “an arrow,” because it strikes not only close
at hand, but likewise at a distance, and reaches even those who appear
to be far off.

<span id="ii.i-p69"></span>*In his quiver hath he hid me.* After having
spoken of the efficacy of doctrine, Isaiah adds, that God, by his power,
protects Christ and his doctrine, so that nothing can stop his course.
And this was very necessary to be added; for, as soon as the mouth of
Christ is opened, that is, as soon as his Gospel is preached,
adversaries rise up on all sides, and innumerable enemies league
together in order to crush it; so that the efficacy which he ascribes to
doctrine would not be sufficient, if there were not added his
protection, in order to drive away adversaries.

<span id="ii.i-p70"></span>Besides, the present question is not about
the person of Christ, but about the whole body of the Church. We must
indeed begin with the Head, but we must next come down to the members;
and to all the ministers of the Word must be applied what is here
affirmed concerning Christ; for to them is given such efficacy of the
Word, that they may not idly beat the air with their voices, but may
reach the hearts and touch them to the quick. The Lord also causes the
voice of the Gospel to resound not; only in one place, but far and wide
throughout the whole world. In short, because he faithfully keeps them
under his protection, though they are exposed to many attacks, and are
assaulted on every side by Satan and the world, yet they do not swerve
from their course. We ought to have abundant knowledge of this from
experience; for they would all to a man have been long ago ruined by the
conspiracies and snares of adversaries, if the Lord had not defended
them by his protection. And indeed, amidst so many dangers, it is almost
miraculous that a single preacher of the Gospel is permitted to remain.
The reason of this is, that the Lord guards them by his shadow, and
“hides them as arrows in his quiver,” that they may not be laid open to
the assaults of enemies and be destroyed.

<span id="ii.i-p71"></span><span id="ii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p72"></span>**3.** *Thou art my servant, O Israel.* It is
of great importance to connect this verse with the preceding, because
this shews that the Prophet now speaks not only of a single man, but of
the whole nation; which has not been duly considered by commentators.
This passage must not be limited to the person of Christ, and ought not
to be referred to Israel alone; but on the present occasion we should
attend to the customary language of Scripture. When the whole body of
the Church is spoken of, Christ is brought forward conspicuously so as
to include all the children of God. We hear what Paul says:

<span id="ii.i-p73"></span>“The promises were given to Abraham and to
his seed. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to
thy seed, which is Christ.” (<span id="ii.i-p73.1"></span>[Ga
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016)<span id="ii.i-p73.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p74"></span>He does not include the whole multitude of
children who were descended from Abraham himself according to the flesh,
seeing that all were not partakers of the blessing. Ishmael was
rejected, Esau was a reprobate, and many others were cut off. When the
people were rescued from Babylon, but a small renmant came out; for the
greater part rejected God’s astonishing kindness. Where then was “the
seed?” In Christ, who is the Head, and contains in himself the rest of
the members; for in him is joined and bound by an indisoluble bond all
the seed.

<span id="ii.i-p75"></span>In like manner, under the name *Israel,* by
which he means Christ, Isaiah includes the whole body of the people, as
members under the Head. Nor ought this to be thought strange; for Paul
also, when he speaks of the union, employs the metaphor of the human
body, and then adds: “So also is Christ.” (<span
id="ii.i-p75.1"></span>[1Co 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md)<span
id="ii.i-p75.1"></span>.) In that passage the name of Christ is given to
Israel, that is, to the whole body of believers, who are joined to
Christ, as members to the Head. In a word, the Lord honors by this name
the Church, which is the spouse of Christ, just as the wife is honored
by bearing the name and title of her husband. He calls “Israel his
*servant,”* that is, he calls the Church his handmaid, because she is
“the pillar and foundation of truth,” (<span id="ii.i-p75.2"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="ii.i-p75.2"></span>;.md)
for he hath committed his word to the care of the Church, that by her
ministrations it may be published throughout the whole world.

<span id="ii.i-p76"></span>*In thee I will be glorified.* At length, in
the conclusion of the verse he shews what is the design of these
ministrations, and for what purpose, they who preach the Gospel are
called by God; namely, that they may zealously display his glory, and
may likewise promote it among others, which Christ also teaches us in
the Gospel,

<span id="ii.i-p77"></span>“Father, glorify thy Son, that thy Son may
glorify thee.” (<span id="ii.i-p77.1"></span>[Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001)<span id="ii.i-p77.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p78"></span>This is a very high honor conferred on poor,
feeble men, when the Lord appoints them, though corrupt and depraved, to
promote his glory; and therefore we ought to be the more encouraged to
render to him our service and obedience. Yet God intends to express
something more, that, notwithstanding the efforts of Satan and all
wicked men, the power of God will be victorious, so that Christ shall
triumph gloriously, and the majesty of God shall shine forth in his
Gospel.

<span id="ii.i-p79"></span><span id="ii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p80"></span>**4.** *And I said, In vain have I toiled.*
The Prophet here brings forward a grievous complaint in the name of the
Church, yet in such a manner that, as we have formerly remarked, we must
begin with the Head. Christ therefore complains along with his members,
that it appears as if his labor were thrown away; for, having formerly
pronounced a high and striking commendation on the power and efficacy of
the word which proceedeth out of his mouth, while yet it scarcely does
any good, and the glory which God demands from the ministration of it
does not shine forth, he therefore introduces the Church as complaining
that she spends her labor fruitlessly, because men do not repent at the
preaching of heavenly doctrine.

<span id="ii.i-p81"></span>It was highly necessary that the Prophet
should add this; first, that we may know that the fruit which he
mentioned is not always visible to the eyes of men; for otherwise we
might call in question the truth of the word, and might entertain doubts
if that which is so obstinately rejected by many was the word of God.
Secondly, it was necessary, that we may advance with unshaken firmness,
and may commit our labor to the Lord, who will not permit it to be
ultimately unproductive. The Prophet therefore intended to guard against
a dangerous temptation, that we may not, on account of the obstinacy of
men, lose courage in the middle of our course. And indeed Christ begins
with the complaint, for the purpose of affirming that nothing shall
hinder him from executing his office. The meaning of the words might be
more clearly brought out in the following manner: “Though my labor be
unprofitable, and though I have almost exhausted my strength without
doing any good, yet it is enough that God approves of my obedience.”
Such is also the import of what he adds, —

<span id="ii.i-p82"></span>*But my judgement is before Jehovah.*
Although we do not clearly see the fruit of our labors, yet we are
enjoined to be content on this ground, that we serve God, to whom our
obedience is acceptable. Christ exhorts and encourages godly teachers to
strive earnestly till they rise victorious over this temptation, and,
laying aside the malice of the world, to advance cheerfully in the
discharge of duty, and not to allow their hearts to languish through
weariness. If therefore the Lord be pleased to make trial of our faith
and patience to such an extent that it shall seem as if we wearied
ourselves to no purpose, yet we ought to rely on this testimony of our
conscience And if we do not enjoy this consolation, at least we are not
moved by pure affection, and do not serve God, but the world and our own
ambition. In such temptations, therefore, we should have recourse to
this sentiment.

<span id="ii.i-p83"></span>Yet it ought to be observed, that here Christ
and the Church accuse the whole world of ingratitude; for the Church
complains to God in such a manner as to remonstrate with the world,
because no good effect is produced on it by the doctrine of the Gospel,
which in itself is efficacious and powerful. Yet the whole blame rests
on the obstinacy and ingratitude of men, who reject the grace of God
offered to them, and of their own accord choose to perish. Let those
persons now go and accuse Christ, who say that the Gospel yields little
fruit, and who defame the doctrine of the word by wicked slanders, and
who throw ridicule on our labors as vain and unprofitable, and who
allege that, on the contrary, they excite men to sedition, and lead them
to sin with less control. Let them consider, I say, with whom they have
to do, and what advantage they gain by their impudence, since men alone
ought to bear the blame, who, as far as lies in their power, render the
preaching of the Word unprofitable.

<span id="ii.i-p84"></span>Godly ministers, who bitterly lament that men
perish so miserably by their own fault, and who sometimes devour and
waste themselves through grief, when they experience so great
perversity, ought to encourage their hearts by this consolation, and not
to be alarmed so as to throw away the shield and spear, though sometimes
they imagine that it would be better for them to do so. Let them
consider that they share with Christ in this cause; for Christ does not
speak of himself alone, as we formerly mentioned, but undertakes the
cause of all who faithfully serve him, and, as their advocate, brings
forward an accusation in the name of all. Let them therefore rely on his
protection, and allow him to defend their cause. Let them appeal, as
Paul does, to the day of the Lord, (<span id="ii.i-p84.1"></span>[1Co
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#004)<span id="ii.i-p84.1"></span>,.md) and
let them not heed the calumnies, reproaches, or slanders of their
enemies; for their judgment is with the Lord, and although they be a
hundred times slandered by the world, yet a faithful God will approve
and vindicate the service which they render to him.

<span id="ii.i-p85"></span>On the other hand, let wicked men, and
despisers of the word, and hypocrites, tremble; for when Christ accuses,
there will be no room for defense; and when he condenms, there will be
none that can acquit. We must therefore beware lest the fruit which
ought to proceed from the Gospel should be lost through our fault; for
the Lord manifests his glory in order that we may become disciples of
Christ, and may bring forth much fruit.

<span id="ii.i-p86"></span><span id="ii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p87"></span>**5.** *And now saith Jehovah.* By this verse
he confirms the former statement, and yields more abundant consolation,
by repeating that calling; and the testimony of conscience, which ought
to be regarded by us as a fortress; for there is nothing that gives us
greater distress and anxiety, than to entertain doubts by whose
authority, or by whose direction everything is undertaken by us. For
this reason Isaiah reminds us of the certainty of our calling.

<span id="ii.i-p88"></span>*Who formed me from the womb to be his
servant.* In the first place, godly teachers, along with Christ who is
their Prince, say that they have been “formed” by a divine hand; because
God always enriches and adorns with necessary gifts those whom he calls
to the office of teaching, who derive from the one fountain of the
Spirit all the gifts in which they excel. Thus “the Father hath sealed”
(<span id="ii.i-p88.1"></span>[Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span id="ii.i-p88.1"></span>.md) his
Only-begotten Son, and next prepares others, according to their degree,
to be fit for discharging their office. At the same time, he points out
the end of the calling; for to this end have Apostles and teachers of
the Church been appointed, to gather the Lord’s scattered flock, that
under Christ we may all be united in the same body. (<span
id="ii.i-p88.2"></span>[Eph. 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span id="ii.i-p88.2"></span>..md) In
the world there is miserable dispersion, but in Christ there is <span
id="ii.i-p88.3"></span>ἀνακεφαλαίωσις “a gathering together” of all,
(<span id="ii.i-p88.4"></span>[Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span id="ii.i-p88.4"></span>,.md) as
the Apostle speaks; for there can be no other bond of union. As to the
word “create,” or “form,” it is to no purpose that some men speculate
about it as relating to Christ’s human existence, which was created; for
it is clearer than noon-day, that the “forming” must be viewed as
relating to office.

<span id="ii.i-p89"></span>*And though Israel be not gathered.* The Jews
read these words as a question: “Shall I not bring back Jacob? and shall
Israel not be gathered?” and supply the particle <span
id="ii.i-p89.1"></span>ה (*ha*). But that reading is excessively
unnatural, and the Jews do not consider what was the Prophet’s meaning,
but, so far as lies in their power, corrupt the text, in order to
conceal the disgrace of their nation. Some explain it, “Shall not be
lost,” or, “Shall not perish;” for the verb <span
id="ii.i-p89.2"></span>אספ *(asaph)* sometimes denotes what we commonly
call *(*<span id="ii.i-p89.3"></span>*trousser) to truss.* Those things
which are intended to be preserved are “gathered,” and likewise those
things which are intended to be consumed; and accordingly, when we mean
that any person has been removed out of the world, we frequently use the
vulgar phrase, “he is trussed,”  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) or,
“he is despatched.”

<span id="ii.i-p91"></span>*Yet I shall be glorious.* To suppose the
meaning to be, “I have been sent, that Israel may not perish,” would not
be unsuitable; but I choose rather to follow a different interpretation,
namely, “Though Israel be not gathered, yet I shall be glorious;” for it
is probable that opposite things are contrasted with each other in this
passage. If ministers have been set apart, for the salvation of men, it
is glorious to them when many are brought to salvation; and when the
contrary happens, it tends to their shame and disgrace. Paul calls those
whom he had gained to Christ “his glory and crown.” (<span
id="ii.i-p91.1"></span>[Php 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.i-p91.1"></span>; <span id="ii.i-p91.2"></span>[1Th
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#019)<span id="ii.i-p91.2"></span>..md) On
the other hand, when men perish, we receive from it nothing but shame
and disgrace; for God appears to curse our labors, and not to deign to
bestow on us the high honor of advancing his kingdom by our agency. But
the Prophet declares that those who have served Christ shall
nevertheless be glorious; for he speaks both of the head and of the
members, as we have formerly remarked. Although therefore Israel refuse
to be “gathered,” yet the ministry of Christ shall retain its glory
unimpaired; for it will be ascribed to the baseness and wickedness of
men, that they have not been “gathered.”

<span id="ii.i-p92"></span>In like manner, although the preachers of the
Gospel be “the savor of death unto death” to the reprobate, yet Paul
declares that they have a sweet and delightful odor before God, who
determines that wicked men shall thus be rendered the more inexcusable.
God is indeed doubly glorified if success corresponds to their wishes;
but when the ministers of the word have left nothing undone, though they
have good reason to lament that their labor is unprofitable, still they
must not repent of having pleased God, whose approbation is here
contrasted with the perverse judgments of the whole world. As if the
Prophet had said, “Though men vehemently slander and load them with many
reproaches, yet this ought to be calmly and patiently endured by them;
because God judges differently, and bestows a crown of honor on their
patience, which wicked men insolently slander.

<span id="ii.i-p93"></span>*And my God shall be my strength.* When he
says that it is enough that “God is their strength,” the meaning
corresponds to what goes before, that they ought not to be terrified by
the multitude or power of their enemies, seeing that they are persuaded
that their “strength” lies in God.

<span id="ii.i-p94"></span><span id="ii.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p95"></span>**6.** *And he said, It is a small matter.*
Isaiah proceeds still farther, and shews that the labor of Christ, and
of the whole Church, will be glorious not only before God, but likewise
before men. Although at first it appears to be vain and useless, yet the
Lord will cause some fruit to spring from it contrary to the
expectations of men. Already it was enough that our labor should be
approved by God; but when he adds that it will not be unprofitable even
in the eyes of men, this ought still more abundantly to comfort, and
more vehemently to excite us. Hence it follows, that we ought to have
good hopes of success, but that we ought to leave it to the disposal of
God himself, that the blessing which he promises may be made manifest at
the proper time, to whatever extent, and in whatever manner he shall
think proper.

<span id="ii.i-p96"></span>*Therefore I have appointed thee to be a
light of the Gentiles.* He now adds, that this labor will be
efficacious, not only among the people of Israel, but likewise among the
Gentiles; and so it actually happened. Moreover, when the preaching of
the Gospel produced hardly any good effect on the Jews, and when Christ
was obstinately rejected by them, the Gentiles were substituted in their
room. And thus Christ was

<span id="ii.i-p97"></span>“appointed to be a light of the Gentiles, and
his salvation was manifested to the very ends of the earth.” (<span
id="ii.i-p97.1"></span>[Ac 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047.md)<span
id="ii.i-p97.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p98"></span>Now this consolation was highly necessary,
both for prophets and for apostles, who experienced more and more the
obstinacy of the Jews. They might doubt the truth of these promises,
since they did not perceive them to yield any fruit; but when they
understood that Christ was sent to the Gentiles also, it was not so
difficult to animate their hearts to persevere. This was incredible, and
even monstrous; but this is the manner in which the Lord commonly works,
contrary to the expectation of all. Paul says that this was “a mystery
bidden from ages,” and that the angels themselves did not understand it
until it was actually revealed in the Church of God. (<span
id="ii.i-p98.1"></span>[Eph 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#005.md)<span
id="ii.i-p98.1"></span>.) Although therefore the Jews alone appeared to
have discernment, they are now placed on a level with the Gentiles, and
with God “there is no distinction between the Jews and the Greeks.”
(<span id="ii.i-p98.2"></span>[Ro
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012)<span id="ii.i-p98.2"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p99"></span>The Jews read this verse as a question, “Is
it a small thing?” As if he had said, that it is enough, and that
nothing more or greater ought to be desired. But they maliciously
corrupt the natural meaning of the Prophet, and imagine that they will
one day be lords of the Gentiles, and will have wide and extensive
dominion. The true meaning of the Prophet is, “This work in itself
indeed is magnificent and glorious, to raise up and restore the tribes
of Israel, which had fallen very low; for he will add the Gentiles to
the Jews, that they may be united as one people, and may be acknowledged
to belong to Christ.” Nor does this passage relate to the rejection of
the ancient people, but to the increase of the Church, that the Gentiles
may be associated with the Jews. It is true, indeed, that when the Jews
revolted from the covenant, the Gentiles entered, as it were, into that
place which they had left vacant; and thus their revolt was the reason
why those who had formerly been aliens were admitted to be sons. But in
this, as well as in other passages, Isaiah foretells that the Church
will be greatly extended, when the Gentiles shall be received and united
to the Jews in the unity of faith.

<span id="ii.i-p100"></span>*A light of the Gentiles.* Although by the
word “light” is meant happiness, or joy, yet the Prophet, I have no
doubt, directly refers to the doctrine of the Gospel, which enlightens
souls, and draws them out of darkness, He shews that this “light,” which
Christ shall bring, will give salvation. In the same manner as Christ is
called “the way, the truth, and the life,” (<span
id="ii.i-p100.1"></span>[Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.i-p100.1"></span>) because through the knowledge of the truth we
obtain life, so in this passage he is called the “light” and salvation
of the Gentiles, because he enlightens our minds by the doctrine of the
Gospel, in order that he may lead us to salvation. Two things,
therefore, ought to be remarked; first, that our eyes are opened by the
doctrine of Christ; and secondly, that we who had perished are restored
to life, or rather life is restored to us.

<span id="ii.i-p101"></span><span id="ii.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p102"></span>**7.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* Isaiah pursues
the same subject, that the people, when they were afflicted by that
terrible calamity, might cherish the hope of a better condition; and, in
order to confirm it the more, he calls God, who promised these things,
*the Redeemer and the Holy One of Israel* It will be objected that these
statements are contradictory, that is, that God is called the “redeemer”
of that people which he permitted to be oppressed; for where is this
redemption, and where is this sanctification, if the people could reply
that they were miserable and ruined? I reply, the record of ancient
history is here exhibited as the ground of confidence and hope; for when
the Jews were on the point of despair, the Prophet comes forward and
reminds them that God, who had formerly redeemed their fathers, is still
as powerful as ever; and therefore, although for a time, in order to
exercise the faith of the godly, he concealed their salvation, believers
are commanded to stand firm, because in his hand their redemption is
certain. Yet it was proper that they should form conceptions of that
which lay far beyond human senses. This is a remarkable passage, from
which we learn how firmly we ought to believe God when he speaks, though
he does not immediately perform what he has promised, but permits us to
languish, and to be afflicted for a long time.

<span id="ii.i-p103"></span>*To the contemptible in the soul.* <span
id="ii.i-p103.1"></span>בזה *(bezo)* is rendered by some commentators
“contempt,” and by others “contemptible,” which I prefer.  <span
id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) It heightens the wretchedness of that
nation, that “in the soul,” that is, in their own estimation, they are
“contemptible.” Many are despised by others, though they either deserve
honor on account of their good qualities, or do not cease to swell with
pride, and to tread down the arrogance of others by still greater
arrogance. But of this people the Prophet says, that they despise
themselves as much as others despise them. He therefore describes deep
disgrace and a very unhappy condition, and, at the same time,
prostration of mind, that they may know that God’s time for rendering
assistance will be fully come, when they shall be altogether humbled.

<span id="ii.i-p105"></span>*To the abhorred nation.*  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) I see no reason why the plural “Nations,” is
here employed by some interpreters; seeing that the singular <span
id="ii.i-p106.1"></span>גוי, (*goi*,) “nation,” is used by the Prophet,
and it is certain that the discourse is specially directed to the
posterity of Abraham.

<span id="ii.i-p107"></span>*To the servant of rulers.* This is added,
as if he had said that they are oppressed by strong tyrants; for he
gives the appellation <span id="ii.i-p107.1"></span>משלים *(moshelim)*
to those whose strength and power are so great that it is not easy to
escape out of their hands.

<span id="ii.i-p108"></span>When he says that *kings shall see,* he
speaks in lofty terms of the deliverance of his nation; but yet he
permits them to be put to the test in the fumace, that he may make trial
of their faith and patience; for otherwise there would be no trial of
their faith, if he immediately performed what he promised, as we have
already said. The word *princes* contains a repetition which is
customary among the Hebrews. We would express it thus: “Kings and
princes shall see; they shall rise up: and adore.” By the word *adore,*
he explains what he had said, “They shall rise up;“ for we “rise up” for
the purpose of shewing respect. The general meaning is, that the most
exalted princes of the world shall be aroused to perceive that the
restoration of the nation is an illustrious work of God, and worthy of
reverence.

<span id="ii.i-p109"></span>*For faithful is the Holy One of Israel.*
This is the reason of the great admiration and honor which the princes
shall render to God. It is because they shall perceive the
“faithfulness” and constancy of the Lord in his promises. Now, the Lord
wishes to be acknowledged to be true, not by a bare and naked
imagination, but by actual experience, that is, by preserving the people
whom he has adopted. Let us therefore learn from it, that we ougtlt not
to judge of the promises of God from our condition, but from his truth;
so that, when we shall see nothing before us but destruction and death,
we may remember this sentiment, by which the Lord calls to himself the
contemptible and abominable.

<span id="ii.i-p110"></span>Hence also it ought to be observed, how
splendid and astonishing a work of God is the deliverance of the Church,
which compels kings, though proud, and deeming hardly anything so
valuable as to be worthy of their notice, to behold, admire, and be
amazed, and even in spite of themselves to reverence the Lord. This
strange and extraordinary work, therefore, is highly commended to us.
How great and how excellent it is, we may learn from ourselves; for to
say nothing about ancient histories, in what manner have we been
redeemed from the wretched tyranny of Antichrist? Truly we shall
consider it to be “a dream,” as the Psalmist says, (<span
id="ii.i-p110.1"></span>[Ps 126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md)<span
id="ii.i-p110.1"></span>,) if we ponder it carefully for a short time;
so strange and incredible is the work which God hath performed in us who
have possessed the name of Christ.

<span id="ii.i-p111"></span>*And who hath chosen thee.* He now repeats
what he had formerly glanced at, that this nation has been set apart to
God. But in election we perceive the beginning of sanctification; for it
was in consequence of God having deigned to elect them out of his mere
good pleasure, that this nation became his peculiar inheritance. Isaiah
therefore points out the secret will of God, from which sanctification
proceeds; that Israel might not think that he had been selected on
account of his own merits. As if he had said, “The Lord, who hath chosen
thee, gives actual proof of his election, and shows it by the effect.”
In the same manner, therefore, as the truth of God ought to be
acknowledged in our salvation, so salvation ought to be ascribed
exclusively to his election, which is of free grace. Yet they who wish
to become partakers of so great a benefit, must be a part of Israel,
that is, of the Church, out of which there can be neither salvation nor
truth.

<span id="ii.i-p112"></span><span id="ii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p113"></span>**8.** *In a time of good pleasure.* From
this verse we again learn more clearly what we explained at the
beginning of this chapter, that the Prophet, while he addresses the
whole body of the Church, begins with Christ, who is the head. I have
said that this ought to be carefully observed; for commentators have not
attended to it, and yet there is no other way in which this chapter can
be consistently expounded. This is clearly shewn by Paul, who applies
this statement to the whole Church. (<span id="ii.i-p113.1"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p113.1"></span>..md)
And yet, what the Prophet adds, *I will give thee to be a covenant,* is
applicable to no other than Christ.

<span id="ii.i-p114"></span>How shall we reconcile these statements? By
considering that Christ is not so much his own as ours; for he neither
came, nor died, nor rose again for himself. He was sent for the
salvation of the Church, and seeks nothing as his own; for he has no
want of anything. Accordingly, God makes promises to the whole body of
the Church. Christ, who occupies the place of Mediator, receives these
promises, and does not plead on behalf of himself as an individual, but
of the whole Church, for whose salvation he was sent. On this account he
does not address Christ separately, but so far as he is joined and
continually united to his body. It is an inconceivable honor which our
heavenly Father bestows upon us, when he listens to his Son on our
account, and when he even directs the discourse to the Son, while the
matter relates to our salvation. Hence we see how close is the
connection between us and Christ. He stands in our room, and has nothing
separate from us; and the Father listens to our cause.

<span id="ii.i-p115"></span>By the word “good pleasure,” the Prophet
lays a bridle on believers, so to speak, that they may not be too eager
in their desires, but may wait patiently till the time appointed by God
has arrived; and in this sense Paul gives to the coming of Christ the
appellation of “the time of fullness.” (<span
id="ii.i-p115.1"></span>[Ga 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.i-p115.1"></span>.) He means, therefore, that they depend on
God’s disposal, and ought therefore to endure his wrath with meekness
and composure. But although the intention of the Prophet is to exhort
the godly to patience, that they may learn to place their feelings in
subordination to God, yet at the same time he shows that our salvation
proceeds from God’s undeserved kindness. <span
id="ii.i-p115.2"></span>רצון *(ratzon)* which the Greeks translate <span
id="ii.i-p115.3"></span>εὐδοκία*,* that is, the good-will of God is the
foundation of our salvation; and salvation is the effect of that grace.
We are saved, because we please God, not through our worthiness or
merits, but by his free grace. Secondly, he shows, at the same time,
that our salvation is certain, when we have a clear proof of the grace
of the Lord. All doubt ought to be removed, when the Lord testified of
his “good pleasure.” This passage tends to the commendation of the word,
beyond which we ought not to inquire about salvation; as Paul declares
that the good pleasure of God is clearly manifested in the preaching of
the Gospel, and that thus is fulfilled what is contained in this passage
about “the day of salvation.” (<span id="ii.i-p115.4"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p115.4"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p116"></span>Thirdly, the Prophet intended to remind us,
that God gives us an undoubted pledge of his favor when he sends the
Gospel to us; because it is evident that he has compassion upon us, when
he gently invites us to himself, that we may not look around in every
direction to seek this light, which ought to be expected only from God’s
gracious pleasure, or be tortured by doubt, from which God frees us. But
let us remember that all this depends on God’s free purpose. When
therefore the question is put, why the Lord enlightened us at this time
rather than at an earlier period, the reason which ought to be assigned
is this: because thus it pleased God, thus it seemed good in his sight.
Such is the conclusion to which Paul comes in the passage which we
quoted,

<span id="ii.i-p117"></span>“Behold, now is the accepted time; behold,
now is the day of salvation.” (<span id="ii.i-p117.1"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="ii.i-p117.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p118"></span>This passage may greatly aid us in
ascertaining Isaiah’s meaning, that we may learn to connect our
salvation with God’s good pleasure; a proof of which is given to us in
the preaching of the Gospel. It ought also to be observed, that these
predictions should not be limited to a certain age, since they belong to
the whole Church in all ages. For if we begin with the deliverance from
Babylon, we must go on to the redemption of Christ, of which it might be
regarded as the commencement and the forerunner; and since there are
still found among us many remnants of slavery, we must proceed forward
to the last day, when everything shall be restored.

<span id="ii.i-p119"></span>*I have appointed thee to be a covenant.*
This makes it still more evident, that all that had formerly been said
was promised to Christ, not for the sake of his personal advantage, but
on our behalf; for he has been appointed to be the mediator of the
covenant, because the Jews by their sins had revolted from God, who had
made an everlasting covenant with them. The renewal of that covenant,
therefore, which had been broken or dissolved, is ascribed to Christ.
Yet we must likewise keep in view the saying of Paul, that

<span id="ii.i-p120"></span>“Christ is our peace, to reconcile both them
that are far off, and them that are near.” (<span
id="ii.i-p120.1"></span>[Eph. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span id="ii.i-p120.1"></span>..md)

<span id="ii.i-p121"></span>But, Isaiah had directly in view that
lamentable ruin, the remedy for which could be expected from Christ
alone. Besides, it is proper to apply this grace to ourselves, because,
as compared to the Jews, before the Gospel was preached, we were enemies
and aliens from God, and could not in any other way be reconciled to
him. Christ was therefore “given to be a covenant of the people,”
because there was no other way to God but by him. At that time the Jews
were a people; but in consequence of the partition-wall having been
broken down, all of us, both Jews and Gentiles, have been united in one
body.

<span id="ii.i-p122"></span>*That thou mayest raise up the earth,* which
at that time was waste and desolate; for the return of the people was,
as we have elsewhere seen, a kind of new creation. Such is also the
design of the words of the Prophet, that we may know that there is
nothing in the world but ruin and desolation. Christ is sent in order to
restore what was fallen down and decayed. If we had not been in a fallen
condition, there would have been no reason why Christ should be sent to
us. We ought therefore to weigh well our condition; for we are aliens
from God, destitute of life, and shut out from all hope of salvation.
But by Christ we are fully restored and reconciled to our Heavenly
Father. Isaiah likewise adds the benefits which we obtain through
Christ, after having been reconciled to God.

<span id="ii.i-p123"></span><span id="ii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p124"></span>**9.** *That thou mayest say to them that
are bound.* These words describe the change which took place at the
coming of Christ. And yet the Prophet unquestionably intends to
administer consolation to the Jews in their extremity, that they may not
think it incredible that they shall be restored to a better condition,
because they see that they are almost devoted to destruction. Still, he
shows in general what is the nature of Christ’s office, and explains
what is meant by *restoring desolate heritages;* for, before the coming
of Christ, we are “bound” under a miserable yoke, and plunged in
darkness. By these metaphors is meant, that so long as we are without
Christ, we are overwhelmed by a load of all evils; for by *darkness* he
excludes everything that relates to the kingdom of Christ, faith,
righteousness, truth, innocence, and everything of that nature. We are
therefore in “darkness,” till Christ say, *Shew yourselves* We are
“bound,” till he say, *Come forth.*

<span id="ii.i-p125"></span>The word <span id="ii.i-p125.1"></span>לאמר,
(*lemor*,) “that thou mayest say,” is highly emphatic; for it shews that
the preaching of the Gospel is the means by which we are delivered. If
therefore we desire liberty, if we desire the light of the kingdom of
God, let us listen to Christ when he speaks; otherwise we shall be
oppressed by the unceasing tyranny of Satan. Where then is the liberty
of our will? Whosoever claims for himself light, or reason, or
understanding, can have no share in this deliverance of Christ; for
liberty is not promised to any but those who acknowledge that they are
captives, and light and salvation are not promised to any but those who
acknowledge that they are plunged in darkness.

<span id="ii.i-p126"></span>*On the ways they shall feed.* When he
promises that pastures shall be accessible to the children of God, and
shall be on the tops of the mountains, by these metaphors he declares
that all who shall be under the protection of Christ shall dwell safely;
for he is a careful and attentive Shepherd, who supplies his flock with
everything that is necessary, so that they are in want of nothing that
is requisite for the highest happiness. (<span
id="ii.i-p126.1"></span>[Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011)<span id="ii.i-p126.1"></span>..md)
This instruction was highly necessary at the time when the Jews were
about to perform a joumey through dry and barren countries, in their
return to a land which lay waste and desolate. The Prophet therefore
says that God has abundant resources for supplying their wants, though
earthly means should fail; and accordingly, in accordance with the
ordinary custom of Scripture, he compares believers to sheep, in order
that, being aware of their weakness, they may shrink themselves entirely
to the care of the Shepherd.

<span id="ii.i-p127"></span>Yet it is probable that indirectly he warns
believers not to desire excessive luxury, because they will never have
so great a superfluity as not to be attended by many difficulties; and
likewise not to become effeminate, because they will be beset by
dangers; for we know that “the ways” are exposed to the attacks of
enemies and robbers, and that the tops of mountains are for the most
part barren. The Church is governed by Christ in such a manner as not to
be free from the attacks and insults of men, and is fed in such a manner
as frequently to inhabit barren and frightful regions. But though
enemies are at hand, God protects us from their violence and oppression.
If we are thirsty or hungry, he is abundantly able to supply everything
that is necessary for food and maintenance; and amidst perils and
difficulties of this nature we perceive his care and anxiety more dearly
than if we were placed beyond the reach of all danger.

<span id="ii.i-p128"></span><span id="ii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p129"></span>**10.** *They shall not hunger or thirst.*
He confirms what was said in the former verse, that there is food in the
hand of God, so that the Jews shall not be in want of provisions for
their joumey. Nor can it be doubted that he calls to their remembrance,
that when their fathers were threatened with death in the wilderness
through a scarcity of bread and of every kind of food, God gave them
daily, for forty years, manna from heaven. (<span
id="ii.i-p129.1"></span>[Ex 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035.md)<span
id="ii.i-p129.1"></span>.) In like manner, when he immediately
afterwards speaks of a shadow against *the heat of the sun,* he alludes
to the history related by Moses about “the pillar of a cloud,” by which
God protected his people from being scorched by the buming rays of the
sun. (<span id="ii.i-p129.2"></span>[Ex
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)<span id="ii.i-p129.2"></span>..md)
We have said that it is customary with the prophets to mention the
departure of the people out of Egypt, whenever they intend to
demonstrate the kindness of God, either publicly towards all, or
privately towards any individual.

<span id="ii.i-p130"></span>*By the fountains of waters.* He likewise
alludes to those waters which flowed from the rock, (<span
id="ii.i-p130.1"></span>[Ex 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006.md)<span
id="ii.i-p130.1"></span>,) when the people had well-nigh perished from
thirst; for those occurrences did not take place at the deliverance from
Babylon, but, by mentioning former benefits, the Prophet magnifies the
power of God in securing the safety of the Church.

<span id="ii.i-p131"></span><span id="ii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p132"></span>**11.** *And I will place all my mountains.*
Here he directly and expressly treats of the return of the people; for
in vain would he have promised so great happiness to the Church, if the
people were not to be restored to their former liberty. The meaning is,
that he will remove every obstacle and hinderance that might prevent the
return of the people; and that he will render the “mountains” passable,
which appeared to be impassable; and, in short, that he will level both
the mountains and the valleys, that their return to Judea may be
facilitated. Thus, when the Church is about to be completely restored,
no obstructions, however great and formidable, can hinder God from being
finally victorious. Besides, when he calls them “my mountains,” he not
only means that he has an absolute right to command them to afford a
passage to his people, but declares that he will be the leader of the
expedition, as if he would march along with the Jews, and accompany them
in the joumey. In like manner, it is said in another passage, that he
passed through Egypt and “rode on the high places of it” at the
departure of his people. (<span id="ii.i-p132.1"></span>[De
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)<span id="ii.i-p132.1"></span>..md)
But here he describes the extraordinary love of God towards the Church,
when he says that he travels along with her, and undertakes to supply
all her wants, as if he were consulting his own interests when he
assisted his people.

<span id="ii.i-p133"></span><span id="ii.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p134"></span>**12.** *Behold, those from afar shall
come.* The opinion entertained by some, that the four quarters of the
earth are here denoted, does not rest on very solid grounds; yet I do
not reject it, because it not only is probable, but agrees with many
other passages. Undoubtedly, he first says that they shall come from
distant parts of the world, and next adds certain subdivisions or parts
in order to explain this general statement.

<span id="ii.i-p135"></span>*And those from the land of Sinis.* Instead
of “Sinis,” some read “Sinis;” and indeed the Hebrew copies differ.
 <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) Jerome thinks (and this is the
commonly received opinion) that a southern region is so denominated from
Mount Sinai, which lay toward the south. Others think that “Syene” is
meant, because it lies under the tropic of Cancer.  <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) But this diversity has nothing to do with
the meaning of the Prophet, which of itself is clear and easy to be
understood; for the Prophet unquestionably means those who had been
scattered and dispersed in various places, whether they are collected
from the north or from the sea. While Isaiah promises a return from
Babylon, he at the same time extends this prediction to the time of
Christ, as may be easily learned from what goes before; for we must keep
in remembrance what we formerly said, that the second birth of the
Church is here described. Not only does he promise that the Jews shall
return to Jerusalem to build the temple, but likewise that they who had
formerly been aliens from the Church, shall be collected from every
corner of the world.

<span id="ii.i-p138"></span><span id="ii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p139"></span>**13.** *Praise, O heavens; and rejoice, O
earth.* Though he exhorts and encourages all the godly to thanksgiving,
yet he likewise aims at confirming the promise which might have been
regarded as doubtful; for afflictions trouble our consciences, and cause
them to waver in such a manner that it is not so easy to rest firmly on
the promises of God. In short, men either remain in suspense, or
tremble, or utterly fall and even faint. So long as they are oppressed
by fear or anxiety, or grief, they scarcely accept of any consolation;
and therefore they need to be confirmed in various ways. This is the
reason why Isaiah describes the advantages of this deliverance in such
lofty terms, in order that believers, though they beheld nothing around
them but death and ruin, might sustain their heart by the hope of a
better condition. Accordingly, he places the subject almost before their
eye, that they may be fully convinced that they shall have the most
abundant cause of rejoicing; though at that time they saw nothing but
grief and sorrow.

<span id="ii.i-p140"></span>Let us therefore remember, that whenever the
Lord promises anything, we ought to add thanksgiving, that we may more
powerfully affect our hearts; and next, that we ought to raise our minds
to the power of God, who exercises a wide and extensive dominion over
all the creatures; for as soon as he lifts his hand, “heaven and earth”
are moved. If the tokens of his wonderful power are to be seen
everywhere, he intends that there shall be an eminent and remarkable
example of it in the salvation of the Church.

<span id="ii.i-p141"></span>*And he wilt have compassion on his poor.*
By this metaphor the Prophet shews that no obedience which is rendered
to God by heaven and earth is more acceptable to him than to join
together and lend their mutual aid to his Church. Moreover, that
believers may not faint under the weight of distresses, before promising
to them consolation from God, he exhorts them calmly to bear distresses;
for by the word *poor* he means that the Church, in this world, is
liable to many calamities. In order, therefore, that we may partake of
the compassion of God, let us learn, under the cross and amidst many
annoyances, to strive after it with sighs and tears.

<span id="ii.i-p142"></span><span id="ii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p143"></span>**14.** *But Zion said, Jehovah hath
forsaken me.* In order to magnify his grace the more, God complains that
the hearts of the Jews were so narrow and close, that the road was
almost shut against him, if he had not overcome their wicked thoughts by
his great goodness. Yet at the same time he endeavors to correct this
fault, that the deliverance which is offered, and, as it were, set
before them, may be received by them with open hearts, and that, as he
is willing to assist them, so they, on the other hand, may be prepared
to cherish favorable hopes. Now, to us also this doctrine belongs;
because almost all of us, when God delays his assistance, are fearfully
distressed and tormented; for we think that he has forsaken and rejected
us. Thus despair quickly creeps in, which must be opposed, that we may
not be deprived of the grace of God. And indeed amidst these doubts our
unbelief is manifested and exposed, by our not relying on the promises
of God, so as to bear patiently either the chastisements by which God
urges us to repentance, or the trials of faith by which he trains us to
patience, or any afflictions by which he humbles us. Justly therefore
does God remonstrate with the Jews for rejecting by wicked distrust the
salvation offered to them, and not permitting themselves to receive
assistance. Nor does he limit this accusation to a small number, but
includes nearly the whole Church, in order to shew that he will be kind
and bountiful toward the Jews beyond the measure of their faith, and
that he even strives with them, that by his salvation he may break
through all the hinderances by which they opposed him. Let each of us
therefore beware of indulging or flattering ourselves in this matter;
for the Lord contends with the whole Church, for uttering speeches of
this kind, which proceed from the fountain of distrust.

<span id="ii.i-p144"></span><span id="ii.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p145"></span>**15.** *Shall a woman forget her child!* In
order to correct that distrust, he adds to the remonstrance an
exhortation full of the sweetest consolation. By an appropriate
comparison, he shews how strong is his anxiety about his people,
comparing himself to a mother, whose love toward her offspring is so
strong and ardent, as to leave far behind it a father’s love. Thus he
did not satisfy himself with proposing the example of a father, (which
on other occasions he very frequently employs,) but in order to express
his very strong affection, he chose to liken himself to a mother, and
calls them not merely “children,” but *the fruit of the womb,* towards
which there is usually a warmer affection. What amazing affection does a
mother feel toward her offspring, which she cherishes in her bosom,
suckles on her breast, and watches over with tender care, so that she
passes sleepless nights, wears herself out by continued anxiety, and
forgets herself! And this carefulness is manifested, not only among men,
but even among savage beasts, which, though they are by nature cruel,
yet in this respect are gentle.

<span id="ii.i-p146"></span>*Even if they shall forget.* Since it does
sometimes happen that mothers degenerate into such monsters as to exceed
in cruelty the wild beasts and forget “the fruit of their womb,” the
Lord next declares that, even though this should happen, still he will
never forget his people. The affection which he bears toward us is far
stronger and warmer than the love of all mothers. We ought also to bear
in mind the saying of Christ,

<span id="ii.i-p147"></span>“If ye, being evil, know how to give good
things to your children, how much more your heavenly Father?” (<span
id="ii.i-p147.1"></span>[Mt 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011.md)<span
id="ii.i-p147.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p148"></span>Men, though by nature depraved and addicted
to self-love, are anxious about their children. What shall God do, who
is goodness itself? Will it be possible for him to lay aside a father’s
love? Certainly not. Although therefore it should happen that mothers
(which is a monstrous thing) should forsake their own offspring, yet
God, whose love toward his people is constant and unremitting, will
never forsake them. In a word, the Prophet here describes to us the
inconceivable carefulness with which God unceasingly watches over our
salvation, that we may be fully convinced that he will never forsake us,
though we may be afflicted with great and numerous calamities.

<span id="ii.i-p149"></span><span id="ii.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p150"></span>**16.** *Behold, on the palms of my hands.*
By another cormparison he describes that inconceivable carefulness which
the Lord exercises toward us. It is a common proverb, that “we have it
on our fingers’ ends,” when we have anything fully and deeply fixed on
our memory. And Moses when he recommends constant meditation on the Law,
says, “Thou shalt bind them for a sign on thy hand;” that is, that they
should always have the commandments of God placed before their eyes.
(<span id="ii.i-p150.1"></span>[De
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008)<span id="ii.i-p150.1"></span>..md) He
now makes use of the same comparison; as if he had said, “I cannot look
at my hands without beholding thee in them; I carry thee engraved on my
heart, so that no forgetfulness can efface thee; in a word, I cannot
forget thee without forgetting myself.” True, indeed, God has neither
hands nor bodily shape; but Scripture accommodates itself to our weak
capacity so as to express the strength of God’s love toward us.

<span id="ii.i-p151"></span>*Thy walls are continually before me.* As
the Church is frequently called the “habitation” or “city of God,” (and
hence also the metaphor of “building” (<span id="ii.i-p151.1"></span>[Ps
102:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#016.md)<span id="ii.i-p151.1"></span>;
<span id="ii.i-p151.2"></span>[Jer
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006.md)<span id="ii.i-p151.2"></span>;
<span id="ii.i-p151.3"></span>[Mt
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018)<span id="ii.i-p151.3"></span>.md)
is frequently employed in Scripture,) so he makes use of the figurative
term “walls,” by which he denotes the peace and prosperity of the
Church; as if he had said that he would take care that Jerusalem should
thrive and flourish. Yet it ought to be observed that the term “walls”
denotes proper order of policy and discipline, of which God declares
that he will be the ceaseless and unwearied guardian. Let us remember
that this prophecy was accomplished during that frightful desolation,
when the “walls” of Jerusalem, which were a lively image of the Church,
had been cast down, the temple overthrown, and government overtumed,
and, in a word, when everything had been destroyed and nearly razed to
the foundation; for immediately afterwards he promises that they shall
all be restored.

<span id="ii.i-p152"></span><span id="ii.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p153"></span>**17.** *Thy builders hasten.* He affirms
what had been briefly stated in the former verse; for it might have been
thought that there was no ground for what he had now asserted about the
unceasing care which God takes of his Church and of her walls, which he
permits to be razed to their foundations, and therefore he adds the
explanation, that it will indeed be thrown down, but will afterwards be
built anew. *Builders.* From this word we may learn what is the true
method of restoring the Church, namely, if the Lord send “builders,
 <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) to rear it, and next if he *drive far
away the destroyers* who demolish it. Though God could, by himself, and
without the aid of men, rebuild the Church, yet he deigns to employ
their hands; and although he alone, by the secret influence of his
Spirit, completes this whole building, yet he blesses their labor, that
it may not be useless. From him, therefore, we ought to ask and look for
builders; for it belongs to him to render them “sufficient,” as Paul
also informs us, (<span id="ii.i-p154.2"></span>[2Co
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)<span id="ii.i-p154.2"></span>,.md)
and to assign to each his department.

<span id="ii.i-p155"></span>We ought also to pray not only that he may
“send forth laborers into his harvest,” (<span
id="ii.i-p155.1"></span>[Mt 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038.md)<span
id="ii.i-p155.1"></span>,) but that he may recruit their strength and
efficaciously direct them, so that they may not labor in vain; for, when
the doctrine of the Gospel is preached with any advantage, it arises
from his extraordinary goodness. But even this would not be enough, if
he did not “drive destroyers far away;” for Satan, by innumerable arts,
invades and assails the Church, and is in no want of servants and
attendants, who direct their whole energy to destroy, or spoil, or
hinder the Lord’s building. We ought, therefore, constantly to entreat
that he would ward off their attacks; and if the result be not entirely
according to our expectations, let us blame our own sins and
ingratitude; for the Lord was ready to bestow those blessings abundantly
upon us.

<span id="ii.i-p156"></span><span id="ii.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p157"></span>**18.** *Lift up thine eyes round about.* He
arouses the Church to survey this magnificent work, as if it were
actually before her eyes, and to behold the multitudes of men who shall
flock into it from every quarter. Now, as this assemblage must have
encouraged godly hearts during the dispersion, so they who were
eye-witnesses must have been excited to gratitude. This shews clearly
that this prediction was useful at both periods, not only while the
event was still concealed by hope, but when it had been actually
accomplished. Though he speaks to the whole Church at large, yet this
discourse relates also to individuals, that all with one accord, and
each person separately, may embrace these promises.

<span id="ii.i-p158"></span>When he bids them “lift up their eyes,” he
means that the reason why we are so much cast down is, that we do not
examine the Lord’s work with due attention, but have a vail placed, as
it were, before our eyes, to hinder us from seeing what lies at our
feet. In consequence of this, we do not cherish any confidence, but in
adversity are almost overwhelmed by despair. And if these things are
said to the whole Church, let every man consider in his own heart how
far he is chargeable with this vice, and let him forthwith arouse and
awaken himself to behold the works of the Lord, that he may rely with
all his heart on his promises.

<span id="ii.i-p159"></span>*All are gathered together.* When he says
that the elect of the Church are “gathered together,” he means that, in
order to their becoming one body under Christ, and, as it were, “one
fold under one shepherd,” (<span id="ii.i-p159.1"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="ii.i-p159.1"></span>,.md)
they must be, if we may so express it, “gathered” into one bosom. Christ
reckons and treats as his followers none but those who are joined in one
body by unity of faith. Whoever then shall choose to be regarded as
belonging to the number of the children of God, let him be a son of the
Church; for all who are separated from it will be aliens from God.

<span id="ii.i-p160"></span>*Thou shalt be clothed as with an ornament.*
The Prophet shews what is the true ornament of the Church, namely, to
have a great number of children, who are brought to her by faith and
guided by the Spirit of God. This is true splendor; this is the glory of
the Church, which must be filthy and ugly, ragged and dishevelled, if
she have not these ornaments. Hence we see how well the Papists
understand what is the true manner in which the Church ought to be
adorned; for their whole attention is given to painted tables, to
statues, to fine buildings, to gold, precious stones, and costly
garments; that is, they give their whole attention to puppets, like
children. But the true dignity of the Church is internal, so far as it
consists of the gifts of the Holy Spirit, and of progressive faith and
piety. Hence it follows, that she is richly provided with her ornaments,
when the people, joined together by faith, are gathered into her bosom,
to worship God in a proper manner.

<span id="ii.i-p161"></span>*I live, saith Jehovah.*  <span
id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) In order that this promise may be more
certain, the Lord employs an oath, which is intended to warn us against
distrust, and that, when we shall consider that her end is near, we may
be certain that she shall be fully restored. And if this doctrine was
ever necessary, it is especially necessary at the present time; for,
wherever we tum our eyes, we meet with nothing but frightful desolation.

<span id="ii.i-p163"></span>What then must we do, but, relying on this
oath of God, struggle against despair, and not be terrified by our being
inconsiderable in number, which makes us despised by the world, and not
doubt that there are many of the elect, now wandering and scattered,
whom God will at length assemble into his Church? And therefore we ought
to encourage our hearts, and to lift up our eyes by faith, that we may
extend our hope not only to a single age, but to the most distant
period.

<span id="ii.i-p164"></span><span id="ii.i-p164.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p165"></span>**19.** *For thy desolate places,* he
confirms by other words what we have already seen, that the change which
he promised is in the hand of God, that the Church, which was for a long
time waste and desolate, may speedily have many inhabitants; so that the
place may be too narrow to contain them all. He employs the metaphor of
a ruinous city, whose walls and houses are rebuilt, to which the
citizens return in such vast numbers that its circumference must be
enlarged, because its former extent cannot contain them all. Thus he
means not only the return of the people from Babylon, but the
restoration which was effected through Christ; that is, when the Church
was spread far and wide, not only throughout Judea, but throughout the
whole world.

<span id="ii.i-p166"></span>*And thy destroyers shall remove far away.*
He adds that a garrison will be provided, if any enemies shall molest
her; yea, that she shall be secure against their attacks and
molestation, because God will “drive them far away.” Not that the Church
shall ever enjoy perfect peace, and be secured against all the attacks
of enemies; but yet God, bearing with the weakness of his people,
defended them from wicked men, and restrained or warded off their
attacks, so that at least the kingdom of Satan might not grow out of the
ruins of the Church.

<span id="ii.i-p167"></span><span id="ii.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p168"></span>**20.** *Shall again say in thine ears.*
Isaiah continues the same subject, and, under a different metaphor,
promises the restoration of the Church. He compares her to a widowed or
rather a barren mother, in order to describe her wretched and
distressful condition; for she was overwhelmed by so many distresses,
that the remembrance of the nation appeared to have wholly perished.
Mingled with the Babylonians,who held her captive, she had almost passed
into another body. We need not wonder, therefore, if he compares her to
a barren mother; for she brought forth no more children. Formerly the
Jews had enjoyed high prosperity; but the kingdom was ruined, and all
their strength was decayed, and, in short, their name was almost
extinguished, when they were led into captivity. He therefore promises
that the Church shall be purified from her filthiness, and that she who
is now solitary shall regain that condition which she formerly held. And
this is included in the word *Again,* that they may not doubt that it is
in the power of God to restore what he formerly gave, though it was
withdrawn for a time.

<span id="ii.i-p169"></span>*The children of thy bereavement.*  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) By “the children of bereavement” some
suppose that orphan children are meant; but I cannot agree with this,
for “bereavement” and “barrenness” refer rather to the person of the
Church, and accordingly it is for the sake of amplification that he
describes them to be those who, contrary to expectation, had been given
to her who was bereaved and barren.

<span id="ii.i-p171"></span>*Make room for me;* that is, “withdraw for
my benefit.” Not that it is proper for the godly to shut out their
brethren or drive them from their place; but the Prophet has borrowed
from familiar language a mode of expression fitted to declare that no
inconvenience shall hinder many from desiring to be admitted and to have
room made for them. Now, this happened, when the Lord collected
innumerable persons out of the whole world; for suddenly, and contrary
to the expectation of men, the Church, which had formerly been empty,
was filled; its boundaries were enlarged and extended far and wide.

<span id="ii.i-p172"></span><span id="ii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p173"></span>**21.** *And thou shalt say in thy heart.*
By these words he declares that the restoration of the Church, of which
he now speaks, will be wonderful; and therefore he represents her as
wondering and amazed on account of having been restored in a strange and
unexpected manner. And truly a description of this sort is not
superfluous; for, as a new offspring grows up among men every day, by
which the human race is propagated, so the children of God and of the
Church are born, who, “not from flesh and blood,” (<span
id="ii.i-p173.1"></span>[Joh 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md)<span
id="ii.i-p173.1"></span>,) but by the secret power of God, are formed
again to be new creatures. By nature we have no share in the kingdom of
God;  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) and therefore, if any man
contemplate this new and uncommon work, and in what manner the Church is
increased and maintained, he will be constrained to wonder.

<span id="ii.i-p175"></span>*Who hath begotten me these?* He shews that
this astonishment will not be pretended, like expressions of this kind
which frequently proceed from flatterers, but that it will come from
“the heart;” for there will be good ground for wondering, that the Lord
has preserved the Church amidst so great dangers, and has multiplied it
by a new and unexpected offspring. Who would have thought that, at the
time when the Jews were held in the greatest contempt, and were
overwhelmed by every kind of reproaches and distresses, there would be
any of the Gentiles who of their own accord desired to be associated
with them? It was also in the highest degree improbable that the
dispositions of men should be so suddenly changed as to adopt a religion
which they had detested. Besides, the partition-wall which had been
erected between them hindered all foreigners and uncircumcised persons
from entering.

<span id="ii.i-p176"></span>*For I was bereaved* (or *barren) and
solitary.* She now explains what was the chief ground of that
astonishment; namely, that formerly she brought forth no children, and
was altogether destitute. Doctrine, which is the seed of spiritual life,
by which the children of the Church are begotten, (<span
id="ii.i-p176.1"></span>[1Pe 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.i-p176.1"></span>,) had ceased; even the worship enjoined by the
Law had been broken off; and, in short, everything that usually
contributes to upholding the order of government had been taken away.
Now, the Church is called *bereaved* or *barren,* not because God hath
forsaken her, but because his presence is not always visible. We
ourselves saw an image of that barrenness, when the Lord, in order to
punish the ingratitude of men, took away his doctrine, and allowed them
to wander in darkness. The Church might truly be said to be “bereaved”
and “barren,” when none of her children were seen. Hence we ought to
conclude how foolish the Papists are, who wish that Christ would always
govern his Church so that it may never be “bereaved” or “barren;” seeing
that the Lord, thougit he does not forsake the Church, yet very
frequently, on account of the ingratitude of men, withdraws the tokens
of his presence.

<span id="ii.i-p177"></span>*Who then hath brought up those?* It is no
easy matter for those who are led into captivity, and who often change
their place and habitation, to “bring up” children; and when the law and
the doctrine of piety no longer resounded in the temple, spiritual
nourishment had almost entirely failed. But the Lord, who has no need of
human aid, begets his children in an extraordinary manner, and by the
astonishing power of his Spirit, and “brings them up” wherever he thinks
proper; and in the fulfillment of this prediction, the Lord supplied
them with nurses contrary to the expectation of all, so that it is not
without reason that the Church wonders how they were reared. When we
read this prophecy we are reminded that we ought not to be distressed
beyond measure, if at any time we see the Church resemble a “bereaved”
woman, and that we ought not to doubt that he can suddenly, or in a
moment, raise up and restore her, though we perceive no means by which
she can be restored.

<span id="ii.i-p178"></span><span id="ii.i-p178.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p179"></span>**22.** *Thus saith the Lord Jehovah.*
Isaiah confirms what he had said a little before, that the Lord would
cause his Church, though for a very long time she had been “barren” and
“bereaved,” to have an exceedingly numerous offspring, and to be
constrained to wonder at her own fruitfulness; and he does so, in order
to remove all doubt which might have found its way into their hearts.

<span id="ii.i-p180"></span>*I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles.* He
declares that he will give children to the Church, not only from among
the Jews, as formerly, but likewise from among “the Gentiles.” And yet
he indirectly asserts that this generation shall be spiritual through
the grace of adoption; for the metaphor of a *banner* was intended to
lead believers to expect a new kind of generation, and different from
that which is seen in the ordinary course of nature. The Lord must
therefore set up a sign, and display his secret power through the
Gospel,  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) that, out of nations who
differed so widely from each other both in customs and in language, he
might bring children to the Church, who should be united in the same
faith, as brethren meet in their mother’s bosom.

<span id="ii.i-p182"></span>Those who think that, by the figurative
terms *Hand* and *Banner,* nothing more than the preaching of the Gospel
is meant, and who set aside the power of the Spirit, are mistaken; for
both ought to be united, and the efficacy of the Spirit ought not to be
separated from the preaching of the Gospel, as Paul clearly shews.
(<span id="ii.i-p182.1"></span>[2Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="ii.i-p182.1"></span>..md) To
this “hand” of God, therefore, to this “banner” we must betake
ourselves, when we see that the Church is oppressed by the tyranny of
wicked men. Though every effort be made to overthrow and destroy it, the
“hand” of God is higher, and in vain do men oppose him. He will at
length subdue and crush their obstinacy, that the Church may obtain some
repose in spite of all their exertions.

<span id="ii.i-p183"></span>When he promises that the sons of the Church
*shall be brought in her arms and on her shoulders,* the language is
metaphorical, and means that God will find no difficulty, when he shall
wish to gather the Church out of her dispersion; for all the Gentiles
will assist him. Although this refers, in the first instance, to the
Jews who had been banished and scattered, yet it undoubtedly ought to be
extended to all the elect of God, who have become partakers of the same
grace.

<span id="ii.i-p184"></span><span id="ii.i-p184.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p185"></span>**23.** *And kings shall be thy nursing
fathers.* After having spoken of the obedience of the Gentiles, he shews
that this relates not to the common people only, but to “kings” also. He
compares “kings” to hired men who bring up the children of others, and
“queens” to “nurses,” who give out their labor for hire. Why so? Because
“kings” and “queens” shall supply everything that is necessary for
nourishing the offspring of the Church. Having formerly driven out
Christ from their dominions, they shall henceforth acknowledge him to be
the supreme King: and shall render to him all honor, obedience, and
worship. This took place when the Lord revealed himself to the whole
world by the Gospel; for mighty kings and princes not only submitted to
the yoke of Christ, but likewise contributed their riches to raise up
and maintain the Church of Christ, so as to be her guardians and
defenders.

<span id="ii.i-p186"></span>Hence it ought to be observed that something
remarkable is here demanded from princes, besides an ordinary profession
of faith; for the Lord has bestowed on them authority and power to
defend the Church and to promote the glory of God. This is indeed the
duty of all; but kings, in proportion as their power is greater, ought
to devote themselves to it more earnestly, and to labor in it more
diligently. And this is the reason why David expressly addresses and
exhorts them to “be wise, and serve the Lord, and kiss his Son.” (<span
id="ii.i-p186.1"></span>[Ps
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.i-p186.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii.i-p187"></span>This shews how mad are the dreams of those
who assert that kings cannot be Christians without laying aside that
office; for those things were accomplished under Christ, when kings, who
had been converted to God by the preaching of the Gospel, obtained this
highest pinnacle of rank, which surpasses dominion and principality of
every sort, to be “nursing-fathers” and guardians of the Church. The
Papists have no other idea of kings being *“nursing-fathers”* of the
Church than that they have left to their priests and monks very large
revenues, rich possessions and prebends, on which they might fatten,
like hogs in a sty. But that “nursing” aims at an object quite different
from filling up those insatiable gulls. Nothing is said here about
enriching the houses of those who, under false pretences, hold
themselves out to be ministers of the Church, (which was nothing else
than to corrupt the Church of God and to destroy it by deadly poison,)
but about removing superstitions and putting an end to all wicked
idolatry, about advancing the kingdom of Christ and maintaining purity
of doctrine, about purging scandals and cleansing from the filth that
corrupts piety and impairs the lustre of the Divine majesty.

<span id="ii.i-p188"></span>Undoubtedly, while kings bestow careful
attention on these things, they at the same time supply the pastors and
ministers of the Word with all that is necessary for food and
maintenance, provide for the poor and guard the Church against the
disgrace of pauperism; erect schools, and appoint salaries for the
teachers and board for the students; build poor-houses and hospitals,
and make every other arrangement that belongs to the protection and
defense of the Church. But those unnecessary and extravagant expenses
for Anniversaries and Masses, for golden vessels and costly robes, which
swell the pride and insolence of papists, serve only to uphold pomp and
ambition, and corrupt the pure and simple “nursing” of the Church, and
even choke and extinguish the seed of God, by which alone the Church
lives. When we see that matters are now very different, and that “kings”
are not the “nursing-fathers,” but the executioners of the Church; when,
in consequence of taking away the doctrine of piety and banishing its
true ministers, idle bellies, insatiable whirlpools, and messengers of
Satan, are fattened, (for such are the persons to whom the princes
cheerfully distribute their wealth, that is, the moisture and blood
which they have sucked out of the people;) when even princes otherwise
godly have less strength and firmness for defending the Word and
upholding the Church; let us acknowledge that this is the reward due to
our sins, and let us confess that we do not deserve to have good
“nursing-fathers.” But yet, after this frightfully ruinous condition, we
ought to hope for a restoration of the Church, and such a conversion of
kings that they shall shew themselves to be “nursing-fathers” and
protectors of believers, and shall bravely defend the doctrine of the
Word.

<span id="ii.i-p189"></span>*And shall lick the dust of thy feet.* This
passage is also tortured by the Papists in order to uphold the tyranny
of their idol, as if kings and princes had no other way of proving
themselves to be sincere and lawful worshippers of God than by adoring
that masked prince of the Church instead of God. Thus they consider the
obedience of piety to consist in kissing the Pope’s feet with deep
reverence. What they ought to think of such barbarous and idolatrous
worship, let them learn, first, from Peter, whose seat they boast of
occupying, who would not permit such honor to be rendered to him by the
centurion. (<span id="ii.i-p189.1"></span>[Ac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#006)<span id="ii.i-p189.1"></span>..md)
Let them, next, learn from Paul, who tore his garments, and rejected
such worship with the utmost abhorrence. (<span
id="ii.i-p189.2"></span>[Ac 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014.md)<span
id="ii.i-p189.2"></span>.) What could be more absurd than to imagine
that the Son of God appointed, instead of a minister of the Gospel, an
object of abhorrence, some king dazzling in Persian luxury and splendor?
But let us remember that the Church, so long as she is a pilgrim in this
world, is subjected to the cross, that she may be humble and may be
conformed to her Head; that if her foes make any cessation of their
hostility, still her highest ornament and lustre is modesty. Hence it
follows, that she has laid aside her own attire, when she is clothed
with irreligious pride.

<span id="ii.i-p190"></span>Here the Prophet means nothing else than the
adoration by which princes bow down before God, and the obedience which
they render to his Word in the Church. What we have already said must be
carefully observed, that, when we speak of rendering honor to the
Church, she must never be separated from the Head; for this honor and
worship belongs to Christ, and, when it is bestowed on the Church, it
still continues to belong undivided to him alone. By the obedience of
piety kings do not profess submission, so as to bear the yoke of men,
but to yield to the doctrine of Christ. Whosoever therefore rejects the
ministry of the Church, and refuses to bear the yoke which God wishes to
lay with his own hand on all his people, can neither have any fellowship
with Christ nor be a child of God.

<span id="ii.i-p191"></span>*For they shall not be ashamed.* I consider
<span id="ii.i-p191.1"></span>אשר *(asher)* to be a conjunction
signifying *For;*  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) and the clause
to which it belongs is closely connected with what goes before, and has
been improperly disjoined from it by some commentators. By this argument
he proves that it is highly proper for princes to submit cheerfully to
the government of God, and not hesitate to humble themselves before the
Church; because God will not suffer those who hope in him to “be
ashamed.” As if he had said, “This is a pleasant and delightful
submission.”

<span id="ii.i-p193"></span>*I am Jehovah.* He connects his own truth
with our salvation; as if he had said, that he does not wish men to
acknowledge him to be true or to be God, unless he actually fulfill what
he has promised. And hence we obtain inestimable advantage; for, as it
is impossible that God should not continue to be the same, so the
stability of our salvation, which the Prophet infers from God’s own
stability, must remain unshaken.

<span id="ii.i-p194"></span><span id="ii.i-p194.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p195"></span>**24.** *Shall the prey be taken from the
mighty?* Having solved, in the former verse, an objection which might
occur to the mind of believers, he now confirms that solution still
more; for it might have been thought incredible that the Jews should be
rescued out of the hands of so powerful an enemy, by whom they had been
taken in fair battle and reduced to slavery, He therefore adds this
question as uttered by the whole of the common people, among whom it
probably flew universally from mouth to mouth; and he immediately
replies, as we shall sec.

<span id="ii.i-p196"></span>*Shall the captivity of the righteous* (or,
*the righteous captivity*) *be delivered?* And we ought, first, to
observe this metaphor, that the Church is called “the prey of the
mighty” and “the captivity of the righteous,” that is, lawful captivity.
He is said to be the “righteous” possessor who is the lawful possessor;
just as the prey, when the war has been righteous, passes into the hands
of a righteous possessor.  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) Such was
the condition of the ancient people, after having been driven into
captivity; for, along with their native country, they had lost their
liberty, and were entirely in the power, and at the disposal, of the
conqueror. And yet we ought carefully to observe this metaphor, that the
Church is oppressed by the tyranny of princes, and exposed to the jaws
of wolves, and nevertheless is supposed to be their “just” prey. This
is, indeed, shamefully wicked; but thus were our fathers treated, and we
are not more virtuous or more excellent than our fathers.

<span id="ii.i-p198"></span><span id="ii.i-p198.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p199"></span>**25.** *The prey of the tyrant shall be
delivered.* However they may boast of having a right to govern, and
glory in an empty title, the Lord declares that they are most wicked
robbers, when he threatens that he will be an avenger and will snatch
their prey from them. God does not overturn just dominion; and hence it
follows that the dominion which they usurped over the people of God is
mere robbery and wicked tyranny. Neither their arms, nor their forces,
nor their warlike preparations, shall hinder the Lord from taking out of
their hands an unjust possession.

<span id="ii.i-p200"></span>Nor does this promise relate only to outward
enemies and tyrants, but also to the tyranny of Satan, from which we are
rescued by the wonderful power of God. True indeed, he possesses vast
power, but God is far more powerful, takes away his arms and demolishes
his fortresses, that he may set us at liberty. (<span
id="ii.i-p200.1"></span>[Mt 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#029.md)<span
id="ii.i-p200.1"></span>; <span id="ii.i-p200.2"></span>[Lu
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022)<span id="ii.i-p200.2"></span>..md)
If therefore we have had experience of the power of God in this respect,
so much the stronger reason have we for trusting that he will
undoubtedly be our deliverer, whenever our enemies shall lay us under
their feet and oppress us with cruel bondage.

<span id="ii.i-p201"></span>*I will contend with him that contendeth
with thee.* When he threatens that He will “contend” on our account,
first, he reminds us to consider his power, that we may not regard the
matter by human reason or by the power of men. We ought not therefore to
look at what we can do or what resources we possess, but it is our duty
to commit the whole matter to the disposal of God alone, who is
graciously pleased to protect and defend us. Secondly, he affirms that
he will be a powerful advocate, to reply to the slanders of enemies. We
said, a little before, that wicked men not only are hurried along by
violence and cruelty against the Church, but load her with false and
calumnious charges, as if they had a right to treat her with cruelty;
and therefore this consolation is highly necessary, that God will be the
defender of our innocence, to scatter by his defense all the idle
pretences which strengthen the audacity and fierceness of wicked men.
Accordingly he again repeats, —

<span id="ii.i-p202"></span>*I will save thy children.* We derive great
consolation from knowing that we are united with him by so close a bond
that he sets himself in opposition to all who contend with us, “blesses
those who bless us, and, on the other hand, curses those who curse us,”
and, in short, declares that he is the enemy of our enemies. (<span
id="ii.i-p202.1"></span>[Ge 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003.md)<span
id="ii.i-p202.1"></span>.) Hence also it ought to be observed, that,
when we are restored to liberty and life, when we are not oppressed by
enemies, and, in short, when we are saved, it is not a work of man; that
no one may ascribe to his own industry what God commands us to expect as
an extraordinary blessing from himself alone.

<span id="ii.i-p203"></span><span id="ii.i-p203.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p204"></span>**26.** *And I will feed thy oppressors with
their own flesh.* First, he declares what is the nature of that end
which awaits the enemies of the Church, and threatens that they shall
not only be inflamed with mutual hatred, but shall likewise slay each
other by mutual slaughter. And indeed it is God who drives them
headlong, and rouses them to rage, so that they tum against themselves
that strength which they formerly exerted against the Church, fight with
each other, as the Midianites did, and bring destruction on themselves.
(<span id="ii.i-p204.1"></span>[Jud
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022)<span id="ii.i-p204.1"></span>..md)
The meaning amounts to this, that there will be no need of outward aid
or of any preparations, when God shall determine to overtum and destroy
the reprobate; because, having been struck by him with giddiness, they
shall wear themselves out in mutual conflict by the insatiable rage with
which they shall attack each other.

<span id="ii.i-p205"></span>*And all flesh shall know.* He repeats that
statement which we have formerly seen, namely, that he will be
acknowledged by all to be the God of Israel and the true and only God,
when he shall have delivered his people from destruction; for he
intended it to be a demonstration of his Divinity, that he openly
manifested himself to be the Redeemer and Savior of his people.

<span id="ii.i-p206"></span>*The Mighty One of Jacob.* Some read the
word *Jacob* in the vocative case: “O mighty Jacob;” but I read it in
the genitive case, “of Jacob.” The Lord testifies that he is the Savior,
Redeemer, and Mighty One of Israel, that they may rely with their whole
heart on his defense and protection.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc16001.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="ii.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p58"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, Vol. 3, p. 244.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc16001.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="ii.i-p89.4"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p90"></span> The idiomatic use of “trousser,” bears a
strong resemblance to the idioms of the Italian and English languages.
Thus, “<span id="ii.i-p90.1"></span>trousser baggage,” — “<span
id="ii.i-p90.2"></span>far fagotto,” — “to pack up one’s baggage.”
Again, “<span id="ii.i-p90.3"></span>trousser un homme,” — “<span
id="ii.i-p90.4"></span>spacciare per le poste all’ altro mondo,” — “to
despatch him post haste into the other world.” — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc16001.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="ii.i-p103.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p104"></span> <span id="ii.i-p104.1"></span>בזה *(bezo)*
has been variously explained as an infinitive, a passive participle, and
an adjective in the construct state, which last is adopted by Gessenius
and most later writers.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc16001.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="ii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p106"></span> “‘Whom the nation abhorreth, who abhorreth
the nation, who excites the abhorrence of the nation, the nation which
excites abhorrence,’ — all these are passable translations of the Hebrew
words, among which interpreters choose according to their different
views respecting the whole passage. In any case it is descriptive of
deep debasement and general contempt, to be exchanged hereafter for an
opposite condition.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc16001.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="ii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p136"></span> The resemblance of <span
id="ii.i-p136.1"></span>ס *Samech* to <span id="ii.i-p136.2"></span>ם
final *Mem* partly accounts for the difference of the readings. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc16001.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="ii.i-p136.3"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p137"></span> “Various interpretations have been given of
this name, both in ancient and modern times. The Targum and Vulgate
understand it of some land in the far south; the Septuagint supposes it
to be Persia; Jerome, Jarchi, and Grotius, misled by similarity of
sound, refer it to the wilderness of Sin and Mount Sinai. Others refer
it to Egypt, as if that country were so named, either from Sin, or
Syene. Others, with higher probability, understand ‘Sinim’ to be China.”
— *Eadie’s Cyclopcedia.  
*“From the north — Tartary; west, Europe; Sinim, the Chinese, in whose
country a multitude of Jews he hid, if we may believe the curious
account of them, published by the Jesuit Brotier, in his supplement to
Tacit. Hist. 1. v.” — *Stock.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc16001.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="ii.i-p153.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p154"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p154.1"></span>Maistres
charpentiers et massons.” “Master carpenters and masons.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc16001.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p162"></span> <span id="ii.i-p162.1"></span>חי-אני *(chai
ani)* ‘I the Living One,’ is here, as in many other passages, the form
of an oath, employed both by God and by men; and the meaning of it is:
‘as truly as I live, so certainly will I perform this or that, and this
or that event shall happen.’ The particle <span
id="ii.i-p162.2"></span>כי (ki) here denotes the object of the oath, and
is equivalent to <span id="ii.i-p162.3"></span>ὅτι in Greek after the
verbs <span id="ii.i-p162.4"></span>εἶπον λέγω etc..” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc16001.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.i-p169.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p170"></span> <span id="ii.i-p170.1"></span>בנים שהייתה
שכולה מהם *(banim shedayithah shekula methem,)* ‘the children of whom
thou wast bereft.’” — *Jarchi.  
*“A city deprived of its inhabitants is compared to a mother bereft of
her children.” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc16001.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.i-p173.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p174"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p174.1"></span>Nous n’avons
aucune part au royaume de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc16001.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.i-p180.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p181"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p181.1"></span>Par la
predication de l’Evangile.” “By the preaching of the Gospel.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc16001.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.i-p191.2"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p192"></span> <span id="ii.i-p192.1"></span>אשר לא יבשו
קרי *(asher to yeboshu kovai),* ‘of whom they that wait for me shall not
be ashamed,’ that is, ‘whom Jehovah, they that wait for, they that trust
in, shall not be ashamed.’ When the Hebrews introduce any person
speaking, the provisional affix, which comes after <span
id="ii.i-p192.2"></span>אשר *(asher)* and relates to that person, is
commonly expressed by them in none but the first, that is, in the person
of the speaker. For example, ‘I am Joseph, <span
id="ii.i-p192.3"></span>אשר מכרתם אותי מצרימה *(asher mekartem othi
mitzraimah,)* whom ye sold into Egypt.’” — *Rosenmuller.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc16001.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.i-p196.1"></span>

<span id="ii.i-p197"></span> “<span id="ii.i-p197.1"></span>Quand la
guerre est juste, celuy qui prend la prove est juste possesseur
d’icelle.” “When the war is righteous, he who takes the prey is the
righteous possessor of it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 50](cc16002.md)
