[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16011)  [Next](cc16013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 60.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
60:1-22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Arise, shine; for thy light is come,
and the glory of the LORD is risen upon thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Surge, splendida esto; quia venit
splendor tuus, et gloria Iehovae super to orta est.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span>**2.** For, behold, the darkness shall cover
the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the LORD shall arise upon
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Quia ecce tenebrae operient terrain,
et caligo populos; super to autem orietur Iehova, et gloria ejus super
to videbitur.

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**3.** And the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et ambulabunt gentes ad splendorem
tuum, et reges ad fulgorem ortus tui.

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Lift up thine eyes round about, and
see: all they gather themselves together, they come to thee: thy sons
shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at *thy* side.

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Leva in circuitu oculos tuos, et
vide. Omnes isti congregati sunt ut veniant ad to; filii tui longe
venient, filiae tuae ad latus nutrientur.

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Then thou shalt see, and flow
together, and thine heart shall fear, and be enlarged; because the
abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Tunc videbis, st splendesces, (*vel,
difflues,*) expavesces ac dilatabitur cor tuum; quia ad to conversa
fuerit copia maris, (*vel, multitudo maris*) opes gentium (*vel, robur
gentium*) ad to venerint.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span>**6.** The multitude of camels shall cover
thee, the dromedaries of Midian and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall
come: they shall bring gold and incense; and they shall shew forth the
praises of the LORD.

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Copia camelorum operiet to, pullorum
Midian et Epha. Omnes e Saba venient, aurum et thus afferent, et laudes
Iehovae annuntiabunt.

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span>**7.** All the flocks of Kedar shall be
gathered together unto thee, the rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto
thee: they shall come up with acceptance on mine altar, and I will
glorify the house of my glory.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Omnes oyes Cedar congregabuntur
tibi; arietes Nabaioth ministrabunt tibi; ascendent ad beneplacitum
altaris mei; et domum gloriae meae glorificabo.

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Who *are* these *that* fly as a
cloud, and as the doves to their windows?

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Qui sunt isti qui instar nubis
volant, et quasi columbae ad fenestras suas?

<span id="xiii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Surely the isles shall wait for me,
and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their
silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the LORD thy God, and
to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Me certe insulae expectabunt, et
naves Tharsis, ut filios tuos abducant a longe; argentum eorum et aurum
cum ipsis, nomini Iehovae Dei tui, et sancto Israel; quia glorificavit
to.

<span id="xiii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And the sons of strangers shall
build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee: for in my
wrath I smote thee, but in my favour have I had mercy on thee.

<span id="xiii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et extruent filii alienigenae muros
tuos, et reges eorum ministrabunt tibi; quoniam in ira mea percussi to,
et in clementia mea misertus sum tui.

<span id="xiii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually; they shall not be shut day nor night; that *men* may bring
unto thee the forces of the Gentiles, and *that* their kings *may be*
brought.

<span id="xiii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et aperientur portae tuae jugiter;
die et nocte non claudentur, ut advehantur tibi opes (*vel, robur*)
gentium, et reges eorum ducti.

<span id="xiii.i-p24"></span>**12.** For the nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish; yea, *those* nations shall be utterly
wasted.

<span id="xiii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam gens et regnum quod non
servierit tibi peribunt; gentes, inquam, penitus abolebuntur.

<span id="xiii.i-p26"></span>**13.** The glory of Lebanon shall come
unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to
beautify the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet
glorious.

<span id="xiii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Gloria Libani ad to veniet, abies,
pinus, et buxus pariter, ad decus loci sanctitatis meae; nam locum pedum
meorum glorificabo.

<span id="xiii.i-p28"></span>**14.** The sons also of them that
afflicted thee shall come bending unto thee; and all they that despised
thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet; and they shall
call thee, The city of the LORD, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et venient ad to humiles filii
affligentium to, et incurvabunt se ad plantas pedum tuorum omnes qui to
spernebant; et vocabunt to Civitatem Iehovae, Sion Sancti Israel.

<span id="xiii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Whereas thou hast been forsaken and
hated, so that no man went through *thee,* I will make thee an eternal
excellency, a joy of many generations.

<span id="xiii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Pro eo quod fuisti derelicta ct
exosa, ut nemo per to transiret, ponam to in magnificentiam perpetuam,
gaudium generationis et generationis.

<span id="xiii.i-p32"></span>**16.** Thou shalt also suck the milk of
the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know
that I the LORD *am* thy Saviour and thy Redeemer, the mighty One of
Jacob.

<span id="xiii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Et suges lac Gentium, mammillam
regum suges; et cognosces quod ego Iehova, servator tuus, et redemptor
tuus fortis Iacob.

<span id="xiii.i-p34"></span>**17.** For brass I will bring gold, and
for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron: I
will also make thy officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

<span id="xiii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Pro aere adducam aurum, et pro
ferro adducam argentum, et pro ligno ae, et pro lapidibus ferrum; et
ponam praefecturam tuam, pacem; et exactores tuos, justitiam.

<span id="xiii.i-p36"></span>**18.** Violence shall no more be heard in
thy land, wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt
call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.

<span id="xiii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Non audietur amplius oppressio in
terra tua, vastitas et contritio in terminis tuis; et vocabis Salutem
muros tuos, et portas tuas Laudem.

<span id="xiii.i-p38"></span>**19.** The sun shall be no more thy light
by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee: but
the LORD shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.

<span id="xiii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Nec erit tibi amplius sol in lucem
dierum, nec splendor lunae lucebit tibi; quia erit tibi Iehova in lucem
perpetuam, et Deus tuus in gloriam tuam.

<span id="xiii.i-p40"></span>**20.** Thy sun shall no more go down;
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself: for the LORD shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended.

<span id="xiii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Non occidet amplius sol tuus, nec
luna tua occultabitur; quoniam Iehova erit tibi in lucem perpetuam, et
finientur dies luctus tui.

<span id="xiii.i-p42"></span>**21.** Thy people also *shall be* all
righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my
planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.

<span id="xiii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Populus quoque tuus omnes justi,
perpetuo haereditabunt terram, germen plantationis ejus, opus manuum
mearum, ut glorificer.

<span id="xiii.i-p44"></span>**22.** A little one shall become a
thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the LORD will hasten it in
his time.

<span id="xiii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Parvus erit in mille, exiguus in
gentem robustam. Ego Iehova tempore ejus accelerabo hoc.

<span id="xiii.i-p46"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p47"></span><span id="xiii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p48"></span>**1.** *Arise, be bright.* He now shows
what is the efficacy of that word of which he formerly  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md) spoke; for he raises up a prostrate
and afflicted Church, and restores her to her brightness; and, because
he represents the person of God, he now declares his authority. For this
reason he employs the form of command, that the word spoken might be
more efficacious; as if, in the exercise of absolute power, he put the
Church in possession of that happier condition which he had promised.
The amount of what is said is, that believers may know that he does not
scatter his words in the air, but speaks with effect.

<span id="xiii.i-p50"></span>He bids her “arise,” because he formerly
told her to “lie down;” and these two words stand in contrast with each
other. Of Babylon he formerly said, “Come down, sit in the dust.” (<span
id="xiii.i-p50.1"></span>[Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p50.1"></span>.md)
Of the Jews themselves he said, “My people shall sit in the dust.” On
the other hand, he says, “Arise, arise, put on the garments of thy
beauty.” (<span id="xiii.i-p50.2"></span>[Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p50.2"></span>.md)
Thus, by what may be called the stretching out of his hand, he lifts up
the Church again, that she who had formerly been prostrated, and covered
all over with filth and pollution, may regain her seat of honor.

<span id="xiii.i-p51"></span>*For thy brightness is come.* That the
darkness of afflictions may not overwhelm the Jews with despair, he says
that the light which had been hidden would soon afterwards arise,
alluding to the alternation of day and night. As if he had said, “The
Lord, having compassion upon thee, will rescue thee out of this darkness
in which thou liest; thou hast been sufficiently punished; it is time
that thy condition should begin to be improved.” By the word
*brightness,* therefore, he metaphorically denotes salvation and
prosperity, as by “darkness” he formerly denoted a calamitous state of
the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p52"></span>*The glory of Jehovah.* He mentions at the
same that this light will arise from no other quarter than from God’s
smiling countenance, when he shall be pleased to display his grace; for
everything goes well when the Lord shines upon us by his light; and,
when he turns away from us, nothing that can befall us is more wretched
and unhappy.

<span id="xiii.i-p53"></span><span id="xiii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p54"></span>**2.** *For, behold, darkness shall cover
the earth.* He now exhibits in a stronger light, by means of comparison,
that grace which he formerly mentioned; that we may form some idea how
much God loves his elect, and how extraordinary is the privilege which
he bestows upon them. The amount of what he says is, that, while we are
weighed down by innumerable afflictions, and while the whole world, as
it were, sinks under them, God will take care of his people., in order
to enrich them with various benefits. He shows, therefore, that the
light of grace and favor, which he mentioned, will not be
indiscriminately enjoyed by all, but will be peculiar to the people of
God.

<span id="xiii.i-p55"></span>We have said that the word “brightness”
denotes a prosperous condition of the Church; but let us not judge of
this condition from outward appearance; for the Prophet rises higher,
and I have no doubt that his discourse relates to spiritual light and
brightness. Otherwise that mode of expression which he afterwards
employs, “The Gentiles shall walk to thy brightness,” (verse 3) would
not be appropriate. Besides, this is clearly demonstrated by the
connection between this chapter and the preceding; for he says that this
covenant is continued in the word and Spirit. Finally, from the contrast
it may easily be inferred that the happiness promised to the Church is
different from that which consists in meat and drink, or tranquillity
and peace, and other conveniences; and indeed never afterwards was there
any period in which the darkness of afflictions overwhelmed all the
Gentiles, while the Jews enjoyed peace and prosperity. Since, therefore,
the condition of the Church is separated from the whole world, that
benefit which Isaiah puts into the possession of the Church is
spiritual, and the brightness which he promises is spiritual; and
consequently, these things relate to the spiritual kingdom of Christ,
when the light of the Gospel shone in every part of the world, and
foreign nations were enlightened by it. To this also relates what
follows, —

<span id="xiii.i-p56"></span>*The Lord will arise upon thee*; for
although he shows that the favor of God will be visible by manifest
tokens and effects, yet he does not leave out that which is of the
greatest importance, that believers will truly feel that he is their
Father, so as to expect salvation from him. Hence infer that we are
overwhelmed by darkness till God shine upon us with the testimony of
adoption by free grace. I speak of all mankind; for Isaiah informs us
that this life-giving light proceeds from God alone, in order to declare
that it is a special gift of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p57"></span>Secondly, it ought to be observed that the
Church alone, that is, the elect of God, are partakers of this
brightness. Hence it follows, that it is not a common or natural gift,
but a gift by which the Lord relieves us from an ordinary defect of
human nature. Thus also we perceive that there is no light or brightness
but in the Church; for the rest of men, though they think that they
enjoy light and brightness, are overwhelmed by darkness, from which they
cannot be extricated in any other way than by the light of the Gospel.

<span id="xiii.i-p58"></span>*And his glory shall be seen upon thee.* He
adds the word “glory,” because, after having embraced us by his favor,
the Lord continues more and more to increase his acts of kindness toward
us.

<span id="xiii.i-p59"></span><span id="xiii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p60"></span>**3.** *And the Gentiles shall walk.* He
confirms what we have already said, that there is no other light of men
but when the Lord shines on them by his word. All indeed acknowledge
this; but they do not set so high a value as they ought on this benefit,
and imagine it to be something of an ordinary kind, which naturally
belongs to all men. But he shows that this grace is supernatural, and
therefore it ought to be distinguished from nature; which is clearly
shown by the repetition of the words upon thee, in the preceding verse.

<span id="xiii.i-p61"></span>First, then, we ought to believe that this
benefit comes from God alone; and secondly, that all are not
indiscriminately partakers of it, but only the elect, on whom the Lord
shines by undeserved favor, so as to take them out of the ordinary rank
of men. This is done by Christ, who is called “the Sun of
Righteousness,” because we are enlightened as if by his rays. (<span
id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>[Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p61.1"></span>) Besides, the Prophet declares that this favor
shall be spread far and wide by the Jews; which is also intimated by the
words of the covenant,

<span id="xiii.i-p62"></span>“In thy seed shall all nations be blessed.”
(<span id="xiii.i-p62.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span id="xiii.i-p62.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p63"></span>*To thy brightness.* If one nation only had
enjoyed the light, it would have been of no advantage to the rest; but,
so far as the doctrine of the Gospel has been spread throughout the
whole world, Judea has held out the light to the Gentiles formerly
blinded, in order to point out the way. By making the brightness
peculiar to a single nation, he shows that in no other way could the
world be enlightened, or come to share in this benefit, than by seeking
light from that word which proceeded from the Jews, and was heard at
Jerusalem, where the lamp of the Lord was kindled, and where the Sun of
Righteousness arose, that from it he might diffuse his light to all the
ends of the earth, as we have formerly seen, “Out of Zion shall go forth
the Law.” (<span id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>[Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="xiii.i-p63.1"></span>.md)
There is, therefore, no light but from the doctrine of the prophets; so
that they who withdraw from it falsely boast of walking in the light.

<span id="xiii.i-p64"></span>*And kings to the brightness of thy
rising.* He alludes to the dawn; for, as the morning­star begins the day
in one quarter only of heaven, and immediately the sun enlightens the
whole world, so the daybreak was first in Judea, from which the light
arose and was afterwards diffused throughout the whole world; for there
is no corner of the earth which the Lord has not enlightened by this
light. He mentions “kings,” that they might not imagine that none but
the common people would come to this light, but princes and nobles, who
in other respects are greatly delighted with their high rank. But now he
confers on the Church the very highest honor, that she shines with such
brightness as to attract to herself nations and princes. He calls it
“the light” of the Church; not that she has any light from herself, but
borrows it from Christ, as the moon borrows from the sun.

<span id="xiii.i-p65"></span><span id="xiii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p66"></span>**4.** *Lift up thine eyes round about.* By
a variety of expressions he confirms that promise of the restoration of
the Church which appeared to be altogether incredible. Nor was it easy
to convince the Jews of this, while the state of their affairs was so
wretched and confused. At that time the kingdom of Judah alone remained,
and grew less every day, till it was utterly ruined; but when the people
were led into captivity amidst that frightful dispersion and melancholy
ruin, everything was so desperate that it appeared as if the Church were
entirely ruined. It was therefore proper to confirm this doctrine by a
variety of expressions, that hearts naturally prone to distrust might no
longer doubt. For this reason he leads the Jews to look at the event as
actually at hand, though it was at a great distance; that they might not
hesitate any more than if it were already placed before their eyes.

<span id="xiii.i-p67"></span>He bids believers lift, up their eyes on
high, that is, above human thought; for, so long as we fix them on the
outward condition, we cannot obtain the fruit of these promises. He
adds, “round about,” that they may fully believe that the nations will
come, not from one quarter only, but from every direction, that they may
be united in one body. And not only does he promise a remedy and an end
of the dispersion which was yet to take place, as it is said elsewhere,
“He will gather the dispersed of Israel,” (<span
id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>[Ps
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002.md)<span id="xiii.i-p67.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p67.2"></span>[Isa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#008)<span id="xiii.i-p67.2"></span>.md)
but this gathering is more extensive; for it means that there will be a
wonderful revolution in the world, so that they who formerly were
strangers and dispersed shall be united in one body. Finally, it denotes
the extension of the Church to the farthest boundaries of the earth.
There is also an implied contrast, by which he points out the wretched
and afflicted condition in which the world was, before it was gathered
together under the direction of Christ.

<span id="xiii.i-p68"></span>*Thy sons shall come from far.* Some think
that by “sons” are meant those who are stronger and more steadfast in
faith, and by daughters those who are weaker. But I do not think that
the Prophet intended to convey such ingenious distinctions;  <span
id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md) and therefore I consider the plain
meaning to be, that both sons and daughters shall run together to the
Church; that is, that the Church shall have sons and daughters, not only
at home but abroad, and in the most distant parts of the world; that the
womb of the Church shall not be limited to any corner of the world, but
shall be extended as far and wide as there shall be space throughout the
whole world.

<span id="xiii.i-p70"></span><span id="xiii.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p71"></span>**5.** *Then shalt thou see.* These things
appear, at first sight, to be somewhat inconsistent with each other,
that formerly he spoke of the fact as present, and now foretells it as
future. But formerly he spoke of the eyes of faith, which beholds those
things which do not fall under the senses of men, and now he speaks of
the actual event; or, at least, he intended by the present tense to
point out the certainty; but now, in order that believers may continue
to exercise patience, he limits the same statement. Besides, although
those things which the Lord promises are concealed, for a time, from the
eyes of men, yet believers perceive them by faith; so that they have a
firm belief and expectation of the accomplishment of them, however
incredible they may appear to others.

<span id="xiii.i-p72"></span>*Thou shalt shine,* or, *thou shalt
overflow.* As the verb <span id="xiii.i-p72.1"></span>נהר (*nahar*)
signifies both “to shine” and “to overflow,” so it may be rendered
either way.  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) We may refer it to
that joy with which the Church is filled and overflows, when it is
enlarged in this manner, or to the ornament with which it shines and
dazzles.  <span id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p75"></span>*Thou shalt tremble.* He now mentions
“trembling,” and connects it with splendor or joy; and this may appear
to be inconsistent with the meaning assigned to the former clause. But I
have no doubt that he intended, by this word, to express the
astonishment and even amazement with which the Church shall be seized,
when she shall perceive that this strange and unexpected honor has been
obtained by her, and that she has been elevated to so high a rank of
honor. As if he had said, “The extent of the work will be so great as to
exceed thy expectation.” It is not, therefore, the “trembling”’ which is
produced by some danger or some melancholy event, but such as commonly
arises in matters of great importance, which exceed the capacity of our
understanding, when we are struck with amazement, and almost think that
we dream, and this “trembling” agrees very well with joy.

<span id="xiii.i-p76"></span><span id="xiii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p77"></span>**6.** *A multitude of camels shall cover
thee.* The Prophet describes figuratively the glory of the Church, and
accommodates his discourse to the time, and to the persons with whom he
had to do. We must keep in remembrance what we have often said, that the
prophets took into account the people whom they taught, and therefore
mentioned customary transactions and well­known ceremonies, that, under
the figures of them, they might describe the spiritual worship of God.
The Jews must be first instructed, and afterwards the Gentiles, to whom
the truth of those things has come; as if he had said, that nations far
distant shall come, with their wealth, into the power of God; for, when
he foretells that the Church shall be enriched, this must not be
understood as referring to the persons of men; but, on account of the
unity of the Head and the members, what belongs to God and to Christ is
transferred to the Church. Foolishly, therefore, do the Jews, under the
pretense of this prophecy, devour with their insatiable avarice all the
riches of the earth; and not less absurdly do the Papists torture these
words to support their luxuries, wealth, and magnificence.

<span id="xiii.i-p78"></span>He mentions “camels, frankincense, gold.,
and sheep,” because he has in his eye what each country produces, in
order to show that all will consecrate to God whatever they shall have
in their power, and will offer themselves and all that they have as a
sacrifice. Hence it ought to be inferred, that we cannot be truly
converted to the Lord, without offering to him all our faculties; for
these are “spiritual sacrifices,” (<span id="xiii.i-p78.1"></span>[1Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p78.1"></span>.md)
which he demands, and which cannot be refused to him, if our hearts be
dedicated and consecrated to him in sincerity. (<span
id="xiii.i-p78.2"></span>[Ro 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p78.2"></span>) Wicked men abuse the gifts of God for luxury
and intemperance, and corrupt them, as far as lies in their power, by
unworthy profanation; but good men, by using them with a pure
conscience, dedicate them to the Lord. No one, therefore, can belong to
God without dedicating and devoting to him all that he has.

<span id="xiii.i-p79"></span><span id="xiii.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p80"></span>**7.** *Kedar, Nebaioth.* So far as relates
to the countries which the Prophet here enumerates, it is unnecessary to
explain in what place each of them is situated; but it ought to be
observed, in passing, that he mentions here those countries which lay
toward the East, and chiefly Arabia and neighboring places, which he
describes under the names of “Kedar” and “Nebaioth.” The Papists have
also abused this passage, in order to prove that kings came from the
East to offer gifts to Christ; and, in so doing, they make themselves
exceedingly ridiculous, seeing that the Prophet speaks of all ranks of
men. But they heap up, without judgment, all passages of this kind, in
which mention is made of “gold” or “frankincense,” as if the prophets
meant those gifts which the magi offered. (<span
id="xiii.i-p80.1"></span>[Mt 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p80.1"></span>) But in this passage there is no obscurity;
for it means that everywhere men shall call upon God, and all foreigners
shall assemble to worship him.

<span id="xiii.i-p81"></span>*They shall ascend to the good pleasure of
my altar.* Others render the words, “They shall ascend with good
pleasure on my altar,” and think (not altogether without reason, in my
opinion) that it is a figure of speech by which words interchange their
cases with each other, and that. the Prophet means that those sacrifices
which shall be offered by the Gentiles will be acceptable to God. Others
interpret <span id="xiii.i-p81.1"></span>רצון (*ratzon*) as if it were
an adjective, which does not agree with the correct use of the language;
for <span id="xiii.i-p81.2"></span>רצון (*ratzon*) signifies benevolence
or favor. For this reason I consider the rendering which I have given to
be preferable; namely, that “sacrifices shall ascend to the good
pleasure of the altar;” and the meaning may be brought out in this
manner, “They shall ascend to appease God; as it is for this purpose
that an altar has been appointed, and sacrifices are offered, that God
may be reconciled and favorable to men; and God also, according to his
promise, accepts the sacrifices that have been offered on his altar;”
for at that time the “altar” was the approach to obtain God’s favor.

<span id="xiii.i-p82"></span>Here the Prophet plainly expresses three
things. First, when he says that “the sacrifices ascend,” he alludes to
the ancient ceremony, which was formerly observed by them in sacrifices;
for they lifted up the slain beasts; by which they meant that all men
ought to raise their hearts on high, that they might not keep their eyes
fixed on the earth or look only at the sacrifice which was offered.
Secondly, the Prophet says that those sacrifices are acceptable to God,
that they may be distinguished from the profane offerings of the
Gentiles, which were unaccompanied by faith. Thirdly, he says, “On the
altar,” which alone can “sanctify the offerings,” (<span
id="xiii.i-p82.1"></span>[Mt
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)<span id="xiii.i-p82.1"></span>;.md)
for all that was offered anywhere else was unholy and detestable.
Besides, this figure ought to lead us to the truth; for Christ is the
altar of God, and on him we must offer, if we wish that God should
accept our sacrifices.

<span id="xiii.i-p83"></span>*And I will glorify the house of my glory.*
Under the glorification of the temple he declares the true restoration
of the people; for the chief part of their happiness was, that the
temple should stand, in which men called on God in a right manner; and
we must begin with this, that God reigns amongst us, by which we are
made truly happy. For this reason, when the Lord declares that the
Church shall be restored, he mentions the temple, the glory of which he
will restore; as if he had said, “My house is now exposed to the mockery
of the Gentiles, but I will at length restore to it that glory of which
it has now been deprived.” It is evident from Zechariah, Haggai, and
Malachi, that this was not completed immediately after the return of the
people. We must not imagine that its true dignity consisted in that
splendid building by which Herod cunningly endeavored to gain favor; and
therefore the dignity or honor, which is here mentioned, was not
manifested till God opened the gate of heaven to Jerusalem, and then
openly called all the Gentiles to the hope of eternal salvation.

<span id="xiii.i-p84"></span><span id="xiii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p85"></span>**8.** *Who are those?* As the Prophet
cannot satisfy himself in describing this gift of God, he breaks out
into admiration, and exclaims, “Who are those?“ This is far more
forcible than if he had simply said that an inconceivable multitude was
flying, and had even made use of the same metaphors. He intended,
therefore, to describe how splendid this multiplication would be, when
he could not find words sufficient to express it.

<span id="xiii.i-p86"></span>*That fly as a cloud.*  <span
id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153.md) It is generally thought that this
denotes the Apostles, who, with incredible swiftness, made their way to
the farthest boundaries of the world; and there is some plausibility in
that interpretation. (<span id="xiii.i-p87.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="xiii.i-p87.1"></span>.md)
But the Prophet speaks of a universal assemblage of the Church; for from
every quarter men shall run to it readily and cheerfully.

<span id="xiii.i-p88"></span>*And as doves to their windows*  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154.md) The metaphor of “doves,” which he
employs, is highly appropriate to this subject; for, when they are
dispersed through the fields, they appear not to differ at all from
untamed birds; and yet they are domesticated, and have their
pigeon­house, to which they betake themselves, and in which they build
their nests. Thus believers, enlightened by faith, begin to perceive
their assembly, to which they fly from frightful dispersion. How
necessary this warning was, will be readily perceived by all who shall
take into account their wretched and alarming condition at that time;
for, if the prophets, after having carefully instructed the Jews for
many years, could gain very little or hardly any success, what was to be
expected from the Gentiles, who were altogether alienated from God? Was
it not <span id="xiii.i-p89.2"></span>παράδοξον beyond all reasonable
expectation, that the Gentiles would one day come into the Church? Yet
the Prophet does not speak extravagantly, but is filled with such
amazement that he leads us to admire it in the same manner.

<span id="xiii.i-p90"></span><span id="xiii.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p91"></span>**9.** *Surely the islands shall wait for
me.* After having employed every eulogium that he could find for
extolling that wonderful benefit of restoration, Isaiah introduces God
himself as speaking, that the discourse may carry greater weight. This
“waiting” is supposed by some to denote desire; as if he had said that
this is done, because nations beyond the seas shall, as it were, hunger
after him; because they shall feel that they are destitute of life and
salvation. Others view it as simply denoting hope. But sometimes it
likewise means “to observe,” in which sense David employs it. “Wicked
men wait for my soul;” that is, “they lay snares for my life.” (<span
id="xiii.i-p91.1"></span>[Ps 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p91.1"></span>) In that sense it may be understood in this
passage. “They shall wait for,” that is, they shall observe my will; as
servants are wont to comply with the will of their masters. Do not
wonder, therefore, that so many shall flow into the Church; for “the
islands,” which at present sometimes despise and sometimes fight against
me, shall be so attentive to me as to execute whatever I shall command.
And indeed from the remainder of the verse it is manifest that he now
speaks of that kind of obedience.

<span id="xiii.i-p92"></span>*And the ships of Tarshish.* If it be
thought preferable, the particle <span id="xiii.i-p92.1"></span>כ
(*caph*,) *as,* may be here supplied in this manner: “As the ships of
Tarshish formerly traded with Judea, and brought what was necessary for
building the temple and for the use of men, so they shall again renew
their traffic, and that navigation which had been broken off shall bring
them back to their former course. By “Tarshish,” that is, Cilicia, he
means, <span id="xiii.i-p92.2"></span>συνεκδοχικῶς by a figure of speech
in which a part is taken for the whole, all the naval intercourse and
all the traffic which they carried on with foreign nations. It may also
be supposed simply to mean, “The ships of Tarshish, which now proudly
despise my Church, shall be subjected to my authority, and shall bring
sons to her from distant countries.”

<span id="xiii.i-p93"></span>*Their silver and gold with them.* He again
repeats what he had formerly said, that the Gentiles shall yield
obedience to God in such a manner as to offer themselves and all that
they have. The Popish doctors, as I remarked a little before, display
consummate impudence in abusing these proofs for defending that
tyrannical and theatrical  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155.md)
display by which Roman antichrist, and his attendants, wish to attain
fame and distinction. Abounding in luxury, adorning themselves with gold
and jewels, and indeed with the attire of a harlot, they are not ashamed
of representing the Holy Spirit as the author of this wickedness; so
that, whenever gold and silver are mentioned in Scripture, they apply it
to their luxury. In. this respect they certainly are very like the Jews,
who rise to ecstatic delight at the mention of gold and silver, and hope
to wallow in them, when Messiah comes. Thus the Papists think of nothing
else than gold and silver, and their understandings are so much dazzled
by that empty display that they cannot raise them to heaven. But such
stupidity does not need a lengthened refutation.

<span id="xiii.i-p95"></span>*To the name of Jehovah thy God.* The
general meaning is, that God intends to elevate his Church to the
highest honor, and to adorn her with necessary ornaments. And that
believers may not have their minds disturbed by any doubt of so
illustrious a promise, or ascribe anything to their own merits, God
himself promises that he will be the author of this event, *for he will
glorify thee*. Besides, the Prophet declares that the riches of the
Gentiles, which he appeared to represent, a little before, as the prey
of the Church or the prize of victory, shall be a sacred offering to
God; and thus he states more clearly what I have said, that there is
nothing which we ought to desire more earnestly than that the whole
world should bow to the authority of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p96"></span><span id="xiii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p97"></span>**10.** *And the sons of the stranger shall
build thy walls.* He continues the same subject. As he formerly said
that foreigners shall submit to his authority, in order to build the
temple; so he now says that “the sons of the stranger” shall bestow
their labor in building the walls. Various are the comparisons by which
he promises the restoration of the Church. It is customary in Scripture,
when the Church is spoken of, to exhibit sometimes the temple, and
sometimes Jerusalem. He promises that foreigners and strangers shall
assist in rearing this building, that the Jews may not be terrified by
their poverty or their small number, and consequently lose heart; for
they might be tempted to distrust during the captivity, so that, though
they hoped to return to their native country, still they might think
that this could not be accomplished by them.

<span id="xiii.i-p98"></span>Now, Cyrus accomplished it, when he
supplied them with a large amount of gold and silver. But in him these
things were merely shadowed out. They were actually fulfilled in Christ,
to whose reign they must entirely relate; for, first, Christ employed a
few apostles, (<span id="xiii.i-p98.1"></span>[Mt
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p98.1"></span>.md)
who could not be sufficient for so great a work; but afterwards he
raised up strangers, from among whom he chose pastors, and wished that
their foreign princes should be nursing­fathers of the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p99"></span>With aggravated wickedness do the Papists
pervert and corrupt this passage, by torturing it to uphold the tyranny
of the Pope, whom they wish to possess supreme power over kings and
princes. They speak impudent falsehood when they say that he is Christ’s
deputy; for Christ’s “kingdom” is not of this world. (<span
id="xiii.i-p99.1"></span>[Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)<span id="xiii.i-p99.1"></span>.md)
The Pope rules barbarously and tyrannically, and claims the power of
changing and disposing of kingdoms. But kings submit to Christ in such a
manner that they do not cease to be kings, but exercise all their power
for preserving the worship of God and administering righteous
government.

<span id="xiii.i-p100"></span>Hence we see how much those persons are
opposed to the kingdom of Christ who wish to snatch authority and power
from kings, that they themselves may possess it. Hence also the
Anabaptists may be refuted, who overturn political order so far as to
imagine that kings cannot be Christians in any other way than by
renouncing their own authority, since even in the royal rank God shows
that he wishes to hold the highest place.

<span id="xiii.i-p101"></span>*For in my wrath I smote thee.* Lest any
one should object that it would have been easier to preserve the Church
uninjured than to raise her from hell, God anticipates the objection,
and shows that the Jews were justly afflicted in this manner, because he
had been exceedingly provoked by their offenses; but he gives them good
ground of hope, because he does not choose to demand the punishment
which they had deserved, but will be satisfied, provided that a
temporary chastisement shall humble them.

<span id="xiii.i-p102"></span>*In my kindness have I had compassion on
thee.* He reminds the Jews what is the cause of this change, that they
may not judge of it according to their own apprehension. When kingdoms
are changed, and frequently rise and fall, men think that these events
happen by chance, and that it is the common lot of the world. The Jews
might think the same thing, when, in consequence of the kingdom of the
Babylonians having been overturned, they were restored to liberty. For
this reason the Lord testifies that all these things are governed by his
providence; that is, that they may not shut their eyes after the manner
of heathens. It is as if he had said, “If thou inquire why thou hast
endured so many afflictions, the reason is this, that I was angry with
thee and punished thy transgressions. But if thou ask the cause of thy
deliverance, my undeserved kindness, and not thy worthiness, or an
accidental occurrence, was the cause.” Accordingly, calamities do not
happen by chance, nor is God angry without cause; and he is not angry to
such a degree as not to leave room for his compassion. (<span
id="xiii.i-p102.1"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="xiii.i-p102.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p103"></span><span id="xiii.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p104"></span>**11.** *And thy gates shall be open
continually.* The ordinary exposition of this verse is incorrect. The
Prophet is generally supposed to mean that the Church will be perfectly
safe under the Lord’s protection and guardianship; for “open gates”
indicate that danger is far off. But I think that the Prophet himself
explains it; namely, that the gates shall be open, that riches may be
brought into the city from every quarter. And as burdens are usually
carried in the daytime, “The day,” he says, “will not be enough, so vast
shall be the crowd of those who bring into it precious treasures, and
therefore the carrying will be so constant that it will be necessary to
keep the gates open night and day.”  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p106"></span>When he says that *the riches of the
Gentiles* shall belong to the Church, let us not view this as referring
to carnal luxury, but to obedience, which the whole world shall render
to God in the Church; for he says that what is offered to God belongs to
the Church, because here God has nothing separate from it.

<span id="xiii.i-p107"></span>*That their kings may be led.* I prefer
retaining the participial form which the Prophet employs, instead of
following those who change it into a verb. Such commentators corrupt the
Prophet’s meaning, who expressly added this, because so great is the
haughtiness of kings that they can scarcely endure to be led, but.
rather, relying on their power, give free scope to their inclinations,
and not only are driven along so as to be the sport of their passions,
but., like violent torrents, drag others along with them. He shows,
therefore, that these kings, though naturally haughty and ungovernable,
shall submit to the authority of God and of the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p108"></span><span id="xiii.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p109"></span>**12.** *For the nation and kingdom.* The
Prophet dwells largely on confirming the hearts of believers, that they
may not doubt that the restoration shall be such as he has described.
Those events were altogether incredible; and we ourselves, though we
have obtained abundant confirmation of them from the actual event, (for
they have been made manifest to the eyes of all,) yet, unless we are
guided by the Spirit of the Lord, could hardly conceive of them in our
mind. He shows, therefore, that there is no reason why the Jews should
doubt as to the restoration of the temple, because the Gentiles will aid
them to the utmost of their power But here Isaiah looks at something
higher than the building of the visible temple; for he intends to speak
of that obedience which kings and nobles and the common people render to
the Church when they promote, as far as they are able, pure doctrine.

<span id="xiii.i-p110"></span>*Shall perish.* He goes still farther, and
confirms his statement the more by declaring that “the kingdoms and
nations which will not serve the Church shall be destroyed.” And if so
dreadful a punishment was pronounced against those who did not aid the
Church, what shall we say of the tyrants who rush upon her with furious
attack, and labor with all their might to destroy her? If careless and
slothful men do not pass unpunished, does not a fearful vengeance await
the ungodly, who disturb and overturn the work of the Lord?

<span id="xiii.i-p111"></span>*The nations, I say, shall be utterly
destroyed.* What he had said in the singular number he immediately
repeats in the plural, in order to show that even the whole world, if it
be involved in the same guilt, shall likewise perish; for their
multitude will not be able to prevent all who are estranged from God
from perishing, and ungodly men will have no excuse for throwing
obstacles in each other’s way, or for encouraging each other to impiety
and wickedness. Kings and nations are said, as we have already seen, to
“serve the Church;” not that she exercises any dominion over them, but
because God has committed to her the scepter of his word by which he
rules.

<span id="xiii.i-p112"></span><span id="xiii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p113"></span>**13.** *The glory of Lebanon.* Isaiah
again employs the metaphor which he formerly used, when he compared the
Church of God to a building or a city. He enumerates those things which
were necessary for building, such as “the fir-tree, the pine, and the
box-tree,” which grew in Lebanon, a forest abounding, as we know, in
excellent trees.

<span id="xiii.i-p114"></span>*For the beauty of the place of my
holiness.* He means that all that is excellent and beautiful in Lebanon
shall be carried into the Church. But it must be believed that these
figures contain an emblematical reference to the spiritual worship of
God; for the Lord adorns his Church with the title of a sanctuary,
because he dwells in the midst of it. Yet he always alludes to the
temple, so as to accommodate himself to the time and to ordinary custom.
Thus he holds out to us the pattern of the temple which stood at
Jerusalem, that under the image of it we may contemplate the “spiritual
temple,” (<span id="xiii.i-p114.1"></span>[Eph
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021)<span id="xiii.i-p114.1"></span>.md)
of which we are the “living stones” and the living substance. (<span
id="xiii.i-p114.2"></span>[1Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p114.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p115"></span>*For I will glorify the place of my feet.*
By “the place of his feet,” he means that he dwells in the temple in
such a manner that his majesty is not confined within it, (for he is not
limited to so narrow a place;) and therefore his feet only, what may be
called the smallest part, is there, that we may ascend to heaven, and
not fix our whole attention on those outward signs by which we are
instructed according to our capacity. Thus also in the Psalm,

<span id="xiii.i-p116"></span>“Worship the footstool of his feet, for it
is holy.”  
(<span id="xiii.i-p116.2"></span>[Ps
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p116.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p117"></span>And again,

<span id="xiii.i-p118"></span>“We will worship in the place where his
feet stood.”  
(<span id="xiii.i-p118.2"></span>[Ps
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007)<span id="xiii.i-p118.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p119"></span>Not that God’s essence is divided into
parts above and below,  <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157.md) but
because by such means he lifts up his servants, as it were, from the
feet to the head.

<span id="xiii.i-p121"></span><span id="xiii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p122"></span>**14.** *And the sons of them that afflict
thee shall come.* He continues the same subject, for he shows how
splendid will be this work of redemption; that is, that they who
persecuted or despised the Church “shall come,” so as to bow down humbly
before her, and submit to her with their whole heart. By “the sons of
them that afflict her,” he means the persecutors and enemies who
oppressed her. This was indeed partly fulfilled, when the Jews returned
to their native country; but that return was nothing more than a dark
shadow of the deliverance which we have obtained through Christ. These
things were actually accomplished under the reign of Christ, yet so that
the full accomplishment of them may be expected at; his second coming,
as we have already said under a different passage.

<span id="xiii.i-p123"></span>Some one will ask, “Is not this honor, of
which the Prophet speaks, excessive and greater than ought to be given
to the Church? for to bow down and prostrate ourselves are tokens of
honor which no human being ought to receive.” I reply, this honor is
rendered, not to the members, but to the Head; that is, to Christ, who
is worshipped in the Church; and this worship is rendered by those who
formerly hated and persecuted him. Now we say that Christ is worshipped
in the Church, not as the Papists do, who think that the honor which
they bestow on that Roman idol is rendered to Christ.  <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158.md) They for whose sake these things are
said reject and despise doctrine; for Christ is honored by those who
obey his doctrine. And this is what the Prophet means, that they who
were formerly alienated from it shall heartily submit, so as to obey
Christ; for if Christ; has any majesty, it shines forth in the doctrine
which he administers by the agency of men.

<span id="xiii.i-p125"></span>*They shall call thee the city of
Jehovah.* The Church had formerly been adorned with that title; but it
was nearly obliterated when the city was destroyed, the temple thrown
down, and the people carried into captivity. Jerusalem was no more, and
nothing was to be seen in it but frightful desolation; and therefore he
means that it shall be restored in such a manner that all shall
acknowledge it to be the city of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p126"></span>*The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.* He
next speaks of the temple, that all may know that this high rank is
ascribed to Jerusalem on account of the temple; that is, on account of
the worship of God which the Lord established there.

<span id="xiii.i-p127"></span><span id="xiii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p128"></span>**15.** *Instead of*  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159.md) *thy having been forsaken and hated.*
The Prophet has in his eye that intermediate period which was already at
hand; for, soon after his death, the people were deprived of their
heritage and led into captivity, so that all thought that there was no
remaining hope of their safety. Lest this thought should come into the
minds of believers, by which they might be reduced to despair, “We are
undone, there can be no remedy for affairs so desperate, and we ought
not to hope for a better condition,” he shows that those grievous
calamities cannot prevent God from restoring them; for, although for a
time, when the Lord chastised them, they appeared to be forsaken, yet it
was easy for him to raise them again to prosperity and to a better
condition than before.

<span id="xiii.i-p130"></span>If any one object that this splendor of
the Church was not of long duration, the reply is short. Although the
people were afflicted in various ways after their return, and although
even the Christian Church did not long retain its glory, yet those
things which the Prophet foretold were fulfilled; for under the cross
the glory of Christ shines forth, so that the name of God remains, and
there is a people that calls upon him by faith. It ought also to be
observed, that in consequence of our ingratitude, we do not obtain the
fruit of those promises; for we interrupt the course of God’s works, and
deprive ourselves of the fruit of them by our malice. Besides, we ought
always to keep in remembrance what I have so often said, that the
Prophet does not speak of a few years or a short period, but embraces
the whole course of redemption, from the end of the captivity to the
preaching of the Gospel, and, finally, down to the end of the reign of
Christ.

<span id="xiii.i-p131"></span><span id="xiii.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p132"></span>**16.** *And thou shalt suck the milk of
the Gentiles.* He speaks of the extension of the Church which he had
formerly mentioned; but it was of great importance that the same things
should be frequently repeated, because it appeared to be incredible that
the Church, which had been reduced to calamities so great and so
numerous, would be restored and spread throughout the whole world. Her
condition was desperate; but at length, out of that slender remnant
which had been, as it were, snatched from the burning, to the great
astonishment of all she was restored, and her seed was spread far and
wide through every part of the world. And therefore it is as if he had
said, “Although thou art confined within narrow limits, and thou hast
had no intercourse with the Gentiles, yet thou wilt obtain very abundant
fruit from them.”

<span id="xiii.i-p133"></span>*Thou shalt suck the breast of kings.*
 <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160.md) By “milk” and “breasts” he
means nothing else than service and obedience, which the Gentiles shall
render to the Church for supporting her offspring; for, having formerly
said that at one birth she would bring forth innumerable children, he
now gives them milk for nourishment till they grow up. And he speaks
expressly of “kings,” because it was more difficult to be believed.
Here, too, in passing, “kings” are reminded of their duty; and if they
wish to discharge it in a proper manner, they must be the servants of
the Church; otherwise the Lord will call them to account. We see also
what David says of them,

<span id="xiii.i-p135"></span>“And now, O ye kings, be wise; and ye
judges of the earth, be instructed. Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice
with trembling.” (<span id="xiii.i-p135.1"></span>[Ps.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011)<span id="xiii.i-p135.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p136"></span>But we ought carefully to observe in what
manner the Church sucks “the milk” and “the breasts” of the Gentiles;
for she is not at liberty to exhaust the wealth of the whole world, but
to preserve her own condition safe and sound. What is more inconsistent
with the nature of a Church than to be an insatiable gulf, and to draw
the wealth of all to herself? Those things, therefore, must relate to
her spiritual condition, that God may be purely worshipped in her, that
the ministry of the word may prosper and flourish, and that some
discipline may be maintained, which shall serve as a bridle to restrain
all. Yet let believers remember that (<span
id="xiii.i-p136.1"></span>[Ac
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#035)<span id="xiii.i-p136.1"></span>.md)
“it is more blessed to give than to receive,” and that they ought to
bear poverty so patiently as to enrich others abundantly with spiritual
benefits.

<span id="xiii.i-p137"></span>*And thou shalt know that I Jehovah am thy
Redeemer.* At length he adds that what had been concealed for a time
shall be made manifest, that the Jews were not elected in vain, because
they shall know by undoubted experience that God takes care of their
salvation. It may be asked, Did they not know this even before they were
led into captivity? I answer, that captivity was like the thick darkness
to which also the Prophet compared it in the beginning of this chapter.
Since, therefore, during that harsh tyranny, they could not behold God’s
majesty and power, the Lord led them out into open day, not that faith
gives way amidst afflictions, but that the feeling of faith is different
from that of experience. When we appear to be ruined, faith raises
itself above the present condition and the thick darkness in which we
are involved; and if God restore us perfectly, then we see it, not by
the eyes of faith, but by actual experience. And this is the clear
knowledge of which he speaks; as if he had said, “When I shall have
acted so kindly towards you, then you shall actually know that I am your
Redeemer.”

<span id="xiii.i-p138"></span>*The mighty one of Jacob.* He expressly
claims the title of “the mighty one of Jacob,” because he had often
shown that he was so; and not only had Jacob experience in various ways
of the power of God, but Jacob’s posterity had also known that in the
power of God there was abundant protection. He therefore calls himself
the “mighty one,” that they may know that God will henceforth be to them
what he formerly was to their fathers.

<span id="xiii.i-p139"></span><span id="xiii.i-p139.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p140"></span>**17.** For brass I will bring gold. He
alludes to the building of the ancient temple, and compares it with the
heavenly and spiritual temple; as if he had said, “When you shall be led
into captivity, you will deplore the ruin of the temple, but I will
cause you to build one far more excellent.” Thus, “for brass I will
bring gold, for iron silver, for wood brass, for stones iron;” that is,
everything shall be full of magnificence and splendor in that temple
which shall come in place of the former.

<span id="xiii.i-p141"></span>We know that this prediction was never
accomplished ill that external restoration of the people, or during the
commencement of it, and even that the temple which was afterwards
erected was far inferior to the former. It follows, therefore, that the
Prophet, to whom a full redemption was exhibited in spirit, not only
relates what shall happen immediately after the return of the people,
but discourses concerning the excellence of the spiritual temple; that
is, of the Church of Christ. We must, therefore, come down in
uninterrupted succession to Christ, if we wish to understand this
prophecy. In his reign these things were abundantly fulfilled, and the
glory of the former temple was greatly surpassed; for the Lord poured
out gifts of the Holy Spirit, which are more excellent than gold,
silver, and jewels. We may therefore see the temple now built with
precious stones, as was formerly said. (<span
id="xiii.i-p141.1"></span>[Isa. 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011.md),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#012)<span id="xiii.i-p141.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p142"></span>*I will make thy magistracy peace.*  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161.md) Instead of “magistracy” some render
the word “tribute.” I have no doubt that the Prophet intended indirectly
to compare the wretched bondage of the people under which they were to
be kept, with that pre­eminently high rank which they afterwards
obtained. With “peace” and “righteousness” he contrasts the
“magistrates” who exercised unjust rule, while they were harassed by the
avarice and cruelty of the Babylonians.

<span id="xiii.i-p144"></span>*And thy exactors righteousness.* He now
shows that when their “exactors” shall have been exterminated, there
will be no “magistracy” but that of “peace” and “righteousness.” “They
who shall have power over thee will observe righteousness and peace.”
This was more fully accomplished when, through Christ, we were delivered
from the tyranny of the devil; for by the Gospel he set up a kingdom of
righteousness which he has not yet completed; but we must look for his
last coming so as to have our eyes eagerly fixed on it, and, in the
meantime, must; be satisfied with those first­fruits.

<span id="xiii.i-p145"></span><span id="xiii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p146"></span>**18.** *Oppression shall no longer be
heard in thy land.* Here he states more clearly what we have already
said, namely, that, while the Prophet discourses concerning the
prosperous condition of the Church, he indirectly contrasts the miseries
and calamities by which they had been afflicted in various ways. He
promises, therefore, that they shall never afterwards be subjected to
such afflictions. Yet nevertheless various afflictions afterwards befell
them. This is undoubtedly true; but the people were never scattered in
such a manner as not to have some remaining form of the Church, and thus
to enjoy peace, and to feel that they were protected and kept by the
hand of God. These words did not contain a promise of exemption from
every annoyance and distress; but by comparison they held out this
solace for future evils, that God spares his Church, and consequently
the Church shall be safe under his protection; and during the very
course of the deliverance there was exhibited a striking proof of this
peace, which the Prophet extols. Finally, we must always keep in
remembrance what we have so often said, that; it is only in part that
all these things are experienced by us; for the kingdom of Christ has
not yet been completed.

<span id="xiii.i-p147"></span>*And thy gates Praise.* He alludes, as we
have often said already, to the building of the temple or the city, and
shows that the Church shall be safe, not by means of walls, or towers,
or any enclosures, but that, although there are no earthly defenses,
there shall be abundance of safety and peaceful joy in God alone. Now he
connects the safety of the Church with “peace” or “joy;“ because she
rejoices at being safe and sound, whereas formerly she lay silently in
affliction and despair.

<span id="xiii.i-p148"></span><span id="xiii.i-p148.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p149"></span>**19.** and **20.** *And thou shalt no
longer have the sun for the light of days.* He teaches that the
prosperity of the Church shall not be temporary, but permanent; for he
distinguishes it from the ordinary condition of men, among whom there is
nothing steadfast or permanent; because there is nothing under the sun,
however well regulated, that is not subject to various changes. But we
ought not to judge of the Church from the dangers of the present life;
for she is preserved in the midst of the billows; as if he had said, “Do
not judge of thy safety from the present appearance of things, but know
that it is laid up in God. God will be thy sun, so that thou hast no
need of borrowing light from the sun or the moon. Do not, therefore,
dread any change or revolution of affairs; for thou shalt have a
perpetual and unchangeable light.”

<span id="xiii.i-p150"></span>By these words the Prophet does not mean
that the children of God shall be deprived of the ordinary advantages of
life; for, since the Lord bestows them indiscriminately on all men, he
certainly has appointed them also for his children, for whose sake,
indeed, God created all things, since he exercises a peculiar care over
them. But the Prophet intended to express a still greater blessing,
which the children of God alone enjoy, namely, the heavenly Light, which
ungodly men hate, and therefore cannot receive; for, although they enjoy
the sun and other blessings, yet their happiness cannot be firm and
enduring; because, being void of taste, they do not relish that which
was of the greatest importance, that they have God for their Father.

<span id="xiii.i-p151"></span>Thus he distinguishes the condition of the
Church and of believers from the ordinary lot of men, that we may not
judge of it from the revolution and change of events, and next that we
may know that, amidst the thickest darkness, the fatherly kindness of
God shines on believers, in order to cheer them. And, indeed, although
all the elements either cease to discharge their duty, or threaten us
with a melancholy aspect, yet it ought to be enough that God is
reconciled to us. By a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for
the whole, he includes, under the terms “Sun” and “Moon,” the whole
condition of man, which is continually undergoing change.

<span id="xiii.i-p152"></span><span id="xiii.i-p152.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p153"></span>**21.** *Thy people also are all
righteous.* Here he shows what is the true establishment of the Church;
namely, when she is purged of the ungodly, and none but righteous men
have a place in her. Yet we know that, in the Church, hypocrites have
always been mingled with the true children of God. We have said that
this is a description of the whole reign of Christ, not such as it shall
be at any one moment, but in its perfection. Christ began to do this at
his coming, when he purged the Church. Hence also he calls the Church “a
sieve,” (<span id="xiii.i-p153.1"></span>[Mt
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span id="xiii.i-p153.1"></span>.md)
because by means of it the chaff is separated from the wheat; but he
goes on from day to day in purifying it, and will go on till the day of
harvest. Yet there must be much rubbish mixed with the wheat, which
shall at length be removed on that day. Besides, there is an implied
contrast between this people and that irreligious and unholy multitude
which, by its defilement, had polluted the sanctuary of God. The use of
the plural number appears to denote an assemblage of nations, when he
says that all the peoples shall be righteous.

<span id="xiii.i-p154"></span>*They shall inherit the land for ever.* I
have no doubt that, in these words, the Prophet had his eye on Judea,
and indirectly contrasted the time of restoration with the time of the
captivity which was immediately at hand; as if he had said, “Though I
drive out my people from their inheritance, yet after seventy years I
will restore them, that they may possess it for ever.” Besides, it ought
to be observed that, when he limits to the “righteous” that promise
which related to the people of Zion, there is implied a sort of
correction, in order to exclude hypocrites, who falsely and
unwarrantably are wont to appropriate to themselves what is said about
the true children of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p155"></span>This sentiment, therefore, agrees with
these words, “How good is God to Israel, to those who are of an upright
heart!” in which the Psalmist claims the name of “Israel,” which all
without exception had in their mouth, as belonging to none but God’s
sincere worshippers. (<span id="xiii.i-p155.1"></span>[Ps
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p155.1"></span>.md)
Such is the import, in this passage, of the phrase, “Thy people,” that
is, the remaining portion which shall have been purged from its
defilement. This was not, in every respect, fulfilled in the Jews; but a
beginning was made with them, when they were restored to their native
country, that, by their agency, the possession of the whole earth might
afterwards be given to them, that is, to the children of God. For as he
formerly spoke of the restoration of the temple, which was not complete
at Jerusalem, but must be extended throughout the whole world, so the
possession of this land must not be limited to Judea, since it is more
extensive, and all men are called to it, that by faith they may be
children of Abraham, and may thus become heirs of it. (<span
id="xiii.i-p155.2"></span>[Ga
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#028)<span id="xiii.i-p155.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p156"></span>We must therefore observe carefully those
modes of expression which are customary among the prophets, that we, nay
understand their meaning, and not break off sentences, or torture them
to meanings different from what was intended. Exceedingly unnatural and
inconsistent with the style of the prophets is the interpretation of
those who explain “the land” to mean heaven and the blessed life; for
the land of Canaan was given to the children of God with this intention,
that, being separated from the whole world, and having become God’s
heritage, they might worship him there in a right manner; and
consequently, to dwell in the land by right of inheritance means nothing
else than to remain in the family of God.

<span id="xiii.i-p157"></span>*The branch of his planting.* When God
declares that a new “branch,” which shall come forth, shall be the work
of his hands, this tends to confirm the hope;  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162.md) for it was impossible, to human view,
that the Church should spring up again, which all perceived to be dead,
especially while the root was hidden. Thus, in order that it may spring
up, he says that God will be like a husbandman, who plants anew that
which had been torn up and was withered. In a word, he declares that it
will be a wonderful work of God, and not of men, that the Church shall
be rescued from a wretched and harsh captivity; for she shall be raised
up as from the dead. And indeed all that relates to the heavenly life
was neither produced in us by nature nor obtained by our own strength,
but flows and proceeds from God alone. What is here said universally
concerning the whole body every person ought to apply to himself in
particular; for we are God’s “planting” before the world was made,
(<span id="xiii.i-p158.2"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="xiii.i-p158.2"></span>,.md)
and were afterwards ingrafted into Christ, and called, that we might
have the testimony of our election and planting. Wicked men are not
God’s planting; and therefore Christ declares that “they whom his
heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up.” (<span
id="xiii.i-p158.3"></span>[Mt
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span id="xiii.i-p158.3"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p159"></span>*That I may be glorified.* At length he
adds the end of the “planting,” that we may celebrate the perfections of
God, (<span id="xiii.i-p159.1"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="xiii.i-p159.1"></span>.md)
and may show forth his glory, as Paul beautifully explains. (<span
id="xiii.i-p159.2"></span>[Eph
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#012)<span id="xiii.i-p159.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiii.i-p160"></span><span id="xiii.i-p160.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p161"></span>**22.** *A little one shall become a
thousand.* He again confirms what he formerly said, that, although they
were few in number, yet the Church of God would be populous. When the
Prophet foretold these things, there was still a vast multitude of
people; but afterwards it was so greatly diminished that not more than a
feeble remnant was left, as we have formerly seen. (<span
id="xiii.i-p161.1"></span>[Isa. 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md),
[Isa. 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p161.1"></span>) he declares that the small number shall be
so much enlarged, that it shall afterwards be a vast body of people, and
shall possess great strength. Let us consider that what was said to the
Jews is now said also to us; that is, though we are few in number and
inconsiderable, and appear to be very near destruction, still the Church
cannot perish, but will be enlarged and multiplied till it become very
numerous; for it is God’s planting, and therefore we must not judge of
it from the multitude or strength of men.

<span id="xiii.i-p162"></span>*I Jehovah.* He now shows the reason why
he said all those things which we have formerly seen; namely, that we
may not suppose him to be like men, whose labors and efforts quickly
pass away. Although they wish to change the condition of any kingdom or
of the world, they will accomplish nothing; but the Lord changes
everything in an instant. He does not speak, therefore, of an ordinary
government, but of a wonderful work by which the Lord delivers and
multiplies his Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p163"></span>*Will hasten it in her time.* He says that
“he will hasten this,” so as to complete it. But he employs a little
word which deserves notice as to the time of the Church; for the
relative is in the feminine gender, and is improperly interpreted by
some as relating to God.  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163.md) The
Prophet means that there is a fixed time when the Church shall be
delivered; and in this way he exhorts believers to patience, that they
may not plunge headlong, but depend on God’s eternal purpose, who knows
how to arrange every moment in an appropriate manner.

<span id="xiii.i-p165"></span>First, then, he describes the
seasonableness and the time when it is advantageous that. the Church
shall be delivered. We do not indeed perceive this, for we would wish to
obtain instantly God’s promises, and are impatient of delay; but the
Lord delays for our benefit, and because the time is not yet come. Next,
he speaks of haste; for the Lord appears to us to be idle and inactive,
when he prolongs the time; although he hastens to accomplish everything
at the proper season, which he knows.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc16012.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p49"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p49.1"></span>Au
chapitre precedent.” “In the preceding chapter.”

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc16012.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p69"></span> “There is more probability in Knobel’s
suggestion, that the Prophet made his picture true to nature by
describing the sons as walking, and the daughters as being carried.” ­
*Alexander*.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc16012.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p72.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p73"></span> “As to <span id="xiii.i-p73.1"></span>נהר,
(*nahar*,) the difficulty is in choosing between its two admitted senses
of ‘flowing,’ (<span id="xiii.i-p73.2"></span>[Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span id="xiii.i-p73.2"></span>.md)
and of ‘shining,’ (<span id="xiii.i-p73.3"></span>[Ps
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005)<span id="xiii.i-p73.3"></span>.md)
The former is preferred by Jerome, who translates it <span
id="xiii.i-p73.4"></span>*afflues*; by Junius and Tremellius, who have
<span id="xiii.i-p73.5"></span>*conflues*; and by the English and Dutch
versions, the latter of which refers it to the confluence of crowds
produced by any strange occurrence. Vitringa makes it mean to *flow
out*, and Lowth to *overflow* with joy. But all the latest writers of
authority give the word the same sense as in <span
id="xiii.i-p73.6"></span>[Ps 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#005.md)<span
id="xiii.i-p73.6"></span>, which is well expressed by Henderson in
strong though homely English, *thou shalt look and brighten up*.” —
*Alexander*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc16012.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p73.7"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p74"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p74.1"></span>Qui la
fait reluire.” “Which causes it to shine.”

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc16012.htm#fr_153.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p86.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p87"></span> “It is a fine conception of Vitringa, that
the ships expressly mentioned in the next verse are here described, on
their first appearance at a distance, resembling with their outspread
sails and rapid course a fleecy cloud driven by the wind, and a flight
of doves returning to their young.” ­ *Alexander*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc16012.htm#fr_154.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p89"></span> “The ideas conveyed by the images here
employed are those of number and velocity. The reference to the doves is
beautifully illustrated by a passage in Morier’s Second Journey in
Persia. Speaking of the pigeon­houses near Ispahan, he says: ‘They are
large round towers, rather broader at the bottom than the top, crowned
by conical spiracles, through which the pigeons descend. Their interior
resembles a honey-comb, pierced with a thousand holes, each of which
forms a snug retreat for a nest. The extraordinary flights of pigeons
which I have seen upon one of these buildings, afford perhaps a good
illustration of <span id="xiii.i-p89.1"></span>[Isa
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#008.md)<span id="xiii.i-p89.1"></span>.
Their great numbers, and the compactness of their mass, literally looked
like a cloud at a distance, and obscured the sun in their passage.’ The
persons referred to are the Jews, who now flock in immense numbers from
all quarters to the land of their fathers, and Jerusalem, the summit of
their earthly joy.” ­ *Henderson*.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc16012.htm#fr_155.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p94"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p94.1"></span>Et
Persiques.” “And Persian.”  
The reference is to that love of display which has always prevailed in
Asiatic countrics. ­ *Ed*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc16012.htm#fr_156.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p105"></span> “The idea conveyed by the gates never
being shut is that of the continual arrival of the multitudes referred
to. Modern travelers greatly complain of the inconvenience to which they
are put, when they do not reach Jerusalem before the gates are closed.
The Apostle John borrows the language in his description of the New
Jerusalem. (<span id="xiii.i-p105.1"></span>[Re
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#025)<span id="xiii.i-p105.1"></span>.md)
The ideas of security and peace are implied.” ­ *Henderson*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc16012.htm#fr_157.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p120"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p120.1"></span>L’une au
ciel, l’autre en terre.” “One in heaven, another on earth.”

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc16012.htm#fr_158.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p124"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p124.1"></span>Qui
pensent bien honnorer Christ en s’agenouillant derant cette idole de
Rome pour baiser sa pantoufle.” “Who think that they greatly honor
Christ by kneeling before that idol of Rome to kiss his slipper.”

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc16012.htm#fr_159.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p129"></span> <span id="xiii.i-p129.1"></span>תחת
(*tachath*) merely expresses ‘in exchange for:’ though, from the
circumstances of the case, the idea of compensation is necessarily
implied.” ­ *Henderson*. “The <span id="xiii.i-p129.2"></span>תחת
(tachath) may express either simply a change of condition, (whereas,) or
the reason of the change, (because,) or the further idea of equitable
compensation.” ­ *Alexander*

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc16012.htm#fr_160.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p133.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p134"></span> “Sucking the breast of *kings* is
unusual, and by fastidious critics may be deemed unnatural: but the
phrase is merely employed for the purpose of carrying out more
efficiently the idea taught in the preceding clause; namely, that
abundant contributions would be made by the inhabitants of the different
nations to the sustenance of Zion.” ­ *Henderson*

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc16012.htm#fr_161.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p143"></span> “‘And I will make thy magistracy peace;’
that is, ‘I will make thy rulers peaceful. <span
id="xiii.i-p143.1"></span>פקדה, (*pekudah*,) which evidently corresponds
to the Greek word <span id="xiii.i-p143.2"></span>ἐπισκοπὴ, is here used
by metonymy for, <span id="xiii.i-p143.3"></span>אנשי פקדה, (*anshe
pekudah*,) or <span id="xiii.i-p143.4"></span>בעלי פקדה, (*begnale
pekudah*,) those who discharge the office of magistracy, as in <span
id="xiii.i-p143.5"></span>[2Ki
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#018.md)<span id="xiii.i-p143.5"></span>,
<span id="xiii.i-p143.6"></span>[Eze
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#011.md)<span id="xiii.i-p143.6"></span>.
The Septuagint renders it <span id="xiii.i-p143.7"></span>ἄρχοντάς, ‘thy
rulers,’ and the Chaldee <span id="xiii.i-p143.8"></span>פרנסך,
(*parnasach*,) ‘thy governors.’“ ­ *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc16012.htm#fr_162.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p158"></span> “<span id="xiii.i-p158.1"></span>Pour
conformer l’esperance des fideles.” “To confirm the hope of believers.”

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc16012.htm#fr_163.md) <span
id="xiii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p164"></span> Our author adds that he prefers “<span
id="xiii.i-p164.1"></span>ejus tempore“ to “<span
id="xiii.i-p164.2"></span>suo tempore,” for the sake of avoiding
ambiguity; but unfortunately neither the Latin language nor his own
vernacular could distinguish between the English pronouns *his*, *her*,
and *its*. ­ *Ed*.  
“The pronouns in the last clause are correctly explained by Knobel as
neuters, referring to the whole preceding series of prophecies. (Compare
<span id="xiii.i-p164.4"></span>[Isa.
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013.md), [Isa.
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011)<span id="xiii.i-p164.4"></span>.md)
The *his* in the common version is equivalent to *its* in modern
English, a possessive form apparently unknown to the translators of the
Bible.” ­ *Alexander*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 61](cc16013.md)
