[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16002)  [Next](cc16004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv"></span>

<span id="iv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 51.

<span id="iv.i"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
51:1-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001)<span id="iv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Hearken to me, ye that follow after
righteousness, ye that seek the LORD: look unto the rock *whence* ye are
hewn, and to the hole of the pit *whence* ye are digged.

<span id="iv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Audite me, qui sequimini justitiam, qui
qumritis Iehovam; aspicire ad petram excisionis vestrae, et ad cavernam
specus unde eruti estis.

<span id="iv.i-p4"></span>**2.** Look unto Abraham your father, and unto
Sarah *that* bare you: for I called him alone, and blessed him, and
increased him.

<span id="iv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Aspicite ad Abraham patrem vestrum, et
ad Sarare, qum peperit vos; quoniam unitum vocavi eum, et benedixi, et
multiplicavi eum.

<span id="iv.i-p6"></span>**3.** For the LORD shall comfort Zion: he
will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like
Eden, and her desert like the garden of the LORD; joy and gladness shall
be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.

<span id="iv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Utique consolabitur Iehova Sion,
consolabitur omnes vastitates ejus, ponetque desertum ejus quasi ocum
deliciarum, et solitudinem ejus quasi hortum Iehovae. Laetitia et
gaudium invenientur in ea; confessio et vox cantici.

<span id="iv.i-p8"></span>**4.** Hearken unto me, my people; and give
ear unto me, O my nation: for a law shall proceed from me, and I will
make my judgment to rest for a light of the people.

<span id="iv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Attendite ad me, popule mi; et plebs
men audite me; quoniam Lex a me egredietur, et judietum meum in lucem
populorum patifaciam.

<span id="iv.i-p10"></span>**5.** My righteousness *is* near; my
salvation is gone forth, and mine arms shall judge the people; the isles
shall wait upon me, and on mine arm shall they trust.

<span id="iv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Prope est justitia mea; egressa eat
salus mea; et brachia mea populos judicabunt. Me insulae expectabunt, et
in brachium meum sperabunt.

<span id="iv.i-p12"></span>**6.** Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and
look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away like
smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner: but my salvation shall be for ever,
and my righteousness shall not be abolished.

<span id="iv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Levate in coelum oculos vestros, et
aspicite in terram deorsum; quoniam coeli ut fumus peribunt; et terra ut
vestis veterascet; et incolae ejus in eundem modum interibunt. Atque
salus mea in aeternum manebit, et justitia mea non interibit.

<span id="iv.i-p14"></span>**7.** Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the people in whose heart *is* my law; fear ye not the
reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

<span id="iv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Audite me, qui cognoscitis justitiam,
populus in cujus corde est lex mea. Ne timeatis probrum hominis eta
contumelia eorum ne frangamini animo.

<span id="iv.i-p16"></span>**8.** For the moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool: but my righteousness
shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to generation.

<span id="iv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quoniam sieur vestimentum comedet eos
tinea; sicut lanam comeder eos vermis. At justitia inca perpetuo
manebit, et salus mea in seculum seculorum.

<span id="iv.i-p18"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm
of the LORD; awake, as in the ancient days, in the generations of old.
*Art* thou not it that hath cut Rahab, *and* wounded the dragon?

<span id="iv.i-p20"></span>**9.** Suscita re, suscita to, indue
fortitudinem, brachium Iehovae. Excita re, sicut in diebus antiquis,
seculis olim praeteritis. Annon tu illud es, proscindens superbam,
conficiens draconem?

<span id="iv.i-p21"></span>**10.** *Art* thou not it which hath dried
the sea, the waters of the great deep; that hath made the depths of the
sea a way for the ransomed to pass over?

<span id="iv.i-p22"></span>**10.** Annon tu illud es, quod exsiccavit
mare, aquam voraginis magnae; quod vertit profundum maris in viare, ad
transitum redemptotum?

<span id="iv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Therefore the redeemed of the LORD
shall return, and come with singing unto Zion; and everlasting joy
*shall be* upon their head: they shall obtain gladness and joy; *and*
sorrow and mourning shall flee away.

<span id="iv.i-p24"></span>**11.** Ergo redempti ad Iehovam revertentur;
venient in Sion cure cantico, eritque gaudium perpetuum super caput
eorum. Laetitiam et gaudium obtinebunt, fugientque dolor et gemitus.

<span id="iv.i-p25"></span>**12.** I, *even* I*, am* he that comforteth
you: who *art* thou, that thou shouldest be afraid of a man *that* shall
die, and of the son of man *which* shall be made *as* grass;

<span id="iv.i-p26"></span>**12.** Ego, ego sum, qui vos consolor.
Quaenam es, ut timeas ab homine qui morietur? a filio hominis, qui
foenum reputabitur?

<span id="iv.i-p27"></span>**13.** And forgettest the LORD thy maker,
that hath stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the
earth; and hast feared continually every day because of the fury of the
oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? and where *is* the fury of
the oppressor?

<span id="iv.i-p28"></span>**13.** Et oblita es Iehovae factoris tui,
qui extendit coelos, et fundavit terram; et formidasti jugiter tota die
a furore affligentis, dum ad vastandum se parat. Et ubi furor
affligentis?

<span id="iv.i-p29"></span>**14.** The captive exile hasteneth that he
may be loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread
should fail.

<span id="iv.i-p30"></span>**14.** Festinat exul ut solvatur, ut non
moriatur in specu, nec deficiat eum panis suus.

<span id="iv.i-p31"></span>**15.** But I *am* the LORD thy God, that
divided the sea, whose waves roared: The LORD of hosts *is* his name.

<span id="iv.i-p32"></span>**15.** Et ego Iehova Deus tuus, qui seco
mare, et sonabunt fluctus ejus; Iehova exercituum nomen ejus.

<span id="iv.i-p33"></span>**16.** And I have put my words in thy mouth,
and I have covered thee in the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the
heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou
*art* my people.

<span id="iv.i-p34"></span>**16.** Et posui verba mea in ore tuo; et in
umbra manus mere protexi to, ut plantem coelos, et fundem terram. Dieam
Sioni, Populus meus tu.

<span id="iv.i-p35"></span>**17.** Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem,
which hast drunk at the hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast
drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, *and* wrung *them* out.

<span id="iv.i-p36"></span>**17.** Expergiscere, expergiscere, surge,
Ierusalem, quae bibisti e manu Iehovae calicem furoris ejus; faeces
calicis angustiae *(vel, trepidationis)* bibisti exprimens.

<span id="iv.i-p37"></span>**18.** *There is* none to guide her among
all the sons *whom* she hath brought forth; neither *is there any* that
taketh her by the hand of all the sons *that* she hath brought up.

<span id="iv.i-p38"></span>**18.** Non est qui regat eam ex omnibus
illils quos genuit; non est qui apprehendat manum ejus ex onmibus illils
quos educavit.

<span id="iv.i-p39"></span>**19.** These two *things* are come unto
thee; who shall be sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the
famine, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee?

<span id="iv.i-p40"></span>**19.** Duo haec acciderunt tibi. Quis
condolebit tibi? Vastitas et contritio, et fames, et gladius. Quis
consolabitur to?

<span id="iv.i-p41"></span>**20.** Thy sons have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of
the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God.

<span id="iv.i-p42"></span>**20.** Filii tui exanimati sunt; jacuerunt
in capite omnium viarum, sicut bos sylvestris in reti, pleni furore
Iehovae, increpatione Dei tui.

<span id="iv.i-p43"></span>**21.** Therefore hear now this, thou
afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine:

<span id="iv.i-p44"></span>**21.** Itaque nunc audi hoc, misera et
ebria, non a vino.

<span id="iv.i-p45"></span>**22.** Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy
God *that* pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of
thine hand the cup of trembling, *even* the dregs of the cup of my fury;
thou shalt no more drink it again:

<span id="iv.i-p46"></span>**22.** Sic dicit Dominus tuus, Iehova, et
Deus tuus, vindex populi sui: Ecce abstuli e mae tua calicem angustiae
*(vel, trepidationis;)* faecem calicis furoris mei. Non fiet ut bibas
amplius.

<span id="iv.i-p47"></span>**23.** But I will put it into the hand of
them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street, to them that went over.

<span id="iv.i-p48"></span>**23.** Et tradam eum in manus oppressorum
tuorum, qui dixerunt animae ’tuae, Incurvate, et transibimus. Et
posuisti quasi terram corpus tuum, et quasi viam transeuntibus.

<span id="iv.i-p49"></span> 

<span id="iv.i-p50"></span><span id="iv.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p51"></span>**1** *Hearken to me, ye that follow
righteousness.* The Prophet now exhorts the Jews not to despair because
they are few in number; for they had been cut down and diminished to
such a degree that they appeared to be on the eve of being reduced to
nothing, while there was little or no hope of any to succeed them. He
therefore reminds them of their origin, that they may know that, though
they are a small remnant, God can increase and multiply them; and he
bids them contemplate their father Abraham, who, though he was a single
individual, grew to a vast number, and received from God a numerous
posterity. Hence they might infer that God, who, in so short a period,
had multiplied their fathers, would in future multiply them also;
because his power has not been diminished, and his will has not been
changed.

<span id="iv.i-p52"></span>*Look to the rock of your hewing.*  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) Some are of opinion that Abraham is
called a “Rock,” because, as Paul declares, “he was strong in faith.”
(<span id="iv.i-p53.2"></span>[Ro
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#020)<span id="iv.i-p53.2"></span>.)
Others assign a totally opposite meaning to this metaphor; for they
think that he is called a “Rock,” because he was worn out by age, and
that Sarah is called a *Pit,* because she was barren. But both, in my
opinion, are in the wrong; for it is a simple metaphor, taken from
quarries, and declares that they have descended from Abraham and Sarah,
as stones are cut out of a “rock” and a “pit.” Amidst the ruin of the
nation it was highly necessary that the godly should be supported by
this doctrine and admonition. God had promised that the seed of Abraham
should be “as the stars of heaven,” (<span id="iv.i-p53.3"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)<span id="iv.i-p53.3"></span>,)
and as “the sand of the sea.” (<span id="iv.i-p53.4"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="iv.i-p53.4"></span>.)
This promise had apparently failed amidst that desolation in which they
who were left hardly differed at all from a few clusters when the
vintage was ended.

<span id="iv.i-p54"></span>But since they had already known by
experience how powerful was the strength of God to create a vast people
out of nothing, the Prophet bids them cherish favorable hopes, that they
may not be ungrateful to God; and he addresses his discourse directly to
believers, to whom this was a sore temptation. He does not speak to all,
but to those only who could rely on the promise, that is, to those whom
he calls “followers of righteousness;” for the country abounded with
unbelievers and hypocrites, who had formerly revolted from the practice
of piety; and so much the more laudable was the steadfastness of those
who did not cease to follow what was right. Wherever “righteousness” is
practiced, there God is listened to; and wherever unbelief reigns,
reliance cannot be placed on any promise.  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) Although therefore they boasted that they
were the children of Abraham, yet all were not capable of receiving this
doctrine.

<span id="iv.i-p56"></span>*Ye that seek Jehovah.* He explains the
method of “following righteousness” to consist in “seeking the Lord;”
for they who make an outward shew of “righteousness,” and do not aim at
this end, must have wandered during their whole life. These two things,
therefore, must be joined together; namely, the practice of
righteousness and seeking God.

<span id="iv.i-p57"></span><span id="iv.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p58"></span>**2.** *For I called him alone.* This
application plainly shews what was the design of this exhortation of the
Prophet. It was to encourage the hearts of believers to cherish the hope
of a better condition. He says that he “called him *one* or *alone,”*
not only because he had none along with him, when he was called out of
his country, but because the Lord suffered him to dwell in the land of
Canaan without children up to a worn out old age, so that he had no hope
of having children, especially because Sarah (<span
id="iv.i-p58.1"></span>[Ge 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)<span
id="iv.i-p58.1"></span>) also was barren; and when at length, as a
solace for their childless condition, one son was given to them, not
long afterwards he appeared to be led forth to slaughter. Yet the Lord
increased and enriched him with a great number of children.

<span id="iv.i-p59"></span>How needful this consolation was to the Jews
has been remarked by me a little before, and may be easily learned from
their condition, which history plainly declares to have been wretched
and unhappy. To us also, in the present day, amidst this distracted
condition of the Church, it is highly necessary, that we may not be
discouraged because our number is small, and that we may hope that God
will increase his Church by unexpected methods. We behold a very clear
and striking testimony of this in the blessing by which the Lord
increased, even to extreme old age, the posterity of Abraham, who was
childless and solitary. That promise relates not to the Jews only, but
to other nations; and on this account also he

<span id="iv.i-p60"></span>“was no longer called Abram, but Abraham.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p60.2"></span>[Ge
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005)<span id="iv.i-p60.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p61"></span><span id="iv.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p62"></span>**3.** *Surely Jehovah will comfort Zion.*
The Prophet shews that in the person of Abraham there was exhibited an
example which applies to all ages; for, as the Lord suddenly produced
from one man so numerous an offspring, so he will also people his Church
by wonderful and unknown methods, and not once only, but whenever she
shall be thought to be childless and solitary. In like manner, Paul,
after having spoken of the faith of Abraham and praised his excellence,
applies that doctrine to each of us, that

<span id="iv.i-p63"></span>“he believed in hope against hope, and that
his mind was not driven hither and thither, but that he was fully
persuaded that what God had promised he was able also to perform, though
it appeared to be incredible and at variance with all reason.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p63.2"></span>[Ro
4:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="iv.i-p63.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p64"></span>*He will comfort all her desolations.* This
may be explained to mean, “The Lord will comfort his Church, not only
when she shall be in a flourishing condition, but likewise when she
shall be desolate and reduced to solitude;*“* for she must have been
laid desolate, and her frightful ruins must have brought her to the
verge of destruction, before she felt the aid which is here described.

<span id="iv.i-p65"></span>*And will make her desert like a place of
delights.* The Prophet here alludes to a passage in the writings of
Moses, in which he relates that man was at first placed in “the garden
of Eden,” (<span id="iv.i-p65.1"></span>[Ge
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#015)<span id="iv.i-p65.1"></span>,)
that is, in “a place of delights,” from which he was driven out by his
own fault. (<span id="iv.i-p65.2"></span>[Ge
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024)<span id="iv.i-p65.2"></span>.)
Now we, who have been deprived of that blessing which he bestowed on our
first parent, are exiles throughout the whole world, and are deprived of
that paradise. Accordingly, whenever great calamities happen, and the
order of events is overturned, and everything is thrown into wretched
desolation and ruin, let us know that we are punished for our unbelief
and for our heinous sins; and let us remember that sentence which was
pronounced on our first parent, or rather on all mankind; and that in
every part of life, but especially when we see the condition of the
Church ruined and overturned. The earth, which otherwise would abound in
blessings of every kind, has been reduced to solitude through our fault;
and the Church, which would flourish everywhere, has been ruined and
laid desolate.

<span id="iv.i-p66"></span>*Joy and gladness.* He means that the change
shall be so great that the Church will no longer groan or complain; for,
so long as the Church was oppressed by a harsh captivity, nothing could
be heard in her but mouming and lamentation. Now restored, she shall
rejoice and render thanksgiving to God. Thus we are also exhorted to
gratitude, that we may burst out into praise and thanksgiving to God,
when we have had experience of his goodness.

<span id="iv.i-p67"></span><span id="iv.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p68"></span>**4.** *Attend to me, my people.* There are
good reasons why the Lord so frequently demands that he shall be heard.
We know by experience how slow we are to hear him, especially in
adversity; and even when we would have great need of consolation, we
reject it by our impatience, and faint. Each of us, therefore, the sorer
are the afflictions which press upon him, ought to endeavor more
earnestly to enlarge his heart, and in this way to arouse himself, and
to shake off his slothfulness, that he may receive consolation. What is
here demanded is *attention,* to sustain our hearts by patience, till
the season of grace be fully come.

<span id="iv.i-p69"></span>*For the law shall go forth from me.* The
meaning is, that the Lord will again reign, and will arouse his Church
to call on his name. Though the word *Law* is equivalent to the edict
which God shall order to be proclaimed, when he shall be pleased to
gather his Church, yet at the same time he describes his manner of
reigning; namely, by his “Law” and byhis doctrine. Hence we see that
wherever doctrine is rejected, God’s government is not found, that is,
is not recognised by men. By *judgment* he means the order and
administration of government, by which he shall restore his kingdom.

<span id="iv.i-p70"></span>*For a light of the peoples,* He says that
this will be “for a light of the peoples,” because, when God begins to
reign, miserable men  <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) are rescued
from darkness and enlightened by the doctrine of the word.

<span id="iv.i-p72"></span>*I will reveal.* This vero <span
id="iv.i-p72.1"></span>ארגיע *(argiang)* is variously expounded by
commentators, because <span id="iv.i-p72.2"></span>רגע (*ragang*) has
various significations. Sometimes it signifies to “cut” and “open,” and
sometimes “to be at rest.” Some therefore explain it, “I will cause to
rest,” that is, “I will establish;” and that meaning is not
inappropriate. Most of the Jewish writers explain it differently, but I
shall not relate their crooked and harsh interpretations. I rather
approve of this translation, “I will manifest judgment,” or, “I will
cause judgment to break forth,” or, which means the same thing, “I will
reveal;” because I think that it agrees better with the former clause.
Repetitions, we know, are very customary among the Hebrew writers.
Although, therefore, he employs different words, still the meaning is
the same. Having formerly said that “the law shall go forth from him,”
he now says that “he will reveal judgment.”

<span id="iv.i-p73"></span><span id="iv.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p74"></span>**5.** *My righteousness is near.* He
confirms the former doctrine. The “righteousness” of the Lord has
relation to men, who know by experience that he is “righteous.” While
the people were oppressed by cruel bondage, they knew, indeed, that they
were justly punished for their sins; but they might wonder that they
were so much forsaken, because the worship of God ceased, and his name
was blasphemed by wicked men, who pursued their wicked career without
punishment. In order, therefore, to bring them some consolation, he
promises that God will speedily assist them, so that all shall
acknowledge that he is faithful and just. By the word “righteous” the
Prophet does not mean that he renders to every one a “righteous” reward,
but that he yields the best protection, and dispenses the largest
kindness to his people, that he faithfully performs his promises to all
believers, when he delivers them and does not suffer them to be finally
overwhelmed.

<span id="iv.i-p75"></span>This appears more clearly from the following
clause, in which, for the purpose of explanation, he adds, *My salvation
hath gone forth; for* the “righteousness” of God shone brightly in the
deliverance of the people. Now, the captivity in which the Jews were
held in Babylon was a kind of death, in consequence of which that
deliverance is here called “Salvation.”

<span id="iv.i-p76"></span>*My arms shall judge the peoples.* By “arms”
he means the wide exercise of his power. That figure of speech which
describes God under forms of expression drawn from the human frame
occurs frequently in Scripture. Because God’s government appeared to be
confined within narrow limits, or rather was not at all visible, on this
account he mentions *arms,* by which he means that he will spread his
kingdom far and wide.

<span id="iv.i-p77"></span><span id="iv.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p78"></span>**6.** *Lift up your eyes toward heaven.*
When we see so great changes in the world, we are apt to think that the
Church comes within the influence of the sanhe violent motion; and
therefore we need to have our minds elevated above the ordinary course
of nature; otherwise, the salvation of the Church will appear to hang on
a thread, and to be carried hither and thither by the billows and
tempests. Yet, we may see both in heaven and in earth how wisely God
regulates all things, with what fatherly kindness he upholds and defends
his workmanship and the frame of the world, and with what equity he
provides for all his creatures. But in a remarkable manner he deigns to
watch over his Church, as he has separated her from the ordinary rank.

<span id="iv.i-p79"></span>*And look upon the earth beneath.* Both of
the views now stated are here embraced by the Prophet; for he bids
believers turn their eyes upwards and downwards, so as to perceive both
in heaven and in earth the wonderful providence of God, by which he so
beautifully preserves the order and harmony which he at first
established. But he adds that, though heaven and earth hasten to decay,
it is impossible that the Church shall fail, the stability of which is
founded on God; as if he had said, “A thousand times rather shall leaven
mingle with the earth than the promise on which your salvation rests
shall fail of its accomplishment.”-

<span id="iv.i-p80"></span>*My salvation shall endure for ever.* First
of all, he mentions “salvation,” and next he speaks of “righteousness,”
on which it rests as on a solid foundation. Whenever, therefore, dangers
shall press upon us on every hand, let us learn to betake ourselves to
this place of refuge. And with this sentiment agree the words of the
Psalmist,

<span id="iv.i-p81"></span>“The heavens shall wax old and vanish away;
but thou, Lord, art always the same, and thy years are not changed.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p81.2"></span>[Ps.
102:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027)<span id="iv.i-p81.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.i-p82"></span>Both passages remind us that the grace of
God, which he displays in the preservation of his Church, surpasses all
his other works. Everything that is contained in heaven and earth is
frail and fading; but God’s salvation, by which he guards the Church, is
eternal, and therefore cannot be liable to these dangers.

<span id="iv.i-p83"></span><span id="iv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p84"></span>**7.** *Hearken to me.* Because wicked men,
when they enjoy prosperity, laugh at our faith, and ridicule our
distresses and afflictions, on this account the Prophet exhorts
believers to patience, that they may not dread their reproaches or be
dismayed by their slanders. The reason assigned is, that their
prosperity shall not be of long duration. Whatever may be their insolent
boasting, they are already pronounced (verse 8) to be the food of
*moths* and *worms;* while God holds in his hand the salvation of
believers, from which they appear to be thrown to the greatest possible
distance. Here we ought again to observe the repetition of the word
*Hearken.* This is now the third time that the Lord demands a “hearing;”
because, when we tremble with anxiety on account of our distresses, it
is with the greatest difficulty that we rely on his promises, and
therefore we need to be often roused and stimulated, till we have
conquered every difficulty.

<span id="iv.i-p85"></span>*Ye that know righteousness,* Here he does
not address unbelievers, but those who “know righteousness;” because,
though they do not intentionally reject the word of God, yet they often
shut the door against his “righteousness,” so that it does not reach
them, when, under the influence of adversity, they shut their ears and
almost despair. In order therefore that they may receive the promises,
and that they may admit consolation, the Prophet stirs up and arouses
them.

<span id="iv.i-p86"></span>*A people in whose heart is my law.* We must
attend to the train of thought. First, he describes what kind of people
the Lord wishes to have, namely, “those who know righteousness;” and
next he explains what is the nature of this knowledge, that is, when the
people have “the law” fixed and deeply rooted in their hearts. Without
the word of the Lord there call be no “righteousness.” No laws of men,
however well framed, will lead us to true righteousness, of which they
may indeed give us a feeble idea, but which they never can justly
describe. At the same time, he shews in what manner we ought to make
progress in the law of the Lord; namely, by embracing it with the heart;
for the seat of the law is not in the brain, but in the heart, that,
being imbued with heavenly doctrine, we may be altogether renewed.

<span id="iv.i-p87"></span><span id="iv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p88"></span>**8.** *But my righteousness shall
continually endure.* Because the believing servants of God must endure
many reproaches and slanders from the enemies of the word, the Prophet
exhorts and encourages them to bear it courageously. It frequently
happens that we are more deeply moved by the contumely and insults of
men than by fire and sword; but we ought to reckon it praise and glory
to be the object of their contempt and abhorrence. True valor springs
from this consideration, that, although the world reject us as “filth
and offscourings,” (<span id="iv.i-p88.1"></span>[1Co
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#013)<span id="iv.i-p88.1"></span>,)
God holds us in estimation; because we maintain the same cause with
himself. Let us with Moses, therefore, “prefer the reproach of Christ to
the treasures of the Egyptians.” (<span id="iv.i-p88.2"></span>[Heb
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#026)<span id="iv.i-p88.2"></span>.)
Let us rejoice with the Apostles, who

<span id="iv.i-p89"></span>“departed from the council glad and joyful,
because they were accounted worthy to suffer shame for the name of
Jesus.” (<span id="iv.i-p89.1"></span>[Ac
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#041)<span id="iv.i-p89.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p90"></span>*And my salvation for ever and ever.* Because
the death of wicked men would yield to us small consolation, if we were
not saved, he shews what will be our condition, namely, that we shall
never be left destitute of “God’s righteousness and salvation.” But the
comparison may appear to be inappropriate, when he contrasts the
destruction of the wicked with his righteousness. Far more clearly and
suitably it might have been thus expressed: “though the reprobate
indulge in mirth, yet they shall speedily perish; but believers, though
they appear to be dead, shall live.” Again, because he makes no mention
of us, and commends only the eternity of God’s righteousness, it may be
objected, that to us who are almost overwhelmed this is of no avail. But
by these words the Prophet instructs us, that in our afflictions we
ought to seek consolation from the thought, that our health and
salvation are, as it were, shut up in God; for, so long as men trust or
rely on themselves, they cannot cherish any good hope that does not
speedily decay; and therefore we ought to turn our hearts to God, whose
“mercy endureth from everlasting to everlasting on them that fear him,”
as David says, “and his righteousness to children’s children.” (<span
id="iv.i-p90.1"></span>[Ps 103:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#017)<span
id="iv.i-p90.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p91"></span>Because salvation is founded on the goodness
of God, Isaiah reminds us of it, that men may be reduced to nothing, and
that confidence may be placed in God alone. The meaning may be thus
summed up, “*Salvation* is in God, that by it he may preserve, not
himself, but us; *righteousness* is in God, that he may display it for
our defense and preservation.” Accordingly, from the eternity of God’s
“salvation and righteousness” we ought to infer that the servants of God
cannot possibly perish; which agrees with the passage quoted a little
before from David,

<span id="iv.i-p92"></span>“Thou art the same, and thy years shall not
fail. The children of thy servants shall dwell, and their posterity
shall be established for ever.” (<span id="iv.i-p92.1"></span>[Ps.
102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#028)<span id="iv.i-p92.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p93"></span>Thus we see how he applies this eternity to
the children of God, who do not subsist in themselves, but in God, and
have the foundation of their salvation in him.

<span id="iv.i-p94"></span><span id="iv.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p95"></span>**9.** *Awake, awake.* Here the Prophet
instructs us, that, when God cheers us by his promises, we ought also to
pray earnestly that he would perform what he has promised. He does not
comfort us in order to render us slothful, but that we may be inflamed
with a stronger desire to pray, and may continually exercise our faith.
The Prophet speaks according to our feelings; for we think that God is
asleep, so long as he does not come to the relief of our wants; and the
Lord indulges us so far as to permit us to speak and pray according to
the feeling of our weakness. Believers therefore entreat the Lord to
“awake,” not that they imagine him to be idle or asleep in heaven;
 <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) but, on the contrary, they confess
their own sluggishness and ignorance, in not being able to form any
conception of God, so long as they are not awaro of receiving his
assistance. But yet, though the flesh imagine that he is asleep, or that
he disregards our calamities, faith rises higher and lays hold on his
eternal power.

<span id="iv.i-p97"></span>*Put on strength, O arm of Jehovah.* He is
said to “awake” and “put on strength,” when he exhibits testimonies of
his power, because otherwise we think that he is idle or asleep.
Meanwhile, the Prophet, by addressing the arm of God which was
concealed, holds it out to the view of believers as actually present,
that they may be convinced that there is no other reason why they are so
bitterly and painfully afflicted by their enemies than because God has
withdrawn his aid. The cause of the delay has been already shewn, that
they had estranged themselves from God.

<span id="iv.i-p98"></span>*In ancient days.* By the term “ancient days”
he shews that we ought to bear in remembrance all that the Lord did long
ago for the salvation of his people. Though he appears to pause and to
take no more care about us, still he is the same God who formerly
governed his Church; and therefore he can never forsake or abandon those
whom he takes under his protection.

<span id="iv.i-p99"></span>*In ages long ago past.* This repetition
tells us still more clearly, that we ought to consider not only those
things which have happened lately, but those which happened long ago;
for we ought to stretch our minds even to the most remote ages, that
they may rise above temptations, which otherwise might easily overwhelm
us.

<span id="iv.i-p100"></span>*Art thou not it that crushed the proud
one?*  <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) The numerous testimonies of
grace which God had displayed in various ages are here collected by the
Prophet, so that, if a few are not enough, the vast number of them may
altogether confirm the faith of the Church. But, since it would be too
tedious to draw up an entire catalogue, he brings forward that singular
and most remarkable of all such events, namely, that the people were
once delivered from Egypt in a miraculous manner, for I have no doubt
that by *Rahab*  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) he means proud and
cruel Egypt; as it is also said,

<span id="iv.i-p103"></span>“I will mention Rahab and Babylon among my
friends.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p103.2"></span>[Ps
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)<span id="iv.i-p103.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p104"></span>In like manner Ezekiel calls the king of
Egypt “a Dragon.”

<span id="iv.i-p105"></span>“Behold, I am against thee,O Pharaoh, king
of Egypt, the great dragon, who dwellest in the midst of thy rivers.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p105.2"></span>[Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)<span id="iv.i-p105.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p106"></span>It is sufficiently evident, and is
universally admitted, that the Prophet here calls to remembrance the
miraculous deliverance of the people from Egypt. “If at that time the
pride of Egypt was tamed and subdued, if the dragon was put to flight,
why should we not hope for the same thing?”

<span id="iv.i-p107"></span>By putting the question, if it be the same
arm, he argues from the nature of God; for this could not be affirmed
respecting the “arm” of man, whose strength, though it be great, is
diminished and fails through time? Milo, who had been very strong, when
he became old and looked at his arms, groaned because the strength which
he possessed at an earlier period had now left him. But it is not so
with God, whose strength no lapse of time can diminish. These words
ought to be read <span id="iv.i-p107.1"></span>ἐμφατικῶς emphatically,
“Art thou not it?“ For he shews that the Lord is the same as he formerly
was, because he remains unchangeable.

<span id="iv.i-p108"></span><span id="iv.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p109"></span>**10.** *Which dried up the sea.* Though
Isaiah does not relate all the miracles which God performed when he
brought out his people from the bondage of Egypt, yet he intended to
include in a few words all that are related by Moses, that the Jews,
having been briefly addressed, might consider the various ways in which
the Lord had demonstrated his power. The drying up of the Red Sea is
mentioned, not only on account of the extraordinary excellence of the
miracle, but because the numerous miracles which preceeded it were
directed to this end, that the people, rescued from unjust violence and
tyranny, might pass into the promised land. Accordingly, the Prophet
expressly mentions that *a way was opened up for the redeemed.* From
this example we ought to consider what God will be to us, so as to draw
this conclusion, that in future God will always be like himself, as is
evident from the context.

<span id="iv.i-p110"></span><span id="iv.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p111"></span>**11** *Therefore the redeemed by Jehovah
shall return.* He now describes more plainly what he had briefly
remarked; for, after having related the magnificent works of God, by
which he formerly displayed his power in Egypt, in order to deliver his
people, he concludes that neither the sea, nor the lofty rocks, nor the
whirlpools, nor even hell itself, can prevent him from leading forth his
people out of Babylon. And in order to confirm it more fully, and to
apply that example, he calls them “redeemed,” that they may know that,
when God calls himself the deliverer of his people, this belongs to
them, and that they may not doubt that, in delivering them, he will
produce such an example as had been already exhibited; for the reason is
the same.

<span id="iv.i-p112"></span>*Shall come to Zion.* Namely, to that place
where he wished that men should call on his name, that the temple may be
rebuilt and the pure worship of God restored; for, since the Jews,
during the Babylonish captivity, ought to expect the same aid as had
been obtained by their fathers, because God was in like manner the
Redeemer of the children also, they were superior to the fathers in one
respect, that God had at that time chosen Mount Zion, in which he had
promised that his rest would be eternal. (<span
id="iv.i-p112.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="iv.i-p112.1"></span>.)
But since the work of God, which Isaiah promises, was worthy of
admiration, on this account, he exhorts the people to praise and
thanksgiving.

<span id="iv.i-p113"></span>*With a song.* <span
id="iv.i-p113.1"></span>רנה *(rinnah)* may indeed be taken simply for
“rejoicing;” but, as it frequently denotes the praise which is rendered
to God when we acknowledge his benefits, I prefer to take it in that
sense in this passage.  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) The meaning
is, that there will be a great and unexpected change, so that they shall
have very abundant ground of joy and thanksgiving. When he says that
*joy shall be on their head,* he alludes to the chaplets of flowers with
which they were wont to adorn themselves at banquets. He adds that “they
shall obtain joy,” which denotes that their enjoyment shall be solid and
lasting. Lastly, for the purpose of amplification, he adds that all
sorrow shall be banished, that they may not dread what frequently
happens, that *joy,* by a sudden change, shall give place to mourning.
(<span id="iv.i-p114.2"></span>[Pr
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#013)<span id="iv.i-p114.2"></span>.)
Yet the Prophet instructs them, though they groan and are sorrowful, to
wait patiently for that issue which he promises.

<span id="iv.i-p115"></span><span id="iv.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p116"></span>**12.** *I, I am.* Here the Lord not only
promises grace and salvation to the Jews, but remonstrates with them for
refusing to believe him, and for valuing his power less than they ought.
It is exceedingly base to tremble at the threatenings of men to such a
degree as to care nothing about God’s assistance; for he displays his
power for this purpose, that he may at least fortify; us against every
attack. Accordingly, by an excessive fear of men we betray contempt of
God.

<span id="iv.i-p117"></span>Hence it is evident how sinful it is to be
agitated by the terrors of men, when God calls us to repose. And indeed
it is amazing ingratitude in men, who, when they hear that God is on
their side, derive no hope from his magnificent promises, so as to
venture boldly to exclaim, “If God be for us, who can be against us?”
(<span id="iv.i-p117.1"></span>[Ro
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031)<span id="iv.i-p117.1"></span>.)
The consequence is, that when dangers arise, they are terrified and
confounded, and attribute far more to the power of mortal man in
attacking than to the power of God in defending. Justly, therefore, does
he upbraid the Jews with not fortifying themselves by these promises,
and with not rendering themselves invincible against every danger; for
God is treated with the highest dishonor when we doubt his truth, that
is, when we are so completely overcome by human terrors that we cannot
rest on his promises.

<span id="iv.i-p118"></span>The repetition, *I, I,* is highly emphatic.
He who promises consolation is the God of truth, against whom neither
the strength nor the contrivances of men will be of any avail. When thou
distrustest him, it follows that thou dost not consider who he is.

<span id="iv.i-p119"></span>*That thou shoudest be afraid of a man.* He
describes how frail, fading, transitory: and unsubstantial is the
condition of men, in order to exhibit more fully their criminal
stupidity in preferring a shadow and smoke to God. He shews that men, so
long as they are mindful of God, cannot be struck down by fear.
Consequently, when we are stunned by dangers that assail us, it follows
that we have forgotten God; and therefore he adds, —

<span id="iv.i-p120"></span><span id="iv.i-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p121"></span>**13.** *And hast forgotten Jehovah thy
Maker.* It is not enough to imagine that there is some God, but we ought
to acknowledge and embrace him as ours. When he calls him “Maker,” this
must not be understood to refer to universal creation, but to spiritual
regeneration, as we have already explained under other passages. In this
sense Paul calls us (<span id="iv.i-p121.1"></span>τὸ ποίημα) “the
workmanship of God,” (<span id="iv.i-p121.2"></span>[Eph
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#010)<span id="iv.i-p121.2"></span>,)
because he hath created us to every good work. Thus, if we remember our
creation and adoption, these beginnings may encourage us to hope for
continued progress, that we may not be ungrateful to God, when he has
proved his veracity by undoubted experience.

<span id="iv.i-p122"></span>*Who hath stretched out the heavens and
founded the earth.* To the special kindness which God had exercised
towards his people he likewise adds his boundless power which he
contrasts with the weakness of men, whom he formerly compared to
withered grass. (<span id="iv.i-p122.1"></span>[Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)<span id="iv.i-p122.1"></span>.)
He demonstrates that power by his works, so that they who do not
perceive it must be exceedingly stupid; for we cannot tum our eyes in
any direction without perceiving very abundant testimonies of divine
goodness and power, which, however, are briefly described by a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole, when he says that it is
“He who stretched out the heavens and founded the earth.” It is
therefore the greatest folly and indolence to forget him, for so
numerous are the signs and testimonies which recall him to the
remembrance of men.

<span id="iv.i-p123"></span>*And hast dreaded continually.* He follows
out the same comparison. “What are men,” says he, “that thou shouldst
dread them, if thou compare them to God, who promises thee his
assistance?” Assuredly, God is grievously blasphemed, if we refuse to
believe that he is more powerful to preserve than enemies are to destroy
us; and therefore the Lord bids us consider who and what he is, how vast
and extensive is his power, that we may not dread the fury of a mortal
man, who vanishes like a whirlwind or like smoke.

<span id="iv.i-p124"></span><span id="iv.i-p124.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p125"></span>**14.** *The exile hasteneth to be loosed.*
This verse is expounded in various ways; for some think that it refers
to Cyrus, and take the word, <span id="iv.i-p125.1"></span>צעה *(tzoeh)*
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) in a transitive sense, and explain
it to mean, “Causing to migrate.”  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28)
But it is more customary to interpret it as meaning one who is
imprisoned and oppressed, or an exile who wanders about without any
settled abode. Now, the Jews were not only exiles but captives, so that
they were not at liberty to return to their native land; and therefore I
explain it as referring to the Jews.

<span id="iv.i-p128"></span>But still there are two senses in which it
may be understood, either that the Prophet reproves their excessive
haste, in impatiently desiring to return, or that the Prophet means that
their return to their native country is immediately at hand, that they
may not sink under the discouragement of long delay; as if he had said,
that the time when they must prepare for departure will speedily arrive.
The second of these expositions has been more generally approved; and I
adopt it the more readily, because it agrees best with the context.

<span id="iv.i-p129"></span>But it may appear strange that he should say
that the people will quickly return, since their captivity was of long
duration. Yet with good reason does God say that that event will come
quickly which he delays till a fit season; for, although to us it may
appear to be long, yet, being appropriate and suitable, the time is
short. And indeed it was a short time, if we look at the condition of
that monarchy, which was so vast and strong that it appeared as if it
could never be destroyed. Thus, what appears to be long in the promises
of God will appear to be short, provided that we do not refuse to lift
up our eyes to heaven. This meaning is confirmed by what immediately
follows.

<span id="iv.i-p130"></span>*That he may not die in a pit.* Such then is
God’s haste to come early to deliver his people; that they may come
forth safely out of the dungeon. The Lord does not promise to his people
some sudden assistance, that he may only bring them out of prison, but
also that, after having been delivered, they may be the objects of his
kindness; for he promises everything necessary for their food and
support, that they may be convinced that God will always take care of
them; and he is wont not only to assist his people for a moment, but to
remain with them continually.

<span id="iv.i-p131"></span><span id="iv.i-p131.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p132"></span>**15.** *And I am Jehovah thy God.* Again
the Lord declares his power; for so great is the unbelief and
sluggishness of men, that, although it is frequently declared, yet the
very smallest temptation shews that they are not fully convinced of it.
They quickly fall back upon themselves, when they are hard pressed by
afflictions; and when they hear that anything is in the power of God,
they do not think that it belongs to them.

<span id="iv.i-p133"></span>*Who divide the sea.* He does not speak in
general terms, but brings forward the instance which he had often
mentioned before; for, by once redeeming the fathers, he held out to
posterity the hope of eternal salvation. Justly, therefore, does he
exclaim that he is the same God who long ago “divided the sea;” and next
he magnifies the miracle by saying that its roaring billows were stilled
at his command. (<span id="iv.i-p133.1"></span>[Ex
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)<span id="iv.i-p133.1"></span>.)
We ought to know, therefore, that there are no raging billows which God
cannot allay and calm in order to deliver his Church. “It is he who,” by
his power, “stills the sea and makes it calm,” (<span
id="iv.i-p133.2"></span>[Job
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#012)<span id="iv.i-p133.2"></span>,)
though it rage furiously; and he likewise drives and swells its waves,
when he thinks fit; though literally, as I have remarked, the Prophet
alludes to the history of the deliverance from Egypt.  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29)

<span id="iv.i-p135"></span>*Jehovah of hosts.* The Lord is adorned with
this title, that we may know how extensive is his power; and he exhibits
that power as often as he is pleased to render assistance to his Church.

<span id="iv.i-p136"></span><span id="iv.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p137"></span>**16.** *And I have put my words in thy
mouth.* He again retums to the doctrine which he had formerly stated,
namely, that the Lord comforts his Church: “I, I am he that comforteth
you,” (ver. 12.) So he now says that he put into the mouth of the
prophets what they should say. Hence we may infer that these words do
not proceed from men, who often prove false, but from “God, who cannot
lie.” (<span id="iv.i-p137.1"></span>Titus 1:2.) The Lord speaks to all
the prophets, first to Isaiah, and then to the rest in their order; but
at last we must come to Christ. These things must not be limited either
to Isaiah or to Christ, but must be extended to all the prophets. The
Lord wishes that believers should hear the consolation from the
prophets, as if he were present and addressed them, and even declares
that he speaks openly by their mouth.

<span id="iv.i-p138"></span>Hence also we ought to conclude that none
ought to come forward to comfort the Church but they who speak from the
mouth of the Lord; for they who alter their own dreams, though they take
shelter under the name of God, ought to be rejected. But; we must
understand the Prophet’s meaning; for, seeing that he shows that the
consciences of men always tremble, till the Lord confirm them, he
instructs us to abide by this principle, that it is God who speaks by
the prophets; for otherwise consciences will always remain in doubt and
uncertainty. Yet the mode of expression is highly emphatic, when he
repeats the commandments of God, by which he was encouraged to the
execution of his office.

<span id="iv.i-p139"></span>*And in the shadow of my hand.* Though he
had already said this, yet the repetition is not superfluous, that we
may fully believe that God will always assist his ministers, so that,
relying on his immediate aid, they may be raised by him above all
obstructions. Now, in order to being covered with that shadow of the
Lord, two things are necessary; first, that they are certain that what
they utter is the word of God, and secondly, that they do so by God’s
command. They who rashly put themselves forward may indeed boast of the
name of God, but in vain; for when they come to fight in earnest, they
will faint. And if we have the testimony of conscience, we have no
reason for entertaining doubts as to God’s protection and aid, by which
he will enable us to gain the victory. Next comes the object of the
embassy.

<span id="iv.i-p140"></span>*That I may plant the heavens;* that is,
that I may restore everything to its proper order. There are, indeed,
various interpretations of these words; but the true meaning appears to
me to be this, that heaven and earth are said to be restored by the
doctrine of salvation; because “in Christ,” as Paul says, “are collected
all things that are either in heaven or in earth.” (<span
id="iv.i-p140.1"></span>[Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span
id="iv.i-p140.1"></span>.) Since the fall of the first man we see
nothing but frightful confusion, which troubles even the dumb creatures,
and makes them suffer, in some respects, the punishment of our sins;
and, consequently, that confusion cannot be repaired but by Christ.
Since therefore the whole face of the world is disfigured by frightful
desolation, there are good grounds for saying that godly teachers
renovate the world, as if God formed heaven and earth anew by their
hand. And hence it is evident how great is the heinousness of our guilt,
which has been followed by such dreadful confusion in the nature of
things. Thus, “the heavens” are said to be “planted and the earth to be
founded,” when the Lord establishes his Church by the word; and he does
this by the agency of ministers, whom he directs by his Spirit, and
protects against hidden enemies and various dangers, that they may
effectually accomplish what he has enjoined.

<span id="iv.i-p141"></span>*That I may say to Zion, Thou art my
people.* At length he shews that this aims at something higher than the
visible form of the world, which shall quickly perish; namely, to excite
and nourish in the hearts of believers the hope of a heavenly life. The
true stability of the Church, the restoration of the world, consists in
this, that the elect be gathered into the unity of faith, so that, with
one consent, all may lift their hearts to God, who also invites them
sweetly and gently by these words, “I am thy God.” And hence we see how
highly God values the salvation of the Church, since he not only prefers
it to the whole world, but even shews that the stability of the world
depends upon it. We must likewise observe what is the word which the
Lord enjoins to be proclaimed; for it not only lays down a rule of life,
but also gives a testimony of our adoption, in which our salvation
chiefly consists.

<span id="iv.i-p142"></span><span id="iv.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p143"></span>**17.** *Awake, awake.* The Church was about
to endure grievous calamities, and therefore he fortifies her by
consolation, and meets a doubt which might arise, that the Jews, being
now oppressed by tyrants, saw no fulfillment of these promises. The
meaning therefore is, that the Church, though afflicted and tossed in
various ways, will nevertheless be set up again, so as to regain her
full vigor. By the word “Awake” he recalls her, as it were, from death
and the grave; as if he had said, that no ruins shall be so dismal, no
desolations shall be so horrible, as to be capable of hindering God from
effecting this restoration. And this consolation was highly necessary;
for when grief seizes our hearts, we think that the promises do not at
all belong to us; and therefore we ought frequently to call to
remembrance, and to place constantly before our eyes, that it is God who
speaks, and who addresses men who are not in a prosperous or flourishing
condition, but fallen and dead, and whom notwithstanding he can raise up
and uphold by his word; for this doctrine of salvation is intended not
for those who retain their original condition, but for those who are
dead and ruined.

<span id="iv.i-p144"></span>*Who hast drunk from the hand of Jehovah the
cup of his wrath.* There are two senses in which the term, “cup of
wrath,” may be understood; for sometimes the Lord is said to put into
our hands a “cup of wrath,” when he strikes us with some kind of
giddiness, or deranges our intellect; as we see that affliction
sometimes takes away men’s understanding; but sometimes it is used in a
simpler sense, to denote the sharp and heavy punishments by which the
Lord severely chastises his people. This is evidently the meaning in
which it must be taken here, as appears from the addition of the pronoun
*His.* Nor is this inconsistent with what he says, that the Church was
stupified and drunk; for he shews that this happened in consequence of
the Lord having severely chastised her. It is an ordinary metaphor by
which the chastisement which God inflicts on his people is called a
“potion,”  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) or a certain measure
which he assigns to each. But whenever it relates to the elect, this
term “cup” serves to express the moderation of the divine judgment; that
the Lord, though he punish his people severely, still observes a limit.
 <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31)

<span id="iv.i-p147"></span>*Pressing out the dregs of the cup of
distress* (or *of trembling.)* I consider the word <span
id="iv.i-p147.1"></span>תרעלה *(targnelah)* to denote “anguish” or
“trembling,” by which men are nearly struck dead, when they are weighed
down by heavy calamities. Such persons may be called “drunk,” as having
exhausted all that is in the cup, because nothing can be added to their
affliction and distress.

<span id="iv.i-p148"></span>This is also denoted by another term,
“pressing out.” The Church is here reminded that all the evils which
befall her proceed from no other source than from the hand of God, that
she may not think that they happen to her by chance, or that she is
unjustly afflicted. The object which the Prophet has in view is, that
the people may know that they are justly punished for their sins. No one
can rise up till he first acknowledge that he has fallen, or be
delivered from misery till he perceive that it is by his own fault that
he is miserable. In short, there can be no room for consolations till
they have been preceded by the doctrine of repentance.

<span id="iv.i-p149"></span>*Dregs,* therefore, must not here be
understood in the same sense as in <span id="iv.i-p149.1"></span>[Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015)<span id="iv.i-p149.1"></span>,
where the reprobate are spoken of, whom the Lord chokes and kills by his
cup, but as denoting complete and righteous punishment, to which the
Lord has been pleased to assign a limit. Thus, when the Lord has
inflicted on us such punishment as he thought fit, and puts an end to
our afflictions, he declares that the “dregs” are exhausted; as we have
seen before at the fortieth chapter.  <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32)

<span id="iv.i-p151"></span><span id="iv.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p152"></span>**18.** *There is no one to guide her.* He
describes the sorest calamity of the Church; for the heaviest and sorest
of all undoubtedly is, that she receives no sympathy or consolation from
her own children. This accumulated misery is described by him, in order
that, though her condition be desperate, she may still expect
consolation from God, who will never disappoint his servants, though
they be sunk to the depth of hell. Although the Church has been forsaken
by men, and even by those whom she nourished in her bosom and carried in
her arms, yet she shall receive assistance from God. No affliction more
severe can befall a mother than to be deserted by her children, who
ought in their turn to have treated her with kindness. Such ingratitude
and want of natural affection is certainly much liarder to bear than the
violent and unbridled cruelty of enemies; for why does she give birth to
children, and why does she bring them up, but in expectation of being
supported by them in return? Since her children do not perform their
duty, what remains but that she shall think that to have born and reared
them has been of no advantage to her? Although therefore the Church has
performed the duty of a mother, and has brought up her children to the
age of maturity, yet the Prophet declares that she must not expect any
assistance or consolation from ungrateful persons.

<span id="iv.i-p153"></span>Yet his discourse conveys something more,
and pronounces those children who have rendered no assistance to their
mother to be bastards and reprobates, with the view of inducing her to
bear the loss of them more patiently. It was sad and distressing for the
Church to be deprived of all her offspring, and to be reduced to
childlessness; though this has sometimes happened. But the Prophet
reminds the mother that the children do not deserve that she should
mourn for them, and that, on the contrary, she ought to desire
additional offspring, as it is said by the Psalmist,

<span id="iv.i-p154"></span>“The people that shall be created shall
praise the Lord.” (<span id="iv.i-p154.1"></span>[Ps
103:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#018)<span id="iv.i-p154.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p155"></span>What is here described by the Prophet is
entirely applicable to our own age; for many boast of being the children
of the Church; but where is the man that cares about his mother’s
distresses? Who is grieved for her ruin? Who is moved so deeply as to
put his shoulders to her support? How many betray her, and, under
presence of this title, persecute her more cruelly than open and avowed
enemies? Accordingly, after all her calamities this is added as the
copestone of her miseries. Moreover, they who wish to be regarded as
holding the first rank in the Church, and who not only boast of being
children, but vaunt of being called fathers, treacherously desert her
when she implores their aid. We need not wonder, therefore, if God shall
drive them out, in order to make way for the increase of his Church by
lawful and dutiful children.  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33)

<span id="iv.i-p157"></span><span id="iv.i-p157.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p158"></span>**19.** *These two things have happened to
thee.* Nearly the same thing was already asserted concerning Babylon,

<span id="iv.i-p159"></span>“These two things shall befall thee suddenly
in one day, childlessness and widowhood.” (<span
id="iv.i-p159.1"></span>[Isa 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009)<span
id="iv.i-p159.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p160"></span>But here Isaiah promises to the Church that
there shall eventually be a different issue; for the Lord will rescue
her from the deepest abyss. He threatens extreme wretchedness, that
believers may gird themselves for patience, and not cease to send
upwards prayers and supplications from the depth of their distresses.
The general meaning is, that the Church shall be burdened with
afflictions of every kind, so that she shall appear to be on the brink
of utter ruin; because from without she shall endure very heavy
calamities, and from within shall obtain no aid or sympathy from her own
children. These are two very sore evils which the Prophet relates. But
it appears as if the division were not quite appropriate; for, after
having related one evil, that there is none *to bewail her,* he
enumerates four kinds —

<span id="iv.i-p161"></span>*Desolation and destruction, and the sword
and famine.* Some explain it to mean that the Church is visited by
famine within, and harassed by enemies without. But I interpret it
differently, as I have already hinted; for it is very customary among
Hebrew writers to put a question, when they wish absolutely to deny
anything; and among them it is elegant, though in Greek or Latin authors
it would be ungraceful. Isaiah therefore describes “two evils,” one
external, for both by the devastations of “war” and by “famine” they
will be brought to the verge of “destruction” and “desolation,” which he
describes by these four classes; and another internal, because she is
deprived of consolation, and “there is none to bewail her.” By putting
the question, “Who shall bewail her?” he affirms that she shall have no
consolation; and this verse agrees with the former, in which we have
already explained the design which the Prophet has in view, in
describing this highly calamitous and wretched condition of the Church.

<span id="iv.i-p162"></span><span id="iv.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p163"></span>**20.** *Thy sons have fainted.* He
describes more fully the lamentable and wretched condition of the
Church, when he says that her children he prostrate. A mother cannot be
visited with any grief more bitter than to have her children slain
before her eyes, and not one or two of them, but so great a number as to
fill the roads with the slaughter.

<span id="iv.i-p164"></span>*As a wild bull in a net.* The metaphor is
taken from bears or other savage animals, by which he means that even
the strongest of them have, as it were, been caught in snares.

<span id="iv.i-p165"></span>*Full of the indignation of Jehovah.* By
this expression he distinctly states that none of these events are
accidental, lest they should suppose that any of them has happened by
chance, or lest they should accuse the Lord of cruelty for having
punished them severely; because his judgment is just and righteous. This
is what he means, when he says that this punishment has proceeded from
*the rebuke* of the Lord. Yet we must bear in mind his object which I
have already mentioned, that believers ought not to throw away the hope
of grace, though innumerable calamities prompt and urge them to despair.

<span id="iv.i-p166"></span><span id="iv.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p167"></span>**21.** *Therefore now hear this.* He now
shews more plainly the reason why he spoke of the calamities of the
Church. It was, that believers might be fully persuaded that they would
obtain consolation from God, though they were reduced to the extremity
of distress. But why does he call the Church *wretched,* since nothing
is more happy than to be God’s people, and that happiness cannot be
taken away by any tribulations?; Not without cause is it said,

<span id="iv.i-p168"></span>“Blessed is the people whose God is
Jehovah.”  
(<span id="iv.i-p168.2"></span>[Ps
144:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#015)<span id="iv.i-p168.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.i-p169"></span>I reply, she is apparently “wretched,” and
not in vain does the Lord address her by that name; for, as we have
already said, he helps the wretched, and succors the destitute.

<span id="iv.i-p170"></span>*And drunken, not with wine.*  <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) When he calls her “drunken,” it ought to
be observed that believers never endure so patiently the chastisements
which are inflicted on them as not to be sometimes stupified; but,
although stupified, they ought to remember that the Lord punishes them
justly, and ought to believe that the Lord will assist them. He does not
speak to robust or healthy men, but to those who are feeble, wretched,
prostrate, and who resemble drunken persons, and says that he brings to
them consolation. Finally, by this word he soothes the grief of the
Church, and shews that he preserves a limit, by which he restrains the
violence even of the greatest afflictions, and restores her when ruined,
as if he were raising from the dead a rotten corpse.

<span id="iv.i-p172"></span><span id="iv.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p173"></span>**22.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* Not at random
does the Prophet add to the name Jehovah three epithets, namely, that he
is the *Lord* or Defender of his Church, that he is *God,* and lastly,
that he is her *Avenger.* We ought always to consider what is the nature
of our relation to God; for he addresses us in a familiar manner, in
consequence of having once chosen us to be his people, by uniting
himself to us in an everlasting covenant. This preface encouraged the
Jews, in ancient times, not to hesitate to embrace what is here
promised; and at the present day the same argument applies to a new
people, who have been taken under God’s care and protection not less
than they. The Lord declares himself to hold the office of an “Avenger,”
in order that, when we shall be threatened with the most alarming
dangers, and when it shall appear as if all were over with us, we may
betake ourselves to this anchor, that God is the “Avenger” of his
people; and this ought to support us, not only when we are assailed by
outward enemies, but also when we are assailed by Satan.

<span id="iv.i-p174"></span>*Behold, I have taken from thy hand.* He
holds out the ground of hope; for it is only by temporary stripes that
the Lord chastises his Church. Hence also the Jews ought to learn that
all the calamities to which they were subjected were the just reward of
their transgressions; for those calamities would never come to an end
but by their being reconciled to God. The general meaning is, that the
wrath of the Lord will be appeased, so that he will restrain and bring
to a close the chastisements which he had formerly inflicted on his
Church.

<span id="iv.i-p175"></span>*The cup of thy affliction,* or, *the cup of
thy trembling.* We have already spoken of the metaphor of “the cup;” and
the explanation of it which we gave is fully confirmed by this passage,
in which God calls it “the cup of his indignation,” though it had made
the Church to tremble, as if she had been seized with giddiness. Yet it
is the same word which he formerly used, <span
id="iv.i-p175.1"></span>תרעלה *(targnelah,)* which some translate
“anguish,” and others “trembling.” By *dregs,* as I have said, he means
the full measure of vengeance with which God is satisfied on account of
his fatherly kindness.

<span id="iv.i-p176"></span><span id="iv.i-p176.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p177"></span>**23.** *And I will put it into the hand of
thy oppressors.* This is another part of the consolation, in which he
promises that the Lord will not only deliver the Church from those heavy
distresses, but will also lay upon her enemies the calamities with which
she is afflicted. If therefore we are afflicted,  <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) our condition will be speedily changed,
and our enemies will be severely punished. Truly, as Paul says, it is
righteous with God to render tribulation to them that trouble you, and
to you who are troubled rest along with us, when the Lord shall be
revealed from heaven, with the angels of his power, with flame of fire,
to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (<span id="iv.i-p178.2"></span>[2Th
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="iv.i-p178.2"></span>.)
Thus the temporary punishments which God inflicts on them are the
beginnings of that eternal punishment to which they shall be finally
condemned.

<span id="iv.i-p179"></span>*Who said to thy soul.* In order to describe
more fully the insolence and haughtiness of their enemies, such as we
too experience every day in our adversaries, he quotes their words, by
which they slandered and insulted the unhappy children of God. Impiety
is always accompanied by pride and cruelty; for, as the true knowledge
of God renders men gentle, so ignorance makes them ferocious and savage.
They who are ignorant of God please themselves, and pour out unmeasured
reproaches against God and those who truly worship him. This truly is
most wretched and base; but since he frequently permits his name to be
exposed to the insults of wicked men, let us not wonder that we are
assailed on account of his name; for we are not more excellent than God,
and our condition ought not to be better than that of the ancient
Church. David employs a different metaphor, (<span
id="iv.i-p179.1"></span>[Ps 129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003)<span
id="iv.i-p179.1"></span>,) when he says that the Church resembles a
field which is cut and broken up by the plough; for he shews that
frequently it is deeply furrowed and trodden upon, that we may not think
that our condition is different.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc16003.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iv.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p53"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p53.1"></span>Regardez a la
pierre dont vous avez este coupez.” “Look to the stone whence you were
hewn.”

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc16003.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iv.i-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p55"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p55.1"></span>On ne sauroit
recevoir promesse queleonque.” “No promise whatever can be believed.”

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc16003.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iv.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p71"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p71.1"></span>Les hommes
miserables de nature.” “Men who are by nature miserable.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc16003.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p96"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p96.1"></span>Non pas qu’ils
le pensent oisif ni endormi au ciel.”

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc16003.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p101"></span> “Here is a noble mixture of lively figures;
the Prophet first addressing himself to the Lord, as if he were fast
asleep, tired with fatigue and labor; then painting him in a martial
posture, dressing himself in arms, and putting on his accoutrements;
then raising his courage by a narration of his former valorous
performances, Art not thou that Arm which cut off the Egyptian Rahab,
when with all the strength of his kingdom he pursued the naked
Israelites to the further banks of the Red Sea? Certainly thou art the
same, not at all decayed in strength, but able to do as much for thy
people now, as for their fathers then.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc16003.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p102"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p102.1"></span>Par *Rahab,*
que nous avons traduit l’orgueilleuse.” “By Rahab, which we have
translated The proud.”

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc16003.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.i-p113.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p114"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p114.1"></span>J’aime mieux
le prendre pour *cantique* en cest endroit-ci.” “I prefer to take it for
a *song* in this passage.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc16003.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.i-p125.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p126"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p126.1"></span>Que nons
avons traduit *banni.”* “Which we have translated *banished.”*

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc16003.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.i-p126.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p127"></span> That is, they treat it as the Kal
participle of an active verb, signifying “Banishing,” and not as the
participle of a passive or neuter verb, signifying “Banished,” or
“Wandering.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc16003.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.i-p133.3"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p134"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p134.1"></span>A l’histoire
de la deliverance d’Egypte.”

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc16003.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p145"></span> “He sets forth God like a physician, mixing
a bitter potion for Jerusalem, putting as it were into one cup all the
anger he had conceived against her, and standing by to see her take it
off, that not a drop should be spilt, or any of the nauseous settlings
left behind: a potion so strong that it made her tremble every limb of
her, and so giddy that she stood in need of one to lead her: but such
were her misfortunes that none of her inhabitants were able to support
her; by all which the Prophet means that her afflictions should be so
great as to turn her brain, and make her sink under the load of them.” —
*W’hite.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc16003.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iv.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p146"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p146.1"></span>Pource qu’il
retient son bras.” “Because he restrains his arm.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc16003.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.i-p149.2"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p150"></span> The allusion appears to be to a different
but analogous expression. See Com. on Isaiah, Vol. 3, pp. 201,202. —
*Ed*.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc16003.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.i-p155.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p156"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p156.1"></span>Afin de
donner puis apres a son Eglise des enfans legitimes qui luy assistent.”
“In order afterwards to give to his Church lawful children to assist
her.”

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc16003.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.i-p170.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p171"></span> <span id="iv.i-p171.1"></span>שכרת דבר אהד
שלא מיין (*shekurath dabar ehad shello miyain*). Drunken with something
which is not wine.” — *Jarchi.*

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc16003.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.i-p177.1"></span>

<span id="iv.i-p178"></span> “<span id="iv.i-p178.1"></span>si nous
sommes persecutez.” “If we are persecuted.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 52](cc16004)
