[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16010)  [Next](cc16012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 59.

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
59:1-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Behold, the LORD’S hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save; neither his ear heavy, that it cannot
hear:

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Ecce non est mutilata manus Iehovae,
quin servet; neque aggravata auris ejus, quin audiat.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** But your iniquities have separated
between you and your God, and your sins have hid *his* face from you,
that he will not hear.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Sed iniquitates vestrae dissidium
fecerunt inter vos et Deum vestrum; et peccata vestra operuerunt faciem
ejus a vobis, ne audiat.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, your tongue
hath muttered perverseness.

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Nam manus vestrae pollutae sunt
sanguine, et digiti vestri iniquitate; labia vestra protulerunt
mendacium; lingua vestra iniquitatem loquuta est.

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>**4.** None calleth for justice, nor *any*
pleadeth for truth: they trust in vanity, and speak lies; they conceive
mischief, and bring forth iniquity.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Nemo est qui clamet pro justitia, nemo
qui disceptet pro veritate; confidunt rebus vanis; loquuntur inania,
concipiunt molestiam, pariunt iniquitatem.

<span id="xii.i-p10"></span>**5.** They hatch cockatrice' eggs, and
weave the spider's web: he that eateth of their eggs dieth, and that
which is crushed breaketh out into a viper.

<span id="xii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ova reguli excludunt, et telas
aranearum texunt; qui comederit ex ovis eorum morietur; si comprimantur,
exibit ripera.

<span id="xii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Their webs shall not become garments,
neither shall they cover themselves with their works: their works *are*
works of iniquity, and the act of violence *is* in their hands.

<span id="xii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Telae eorum non erunt in vestimentum;
neque se tegent eorum operibus. Nam opera eorum sunt opera iniquitatis
(*aut, vanitatis*); et opus violentiae in manibus eorum.

<span id="xii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Their feet run to evil, and they make
haste to shed innocent blood: their thoughts *are* thoughts of iniquity;
wasting and destruction *are* in their paths.

<span id="xii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Pedes eorum ad malum currunt, et
properant ad fundendum sanguinem innoxium; cogitationes eorum
cogitationes vanae (*vel iniquitatis*); vastitas et contritio in viis
eorum.

<span id="xii.i-p16"></span>**8.** The way of peace they know not; and
*there is* no judgment in their goings: they have made them crooked
paths: whosoever goeth therein shall not know peace.

<span id="xii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Viam pacis non noverunt; nec judicium
est in gressibus eorum; semitas suas perverterunt sibi; quis­quis
graditur per eas nesciet pacere.

<span id="xii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Therefore is judgment far from us,
neither doth justice overtake us: we wait for light, but behold
obscurity; for brightness, *but* we walk in darkness.

<span id="xii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Propterea longe recessit a nobis
judicium; nec apprehendit nos justitia. Expectavimus lucem, et ecce
tenebrae; splendorem, et ecce in caligine versamur.

<span id="xii.i-p20"></span>**10.** We grope for the wall like the
blind, and we grope as if *we had* no eyes: we stumble at noonday as in
the night; *we are* in desolate places as dead *men.*

<span id="xii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Palpamus sicut caeci parietem:
sicuti qui oculis capti sunt, palpamus. Impingimus in meridie tanquam
noctu; in locis solitariis tanquam mortui.

<span id="xii.i-p22"></span>**11.** We roar all like bears, and mourn
sore like doves: we look for judgment, but *there is* none; for
salvation, *but* it is far off from us.

<span id="xii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Nos onmes quasi ursi vociferamur; et
quasi columbrae susurrando susurramus. Expectavimus judicium, et non
apparet; salutem, et longe stetit a nobis.

<span id="xii.i-p24"></span>**12.** For our transgressions are
multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us: for our
transgressions *are* with us; and *as for* our iniquities, we know them;

<span id="xii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam multiplicatae sunt
iniquitates nostrae coram to, et peccata nostra testata sunt contra nos,
(*vel, respondent nobis*.) Quoniam iniquitates nostrae nobiscum sunt, et
peccata nostra cognoscimus.

<span id="xii.i-p26"></span>**13.** In transgressing and lying against
the LORD, and departing away from our God, speaking oppression and
revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.

<span id="xii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Inique egimuss, et mentiti sumus
Iehovae, et abducti sumns a tergo Dei nostri, loquentes calumniam et
defectionem; concipientes et proferentes ex eorde verba mendacii.

<span id="xii.i-p28"></span>**14.** And judgment is turned away
backward, and justice standeth afar off: for truth is fallen in the
street, and equity cannot enter.

<span id="xii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et actum est retrorsum judicium; et
justitia procul stetit. Quoniam corruit in platea veritas, et aequitas
non potuit prodire.

<span id="xii.i-p30"></span>**15.** Yea, truth faileth; and he *that*
departeth from evil maketh himself a prey: and the LORD saw *it*, and it
displeased him that *there was* no judgment.

<span id="xii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Defecit, inquam, veritas: et qui
recessit a malo praedae fuit expositus. Et vidit Iehova, ac displicuit
oculis ejus, quod non esset judicium.

<span id="xii.i-p32"></span>**16.** And he saw that *there was* no man,
and wondered that *there was* no intercessor: therefore his arm brought
salvation unto him; and his righteousness, it sustained him.

<span id="xii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Vidit, inquam, quod non esset vir;
et admiratus est quod nemo intercederet (*vel,* *occurreret*). Itaque
salutem ei attulit (*vel, salutem illi fecit*) brachium suum; et
justitia ejus, ipsa stabilivit eum.

<span id="xii.i-p34"></span>**17.** For he put on righteousness as a
breastplate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head; and he put on the
garments of vengeance *for* clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloke.

<span id="xii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Et induit justitiam, sicut loricam;
et galeam salutis capiti suo. Induit, inquam, ultionem quasi vestem, et
indignatione amictus fuit vice pallii.

<span id="xii.i-p36"></span>**18.** According to *their* deeds,
accordingly he will repay, fury to his adversaries, recompense to his
enemies; to the islands he will repay recompense.

<span id="xii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Quasi propter retributiones, quasi
ad reddendam vindictam, hostibus suis indignationem, vicem inimicis
suis, insulis vicem reddet.

<span id="xii.i-p38"></span>**19.** So shall they fear the name of the
LORD from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the
enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the LORD shall lift up a
standard against him.

<span id="xii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Proinde timebunt ab occidente nomen
Iehovae, et ab ortu solis gloriam ejus; quia veniet quasi flumen hostis,
et Spiritus Iehovae impellet (*vel, fugabit eum*).

<span id="xii.i-p40"></span>**20.** And the Redeemer shall come to Zion,
and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the LORD.

<span id="xii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et veniet Sioni redemptor, et iis
qui redierint ab iniquitate in Iacob, dicit Iehova.

<span id="xii.i-p42"></span>**21.** As for me, this *is* my covenant
with them, saith the LORD; My spirit that *is* upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed,
saith the LORD, from henceforth and for ever.

<span id="xii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Et ego cum ipsis hoc foedus meum
(sancio), dicit Iehova. Spiritus meus, qui super to est, et verba mea,
qae posui in ore tuo, non recedent ex ore tuo, neque ex ore seminis tui,
neque ex ore seminis seminis tui, dicit Iehova, ab hoc tempore usque in
aeternum.

<span id="xii.i-p44"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p45"></span><span id="xii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p46"></span>**1.** *Behold, the hand of Jehovah is not
shortened.* This discourse closely resembles the preceding one; for,
after having torn off the mask from hypocrites, who vainly boasted of
themselves, and after having shown that the punishment inflicted on them
was just, he now replies to other objections. Hypocrites are wont to
accuse God either of weakness or of excessive severity. He shows,
therefore, that he does not want either power or will to save his
people, but that he is prevented by their wickedness from exercising his
kindness towards them; and therefore that they do wrong in blaming God,
and in uttering those slanders against him, when they ought, on the
contrary, to accuse themselves.

<span id="xii.i-p47"></span>The word <span id="xii.i-p47.1"></span>הן
(*hen*) “behold,” is emphatic, as if the Prophet spoke of something
actually present, and pointed it out with the finger, for the sake of
expressing certainty, in order to cut off a handle from hypocrites, that
they might no longer practice evasion. We must also supply the contrasts
to the words “shortened” and “benumbed;“ as if he had said, that
formerly there were abundant resources in the hand of God to render
assistance to his people, and that he always was ready to be reconciled
and lent a willing car to prayers, and that now he is not unlike
himself,  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) as if either his hand
were broken or his ears grown dull, so that he did not hear distinctly.

<span id="xii.i-p49"></span><span id="xii.i-p49.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p50"></span>**2.** *But your iniquities have made a
separation.* The amount of what is said is, that they cannot say that
God has changed, as if he had swerved from his natural disposition, but
that the whole blame lies with themselves; because by their own sins
they, in some measure, prevent his kindness, and refuse to receive his
assistance. Hence we infer that our sins alone deprive us of the grace
of God, and cause separation between us and him; for what the Prophet
testifies as to the men of his time is applicable to all ages; since he
pleads the cause of God, against the slanders of wicked men. Thus God is
always like himself, and is not wearied in doing good; and his power is
not diminished, but we hinder the entrance of his grace.

<span id="xii.i-p51"></span>It will be objected, that men cannot
anticipate God by deserving well of him, and that consequently he must
do good to those who are unworthy. I reply, this is undoubtedly true;
but sometimes the frowardness of men grows to such an extent as to shut
the door against God’s benefits, as if they purposely intended to drive
him far away from them. And although he listens to no man without
pardoning him, as we always bring before him supplication for the
removal of guilt, yet he does not listen to the prayers of the wicked.
We need not wonder, therefore, if the Prophet accuse the people of
rejecting God’s benefits by their iniquities, and rendering him
irreconcilable by their obstinacy, and, in a word, of making a divorce,
which drives away or turns aside the ordinary course of grace.

<span id="xii.i-p52"></span><span id="xii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p53"></span>**3.** *For your hands.* He now brings
forward their actions, that they may not practice evasion, or call in
question what are those sins which have “caused the separation.” He
therefore takes away from them every excuse, by bringing forward
particular instances, as if their shameful life were exhibited on an
open stage. Now, he speaks in the second person, because, like an
advocate, he argues and pleads the cause of God, and therefore speaks of
himself as not belonging to the rank of the wicked, with whom he did not
wish to be classed, though he was not entirely free from sin, but feared
and served God, and enjoyed liberty of conscience. No man could be at
liberty to condemn others, who was involved in the guilt of the same
vices; and no man could be qualified for pleading the cause of God, who
deprived himself of his right by living wickedly. We must be unlike
those whom we reprove, if we do not wish to expose our doctrine to
ridicule, and to be reckoned impudent; and, on the other band, when we
serve God with a pure conscience, our doctrine obtains weight and
authority, and holds even adversaries to be more fully convicted.

<span id="xii.i-p54"></span>*Are polluted with blood.* The picture which
he gives of the wicked life of the people is not superfluous; for men
seek various subterfuges, and cannot be reduced to a state of obedience,
unless they have previously acknowledged their sins. By mentioning
*blood,* he does not mean that murders have been everywhere committed;
but by this word he describes the cruelty, extortions, violence, and
enormities, which were perpetrated by hypocrites against the poor and
defenseless; for they had not to deal with robbers and assassins, but
with the king and the nobles, who were highly respected and honored. He
calls them manslayers, because they cruelly harassed the innocent, and
seized by force and violence the property of others; and so, immediately
afterwards he uses the word “iniquity” instead of “blood.”

<span id="xii.i-p55"></span>*And your fingers with iniquity.* Though he
appears to extend the discourse farther, yet it is a repetition, or
rather, a reduplication, such as is frequently employed by Hebrew
writers, accompanied by amplification; for he expresses more by
“fingers” than by “hands;“ as if he had said that not even the smallest
part was free from unjust violence.  <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129)

<span id="xii.i-p57"></span>*Your lips have uttered falsehood.* Next, he
takes notice of one kind of wickedness, that is, when men deceive each
other by tricks, or falsehood, or perjury; for that iniquity by which we
wound our neighbors is most frequently defended either by cruelty as a
body­guard, or by cheating and falsehood. Here the Prophet takes a rapid
view of the second table, and, from the crimes which they commit against
it, he shows that they are wicked and destitute of all fear of God; for
cruelty and treachery, by which human society is infringed, proceed from
contempt of God. Thus from “the hands,” that is, from extortion and
violence, he descends to falsehoods and deceitful practices, to
perjuries and crafty devices, by which we take advantage of our
neighbors.

<span id="xii.i-p58"></span><span id="xii.i-p58.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p59"></span>**4.** *There is none that crieth for
justice.* He means that there is not among them any study of what is
right or proper, that no man opposes the acts of injustice which are
committed by the strong on the weak; and that this leads to growing
licentiousness, because all wink at it, and there is none who cares
about undertaking the defense of justice. It is not enough that we
abstain from violence, if we do not, as far as lies in our power, hinder
it from being committed by others. And, indeed, whoever permits what he
is able to hinder does in some sense command it; so that silence is a
sort of consent.

<span id="xii.i-p60"></span>*None that contendeth for truth.* This
clause is of the same import as the preceding one. Some take <span
id="xii.i-p60.1"></span>נשפט (*nishpat*) in a passive sense, and suppose
the Prophet’s meaning to be, “None is rightly judged; for everything is
full of corruptions, and yet nobody makes opposition.” But the active
signification is more appropriate; for these two statements are closely
connected with each other, that “None crieth for justice” and “None
defendeth truth or uprightness.” The rendering given by some, “No man
judgeth himself truly,” is rather too harsh. But because this verb in
Niphal is taken, in many passages, for “to contend,”  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) the whole passage appeared to run more
freely thus: that “none comes forward to protect what is right, openly
and loudly to defend justice, and to plead against the wicked.” Yet it
will perhaps be thought preferable to view the words “cry for justice”
as referring to wretched persons who are unjustly harassed; as if he had
said that they are dumb, because they would gain nothing by crying. But
this would also be harsh.

<span id="xii.i-p62"></span>If God condemns so severely those who pay no
attention to the righteous causes of men, and do not aid such as are in
difficulties, what shall become of us, if no zeal for defending the
glory of God prompt us to rebuke iniquities? If we wink at the mockeries
by which wicked men jeer at God’s sacred doctrine and profane his name;
if we pay no attention to the efforts which they make to destroy the
Church of God, shall not our silence be justly condemned for treachery?
 <span id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) In a word, Isaiah says that
good order falls into decay through our fault, if we do not, as far as
we can, resist the wicked.

<span id="xii.i-p64"></span>*They trust in vain things.* He next points
out that this is extreme confusion, when no one rises up in defense of
justice. When he says that they “trust in vain things,” he means that
they heap up perverse reliances, by means of which they bring upon
themselves insensibility. This is the utmost verge of iniquity, when, by
seeking flatteries on every hand, they willingly harden themselves to
despise God; and by such allurements Satan caresses the reprobate, till
he altogether enchants them, so that, shaking off all fear of God, they
not only despise sound counsels, but become haughty and fearless
mockers. Since therefore foolhardiness drives us headlong, when we place
false hopes in opposition to the judgment of God, the Prophet has good
reason for representing, as a mark of desperate malice, this confidence
under which cunning men shelter themselves; because the disease is
manifestly incurable, when men who are openly wicked do not hesitate to
flatter themselves, and, relying on their obstinate wickedness, think
that they are at liberty to do whatever they please.

<span id="xii.i-p65"></span>*They talk idly.* He adds that their
conversation tells plainly what is the nature of their dispositions and
morals; as the proverb says, that “the tongue is the image of the mind.”
Yet this clause may be explained in two ways; either that they speak
nothing sincerely, but, by constant practice, their tongues are formed
to deceive, or, that their wickedness breaks out into open boasting. For
my own part, I prefer the latter of these expositions.

<span id="xii.i-p66"></span>*They conceive mischief, and bring forth
iniquity.* These are elegant metaphors, by which he compares wicked men
to women, who support the child in the womb, and afterwards give birth
to it. Thus he says that the wicked, while they inwardly contrive their
crimes, may be said to be pregnant till they bring forth in due time;
that is, when they have found occasions and opportunities. “They
conceive,” he says, “purposes of mischief, that afterwards they may
unjustly harass simple persons;” as if he had said, that they make
preparation for their crimes by long meditation, and are always ready
for any mischief; because they do not cease to search in every quarter
for indirect methods of annoying those who are giving them no
disturbance.

<span id="xii.i-p67"></span><span id="xii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p68"></span>**5.** *They hatch the eggs of the
basilisk.* The Prophet proceeds farther, comparing the Jews not only to
women, but to venomous beasts; so as to make it more evident that
everything that proceeds from them is destructive and deadly. First,
then, he says, that “they hatch the eggs of the basilisk;“ because, as a
viper cannot lay an egg that is not venomous, so they are so inured to
wickedness, and so full of it, that they can throw out nothing but
poison.  <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132)

<span id="xii.i-p70"></span>*And weave the webs of spiders.* By “the
webs of spiders” he means that they are so barren and destitute of
anything good, that even by the appearance of virtues they deceive. By
two marks he describes wicked men; first, that the works which they
perform manifest their corrupt nature; secondly, that they are of no
value whatever, and. contribute nothing towards making them kind,
amiable, charitable, and faithful to those with whom they have
intercourse. I am aware that it is explained ill a different manner by
other commentators; namely, that the wicked, while they are contriving
the destruction of others, ruin themselves, and, while they think that
they are industrious, labor fruitlessly and to no purpose; that “they
are snared in their own nets,” (<span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>[Ps
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015)<span id="xii.i-p70.1"></span>)
and “fall into the pit which they had digged.” (<span
id="xii.i-p70.2"></span>[Ps 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)<span
id="xii.i-p70.2"></span>) But I am of opinion that the Prophet meant
what I have now said; namely, that the wicked do mischief in all places,
at all times, and in all transactions, and that they never do anything
good; and that every person who has anything to do with them will find
them to be venomous and destructive. Such is the import of what he says,
that in their eggs there lurks a deadly venom, and that, if they are
broken, a serpent will come out of them.

<span id="xii.i-p71"></span><span id="xii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p72"></span>**6.** *Their webs shall not be for
clothing.* He repeats and confirms the same statement, that everything
that they attempt or undertake is always useless to mankind; because
they purposely shrink from all acts of kindness. Now, it is an
indication of a mind utterly abandoned, to devote themselves to evil
deeds in such a manner, that no advantage of any kind can be expected
from the life of him who desires to be barren and destitute of all
justice. Others explain it, that they will toil unsuccessfully to
acquire wealth and to rise to honor. But I consider the meaning to be
more simple, that no man will “cover himself with their works,” because
in their texture there is nothing solid or durable.  <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133)

<span id="xii.i-p74"></span>By various modes of expression he inculcates
the same thing, in order to demonstrate that their works yield no
advantage whatever. But we were born for this end, that we should yield
assistance to our neighbors, and, in our turn, contribute something to
the general good. Thus they are savage beasts, and ought not to be
called men, who are only skillful to do mischief, and labor with all
their might to avoid doing good. he immediately adds, without a figure,
that they are given up, and, as it were, devoted to iniquity.

<span id="xii.i-p75"></span><span id="xii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p76"></span>**7.** *Their feet run to evil.* In various
ways he paints to us the picture of what may be called extreme
wickedness; that is, when men, having shaken off and cast away from them
the fear of God, throw themselves into every kind of wickedness, and
break out into all cruelty, extortion, and outrage. He says that they
*run,* because they are eager and hasten with excessive keenness to evil
actions. Having formerly spoken of the “hands” and the “tongues,” he
likewise adds the feet, in order to show that they are proficients
 <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) in every kind of villainy, and
that there is no part of their body that is entirely free from crime.
Some are violent, but restrain their tongues.  <span
id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) Others resemble harpies, but are
satisfied with the first prey that they meet with. But the Prophet says
that his countrymen are swift of foot for committing robberies.  <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)

<span id="xii.i-p80"></span>*Wasting and destruction are in their
paths.* He means that, wherever they go, they will resemble wild beasts,
which seize and devour whatever they meet with, and leave nothing
behind, so that, by their terrific onset, they drive away every kind of
animals from venturing to approach to them. Pliny makes use of the same
comparison, when speaking of Domitian, whose arrival was like that of a
savage beast. The same thing happens with other violent men, whom all
avoid as wild beasts. And in this manner their ways are rendered
desolate and solitary, when none have any intercourse with them.

<span id="xii.i-p81"></span><span id="xii.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p82"></span>**8.** *The way of peace they know not.*
Some give an ingenious interpretation of the word “peace” as meaning a
“peaceful” conscience; because the wicked must endure continual agony.
But the Prophet summons wicked men to judgment, in order to show, by the
transgression of the Second Table, that they have no sincerity and no
kindness, and, in a word, that they are <span
id="xii.i-p82.1"></span>ἀστόργους without natural affection. He says
that “they know not the way of peace;“ because their cruelty deprives
them of justice and equity, by which human society is maintained, the
very food of which is mutual peace and kindness; for justice and
integrity are nourished by peace. And if every person, with unbridled
rage, rush on his neighbors and attack them, there is then open war; for
harmony cannot be preserved among us, unless equity be observed by every
individual.  <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137)

<span id="xii.i-p84"></span>*And judgment is not in their steps.* What
he had just before said is expressed more clearly by the word
“Judgment;” as if he had said, that they excite terror wherever they go,
because they lay aside all integrity.

<span id="xii.i-p85"></span>*Whosoever walketh by them.* The last clause
may be taken in various senses; either, “Whosoever walketh in them shall
also be a stranger to peace,” or, “He who falleth into the hands of the
wicked shall find them to be savage and barbarous.” Either of those
meanings is admissible, and I do not think it worth while to dispute
much about them. Thus, after having spoken in general terms, and after
having shown that it is not God who prevents the Jews from being
prosperous, the Prophet descends to particulars, by which he explains
more fully the manner in which they have become estranged from God, and
have rendered themselves unworthy of his favor.

<span id="xii.i-p86"></span>Here arises a difficulty; for Paul (<span
id="xii.i-p86.1"></span>[Ro 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017)<span
id="xii.i-p86.1"></span>) quotes this passage for the purpose of
condemning all mankind as being sinful and corrupted, and as having
nothing good; while the Prophet appears to apply it especially to the
men of his own time. But the answer is easy; for, while he expressly
addresses the Jews, who thought that they were holier than other men,
the Gentiles must also be included along with them. If it be objected
that the Gentiles, while they live uprightly, “are a law to themselves,”
(<span id="xii.i-p86.2"></span>[Ro
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014)<span id="xii.i-p86.2"></span>)
and that “uncircumcision is counted as circumcision,” (<span
id="xii.i-p86.3"></span>[Ro 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026)<span
id="xii.i-p86.3"></span>) I reply that the Prophet represents God as
complaining of all who have not been renewed by the Spirit of God. In
this manner no man can be excepted, if he be viewed in his own nature;
but the Prophet speaks of himself as not belonging to their number,
because he had been regenerated and was guided by the Spirit of God.

<span id="xii.i-p87"></span>Paul’s quotation of this passage was
therefore appropriate; because he intended to show what sort of men they
are whom God hath forsaken, and who are under the influence of their own
nature. Although the depravity of men does not always break out into
gross vice, and the Prophet’s design is to rebuke a very corrupt age;
yet whenever crimes become so prevalent, we may behold, as in a mirror,
what a pool and how deep a pool of every evil thing is the nature of
man. And yet this discourse was undoubtedly very distasteful to the
Jews, who were puffed up with vain glorying of the family from which
they were descended; but since even they were not spared by the Spirit
of God, there is no reason why other nations, who are not less sinful by
nature, should wallow in their pleasures.

<span id="xii.i-p88"></span><span id="xii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p89"></span>**9.** *Therefore is judgment far from us.*
After having described how corrupt and depraved was the condition of
that people, he likewise shows that the severe chastisements inflicted
on them are richly deserved, that they may not complain of being treated
with greater harshness and severity than was proper. Thus he has
painted, as in a picture, those vices which were publicly known, that
they might more fully perceive in how many and how various ways they
were guilty before God; and now he again repeats that we need not wonder
if God treat such obstinate dispositions with greater severity, and
render to them a just reward. He says that “Judgment is far off, because
they were the most wretched of all men, and had not God for their
protector as formerly.”

<span id="xii.i-p90"></span>*And justice doth not overtake us.* He
employs the words “judgment” and “justice” as denoting God’s
guardianship, when he defends us, and shows that he takes care of us. He
calls it “justice” when he defends us, and “judgment” when he revenges
the injuries done to us. Here he declares that God had cast away the
care of his people, and had deprived them of his countenance and aid,
because they were unworthy of it; and hence we ought to observe the
particle <span id="xii.i-p90.1"></span>על כן (*gnal ken*) “therefore;”
for he draws the conclusion that we ought not to blame God, as if he
acted unjustly towards his people, since in so many ways they had
insulted his majesty.

<span id="xii.i-p91"></span>Of the same import is what he adds, that
while *they look for light*, continual darkness sits down upon them; for
the metaphor shows that they were almost consumed by their calamities,
and that, when they promised to themselves any alleviation, they were
disappointed of their hope. *Light* is a word very frequently employed
to denote prosperity, and *darkness* to denote adversity. He means,
therefore, that it will be vain to expect that their condition shall be
changed for the better; and his object is, that the people may learn to
ascribe their calamities to themselves, and may not imagine that those
calamities happen by chance, or that the Lord is excessively severe; for
he always endeavors to bring his people to the doctrine of repentance.

<span id="xii.i-p92"></span><span id="xii.i-p92.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p93"></span>**10.** *We grope for the wall like the
blind.* He explains the same thing by different forms of expression;
for, in consequence of the grievous complaints which were heard among
the people, he determined to omit nothing that was fitted to describe
their calamities. It is perhaps by way of concession  <span
id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) that he mentions those things; as if
he had said, “Our affairs are reduced to the deepest misery, but we
ought chiefly to consider the cause, for we have deserved all this and
far worse.” But it is not a probable interpretation, that stupid persons
are aroused to think of their evil actions; for, although they are
abundantly disposed to complain, yet the devil stupifies them, so that
the tokens of God’s anger do not awaken them to repentance, he alludes
to that metaphor which he employed in the preceding verse, when he said
that the people were in darkness and obscurity, and found no escape;
and. his meaning is, that they are destitute of counsel, and overwhelmed
by so deep anguish that they have no solace or refuge. When a lighter
evil presses upon us, we look around and hope to find some means of
escape; but when we are overpowered by heavier distresses, despair takes
from us all ability to see or to judge. For this reason the Prophet says
that they have been thrown into a labyrinth, and are “groping.”

<span id="xii.i-p95"></span>*We stumble.* The same thing is expressed,
and even in a still more aggravated form, by this mode of expression,
that, if they stir a foot, various stumbling blocks meet them on every
hand, and, indeed, that there is no alleviation to their distresses, as
if day had been changed into night.

<span id="xii.i-p96"></span>*In solitary places as dead men.* By
“solitary places” I understand either gulfs or ruinous and barren
regions; for in this passage I willingly follow the version of Jerome,
who derives the word <span id="xii.i-p96.1"></span>אשמנים (*ashmannim*)
from <span id="xii.i-p96.2"></span>אשם (*asham,*)”to be desolate.” The
Jews, who choose to derive it from <span id="xii.i-p96.3"></span>שמן
(*shaman,*) to be fat, appear to me to argue idly, and to have no solid
ground for their opinion. They think that it denotes men, because <span
id="xii.i-p96.4"></span>שמן (*shemen*) denotes “ointment,” and say that
this word is used for describing the Gentiles. But the true meaning of
the Prophet is, that the Jews have been reduced to a wilderness, so
that, shut out from the society of men, they resemble the dead, and have
no hope of escape.

<span id="xii.i-p97"></span><span id="xii.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p98"></span>**11.** *We all roar like bears.* He
describes two classes of those who cannot silently endure their
afflictions without making them known by external signs; for some howl
fiercely, and others *moan like doves*. This latter metaphor was
employed by him in describing the groans of Hezekiah, (<span
id="xii.i-p98.1"></span>[Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)<span id="xii.i-p98.1"></span>;)
and this happens when we endeavor to restrain our grief, and yet cannot
prevent the outward signs of grief from breaking out in spite of us. The
meaning is, that sometimes the violence of their grief constrained them
to utter loud cries, and sometimes they complained in low and murmuring
sounds, but in both cases without avail, because their condition was not
changed for the better.

<span id="xii.i-p99"></span>*We looked for judgment.* He again repeats
that in vain they “looked for judgment and salvation,” meaning that the
people were deprived of the assistance of God, which he desired above
all things; and he makes use of the word *salvation,* in order to
describe more fully and completely what he formerly denoted by the word
“justice,” and now again by the word “judgment.” Thence infer that it is
by our own fault that we are wretched, and grow old and waste away in
our wretchedness, till we are converted to God. We may indeed moan and
howl, but can obtain no alleviation of our grief without repentance.
There can be no end of our afflictions, so long as we provoke the Lord’s
wrath, and do not desire with the whole heart to be reconciled to him.

<span id="xii.i-p100"></span><span id="xii.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p101"></span>**12.** *For our iniquities are multiplied
before thee.* He confirms what he formerly said, namely, that the people
act unjustly in accusing God of cruelty, and in not understanding that
they are justly punished for their iniquities, the huge mass of which
towers up to heaven; and in this sense the Prophet says that they “are
multiplied.” There is also much weight in the phrase “before thee;” for
the Prophet descends into himself, and acknowledges the righteous
judgment of God, which was hidden from men. Thus he intended to point
out an implied contrast between the judgment of God and the judgment of
men, who flatter themselves, and do not consider their sins; but God,
who is a just judge, does not the less on that account reprove them, or
pay any attention to the frivolous excuses under which they endeavor to
shelter themselves. For this reason he does not reckon it enough simply
to condemn the people, but says that they have “multiplied” their sins,
that is, in many respects they are guilty before God. He acknowledges,
therefore, that the Lord is righteous, and performs the part of an
excellent judge; since nothing good or right is found among men; and
therefore he adds, —

<span id="xii.i-p102"></span>*Our sins have testified against us,* (*or,
answer*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) *to us*.) Witnesses are
not summoned, or brought from heaven; but the Jews are rebuked and
condemned by the testimony of conscience. That mode of expression ought
to be carefully observed; for it shows that God does not need many
proofs, since our sins hold us to be sufficiently convicted. We must
not, therefore, strive with God, as if he punished us unjustly, or
chastised us too severely; for our sins openly proclaim what we are, and
God does not need additional proofs.

<span id="xii.i-p104"></span>*For our iniquities are with us.* Instead
of “with us,” some render <span id="xii.i-p104.1"></span>אתנו (*ittanu*)
”upon us;” but I choose rather to adhere to the strict meaning of the
word.  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) Men practice evasions,
and assume various shapes, in order to appear righteous; but in vain,
for they carry with them their iniquities, from which they cannot
extricate themselves; as God, in condemning Cain, (<span
id="xii.i-p105.3"></span>[Ge 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007)<span
id="xii.i-p105.3"></span>) declares that “sin keepeth watch before the
door;“ so that any one who despises the judgment of God shall in vain
attempt to escape by his rebellion.

<span id="xii.i-p106"></span>*And we know our sins.* When he says that
the Jews “know their sins,” he does not mean that their hearts are truly
affected by them, for in that case repentance follows; but he declares
that, although they desire to escape the judgment of God, the testimony
of their own conscience binds and holds them fast, so that it is vain
for them to cavil or seek an excuse. He speaks in the first person, as
if he were one of the great body of the people. This is very customary;
but at the same time he shows that this evil prevails through the whole
body to such an extent that not one member is whole or sound; and,
although he may plead his own cause before God, yet, because iniquity is
diffused through every part of the body, he acknowledges that he is one
of the diseased members and is infected by the general contagion. Nor is
there any contradiction in having formerly spoken of himself as not
sharing the general guilt, and now laying aside all distinction, and
including himself along with others.

<span id="xii.i-p107"></span><span id="xii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p108"></span>**13.** *We have done wickedly.* Here he
enumerates certain classes of sins, in order to arouse the people more
keenly to an acknowledgment of their sin. It must be regarded as
monstrous, that men, who have been chastised and almost crushed by the
hand of God, are still proud, and so obstinate that they cannot bend or
be humbled by a conviction of their sin. The Lord endeavors to soften
our obduracy by stripes and wounds; but when chastisements do us no
good, our case must be given up as hopeless. Isaiah therefore labors to
show how wretched is the condition of the people, who, while they
endured severe hardships, yet murmured against God, and did not suffer
themselves to be brought into a state of obedience. And therefore he
frequently repeats this warning, and reproves sharply, in order to
subdue this obstinacy of the people.

<span id="xii.i-p109"></span>*And we have lied to Jehovah.* By a variety
of terms he rebukes their vices, and enumerates classes of them, after
having pointed out in a general manner that corruption which everywhere
prevailed.: Nor does he mention only slight faults, or those of a small
number of persons, but a universal revolt. By these words he pronounces
them to have been so deeply corrupted, that no sincerity, uprightness,
fear, or conscience remained in them. For what is meant by “lying to
God,” but to revolt treacherously from him, as if all obedience were
refused? Thus he does not reproach them with one or a few transgressions
of the Law, but says that, like fugitives, they have forsaken God, so
that they do not follow him when he calls.

<span id="xii.i-p110"></span>*Conceiving and uttering from the heart.*
He now adds that they were devoted to the invention of mischief, and
thoroughly imbued with falsehood; for “to utter a lie from the heart,”
is far worse than to tell lies thoughtlessly, or even to deceive when an
occasion presents itself.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) Nor
is there any room to doubt that those reproofs grievously offended the
Jews, who, puffed up with pride, imagined that they were exceedingly
holy. But it was proper to treat their hypocrisy in this manner, because
mere doctrine produced little effect upon them. Taught by this example,
pastors, when they see the Church of God corrupt, and men pleasing
themselves and flattering their vices, ought to make strenuous
opposition, accompanied by loud and sharp reproof.

<span id="xii.i-p112"></span><span id="xii.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p113"></span>**14.** *And judgment is driven back.* It
is a mistake to suppose that the Prophet returns to his earliest
subject, (<span id="xii.i-p113.1"></span>[Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)<span id="xii.i-p113.1"></span>)
and speaks of the punishments which the people had suffered at the hand
of God; for he still proceeds with the preceding narrative, and explains
the diseases under which the people labored, that they may see clearly
that they are justly punished. But we must distinguish this verse from
the ninth, in which he said that “judgment had gone back;” for there he
declared that they were deprived of God’s assistance, because they did
not deserve to have him as the defender of their cause; but here he says
that “judgment is driven back” in a different sense, that is, because
they have overthrown all justice and equity among themselves. They have
therefore received a just reward, because no justice of God has shone
forth to render assistance, when they have banished far from them
justice and equity; for in vain do we expect from God what we have
refused to others and cast away from ourselves.

<span id="xii.i-p114"></span>*In the street.* That is, in a public
place. He describes those places in which judicial sentences were
pronounced. When he says that “truth is fallen in the street,” he means
that not only some private individuals have been corrupted, but the
whole condition of the people is so thoroughly depraved as to leave no
part sound; for, if some vices reign among the common people, some
remedy may be obtained, so long as there is room for judgment; but if
judgments are overthrown or corrupted, it follows that all things are
infected by a universal contagion. He describes also their unbridled
licentiousness, in not being ashamed of conduct openly wicked, and in
not shrinking from the light and from the eyes of men.

<span id="xii.i-p115"></span><span id="xii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p116"></span>**15.** *Truth faileth.* Hence it clearly
appears that Isaiah, in the preceding verse, did not speak of
punishments; for, without interrupting the stream of his discourse, he
proceeds to show that the people ought not to complain of the severity
of chastisements, since they have so grievously offended and provoked
God. He therefore confirms what he formerly said, that “truth hath
fallen, that there is no place for equity;” and he enlarges this
statement the more, by adding that *he who hath withdrawn from evil hath
become a prey.*  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) Almost all the
Jewish expositors, reading the two clauses consecutively, explain them
thus: — “Truth hath failed, and, by departing from evil, hath been made
a prey.” Why they adopt that meaning, I do not see.

<span id="xii.i-p118"></span>Jerome’s exposition, which I follow, is
much more correct; and appropriate; and a similar mode of expression is
frequently employed in the Scriptures. Job is said to have been

<span id="xii.i-p119"></span>“an upright and perfect man, fearing  
God, and departing from evil.” (<span id="xii.i-p119.2"></span>[Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p119.2"></span>)

<span id="xii.i-p120"></span>Solomon also says,

<span id="xii.i-p121"></span>“The fool is confident, but the righteous
man looketh well to himself, and departeth from evil.” (<span
id="xii.i-p121.1"></span>[Pr
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#016)<span id="xii.i-p121.1"></span>)

<span id="xii.i-p122"></span>The Prophet means that all uprightness was
so greatly abhorred, that the true worshippers of God, if any remained,
were not permitted to be safe. As if he had said, “Whoever wishes to
live among men must vie with them in wickedness,”  <span
id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) according to the common proverb,
“Among wolves we must howl; but he who wishes to live innocently shall
be torn in pieces, as a sheep is torn by wolves.” Finally, he describes
the utmost pitch of wickedness; for he shows that “truth hath failed,”
so that no good man is allowed to remain among them; because every one
that abstains front acts of injustice “lays himself open to be a prey.”

<span id="xii.i-p124"></span>*And Jehovah saw.* This relates to the
consolation of the people; for he declares that, although they have
grievously offended, so that it may appear as if there were no room for
pardon, still the Lord will have regard to his people, and, although he
has inflicted very severe chastisements, will at length remember his
covenant, so as to bring incredible relief by healing their wounds. He
speaks here of a future period, and promises that one day, after
calamities so numerous and diversified, the Lord will aid the people
that are left; for the Jews would have lost heart, and would have been
altogether discouraged, if the Lord had not brought that consolation.

<span id="xii.i-p125"></span>Thus men commonly rush forward, and throw
themselves headlong into opposite vices; for, when they are reproved,
they either grow obstinate and harden themselves, or are terrified and
fall into despair. We must therefore observe carefully this order which
the Prophet followed. First, it was necessary to reprove the Jews, that,
being affected and laid low by repentance, they might cease to find
fault with God; and, secondly, a mitigation of punishments, accompanied
by salvation, is promised, that they might not be discouraged, but
expect assistance from the Lord, who is unwilling that his Church should
perish, and punishes his people for a time, in order that he may not
suffer them to be ruined and destroyed.

<span id="xii.i-p126"></span>Yet if any one prefer to limit this dislike
or displeasure of God to the “judgment,” because he had good reason for
abhorring a wicked people, I have no objection; as if he had said that
God saw nothing in that people but what was ground of hatred. Hence it
follows, that there was no other motive that prompted him to yield
assistance, than because their affairs were utterly desperate.

<span id="xii.i-p127"></span><span id="xii.i-p127.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p128"></span>**16.** *He saw that there was no man.*
Isaiah continues the same subject, but expresses more, and relates more
fully what he had briefly noticed; for what he said in the preceding
verse, that “it displeased the Lord that there was no judgment,” might
have been obscure. In this passage he repeats that the Lord saw that
“there was no man”  <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) to render
assistance to the Church, and that he *wondered.* He makes use of the
verb <span id="xii.i-p129.5"></span>ישתומם (*yishtomem*) in the
Hithpahel conjugation,  <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) for the
purpose of denoting that the Lord was the cause of his own astonishment;
as if he had said, “He made himself astonished.”

<span id="xii.i-p131"></span>*He wondered that none came forward.* Some
think that <span id="xii.i-p131.1"></span>מפגיע (*maphgiang*) means an
intercessor; but I think that the meaning is this, that there was none
who endeavored to relieve their affliction, that there was no physician
who applied his hand to this wound, and that for this reason God
“wondered.” The reason why he attributes to God this astonishment may be
easily understood. By this rebuke he intended to put the Jews to shame,
that they might not, according to their custom, resort to hypocritical
pretenses for concealing their sins; and, because it was incredible and
monstrous that there was not found in a holy and elect people any one
that opposed injustice, he represents God as astonished at such a
novelty, that the Jews may at length be ashamed and repent. Was it
possible that there could be greater obstinacy of which they ought to be
ashamed, since by their wickedness they moved God to astonishment?

<span id="xii.i-p132"></span>At the same time he rebukes their
hypocrisy, if they pretend to have eminent piety and holiness, when God,
after a diligent search, did not find even one upright man. He likewise
praises and magnifies the unspeakable mercy of God, in condescending to
rescue, as if from the depths of hell, a people whose condition was so
desperate; for the Jews were undoubtedly reminded by these words in what
manner they ought to hope for redemption; namely, because God is pleased
to rise up miraculously to save what was lost. Besides, by the word
“wonder” he describes also God’s fatherly care. It is certain that God
is not liable to those passions, so as to wonder at anything as new or
uncommon; but he accommodates himself to us, in order that, being deeply
moved by a conviction of our evils, we may view our condition with
horror. Thus, when he says that “the Lord saw,” he means that there is
no help in our own industry; when he says that the Lord “wonders,” he
means that we are excessively dull and stupid, because we neither
perceive nor care for the evils of our condition; and yet that our
indifference does not prevent the Lord from rendering assistance to his
Church.

<span id="xii.i-p133"></span>*Therefore his arm brought* (or, *made)
salvation to him.* By these words he means that we ought not to despair,
although we receive no assistance from men. Yet, reducing to nothing
every other assistance, he pronounces the salvation of his own nation,
and consequently of all mankind, to be owing, from first to last, to
God’s undeserved goodness and absolute power. Thus, in like manner as,
by asserting that God is abundantly sufficient for himself, and has
power and strength sufficient to redeem the Jews, he stretches out his
hand to the feeble; so, by saying that men can do nothing to promote
their salvation, he abases all pride, that, being stripped of confidence
in their works, they may approach to God. And we must observe this
design of the Prophet; for, in reading the Prophets and Apostles, we
must not merely consider what they say, but for what purpose, and with
what design. Here, therefore, we ought chiefly to observe the design of
the Prophet, that in God alone is there sufficient power for
accomplishing our salvation, that we may not look hither and thither;
for we are too much disposed to lean on external aids; but that we ought
to place the hope of salvation nowhere else than on the arm of God, and
that the true foundation of the Church is in his righteousness, and that
they do wrong who depend on anything else; since God has borrowed
nothing from any but himself.

<span id="xii.i-p134"></span>The usefulness of this doctrine is still
more extensive; for, although all remedies often fail us, yet the Lord
will find sufficient assistance in his own arm. Whenever, therefore, we
are destitute of men’s assistance, and are overwhelmed by calamities of
every kind, and see nothing before us but ruin, let us betake ourselves
to this doctrine, and let us rest assured that God is sufficiently
powerful to defend us; and, since he has no need of the assistance of
others, let us learn to rely firmly and confidently on his aid.

<span id="xii.i-p135"></span>Yet we must keep in remembrance the
universal doctrine, namely, that the redemption of the Church is a
wonderful blessing bestowed by God alone, that we may not ascribe
anything to the strength or industry of men. With abhorrence we ought to
regard the pride of those who claim for themselves any part of that
praise which belongs to God, since in him alone is found both the cause
and the effect of our salvation.

<span id="xii.i-p136"></span>*And his righteousness, it upheld him.*
Here *arm* denotes power and strength, and righteousness denotes the
integrity which he displays in procuring the salvation of his people,
when he is their protector, and delivers them from destruction.  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) When he says that “the arm of God
brought to him salvation,” this must not be limited to God, and ought
not to be taken passively, as if God saved himself, but, actively; so
that this salvation refers to the Church, which he has delivered from
the bands of enemies.

<span id="xii.i-p138"></span><span id="xii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p139"></span>**17.** *And he put on righteousness as a
coat of mail.* Here he equips God with his armor, for the purpose both
of confirming more and more the confidence of believers, and of
stripping all men of all confidence in their own strength. The meaning
of the verse amounts to this, that God is in want of nothing for
discomfiting his enemies and gaining the victory; because from his
righteousness, power, and grace, and from his ardent love of his people,
he will make for himself <span id="xii.i-p139.1"></span>πανοπλίαν
complete armor. And this is again worthy of remark; for, although we
acknowledge that God is sufficiently powerful, yet we are not satisfied
with it, but at. the same time seek other help. Thus our minds are
always inclined to unbelief, so that they fasten on inferior means, and
are greatly entangled by them.

<span id="xii.i-p140"></span>In order to correct this vice, Isaiah
presents this lively description; as if he had said, “Know ye that God
has in his hand all the safeguards of your salvation, and will be in
want of nothing to deliver you in spite of enemies and bring you back to
your native country; and therefore there is no reason why you should
tremble.” Besides, there is nothing to which we are more prone than to
imagine that we bestow something on God, and thus to claim for ourselves
some part of the praise which ought to remain undivided with him.

<span id="xii.i-p141"></span>When he clothes God *with vengeance, and
with indignation as a cloak*, this relates to enemies, against whom God
is said to be enraged for the sake of his people; and thus, the more
that Satan labors and makes every effort against us, so much the more
does God kindle with zeal, and so much the more powerfully does he rise
up, to render assistance to us. Although, therefore, Satan and all the
reprobate do not rest, but raise up obstacles of every kind to prevent
our salvation, and even exert themselves furiously to destroy us, yet,
by his power alone, God will defeat all their efforts.

<span id="xii.i-p142"></span><span id="xii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p143"></span>**18.** *As if on account of recompenses.*
He confirms the statement of the preceding verse; for he shows what will
be the nature of that vengeance with which he had clothed the Lord;
namely, that he is prepared to render recompense to his enemies. We must
attend to the reason why the Prophet describes the Lord as thus armed,
indignant, and ready for vengeance. It is, because the salvation of the
Church is connected with the destruction of the wicked; and therefore
God must be armed against the enemies who wish to destroy us.

<span id="xii.i-p144"></span>Hence we see God’s infinite love toward us,
who loves us so ardently that he bears hostility to our enemies, and
declares that he will render recompense to them. So strong is his
affection to his little flock, that he sets a higher value on them than
on the whole world. This is the reason why he says that *he will render
recompense to the islands*, that is, to countries beyond the sea and far
off; for, in order to deliver his people, he overthrew monarchies that
were powerful, and that appeared to be invincible. But, although here he
mentions none but mortal men, still we must begin with Satan, who is
their head.

<span id="xii.i-p145"></span><span id="xii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p146"></span>**19.** *Therefore they shall fear the name
of Jehovah.* He now testifies that this work of redemption shall be so
splendid and illustrious, that the whole world shall wonder, behold,
praise, and celebrate, and, struck with fear, shall render glory to God.
It is uncertain whether he means the conversion of the Gentiles, or the
terror with which God dismays his enemies. For my own part, I am more
inclined to the former opinion, that, even to the utmost boundaries of
the earth, the name of God shall be revered and honored, so that the
Gentiles shall not only tremble, but shall serve and adore him with true
repentance.

<span id="xii.i-p147"></span>*For*  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) *the enemy shall come as a river.* As
to the reason now assigned, commentators differ. But the true meaning,
in my opinion, is, that the attack of the enemy shall be so furious
that, like a rapid and impetuous torrent, it shall appear to sweep away
and destroy everything, but that the Lord shall cause it instantly to
subside and disappear. It is therefore intended to heighten the
description of the divine power, by which the vast strength and dreadful
fury of the enemies are repelled, receive a different direction, and
fall to pieces.

<span id="xii.i-p149"></span>A question now arises, “What redemption
does the Prophet mean?” I reply, as I have already suggested on another
passage, that these promises ought not to be limited, as is commonly
done, to a single redemption; for the Jews refer it, exclusively to the
deliverance from Babylon, while Christians refer it to Christ alone. For
my part, I join both, so as to include the whole period after the return
of the people along with that which followed down to the coming of
Christ; for this prophecy was not fulfilled but in Christ, and what is
said here cannot apply to any other. Never was the glory of God revealed
to the whole world, nor were his enemies put to flight so as not to
recover their strength, till Christ achieved a conquest and illustrious
triumph over Satan, sin, and death.

<span id="xii.i-p150"></span><span id="xii.i-p150.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p151"></span>**20.** *And a Redeemer shall come to
Zion.* He again confirms what he formerly said, that the people shall be
delivered, and that God will be the author of this blessing. He bids the
people, therefore, be of good cheer in their captivity, which shall not
be perpetual; and next, he exhorts them to place the hope of redemption
in God alone, that they may fix their minds solely on his promises. By
the name Zion he denotes here, as in other passages, captives and
exiles; for however far they had been banished from their country, still
they must have carried the temple in their hearts.

<span id="xii.i-p152"></span>*And to them who have turned away from
iniquity.* That the bastard children of Abraham may not apply
indiscriminately to themselves what he has just now said, he proceeds to
show to whom the redemption shall come, namely, to those only who have
been truly consecrated to the Lord. It is certain that many returned
from Babylon, who were not moved by any feeling of repentance, and yet
who became partakers of the same blessing. But the Prophet speaks of the
complete redemption which the elect alone enjoy; for, although the fruit
of external redemption extends also to hypocrites, yet they have not
embraced the blessing of God for salvation. The design of the Prophet
is, to show that the punishment; of banishment will be advantageous,
that God may gather his Church, after having purified it from filth and
pollution; for we must always bear in remembrance what we saw elsewhere
as to the diminution of the people.

<span id="xii.i-p153"></span>In this way the Prophet exhorts the elect
to the fear of God, that they may profit by his chastisements. Hence
infer, that we cannot be reconciled to God through the blood of Christ,
unless we first repent of our sins; not that salvation, which is founded
on the pardon of sins, depends on our repentance; but repentance is
joined to it in such a manner that it cannot be separated. They whom the
Lord receives into favor are renewed by his Spirit in such a manner as
to abhor their vices and change their manner of life.

<span id="xii.i-p154"></span>Papists overturn the whole doctrine of
salvation, by mingling and confounding pardon of sin with repentance;
and not only they, but others also who wish to be thought more acute.
 <span id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148) They acknowledge that a man is
justified by free grace through Christ, but add, that it is because we
are renewed by him. Thus they make our justification to depend partly on
the pardon of sins and partly on repentance. But in this way our
consciences will never be pacified; for we are very far from being
perfectly renewed. These things must, therefore, be distinguished, so as
to be neither separated nor confounded; and thus our salvation will
rest; on a solid foundation.

<span id="xii.i-p156"></span>Paul quotes this passage, (<span
id="xii.i-p156.1"></span>[Ro
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026)<span id="xii.i-p156.1"></span>)
in order to show that there is still some remaining hope among the Jews;
although from their unconquerable obstinacy it might be inferred that
they were altogether cast off and doomed to eternal death. But because
God is continually mindful of his covenant, and “his gifts and calling
are without repentance,” (<span id="xii.i-p156.2"></span>[Ro
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#029)<span id="xii.i-p156.2"></span>)
Paul justly concludes that it is impossible that there shall not at
length be some remnant that come to Christ, and obtain that salvation
which he has procured. Thus the Jews must at length be collected along
with the Gentiles, that out of both “there may be one fold” under
Christ. (<span id="xii.i-p156.3"></span>[Joh
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span id="xii.i-p156.3"></span>)
It is of the deliverance from Babylon, however, that the Prophet treats.
This is undoubtedly true; but we have said that he likewise includes the
kingdom of Christ, and spiritual redemption, to which this prediction
relates. Hence we have said that Paul infers that he could not be the
redeemer of the world, without belonging to some Jews, whose fathers he
had chosen, and to whom this promise was directly addressed.

<span id="xii.i-p157"></span>*Saith Jehovah.* By these words, in the
conclusion of the verse, he sets a seal to the excellent sentiment which
he has expressed.

<span id="xii.i-p158"></span><span id="xii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p159"></span>**21.** *And I make this my covenant with
them.* Because it was difficult to believe what the Prophet has hitherto
declared, therefore he endeavors, in various ways, to confirm the Jews,
that they may rely with unshaken confidence on this promise of
salvation, and may ascribe to God so much honor as to trust in his word.
And we ought carefully to observe the word *covenant,* by which the
Prophet points out the greatness and excellence of this promise; for the
promises are more extensive, and may be regarded as the stones of the
building, while the foundation of it is the covenant, which upholds the
whole mass. He makes use of this word, therefore, that they might not
think that it contained some matter of ordinary occurrence, and adds
these confirmations, that, although the Lord did not immediately perform
this, they might nevertheless expect it with firm and unshaken hope; and
there appears to be an implied contrast, that believers may cheerfully
look forward to the new covenant, which was to be established in the
hand of Christ.

<span id="xii.i-p160"></span>*My Spirit that is upon thee, and my
words.* What is now added may be thought to be feeble and trivial, when
he enjoins the Church to be satisfied with the “word” and “Spirit;“ as
if this were a great happiness, to hang in suspense on nothing but God’s
promises. Yet although the Prophet commends the value and excellence of
doctrine, I have no doubt that still it is not separated from its
effect. But because God regulates and dispenses his grace in such a
manner, that, as long as believers remain in this world, he always
trains them to patience, and does not in every instance answer their
prayers, therefore he brings them back to doctrine; as if he had said,
“Thou wilt indeed find that I am kind to thee in various ways; but.
there is no happiness which will be of greater importance to thee, or
which thou oughtest to desire more earnestly, than to feel that I am
present by ‘the word’ and ‘the Spirit.’” Hence we infer that this is a
most valuable treasure of the Church, that he has chosen for himself a
habitation in it, to dwell in the hearts of believers by his Spirit, and
next to preserve among them the doctrine of his gospel.

<span id="xii.i-p161"></span>*Shall not depart out of thy mouth.*
Finally, he foretells that the Lord will never forsake his people, but
will always be present with them by “his Spirit” and by “the word.” The
“Spirit” is joined with the word, because, without the efficacy of the
Spirit, the preaching of the gospel would avail nothing, but would
remain unfruitful. In like manner, “the word” must not be separated from
“the Spirit,” as fanatics imagine, who, despising the word, glory in the
name of the Spirit, and swell with vain confidence in their own
imaginations. It is the spirit of Satan that is separated from the word,
to which the Spirit of God is continually joined. Now, when he quickens
outward doctrine, so that it strikes root in our hearts, our condition
is happy even amidst many afflictions; and I have no doubt that the
Prophet expressly declares that, although God deals kindly with his
Church, still its life and salvation shall be laid up in faith. Thus the
new people is distinguished from the ancient people; for, as the kingdom
of Christ is spiritual, so, since he has risen from the dead, believing
souls must be raised up along with him. But now he promises that the
Church will never be deprived of this invaluable blessing, but will be
guided by the Holy Spirit and sustained by heavenly doctrine; for it
would be of little avail that the gospel should once be offered to us,
and that the Spirit should be given to us, if he did not dwell with us.

<span id="xii.i-p162"></span>*Which I have put in thy mouth.* The
Prophet shows that God addresses us in such a manner that he chooses to
employ the ministry and agency of men. He might indeed speak from heaven
or send angels; but he has consulted our advantage the more by
addressing and exhorting us through men like ourselves, that, by their
voice and word, he may more gently draw us to himself. This order has
therefore been established by him in the Church, that it is vain for
those who reject his ministers to boast that they are willing to obey
God; and therefore he commands us to seek the word and doctrine from the
mouth of prophets and teachers, who teach in his name and by his
authority, that we may not foolishly hunt after new revelations.

<span id="xii.i-p163"></span>*My words shall not depart.* The phrase,
“shall not depart,” is rendered by some in the imperative mood, for
which it is well known that the future tense is sometimes used. But here
a command or exhortation is not appropriate; for the Prophet promises
that which God intends to fulfill. An exhortation may indeed be drawn
from it, but the priority is due to the promise, which is to this
effect, that the Lord will assist his Church, and will take care of it,
so as never to allow it to be deprived of doctrine. To this, therefore,
we ought always to look, when we are tempted by adversity, and when
everything does not succeed according to our wish; for we must be
supported and upheld by the word and the Spirit, of which the Lord
declares that we shall never be left destitute.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc16011.htm#fr_128) <span
id="xii.i-p47.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p48"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p48.1"></span>Il n’a point
change de nature.” “He has not changed his nature.”

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc16011.htm#fr_129) <span
id="xii.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p56.1"></span>Que la
moindre partie de leur corps est souillee d’extorsion.” “That the
smallest part of their body is tainted with extortion.”

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc16011.htm#fr_130) <span
id="xii.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p61"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p61.1"></span>Pour
debatre.” “To debate.”

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc16011.htm#fr_131) <span
id="xii.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p63"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p63.1"></span>De
desloyaute et traison.” “For disloyalty and treason”

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc16011.htm#fr_132) <span
id="xii.i-p68.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p69"></span> “These are (<span
id="xii.i-p69.1"></span>παροιμιώδη) proverbial expressions, and mean
that bad men have taken destructive counsels, as if the eggs of
serpents, which ought to be crushed by those who meet with them, were
purposely hatched by some person, in order that poisonous animals might,
in due time, be produced by them for the destruction of men.” —
*Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc16011.htm#fr_133) <span
id="xii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p73"></span> “Having introduced the spider’s web, in
connection with the serpent’s egg, as an emblem of malignant and
treacherous designs, he here repeats the first, but for another purpose,
namely, to suggest the idea of futility and worthlessness. This
application may have been suggested by the frequent reference to webs
and weaving as conducive to the comfort and emolument of men; but
spiders’ webs can answer no such purpose. The idea that it is not fit or
cannot be applied to this end, although not exclusively expressed, is
really included in the general declaration that they *shall not* be so
used ­ *Alexander*.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc16011.htm#fr_134) <span
id="xii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p77"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p77.1"></span>Maistres
passez.” “Acknowledged masters.”

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc16011.htm#fr_135) <span
id="xii.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p78"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p78.1"></span>Mais c’est
sans parler.” “But it is without speaking.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc16011.htm#fr_136) <span
id="xii.i-p78.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p79"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p79.1"></span>Pour piller
et brigander.” “For thieving and higbway­robbery.”

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc16011.htm#fr_137) <span
id="xii.i-p82.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p83"></span> “J. D. Michaelis and Umbreit go to opposite
extremes in their interpretation of the first clause. The former makes
the way of peace denote the way to happiness; the latter understands the
clause to mean that they refuse all overtures of reconciliation. The
obvious and simple meaning is, that their lives are not pacific but
contentious.” ­ *Alexander*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc16011.htm#fr_138) <span
id="xii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p94"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p94.1"></span>Comme s’il
accordoit qu’elles fassent vrayes.” “As if he admitted that they were
true.”

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc16011.htm#fr_139) <span
id="xii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p103"></span> “A witness interrogated by a judge, or
even speaking of his own accord, is said, <span
id="xii.i-p103.1"></span>ענה, (*gnanah*,) ‘to answer.’ The same forIn of
expression occurs in <span id="xii.i-p103.2"></span>[Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)<span id="xii.i-p103.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p103.3"></span>[Jer
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007)<span id="xii.i-p103.3"></span>;
<span id="xii.i-p103.4"></span>[Ho
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#010)<span id="xii.i-p103.4"></span>.”
— *Rosenmuller*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc16011.htm#fr_140) <span
id="xii.i-p104.2"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p105"></span> “Lowth translates <span
id="xii.i-p105.1"></span>אתנו, (*ittanu*,) ‘cleave fast unto us; ‘but
interpreters generally prefer the sense expressed in the English
Version, (they are with us, that is, in our sight, or present to our
memory.)” ­ *Alexander*.  
“Our sins are well known to us.” ­ *Doederlein*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc16011.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xii.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p111"></span> “What they think in their heart, and utter
from the thought to speech and to action, that is, their thoughts, and
words, and actions, are falsehoods.” ­ *Kimchi*.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc16011.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xii.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p117"></span> “If you render the Hebrew words thus,
‘Withdrawing from evil, he maketh himself a prey,’ that is, ‘Whosoever
shuns vices, exposes himself as a prey to the wicked,’ you will have a
meaning which leaves nothing to desire.” ­ *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc16011.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xii.i-p122.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p123"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p123.1"></span>Doit
neeessairement estre aussi mechant qu’eux.” “Must unavoidably be as
wicked as they are.”

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc16011.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xii.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p129"></span> “And now, when God repents on account of
the evil which he has brought on the people, he sees that there is not a
righteous man to stand in the gap. (<span id="xii.i-p129.1"></span>[Eze
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#030)<span id="xii.i-p129.1"></span>)”
­ *Jarchi*.  
“Rosenmuller, Umbrett, and others, follow Jarchi in supposing <span
id="xii.i-p129.3"></span>איש (*ish*) to be emphatic and to signify a man
of the right sort, a man equal to the occasion. This explanation derives
some color from the analogy of <span id="xii.i-p129.4"></span>[Jer
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p129.4"></span>;
but even there, and still more here, the strength of the expression is
increased rather than diminished by taking this phrase in the simple
sense of *nobody*. What was wanted was not merely a qualified man, but
any man whatever, to maintain the cause of Israel and Jehovah.” ­
*Alexander*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc16011.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xii.i-p129.6"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p130"></span> The verb <span
id="xii.i-p130.1"></span>אשתומם (*yishtomem*) denotes a man who stands,
and wonders, and remains silent through his wonder.” ­ *Jarchi*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc16011.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xii.i-p136.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p137"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p137.1"></span>De mort.”
“From death.”

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc16011.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xii.i-p147.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p148"></span> “Whether <span id="xii.i-p148.1"></span>כי
(*ki*) be rendered *when* or *for*, the sense remains essentially the
same, because the one implies the other. The only weighty reasons for
preferring the latter are, first, its natural priority as being the
usual and proper sense, and then the simplicity of structure which
results from it as being more accordant with the genius and usage of the
language.” ­ *Alexander*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc16011.htm#fr_148) <span
id="xii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p155"></span> “<span id="xii.i-p155.1"></span>Et ce ne
sont pas les ignorans seulement qui font cela, ains ceux qui veulent
estre estimez les plus subtils entre eux.” “And it is not ignorant
persons only who do this, but those who wish to be reckoned the most
ingenious among them.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 60](cc16012)
