[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16016)  [Next](cc16018.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xviii"></span>

<span id="xviii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 65.

<span id="xviii.i"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p1"></span><span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
65:1-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md)<span id="xviii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p2"></span>**1.** I am sought of *them that* asked not
*for me*; I am found of *them that* sought me not: I said, Behold me,
behold me, unto a nation *that* was not called by my name.

<span id="xviii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Patefeci me iis qui non
interrogabant, inventus sum ab ils qui non quaerebant me; dixi, Ecce
ego, ecce ego, ad gentem quae non invocabat nomen meum.

<span id="xviii.i-p4"></span>**2.** I have spread out my hands all the
day unto a rebellious people, which walketh in a way *that was* not
good, after their own thoughts;

<span id="xviii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Expandi quotidie manus meas ad
populum rebellem, gradientes via non bona post cogitationes suas.

<span id="xviii.i-p6"></span>**3.** A people that provoketh me to anger
continually to my face; that sacrificeth in gardens, and burneth incense
upon altars of brick;

<span id="xviii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Populus qui me irritat semper in
faciem meam, qui sacrificat in hortis, et suffitum facit super lateres.

<span id="xviii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Which remain among the graves, and
lodge in the monuments, which eat swine’s flesh, and broth of abominable
*things is in* their vessels;

<span id="xviii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Qui manent in sepulchris, in
desertis pernoctant, qui comedunt carnem suillam, et jus pollutorum in
vasis eorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Which say, Stand by thyself, come
not near to me; for I am holier than thou. These *are* a smoke in my
nose, a fire that burneth all the day.

<span id="xviii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Qui dicunt, Mane apud to, ne
accedas ad me, quia sanctificarem to, (*vel, sanctior sum quam tu*;)
isti fumus in furore meo, ignis ardens tota die.

<span id="xviii.i-p12"></span>**6.** Behold, *it is* written before me:
I will not keep silence, but will recompense, even recompense into their
bosom,

<span id="xviii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ecce scriptum est coram me; non
tacebo, quin reddam et rependam in sinum eorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p14"></span>**7.** Your iniquities, and the iniquities
of your fathers together, saith the LORD, which have burned incense upon
the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I
measure their former work into their bosom.

<span id="xviii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Iniquitates vestrae et iniquitates
patrum vestrorum simul, dicit Iehova. Quia suffitum fecerunt in
montibus, et super comes probro me affecerunt, ideo remetiar opus eorum
vetustum in sinum eorum.

<span id="xviii.i-p16"></span>**8.** Thus saith the LORD, As the new
wine is found in the cluster, and *one* saith, Destroy it not; for a
blessing *is* in it: so will I do for my servants’ sakes, that I may not
destroy them all.

<span id="xviii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Sic dicit Iehova, Quemadmodum si
quis inveniat mustum in botro, et dieat, Ne perdas illud, quoniam est
benedictio in eo; ita faciam propter servos meos, ut non perdam totum.

<span id="xviii.i-p18"></span>**9.** And I will bring forth a seed out
of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains: and mine elect
shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.

<span id="xviii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et educam ex Iaeob semen, et ex
Iuda haeredem montium meorum; et haereditate obtinebunt eam eleeti mei,
et servi mei illic habitabunt.

<span id="xviii.i-p20"></span>**10.** And Sharon shall be a fold of
flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in,
for my people that have sought me.

<span id="xviii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Et erit Saron habitaeulum pecudum,
et vallis Achor ad accubitum armenti, populo meo qui quaesiverunt me.

<span id="xviii.i-p22"></span>**11.** But ye *are* they that forsake the
LORD, that forget my holy mountain, that prepare a table for that troop,
and that furnish the drink offering unto that number.

<span id="xviii.i-p23"></span>**11.** At vos desertores Iehovae, qui
obliviseimini montes sanctitatis meae; qui paratis exereitui mensam, et
impletis numero libamen.

<span id="xviii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Therefore will I number you to the
sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter: because when I
called, ye did not answer; when I spake, ye did not hear; but did evil
before mine eyes, and did choose *that* wherein I delighted not.

<span id="xviii.i-p25"></span>**12.** Itaque numerabo vos ad gladium, et
omnes in caedem corruetis; eo quod vocavi, nec respondistis; loquutus
sum, nec audivistis; fecistisque malum in oculis meis; et in quibus
voluptatem non cepi, elegistis.

<span id="xviii.i-p26"></span>**13.** Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD,
Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold, my
servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall
rejoice, but ye shall be ashamed:

<span id="xviii.i-p27"></span>**13.** Propterea sic dicit Dominus
Iehova, Ecce servi mei comedent, et vos esurietis. Ecce servi mei
bibent, et vos sitietis. Ecce servi mei laetabuntur, et vos erubeseetis.

<span id="xviii.i-p28"></span>**14.** Behold, my servants shall sing for
joy of heart, but ye shalt cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for
vexation of spirit.

<span id="xviii.i-p29"></span>**14.** Ecce servi mei jubilabunt prae
hilaritate cordis, et vos clamabitis prae dolore cordis, et prae
angustia spiritus ululabitis.

<span id="xviii.i-p30"></span>**15.** And ye shall leave your name for a
curse unto my chosen: for the Lord GOD shall slay thee, and call his
servants by another name:

<span id="xviii.i-p31"></span>**15.** Et relinquetis nomen vesstrum in
execrationem electis meis; interficiet to Dominus Iehova, et servos suos
vocabit nomine alio.

<span id="xviii.i-p32"></span>**16.** That he who blesseth himself in
the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that sweareth
in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; because the former
troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from mine eyes.

<span id="xviii.i-p33"></span>**16.** Qui benedixerit sibi in terra,
benedicet se in Deo veraci; et qui juraverit in terra, jurabit in Deo
veraei; quia oblivioni traditae sunt afflictiones priores, et
absconditae ab oculis meis.

<span id="xviii.i-p34"></span>**17.** For, behold, I create new heavens
and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind.

<span id="xviii.i-p35"></span>**17.** Quia ecce ego creabo eralos novos,
et terrain novato; prior um non erit memoria, neque in cor ascendent.

<span id="xviii.i-p36"></span>**18.** But be ye glad and rejoice for
ever *in that* which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy.

<span id="xviii.i-p37"></span>**18.** Sed gaudete et exultate in
perpetuum iis quae ego creo. Nam ecce ego creo Ierusalem exultationem,
et populum ejus gaudium.

<span id="xviii.i-p38"></span>**19.** And I will rejoice in Jerusalem,
and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in
her, nor the voice of crying.

<span id="xviii.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et exultabo in Ierusalem, et
gaudebo in populo meo; nec audietur in ea amplius vox fletus et vox
clamoris.

<span id="xviii.i-p40"></span>**20.** There shall be no more thence an
infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the
child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner *being* an hundred
years old shall be accursed.

<span id="xviii.i-p41"></span>**20.** Non erit illic amplius infans
dierum nec senex qui non impleat dies suos. Quoniam filius centum
annorum morietur adolescens, et qui peccat filius centum annorum
maledicetur.

<span id="xviii.i-p42"></span>**21.** And they shall build houses, and
inhabit *them*; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of
them.

<span id="xviii.i-p43"></span>**21.** Ædificabunt domos, et
inhabitabunt; plantabunt vites, et comedent fructum earum.

<span id="xviii.i-p44"></span>**22.** They shall not build, and another
inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a
tree *are* the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the
work of their hands.

<span id="xviii.i-p45"></span>**22.** Non ædificabunt ut alius
inhabitet; non plantabunt ut alius comedat; quoniam secundum dies
arboris, dies populi mei; et opus manuum suarum perpetuabunt electi mei.

<span id="xviii.i-p46"></span>**23.** They shall not labour in vain, nor
bring forth for trouble; for they *are* the seed of the blessed of the
LORD, and their offspring with them.

<span id="xviii.i-p47"></span>**23.** Non laborabunt frustra, nec
parient in terrore; quoniam semen benedictorum Iehovae erunt et soboles
eorum cure ipsis.

<span id="xviii.i-p48"></span>**24.** And it shall come to pass, that
before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will
hear.

<span id="xviii.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et erit, antequam clament ego
exaudiam; adhuc illis loquentibus ego audiam.

<span id="xviii.i-p50"></span>**25.** The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust *shall
be* the serpent’s meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy
mountain, saith the LORD.

<span id="xviii.i-p51"></span>**25.** Lupus et agnus pascentur simul; et
leo sicut bos comedet paleam; et serpenti pulvis erit panis suus. Non
affligent, neque nocebunt in universo monte sancto meo, dicit Iehova.

<span id="xviii.i-p52"></span> 

<span id="xviii.i-p53"></span><span id="xviii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p54"></span>**1.** *I have manifested myself.* The
Prophet now passes on to another doctrine; for he shews that God has
good reason for rejecting and casting off the Jews. It is because they
have profited nothing by either warnings or threatenings to be brought
back from their errors into the right way. But that they might not think
that the Lord’s covenant would on that account be made void, he adds
that he will have another people which formerly was no people, and that
where he was formerly unknown, his name Shall be well known and highly
celebrated. The Jews looked on this as monstrous, and reckoned it to be
altogether inconsistent with the covenant which the Lord made with
Abraham, (<span id="xviii.i-p54.1"></span>[Ge
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p54.1"></span>,.md)
if such a benefit were extended to any others than his posterity. But
the Prophet intended to strip them of the foolish confidence of
imagining that God was bound to the posterity of Abraham; for the Lord
had not restricted himself to them but on an absolute condition, and if
this were violated by them, they would be deprived, like
covenant-breakers and traitors, of all the advantage derived from the
covenant. Nor was this promise made to Abraham alone, and to those who
were descended from him, but to all who should be ingrafted by faith
into his family. But it will be more convenient to begin with the second
verse, in which he explains the cause of the rejection, that we may more
fully understand the Prophet’s design.  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p56"></span><span id="xviii.i-p56.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p57"></span>**2.** *I have stretched out my hands.* He
accuses the Jews, and complains of their ingratitude and rebellion; and
in this manner he proves that there is no reason why they should say
that the Lord does them wrong if he bestow his grace on others. The Jews
conducted themselves proudly and insolently toward God, as if they had
been elected through their own merit. On account of their ingratitude
and insolence the Lord rejects them as unworthy, and complains that to
no purpose did he “stretch out his hands” to draw and bring them back to
him.

<span id="xviii.i-p58"></span>By “the stretching out of the hands” he
means the daily invitation. There are various ways in which the Lord
“stretches out his hands to us;” for he draws us to him, either
effectually or by the word. In this passage it must relate chiefly to
the word. The Lord never speaks to us without at the same time
“stretching out his hand” to join us to himself, or without causing us
to feel, on the other hand, that he is near to us. He even embraces us,
and shews the anxiety of a father, so that, if we do not comply with his
invitation, it must be owing entirely to our own fault. The heinousness
of the guilt is greatly aggravated by long continuance, that, during a
long succession of ages, God did not cease to send one Prophet after
another, and even, as he says elsewhere, to rise early in the morning
and continue the same care till the evening. (<span
id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>[Jer. 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013.md),
[Jer. 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#007.md), [Jer.
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#014.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p58.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p59"></span>*To a rebellious people.* First, he calls
them “rebellious” or disobedient, but immediately afterwards he declares
what is the nature of that rebellion, namely, that the people *walk
after their own thoughts.* Nothing is more displeasing to God than for
men to be <span id="xviii.i-p59.1"></span>αὐθάδεις “self-willed,” (<span
id="xviii.i-p59.2"></span>[2Pe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#010)<span id="xviii.i-p59.2"></span>;.md)
that is, devoted to their own inclinations; for he commands us to
surrender our own judgment, that we may be capable of receiving the true
doctrine. The Lord therefore testifies that it was not owing to him that
he did not retain and continue to exercise towards them his wonted
favor, but that they alienated themselves through their own madness,
because they chose to abide by their own natural inclinations rather
than to follow God as their leader.

<span id="xviii.i-p60"></span>Having pointed out the cause of this
rejection, we must come to the calling of the Gentiles, who succeeded in
the room of the Jews; for that is undoubtedly the subject treated in the
first verse. The Lord had long ago foretold it by Moses, so that they
ought not to have thought that there was anything new in this
prediction.

<span id="xviii.i-p61"></span>“They have provoked me by that which is
not God; they have moved me to anger by their vanities; and I also will
provoke them by that which is not a people, by a foolish nation I will
enrage them.” (<span id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p61.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p62"></span>Finally, the Prophet now threatens the
same thing which was afterwards foretold by Christ when that blinding
was at hand.

<span id="xviii.i-p63"></span>“The kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and shall be given to a nation which shall bring forth fruit.”
(<span id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>[Mt
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p63.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p64"></span>**1.** *To them that asked not.*  <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) When he says that God manifested
himself “to them that asked not,” he shews that the Gentiles were
anticipated by the grace of God, and that they brought no merit or
excellence as an inducement to God to give it to them. This obviously
agrees with that passage which we quoted, in which Moses calls them “a
foolish nation.” (<span id="xviii.i-p65.1"></span>[De
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p65.1"></span>.) Thus, under a universal type, he describes
what is the nature of men before the Lord anticipates them by his mercy;
for they neither call on the Lord, nor seek him, nor think about him.
And this passage ought to be carefully observed, in order to establish
the certainty of our calling, which may be said to be the key that opens
to us the kingdom of heaven; for by means of it peace and repose are
given to our consciences, which would always be in doubt and uncertainty
if they did not rest on such testimonies. We see, therefore, that it did
not happen accidentally or suddenly that we were called by God and
reckoned to be his people; for it had been predicted long before in many
passages. From this passage Paul earnestly contends for the calling of
the Gentiles, and says that Isaiah boldly exclaims and affirms that the
Gentiles have been called by God, because he spoke more clearly and
loudly than the circumstances of Ms own time required. Here we see,
therefore, that we were called by an eternal purpose of God long before
the event happened.

<span id="xviii.i-p66"></span>*Behold I, behold I.* By repeating these
words twice, he confirms still more the declaration that God hath
manifested himself in so friendly a manner to foreign and heathen
nations, that they do not doubt that he dwells in the midst of them.
And, indeed, that sudden change needed to be confirmed, because it was
difficult to be believed; although by that very novelty the Prophet
intended to magnify the unexpected grace of God. The meaning may be thus
summed up: “When the Lord shall have offered himself to the Gentiles,
and they shall have been joined to the holy family of Abraham, there
will be some Church in the world, after the Jews have been driven out.”
Now we see that all that is here predicted by the Prophet was fulfilled
by the Gospel, by which the Lord actually offered and manifested himself
to foreign nations. Whenever, therefore, this voice of the Gospel is
sounded in our ears, or when we record the word of the Lord, let us know
that the Lord is present, and offers himself, that we may know him
familiarly, and may call on him boldly and with assured confidence.

<span id="xviii.i-p67"></span><span id="xviii.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p68"></span>**3.** *A people that provoketh me.* Here
he describes and illustrates more largely in what respects the Jews were
rebellious against God. It was because they had forsaken the command of
God, and had polluted themselves by various superstitions. He had said a
little before, (<span id="xviii.i-p68.1"></span>[Isa
63:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#017.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p68.1"></span>,) that the Jews had estranged themselves from
God, because they wandered after their inventions; and now he points out
the fruit of that licentiousness, that, by giving a loose rein to their
thoughts, they overturned the pure worship of God. And undoubtedly this
is the origin of all superstitions, that men are delighted with their
own inventions, and choose to be wise in their own eyes rather than
restrain their senses in obedience to God. In vain do men bring forward
their devotions, as they call them, and their good intentions, which God
holds in such abhorrence and detestation that they who have followed
them are guilty of breaking the covenant and deserting from their
allegiance; for there is nothing which we ought to undertake of our own
accord, but we ought to obey God when he commands. In a word, the
beginning and perfection of lawful worship is a readiness to obey.

<span id="xviii.i-p69"></span>By the word “provoke” he describes the
impudence of the people, who deliberately, as it were, provoked God, and
had no reverence for his majesty so as to submit to his authority. And
he heightens the description by saying*, To my face;* for since God may
be said to be present and actually beheld by those whom he warns by his
word, they sin more heinously, and are guilty of greater impudence and
rebellion, than those who never heard the word.

<span id="xviii.i-p70"></span>*That sacrificeth in gardens, and offereth
incense on bricks.* He mentions the “gardens” which they had consecrated
to their idols, and says that they provoked him by them. Some think that
“bricks” are mentioned by way of contempt, and are indirectly contrasted
with the altar on which alone God wished that they should sacrifice; and
accordingly they think that here he mentions the roofs on which
superstitious persons were wont to offer sacrifices; for they were made
of “bricks.” But I think that it means simply the altars which they had
built for idols; for, although they were not without the plausible
pretense of wishing to imitate that form of altar which God had
prescribed, yet God abhorred it, because it was contrary to his word.

<span id="xviii.i-p71"></span><span id="xviii.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p72"></span>**4.** *Who dwell in the graves.* He
enumerates other kinds of superstitions; and although, in consequence of
its brevity, the description is obscure, yet we may easily learn from
other passages what was the nature of them. For as necromancy was
generally practiced among heathen nations, the Jews also consulted
demons “in graves and deserts,” instead of consulting God alone, which
they ought to have done; and, as if they were seeking answers from the
dead, they took pleasure in being deceived by the illusions of demons.
 <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) How solemnly the Lord had
forbidden it, appears very clearly from <span
id="xviii.i-p73.2"></span>[Deut.
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011.md)<span id="xviii.i-p73.2"></span>,
and other passages; and we have seen something of this kind in a former
part of this book, (<span id="xviii.i-p73.3"></span>[Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019)<span id="xviii.i-p73.3"></span>..md)
In general we are taught that God demands nothing more than obedience,
which he prefers to slain beasts and sacrifices. (<span
id="xviii.i-p73.4"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p73.4"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p74"></span>*Who eat swine’s flesh.* Formerly he
complained that the worship of God was polluted by strange inventions;
and now he adds that they set aside every distinction, so that they do
not distinguish between the clean and the unclean; and he brings forward
a single instance, that they do not abstain from “swine’s flesh.” But it
may be thought that this was a small matter. Very far from it; for we
ought not to judge from our own opinion, but from that of the
legislator, how heinous a sin it is; and nothing which the Lord has
forbidden ought to be reckoned trivial. (<span
id="xviii.i-p74.1"></span>[Le
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007.md)<span id="xviii.i-p74.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p74.2"></span>[De
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p74.2"></span>..md)
This related to the external profession of. faith, by which the Jews
were in duty bound to testify how widely they differed from the
pollution of the Gentiles. From that rule, therefore, which the Lord
enjoins upon us, we must not swerve even a hair’s breadth.  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p76"></span><span id="xviii.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p77"></span>**5.** *Remain by thyself.*  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201.md) He points out extreme impiety in the
Jews, who obstinately and rebelliously opposed God’s worshippers, and
refused to listen to any warnings. There is some hope of repentance, so
long as we lend an ear to warnings and reproofs; but if we reject them,
our case is undoubtedly hopeless.

<span id="xviii.i-p79"></span>Though the words are apparently obscure,
their meaning amounts to this, that hypocrites disdainfully and fiercely
repel faithful advisers, because they either make false claims to
holiness, or, on account of pride, do not suffer themselves to be
reproved; for hypocrisy is never free from supercilious disdain and
haughtiness. Let us not wonder, therefore, that those who are infected
by this vice swell with insolent pretensions, and boast of their virtue
and holiness, and value themselves more highly than all others; for
Satan has blinded them to make an idle and ostentatious boast of what
they call their devotions, and to despise the word of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p80"></span>Commentators think that this is a general
statement; which reproves the Jews for refusing to submit to the
prophets. But it appears to me that we ought to take into account a
circumstance to which they do not attach sufficient weight, that this
verse is in close and immediate connection with the preceding verses,
and contains a sharp reproof of the Jews, for not only revolting from
the true worship, but likewise following obstinately their own
inventions, so as to turn with disdain from every one that did not
flatter them; for that phrase, “Remain with thyself,” means nothing else
than “Away with thee!” as if they declared that they would have nothing
to do with honest instructors.  <span id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p82"></span><span id="xviii.i-p82.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p83"></span>**6.** *Lo, it is written before me.* He
alludes to the ordinary custom of judges, who keep before them in
writing the processes of investigation regarding any matter, together
with the testimonies, acts, and everything of that nature, in order
that, when it shall be found necessary to make use of them, the guilt of
the culprit may be easily proved; for we write those things which we
wish to be remembered by posterity The Lord therefore testifies that
these things can never fade into oblivion, because they have been
written; for, although for a time he pass them over in silence, yet the
wicked shall not escape unpunished, but shall at length feel that he is
a righteous judge.

<span id="xviii.i-p84"></span>Hence we ought to learn that we must not
abuse God’s patience, because he bears with us long, and does not all at
once stretch out his hand to punish us; for all our faults are
nevertheless written before him, for which we must at length suffer
punishment, if we do not repent.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203.md) True, indeed, the Lord has no need of
writing as an aid to memory; but he makes use of this form of
expression, that we may not think that he has forgotten anything, when
he is slow in executing his judgments. Jeremiah even says expressly,
that

<span id="xviii.i-p86"></span>“the sin of Judah is written with an iron
pen and with the nail of a diamond.”  
(<span id="xviii.i-p86.2"></span>[Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)<span id="xviii.i-p86.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p87"></span>To *recompense into the bosom* is a phrase
frequently employed in Scripture; for men think either that their sins
are concealed, or that they will not be called to account for them; but,
hurried along by unbridled lust, or laying the blame on some other
person, they drive fear to a distance from them. (<span
id="xviii.i-p87.1"></span>[Ps
79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012.md)<span id="xviii.i-p87.1"></span>;
<span id="xviii.i-p87.2"></span>[Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p87.2"></span>.) On this account the Lord threatens that he
will “recompense into their bosom,” that they may consider who is the
judge with whom they have to do.

<span id="xviii.i-p88"></span><span id="xviii.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p89"></span>**7.** *Your iniquities and the iniquities
of your fathers together.* Isaiah enlarges on that, which he had
expressed briefly in the preceding verse; for he shews that the Jews are
not now, for the first time, guilty of this treason, but that there is
the ancient example of the fathers, in whose footsteps they closely
follow. In like manner the Lord formerly complained that he had borne
long with that people, and was at length wearied with them. He therefore
describes the aggravated heinousness of the offense, by saying that the
Jews follow the example of their fathers; as if he had said, “They are
very bad eggs of bad crows;” for the more frequently and the more
earnestly that men have been warned, so much the more must they be
condemned for obstinacy, if they do not repent. Thus he shews that they
disregarded warnings and threatenings, and persevered for many years in
their baseness and impiety; that they may no longer bring forward any
excuse or pretense, but, on the contrary, may know that they deserve
severe punishment.

<span id="xviii.i-p90"></span>Here we see that the corruption which has
flowed from the fathers is so far from being an excuse to the children,
(as is alleged by ignorant persons, who commonly make use of this
shield,) that, on the contrary, they draw down on themselves severer
judgment. He adds <span id="xviii.i-p90.1"></span>יחדו, (*yachdcav*,)
together. As if the Lord had said, that he gathers together, and, as it
were, forms into a bundle, the crimes of the fathers and of the
children, that he may at length punish them. Not that

<span id="xviii.i-p91"></span>“the son bears the iniquity of the
father,” (<span id="xviii.i-p91.1"></span>[Eze
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p91.1"></span>,)

<span id="xviii.i-p92"></span>and endures the punishment which the
father deserved, but that, since they carry on the crimes of their
fathers, they must be included and condemned in the same judgment, while
obstinacy shews that their diseases are incurable.

<span id="xviii.i-p93"></span>*Because they have offered incense on the
mountains.* He glances at one kind of sin, under which, by a figure of
speech in which a part is taken for the whole, he describes also the
rest of their sins; for he means by it the whole of the revolt by which
the people withdrew from the true worship, and devoted and gave
themselves up to strange gods. This is the utmost verge of iniquities;
for, when the fear of God has been taken away, we can have nothing sound
or healthy in us. Thus he points out the source of all evils, which
ought to be the more diligently observed, because men are highly pleased
with themselves, and think that they deserve great praise, when they
worship God according to their own fancy, and do not understand that
nothing is more abominable in the sight of God than pretended worship,
which proceeds from human contrivance. Beyond all doubt, the people
desired to be acceptable to God by “offering incense on the mountains;”
but it is not from the purpose of their mind, and from their intention,
as they call it, that we must judge of their work. In preference to all
men, we must listen to the voice of the Lord, who testifies that he is
greatly dishonored, that we may not endeavor to defend ourselves by
pleading our intention, which will render us doubly guilty before God.

<span id="xviii.i-p94"></span>*Therefore I will measure back their
ancient work.* The word <span id="xviii.i-p94.1"></span>ראשנה
(*rishonah*) may be explained in various ways, either “I will measure
back with their antiquity,” or, “in the first place,” or “formerly,” or,
“from the beginning.” But we must take into account the connection of
the passage, from which the Prophet’s meaning will be clearly seen.
Having spoken a little before about the works of the fathers, he
undoubtedly ridicules those who made them a bulwark. It is a slight and
useless defense, and indeed it is idle to plead before God the practices
of the fathers, that is, their long-continued corruption; for in this
way we bring down on ourselves a heavier judgment. And yet many men are
so intoxicated by this pretense, that they think that no objection can
be brought against it, and even refuse to listen to anything else.
 <span id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204.md) Antiquity, indeed, is highly
venerable; but no man ought to value it so highly as to make the
smallest diminution of the honor of God. This is a remarkable passage
for convincing those who uphold superstitions by length of years, as if
old established error ought to be accounted a law.

<span id="xviii.i-p96"></span><span id="xviii.i-p96.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p97"></span>**8.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* Here the
Prophet softens the preceding statement; for otherwise it would have
been very hard to say that the iniquities of the fathers would be
brought to remembrance in such a manner, that the Lord would destroy the
fathers and the children along with them; and these things might strike
believers with such horror as to lead them to think that their salvation
was past all hope. We must therefore be carefully on our guard, and
observe the reason why the Lord is angry with us; for he wishes to
terrify us, so as to lead us to himself, and not so as to throw us into
despair. For this reason he holds out hope to believers, that they may
not lose courage; and, by exhibiting consolation, he encourages them to
repentance. He confirms it by a comparison.

<span id="xviii.i-p98"></span>*As if one found a grape in a cluster.* As
if a person who has determined to root out a vine that is inconvenient
or injurious to him, and finds a fruit-bearing branch, shall spare it;
so the Lord will refrain from tearing up those in which he shall find no
strength or flavor. Formerly he complained that the people were useless,
and even that they yielded bitter fruits. (<span
id="xviii.i-p98.1"></span>[Isa. 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#007)<span id="xviii.i-p98.1"></span>..md)
Isaiah retains the same comparison, but applies it in a different
manner. “Though the people may be said to be an unfruitful and
degenerate vine, yet there are still left some fruit-bearing branches
which the Lord will not suffer to perish.

<span id="xviii.i-p99"></span>But this may be understood in two ways;
either that the Lord will preserve his people for the sake of the elect,
or that, when the reprobate are destroyed, he will rescue believers from
destruction. There is a wide difference between these two
interpretations. As to the first, we know that the wicked are sometimes
spared on account of good men, whom God does not wish to destroy or to
involve in the same judgment, as various examples of Scripture
sufficiently shew. The Lord would have spared Sodom, if he had found but
ten good men in it. (<span id="xviii.i-p99.1"></span>[Ge
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#032.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p99.1"></span>.) All who sailed along with Paul, to the
number of “two hundred and seventy-six,” (<span
id="xviii.i-p99.2"></span>[Ac
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#037.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p99.2"></span>,) were “given to him” and rescued from
shipwreck, that the power which He manifested in his servant might be
more illustriously displayed. (<span id="xviii.i-p99.3"></span>[Ac
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#024.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p99.3"></span>.) The Lord blessed the house of Potiphar, and
made it to prosper in all things, for the sake of Joseph who was in his
family. (<span id="xviii.i-p99.4"></span>[Ge
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p99.4"></span>..md)
There are other examples of the same kind, which every one will easily
collect for himself.

<span id="xviii.i-p100"></span>But I approve more highly of the other
interpretation, that the Lord will punish the sins of his people in such
a manner as to have regard nevertheless to his own, and not to involve
all universally in the same destruction. Nor does he mean only that
believers shall be saved, but that a people shall be left amongst whom
men shall call on his name. And the comparison ought to be carefully
observed; for he shews that the remnant will be small, as compared with
the multitude which was at that time, as has been already explained.
(<span id="xviii.i-p100.1"></span>[Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009)<span id="xviii.i-p100.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p101"></span>Now, as to believers being often punished
along with the reprobate, let us not think that it is wrong; for the
Lord will often find in each of us enough of blame to afflict and punish
us. Besides, he wishes to instruct and arouse us by his chastisements;
and seeing that we have been joined to a certain people, and, as it
were, ingrafted into their body, we undoubtedly ought not to think it
strange if we, who may be said to be diseased members, shall share in
the same strokes and pains. Yet the Lord moderates the punishment, so as
not to tear up by the roots the elect plants.

<span id="xviii.i-p102"></span><span id="xviii.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p103"></span>**9.** *And I will bring forth a seed out
of Jacob.* He explains the preceding verse by other words, and shews
that the Lord wishes to reserve for himself some “seed” that shall call
upon him; for the Lord is wont to chastise his people in such a manner
as to determine that the Church shall exist, in which his truth and the
pure religion may be preserved, and which Paul for that very reason
calls “the pillar and foundation of truth.” (<span
id="xviii.i-p103.1"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p103.1"></span>.) We must not, therefore, judge of the
Church from the present condition of things, (for nothing in this world
can be permanent,) but from the purpose of God, which will not suffer it
to be overturned or destroyed. This ought to be carefully remembered by
us, that we may not be terrified by any calamities or ruins, or by any
hideous desolation of the Church.

<span id="xviii.i-p104"></span>*And out of Judah the heir of my
mountains.* He gives the appellation of “heirs of the mountains” to
those who, having returned from captivity, shall again inhabit their
native land. Judea, as is well known, was a mountainous country. He
again explains what might have appeared to be somewhat obscure.

<span id="xviii.i-p105"></span>*And my elect shall possess it by
inheritance.* He means that the Jews shall return to their original
condition, that they may enjoy that country as their own inheritance,
from which they had been driven out. Judea was soon afterwards reduced
to the utmost desolation. The Lord testifies that this shall not be of
long duration; and, in order to confirm it the more, he mentions in a
compendious manner the covenant by which that land was destined for
them, that they might possess it by the right of inheritance. Thus,
although they were long in captivity, yet this word “inheritance” ought
to arouse them to cherish the confident hope that they would at length
regain the possession of it. But it ought to be observed that this grace
is confined to the elect and true worshippers of God, that every one may
not apply it to himself without distinction.  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p107"></span><span id="xviii.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p108"></span>**10.** *And Sharon shall be an abode of
flocks.* By these figures he means nothing else than that the land,
which was a desert, shall be again inhabited; for there is an implied
comparison. “Although, in consequence of the banishment of her
inhabitants into a distant country, she shall be forsaken and desolate,
yet she shall at length be inhabited, so as to abound in flocks and
herds, and have lands that are fertile and that are fit for pasture, and
supply abundantly everything that is necessary for the food and support
of men.” Sharon was a place adapted to pasture, and so was Achor; but
the former was adapted to flocks, and the latter to herds.

<span id="xviii.i-p109"></span>Here we see that the promises of God
contain blessings not only of the future but also of the present life,
that we may taste more and more his bounty and kindness; for by the
latter  <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) we are invited to the
greater and more excellent blessings of the heavenly life. When the Lord
extends his bounty to flocks and herds, this ought to confirm us the
more and make us more certain of his fatherly care and anxiety about us;
for if he pays attention to flocks which were created for our sake, much
more will he supply us with all that is necessary

<span id="xviii.i-p111"></span>“for the life that now is, and for that
which is to come.”  
(<span id="xviii.i-p111.2"></span>[1Ti
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p111.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p112"></span>Yet we must likewise keep in view the
spiritual meaning (of which we have spoken formerly) that leads us from
God’s earthly blessing to Christ’s spiritual kingdom, which the prophets
shadow out under that image.

<span id="xviii.i-p113"></span>*For my people.* Here also he excludes
the reprobate, who were not ashamed of glorying vainly and falsely of
the name of God. Although they confidently boast of promises and
sacraments, yet they have nothing in common with the children, and,
having been shut out from all hope of God’s favors, they receive the
reward of their iniquity. By adding, *Who have sought me*, he describes
more plainly who are they that shall be partakers of these benefits, in
order that, as has been already said, he may entirely cut off reprobates
and hypocrites. The sure mark by which lambs are distinguished from
kids, and lawful children from bastards, is to “seek” the Lord; for it
is not enough to shelter ourselves under a name and title, but we must
seek the Lord with a pure conscience, that we may cleave to him with the
whole heart. (<span id="xviii.i-p113.1"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p113.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p114"></span><span id="xviii.i-p114.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p115"></span>**11.** *But ye forsakers of Jehovah, who
forget the mountain of my holiness.* That hypocrites may not abuse these
promises, or think that what is said about the restoration of the people
relates to them, he again addresses them by these words, and calls them
“forsakers,”  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207.md) because they “have
forgotten” Mount Zion; that is, have revolted from the true worship of
God. By “the mountain of holiness” he denotes figuratively the rule of a
holy life which had been laid down in the word of the Lord; for the
temple had been built by the command of the Lord, that these men might
call upon him; and likewise the altar on which the Lord wished that
sacrifices should be offered. Thus those sacrifices and oblations were
impure which were offered in other places, or to other gods, or in any
way different from the strict observance of the ceremonies of the Law.
It is not lawful for men to undertake anything at their own suggestion;
for the Lord demands nothing but obedience, (<span
id="xviii.i-p116.2"></span>[1Sa
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#022.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p116.2"></span>,) and there is no obedience without faith;
and there is no faith without the word, (<span
id="xviii.i-p116.3"></span>[Ro
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p116.3"></span>,) by which alone we are at liberty to
inquire or think concerning God.

<span id="xviii.i-p117"></span>*Who prepare a table for the army*  <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208.md) He enumerates their superstitions. The
word <span id="xviii.i-p118.6"></span>גד (*Gad*) is variously explained.
Some think that it denotes Jupiter, or the star of Jupiter; and others
that it denotes Fortune. Jerome translates the words, “Ye who spread a
table for fortune;” for he thinks that it means prosperity. But I think
it more probable that <span id="xviii.i-p118.7"></span>גד (*Gad*) means
“a band,” or “a troop,” or even “an army;” and this agrees well with the
etymology of the word and the context. One passage is especially worthy
of notice, (<span id="xviii.i-p118.8"></span>[Ge
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#011.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p118.8"></span>,) in which Leah rejoices on account of the
addition of children; for I think that the word which he employs, <span
id="xviii.i-p118.9"></span>בגד (*begad*), ought to be understood as if
she had said, “Now, I have plenty of children;” for she had many
children before that time, and hence she gave the name <span
id="xviii.i-p118.10"></span>גד (*Gad*) to her fifth son. Accordingly, I
think that <span id="xviii.i-p118.11"></span>גד (*Gad*) ought to be
interpreted, in this passage, as meaning “a troop,” or “an army;”
because their false gods were so numerous, that they could scarcely be
numbered for multitude.

<span id="xviii.i-p119"></span>*And fill an oblation to the number.* To
fill may here be taken in two senses; either that they supplied
everything largely and bountifully for the worship of idols; (for
superstition has no limit or measure, and they who are niggardly in the
worship of God very cheerfully spend all that they have for the sake of
idols;) or that they passed by no idol to which they did not render
their worship. I prefer the latter meaning; for idolaters do not think
that they have done enough, if they do not give honor to each of the
saints; and the more numerous the saints whom they have honored, they
think that they will have better success. We have too great experience
of this every day in the Papists.

<span id="xviii.i-p120"></span>By “number” he means the same thing as he
formerly meant by “army;” for it is a repetition which is very customary
among Hebrew writers. He means, therefore, that “a table is prepared,”
that is, sacrifice is offered, not to a single idol, but to a great
number of idols; in order to shew clearly how grievous are the
punishments which they have deserved.

<span id="xviii.i-p121"></span><span id="xviii.i-p121.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p122"></span>**12.** *Therefore I will number you to
the sword.* He alludes to the number of the gods; and the Lord declares
that he will easily ascertain how numerous they are, for he “will number
them to the sword.” And hence we see that the Prophet, in the preceding
verse, does not speak of the two planets, Jupiter and Mercury, as some
think, but means that they were not satisfied with one God, and
collected for themselves various idols. It is an idle conjecture that
the word <span id="xviii.i-p122.1"></span>מני (*meni*) denotes Mercury,
because <span id="xviii.i-p122.2"></span>מנה (*manah*) signifies “to
number,” and Mercury presided over numbers and merchants.  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209.md) The design of the Prophet is manifest,
who declares that the people “shall be numbered to the sword,” because
they delighted in a vast number of gods, and did not choose to rely on
one God.

<span id="xviii.i-p124"></span>*Because I called, and ye did not
answer.* He heightens the extent and heinousness of that treason, by
saying that the Jews sinned through deliberate malice, and on purpose,
rather than through ignorance. They had been often instructed and
warned, but had disdainfully rejected all warnings, and consequently
were far less excusable than others, to whom no prophets were sent; for
although ignorance cannot be pleaded as an excuse by any man, yet much
less can it be pleaded by the Jews and those to whom the word of God is
proclaimed, and who, on that account, will be condemned and punished
more severely than others.

<span id="xviii.i-p125"></span>*I spake, and ye did not hear.* He
describes the manner of calling, namely, that he exhorted the people by
the prophets; for by the word “speak” he twice repeats the same thing,
as we have already stated to be the custom of Hebrew writers. To “hear”
the Lord is to obey his word; for it would be a trivial matter to lend
our ears, if we did not submit to the word; and it would then be with us
as the proverb says, “They listen with the ears of an ass.”  <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210.md) God wishes to be heard sincerely, and
does not approve of a pretended hearing; and he shews how it came that
they rejected the calling. It was because they shut their ears to the
doctrine of the prophets; for the beginning of obedience is to bring a
desire to learn.

<span id="xviii.i-p127"></span>*And ye did evil before mine eyes*. The
phrase, “before mine eyes,” is of the same import as “to my face;” a
mode of expression which he made use of a little before. (Verse 3.) All
men, indeed, sin “before the eyes” of the Lord, and none can withdraw
from his presence. But in a peculiar sense we are said to sin “before
his eyes,” when, having been called by him, we do not dread his
presence; for he approaches nearer to those whom he calls by the
prophets, and, so to speak, exhibits himself as present to them. Far
more detestable, therefore, and worthy of severe chastisements, is the
impiety of those who, laying aside all shame, despise and scorn God when
he draws near to call and invite them.

<span id="xviii.i-p128"></span>*And chose the things in which I took no
pleasure.* From this concluding clause of the verse it is evident that
they are condemned, not for gross crimes, but for foolish devotions, by
which they corrupted the worship of God. Although they zealously devoted
themselves to sacrifices contrived by themselves, because they thought
that in this way they would become entitled to the favor of God; yet he
declares that he abhors their wicked practices. It is not permitted that
any person shall have a free choice to follow whatever he thinks fit,
but all must observe what God approves, and must not turn aside from it
in any way whatever. Now we see that it was not a fault peculiar to a
single age that men should follow their own caprice in the worship of
God, and should adore their own inventions instead of God; but whatever
“pleasure” men “take in these things,” the Lord solemnly declares that
he condemns and abhors them.

<span id="xviii.i-p129"></span><span id="xviii.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p130"></span>**13.** and **14.** *Behold, my servants
shall eat.* Here also the Prophet more deafly distinguishes between
hypocrites, who held a place in the Church, and the true and lawful
children; for, although all without distinction were called children,
yet he skews that many shall be disowned as not belonging to the family,
and that they who proudly and haughtily exalted themselves, under the
name of the people of God, shall be disappointed of their hope, which is
vain and false. We must carefully observe the highly emphatic contrast
between “the servants of God,” and those who falsely pretend to his
name; for he shews that empty titles, and false boasting, or vain
confidence, shall avail them nothing.

<span id="xviii.i-p131"></span>*Shall eat, shall drink.* By these words
he denotes happiness and a prosperous condition of life; as if he had
said, that he will take care that believers shall not be in want of
anything. But the Lord promises to his servants something different from
what he actually bestows; for they often “are hungry and thirsty,”
(<span id="xviii.i-p131.1"></span>[1Co
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p131.1"></span>,) while the wicked abound in enjoyments of
every kind, and abuse them for luxury and intemperance. But it ought to
be observed, that the kingdom of Christ is here described under figures;
for otherwise we could not understand it. Accordingly, the Prophet draws
comparisons from earthly kingdoms, in which, when the people abound in
wealth and enjoy comforts of every kind, there is a visible display of
the blessing of God from which we may judge of his fatherly love.

<span id="xviii.i-p132"></span>But since it is not proper that good men
should have their minds engrossed by earthly advantages, it is enough
that some taste of those advantages should support their faith. And if
they are sometimes oppressed by hunger, yet, being satisfied with a
moderate portion of good, they nevertheless acknowledge that God is
their Father, and that he is kind to them, and in their poverty have
greater riches than kings and nobles. On the other hand, the wicked,
whatever may be their abundance of good things, cannot enjoy them with a
good conscience, and therefore are the most wretched of all men. The
Prophet, therefore, has in his eye the right use of the gifts of God;
for they who serve God in a right manner receive, as children from the
hand of a father, all that is necessary for this life, while others,
like thieves and profane persons, take violent possession of it. Wicked
men are never satisfied with any amount of wealth, however great; they
have continual fear and trembling, and their conscience can never be at
ease.

<span id="xviii.i-p133"></span>The Lord, therefore, does not promise
here what he does not actually bestow; and this happiness must not be
estimated by the outward condition of things. This is still more evident
from what follows, where he speaks of joy and thanksgiving. The Prophet
undoubtedly intends to state in a few words, that contentment does not
lie in abundance of earthly enjoyments, but in calm peace of mind and
spiritual joy; for unbelievers have no relish for such things, but to
believers a persuasion of God’s fatherly love is more delightful than
all earthly enjoyments. Yet let us observe that we ought to look for all
prosperity from God alone, who will not permit his people to be in want
of anything that belongs to a happy life.

<span id="xviii.i-p134"></span><span id="xviii.i-p134.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p135"></span>**15.** *And ye shall leave your name for
a curse*  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211.md) *to my elect.* He
continues the same doctrine, and teaches that God will at length
separate hypocrites from the true servants. And indeed we need not
wonder that the Prophet dwells so much on this point; for there is
nothing of which it is harder to convince hypocrites, who, puffed up
with pride, deceive and blind themselves. He affirms that “their name”
shall be “accursed,” because they thought that they were the holy seed,
and that nothing else under heaven was worthy of being remembered. Such
is also the import of the word “Leave;” as if he had said that false
boasting, to which they were so strongly attached, shall be shaken off
by violence; and therefore, that they may not flatter themselves with a
glory that is temporal, and that shall speedily pass away, the Lord
rebukes that haughtiness, and declares that he will have other servants,
to whom they shall be a curse, so that even in solemn cursing this shall
be taken as an example, “May God curse thee as he has cursed the Jews!”

<span id="xviii.i-p137"></span>*And shall call his servants by another
name.* He shews how ill-founded is the confidence of that nation, which
thought that God would have no people, if he had not the posterity of
Abraham; for he solemnly declares that he will adopt a new people, and
that he is not confined to the Jews, so as not easily to find others
whom he shall adorn with the “name” of his people. The opinion
entertained by some, that by “another name” is meant the Christian name,
is exceedingly unnatural; and even from the context it is evident that
the Prophet had quite a different object in view; for, in consequence of
the Jews boasting proudly of the antiquity of their name, and growing
insolent at having been elected by God long ago, as if God could not do
without them, he shews that he will elect and adopt another people, and
yet that he cannot be accused of capriciousness or fickleness, as if he
had changed his mind. He will execute his purpose and his righteous
judgments against those who, under a false pretense of his name, obscure
his glory and corrupt all godliness.

<span id="xviii.i-p138"></span><span id="xviii.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p139"></span>**16.** *He who blesseth himself in the
earth.* Here the whole world is contrasted with a corner of Judea, in
which the worship of God might be said to be shut up. Since the time
when God has been manifested everywhere, he is not now worshipped in one
particular district, but in all places without distinction; as Christ
also teacheth, (<span id="xviii.i-p139.1"></span>[Joh
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p139.1"></span>,) “The hour cometh, when neither in this
mountain, nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father;” and Paul also
saith,

<span id="xviii.i-p140"></span>“I wish that men in every place may lift
up clean hands, without wrath and disputing.”  
(<span id="xviii.i-p140.2"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="xviii.i-p140.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xviii.i-p141"></span>Thus the word “earth,” by which he
denotes, in this passage, the whole world, is employed by him in an
indirect contrast with Judea.

<span id="xviii.i-p142"></span>*Shall bless himself in the true God.
Shall swear by the true God.* By “blessing” and “swearing” he denotes
the whole of the worship of God. “Swearing,” as we have formerly seen,
 <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212.md) is a kind of worship of God;
for by it we declare that all judgment belongs to God, and acknowledge
that he is perfectly acquainted with all that we do. We “bless,” when we
wish to obtain from him all prosperity, and render thanksgiving to him
alone; and, in short, when we acknowledge that our prosperity comes from
no other source than from his undeserved kindness. By “the true God” is
meant that he is faithful to his promises and steadfast to his purpose;
though perhaps there is an implied and indirect contrast between “the
true God” and the false gods of the Gentiles.

<span id="xviii.i-p144"></span>*For the former afflictions are
surrendered to forgetfulness.* This promise relates to believers only.
God declares that he will put an end to their afflictions and
distresses, that the calamity of the Church may not be perpetual. This
began to be accomplished when the people were brought out of Babylon;
for, although they were afflicted in various ways both during the
journey and at home, yet the severity of the punishments was mitigated;
because the return to their native country, the rebuilding of the
temple, the restoration of regular government, soothed their griefs, and
supported their hearts by good hope till the coming of Christ.

<span id="xviii.i-p145"></span><span id="xviii.i-p145.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p146"></span>**17.** *For, lo, I will create new
heavens and a new earth.* By these metaphors he promises a remarkable
change of affairs; as if God had said that he has both the inclination
and the power not only to restore his Church, but to restore it in such
a manner that it shall appear to gain new life and to dwell in a new
world. These are exaggerated modes of expression; but the greatness of
such a blessing, which was to be manifested at the coming of Christ,
could not be described in any other way. Nor does he mean only the first
coming, but the whole reign, which must be extended as far as to the
last coming, as we have already said in expounding other passages.

<span id="xviii.i-p147"></span>Thus the world is (so to speak) renewed
by Christ; and hence also the Apostle (<span
id="xviii.i-p147.1"></span>[Heb
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)<span id="xviii.i-p147.1"></span>.md)
calls it “a new age,” and undoubtedly alludes to this statement of the
Prophet. Yet the Prophet speaks of the restoration of the Church after
the return from Babylon. This is undoubtedly true; but that restoration
is imperfect, if it be not extended as far as to Christ; and even now we
are in the progress and accomplishment of it, and those things will not
be fulfilled till the last resurrection, which has been prescribed to be
our limit.

<span id="xviii.i-p148"></span>*The former things shall not be
remembered.* Some refer these words to heaven and earth; as if he had
said that henceforth they shall have no celebrity and no name. But I
choose rather to refer them to the former times; for he means that the
joy at being restored shall be so great that they shall no longer
remember their miseries. Or perhaps it will be thought preferable to
view them as relating to benefits which, though they were worthy of
being recorded, lost their name when God’s amazing- grace shone forth.
In this sense the Prophet said elsewhere, “Remember ye not the former
things.” (<span id="xviii.i-p148.1"></span>[Isa
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p148.1"></span>.) Not that God wished the first deliverance
to be set aside or blotted out of the hearts of believers; but because
by comparison the one brought a kind of forgetfulness over the other,
just as the sun, when he rises, deprives the stars of their brightness.

<span id="xviii.i-p149"></span>Let us remember that these things take
place in us so far as we are renewed. But we are only in part renewed,
and therefore we do not yet see a new heaven and a new earth. We need
not wonder, therefore, that we continue to mourn and weep, since we have
not entirely laid aside the old man, but many remains are still left. It
is with us also that the renovation ought to begin; because we hold the
first rank, and it is through our sin that “the creatures groan, and are
subject to vanity,” as Paul shews. (<span id="xviii.i-p149.1"></span>[Ro
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p149.1"></span>.) But when we shall be perfectly renewed,
heaven and earth shall also be fully renewed, and shall regain their
former state. And hence it ought to be inferred, as we have frequently
remarked, that the Prophet has in his eye the whole reign of Christ,
down to its final close, which is also called

<span id="xviii.i-p150"></span>“the day of renovation and restoration.”
(<span id="xviii.i-p150.1"></span>[Ac
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p150.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p151"></span><span id="xviii.i-p151.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p152"></span>**18.** But rejoice ye and be glad for
ever. He exhorts believers to rejoice, in such a manner as they ought,
on account of such a benefit bestowed by God. And this was added for the
sake of amplification; because men do not adequately consider God’s
other benefits, and especially that which is the highest and most
excellent of all; for either they disregard them altogether, or value
them less than they ought to do. On this account believers must be
aroused and urged by such exhortations as these, that they may not chew
themselves to be unthankful or unmindful, or think that it ought to be
lightly passed by, that, having been redeemed by the hand of Christ,
they carry in their hearts the pledge of eternal and heavenly life. That
is the reason why Isaiah chews that believers do not give due praise for
redemption in any other way than by continuing their joy through the
whole course of their life, and employing themselves in celebrating the
praises of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p153"></span>*For, lo, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing,
and her people a joy.* At first sight this might be thought harsh; but
an excellent meaning is obtained, that the ground of joy in the
deliverance of the Church shall be so great as to remove every cloud of
sadness. And, indeed, since even afflictions aid our salvation, (<span
id="xviii.i-p153.1"></span>[Ro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p153.1"></span>,) we have good reason for rejoicing in them.

<span id="xviii.i-p154"></span><span id="xviii.i-p154.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p155"></span>**19.** *And I will be glad in
Jerusalem.* He expresses more than in the preceding verse; for by these
words he means that he not only will give to men ground for rejoicing,
but even will be a partaker with them in that joy. So great is his love
toward us, that he delights in our prosperity not less than if he
enjoyed it along with us. And hence we obtain no small confirmation of
our faith, when we learn that God is moved, and so powerfully moved, by
such an affection toward us. If we are in painful and distressed
circumstances, he says that he is affected by grief and sorrow; and, on
the other hand, if our condition is pleasant and comfortable, he says
that he takes great pleasure in our prosperity. Hence also we have
formerly seen that “the Spirit of the Lord is sad and vexed,” (<span
id="xviii.i-p155.1"></span>[Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p155.1"></span>,) when that order which he demands and
approves is overturned and confounded; and in another passage he takes
upon himself the character of a husband who is satisfied with the love
of his wife. (<span id="xviii.i-p155.2"></span>[Isa
62:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#005.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p155.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p156"></span><span id="xviii.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p157"></span>**20.** *There shall be no more thence an
infant of days.* Some think that this points out the difference between
the Law and the Gospel; because “the Law, as a schoolmaster,” (<span
id="xviii.i-p157.1"></span>[Ga
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p157.1"></span>,) kept scholars in the first elements, but
the Gospel leads us on to mature age. Others suppose it to mean that
there will no longer be any distinction of age; because, where life is
eternal, no line is drawn between the child and the old man. But I
interpret the words of the Prophet in this manner, “Whether they are
children or old men, they shall arrive at mature age so as to be always
vigorous, like persons in the prime of life; and, in short, they shall
always be healthful and robust;” for it is on account of our sins that
we grow old and lose our strength. “All our days,” saith Moses, “pass
away when thou art angry: we close our years quicker than a word. The
days of our years in which we live are seventy years, or, at the utmost,
eighty: what goeth beyond this in the strongest is toil and vexation;
our strength passeth swiftly, and we fly away.” (<span
id="xviii.i-p157.2"></span>[Ps. 90:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010)<span id="xviii.i-p157.2"></span>..md)
But Christ comes to repair our strength, and to restore and preserve our
original condition.

<span id="xviii.i-p158"></span>*For the son of a hundred years shall die
young.* It is proper to distinguish between the two clauses; for, after
having said that the citizens of the Church shall be long-lived, so that
no one shall be taken out of the world till he has reached mature age
and fully completed his course, he likewise adds that, even in old age,
they shall be robust. Although the greater part of believers hardly
support themselves through weakness, and the strength of others decays
even before the time, yet that promise is not made void; for, if Christ
reigned truly and perfectly in us, his strength would undoubtedly
flourish in us, and would invigorate both body and soul. To our sins,
therefore, it ought to be imputed, that we are liable to diseases,
pains, old age, and other inconveniences; for we do not permit Christ to
possess us fully, and have not advanced so far in newness of life as to
lay aside all that is old.  <span id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213.md)

<span id="xviii.i-p160"></span>Here it ought also to be observed, that
blessings either of soul or body are found only in the kingdom of
Christ, that is, in the Church, apart from which there is nothing but
cursing. Hence it follows that all who have no share in that kingdom are
wretched and unhappy; and, however fresh and vigorous they may appear to
be, they are, nevertheless, in the sight of God, rotten and stinking
corpses.

<span id="xviii.i-p161"></span><span id="xviii.i-p161.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p162"></span>**21** and **22.** *They shall build
houses and inhabit them.* In these verses he mentions what is written in
the Law; for these are the blessings of the Law, that they who have
obeyed God shall dwell in the houses which they have built, and shall
gather fruit from the trees which they have planted. (<span
id="xviii.i-p162.1"></span>[Le
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#010.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p162.1"></span>.) On the other hand, the disobedient shall
be expelled from the houses which they built, and shall give place to
foreigners, and shall be deprived of the fruits of the trees which they
planted. “The Lord,” saith Isaiah, “shall protect you from that curse,
so as to enjoy your property.” Now the Prophets hold out those things
which relate to the present life, and borrow metaphors from them; but it
is in order that they may teach us to rise higher and to embrace eternal
and blessed life. We must not fix our whole attention on these
transitory blessings, but must make use of them as ladders, that, being
raised to heaven, we may enjoy eternal and immortal blessings. To the
Church, which has been renewed, and which rests on nothing but God’s
good pleasure and undeserved favor, is justly promised the enjoyment of
those blessings of which unbelievers had deprived themselves.

<span id="xviii.i-p163"></span><span id="xviii.i-p163.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p164"></span>*According to the days of a tree.* Some
think that this is a promise of eternal life; as if men had the tree of
life; but that is forged ingenuity, and far removed from the Prophet’s
meaning. And I do wonder that commentators give themselves so much
trouble in explaining this passage; for the Prophet speaks, not only of
life, but of a peaceful condition of life; as if he had said, “Ye shall
plant vineyards, and shall eat the fruit of them; and ye shall not be
removed from this life before receiving the fruit, which shall be
enjoyed, not only by yourselves, but by your children and posterity. He
employs the metaphor of a tree, because he had formerly spoken of
planting vineyards; and accordingly he promises that the people shall
peacefully enjoy both their houses and their vineyards, and shall not be
molested by enemies or robbers, and this peaceful condition shall last
as long as the life of a tree.

<span id="xviii.i-p165"></span>*And my elect shall perpetually enjoy*
 <span id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214.md) *the work of their hands.* A
work is said to be continued or perpetuated when the result of it is
prosperous; for otherwise men would subject themselves to long and
severe toil, and all to no purpose, if God did not grant success.
Enemies will either take away or destroy what we have begun, and the
completion of it will be out of our power; and therefore it is strictly
said to be continued, not when merely some progress is made, but when it
is brought to a close. Here it ought to be observed, that we cannot
possess our wealth and have the peaceful and lawful enjoyment of it in
any other way than by dwelling in the kingdom of Christ, who is the only
heir of the world, and without being ingrafted into his body. Wicked men
may indeed enjoy, for many years, the good things of this life; but they
will continually be uneasy, and will wretchedly devour themselves, so
that even possession shall be destructive and deadly; for it is only by
faith that we obtain all that belongs to a blessed life, and they who
have not faith cannot be members of Christ.

<span id="xviii.i-p167"></span><span id="xviii.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p168"></span>**23.** *They shall not toil in vain.* He
enumerates other kinds of blessings which God promises to the kingdom of
Christ; for, although God always blessed his people, yet the blessings
were in some measure suspended till the coming of Christ, in whom was
displayed full and complete happiness. In a word, both Jews and Gentiles
shall be happy, in all respects, under the reign of Christ. Now, as it
is a token of God’s wrath and curse when we obtain no advantage front
our labor, so, on the other hand, it is a token of blessing when we
clearly see the fruit of our labor. For this reason he says that they
who shall have returned from captivity, in order that they may obtain a
true and complete deliverance, shall not spend their labor in vain or
lose their pains. The Law threatens the death of relatives, destructive
wars, losses of property, and terror in their hearts. (<span
id="xviii.i-p168.1"></span>[Le
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p168.1"></span>; <span id="xviii.i-p168.2"></span>[De
28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p168.2"></span>.) Here, on the contrary, are promised
fertility, peace, the fruit of labor, and repose. And blessings of this
kind ought to be carefully observed; for there are few who, amidst their
labors, think of the blessing of God, so as to ascribe everything to him
alone, and to be fully convinced that they will accomplish nothing
whatever unless the Lord grant to them a prosperous result. Wherefore,
as every blessing should be sought from God, so, when it has been
received, thanksgiving should be rendered for it to God alone.

<span id="xviii.i-p169"></span>*And they shall not bring forth in
terror.* When it is said that women “shall not bring forth in terror,”
some explain it to mean, that they shall have no uneasiness or dread of
childbirth, because they shall be free from pain. We know that this
punishment was inflicted on the woman on account of sin, to bring forth
with difficulty, and to be in danger of death. Children are brought into
the world with fear and trembling, when there is any expectation of war;
and it is probable that the Prophet rather looks to this, that there
shall be such settled peace that neither women nor men shall have any
reason to fear; for this must be viewed as relating to both parents, who
will have no dread about their children, as commonly happens when any
danger is threatened.

<span id="xviii.i-p170"></span>*For they shall be the seed of the
blessed of Jehovah.* This reason is highly appropriate; for whence come
fears and terrors, whence come alarms, but from the curse of God? When
the curse has been removed, the Prophet therefore says justly that
parents, together with their offspring, shall be free from dread and
anxious solicitude; because they shall be convinced that they shall
always be safe and sound through the favor of God.

<span id="xviii.i-p171"></span>*And their offspring with them.* This is
contrasted with childlessness, which is reckoned in the number of the
curses of God; and therefore it is the same as if he had said, “I will
no longer deprive them of their children, but will cause them to enjoy
them, along with the rest of the blessings which I shall bestow upon
them.”

<span id="xviii.i-p172"></span><span id="xviii.i-p172.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p173"></span>**24.** *Before they cry, I will listen.*
A remarkable promise; for nothing is more desirable than to have God
reconciled to us, and to have it in our power to draw near to him with
freedom and boldness; for, although we are surrounded by innumerable
distresses and calamities, yet we cannot be miserable so long as we are
at liberty to betake ourselves to the Lord. Here therefore the Lord
promises that we shall not pray in vain. Yet this was also promised to
the fathers under the Law. It is certain that, since the beginning of
the world, God listened to the fathers, to all that called upon him; for
this is the most valuable fruit of faith. But he confirms this more and
more. Because the Jews would be exiles for a long time, the Lord
solemnly declares that he will not permit them any longer to languish in
banishment, and will no longer delay his assistance, but will “listen to
them even before they cry.”

<span id="xviii.i-p174"></span>This relates chiefly to the kingdom of
Christ, through whom we are heard and have access to God the Father, as
Paul admirably explains. (<span id="xviii.i-p174.1"></span>[Eph.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018.md), [Eph.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#012.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p174.1"></span>.) The fathers indeed enjoyed the same
access, and there was no other way in which they could be heard but
through Christ; but the door was still narrow and might be said to be
shut, whereas now it has been most widely and perfectly thrown open.
Under the law the people were wont to stand at a distance in the porch;
but now nothing hinders us from entering into the sanctuary itself,
because

<span id="xviii.i-p175"></span>“the veil of the temple hath been rent.”
(<span id="xviii.i-p175.1"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p175.1"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p176"></span>Thus we have admission into heaven
through Christ,

<span id="xviii.i-p177"></span>“that we may approach with freedom and
boldness to the throne of grace, to obtain mercy and find needful
assistance.”  
(<span id="xviii.i-p177.2"></span>[Heb
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#016.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p177.2"></span>.)

<span id="xviii.i-p178"></span>A question will be put. “Are there no
believers in the world, and is there no kingdom of Christ, in the
present day? For it does not appear that God is so ready to render
assistance, and there is no visible fruit of our prayers.” I reply.
Though it becomes fully evident that we have been heard when the event
actually proves it, yet God does not in the meantime overlook us; for he
does not permit us to faint, but supports us by the power of his Spirit,
that we may wait for him patiently. Nor does he delay, as men do,
because he has need of time, but because he wishes to exercise and try
our patience. In a word, there are two ways in which God listens to us;
first, when he renders assistance openly; and secondly, when he aids us
by the power of his Spirit, that we may not sink under the weight of
afflictions. And if this doctrine were deeply fixed in the hearts of
men, they would fly to God more readily and boldly, and would not
dispute so eagerly about calling on saints. For how comes it that men
contrive for themselves such a variety of intercessors, to whom they
betake themselves rather than to Christ, but because they do not receive
that doctrine, and because they reject such large and bountiful
promises?

<span id="xviii.i-p179"></span><span id="xviii.i-p179.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p180"></span>**25.** *The wolf and the lamb shall feed
together.* He means that everything shall be fully restored, when Christ
shall reign. And here it appears as if there were an implied comparison
between Adam and Christ. We know that all the afflictions of the present
life flowed from the sin of the first man; for at that time we were
deprived of the dominion and sovereignty which God had given to man
(<span id="xviii.i-p180.1"></span>[Ge
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028)<span id="xviii.i-p180.1"></span>.md)
over animals of every kind, all of which at first undoubtedly bowed
cheerfully to the dominion of man, and were obedient to his will; but
now the most of them rise up against man, and even carly on mutual war
against each other. Thus, when wolves, bears, lions, and other savage
animals of that kind, are hurtful to man and to other beasts from which
we obtain some advantage, and when even animals which ought to have been
useful to man are hostile to him, this ought to be imputed to his sin,
because his disobedience overthrew the order of things. But since it is
the office of Christ to bring back everything to its condition and
order, that is the reason why he declares that the confusion or ruin
that now exists in human affairs shall be removed by the coming of
Christ; because at that time, corruptions having been taken away, the
world shall return to its first origin.

<span id="xviii.i-p181"></span>*And the lion shall eat straw like the
ox.* “The lion” shall eat harmlessly, and shall no longer seek his prey.
The serpent, satisfied with his dust, shall wrap himself in it, and
shall no longer hurt by his envenomed bite. In a word, all that is
disordered or confused shall be restored to its proper order. Yet beyond
all controversy the Prophet speaks allegorically of bloody and violent
men, whose cruel and savage nature shall be subdued, when they submit to
the yoke of Christ. But first we must carefully consider that confusion
which befell all the creatures in consequence of the fall of man; for if
this were not taken into view, it would be impossible for us to have
sufficiently just and correct views of this blessing of restoration. At
the same time, we must keep in remembrance what we said in expounding a
similar allegory in the eleventh chapter.  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215.md) Here we are taught what is the nature
of men before the Lord convert them and receive them into his fold; for
they are cruel and untamed beasts, and only begin to abstain from doing
any injury, when the Lord subdues their wicked inclination and their
furious desire to do harm.

<span id="xviii.i-p183"></span>*In all my holy mountain.* This is added
because, when rubbish and filth have been taken out of the way, the Lord
will gather to himself a Church without spot. By the word all he means
cleansing. Yet we ought not to think it strange that still so many are
ferocious; for there are few that are the true inhabitants of God’s
mountain, few that are upright and faithful, even among those who
profess to be Christians. Seeing that the old man still reigns and is
vigorous in them, contentions and wars must also exist and prevail
amongst them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc16017.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p55"></span> The remainder of our author’s exposition
of the first verse will be found at commentary on verse 1. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc16017.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p64.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p65"></span> Calvin, having found it “convenient to
begin with the second verse,” now returns to the exposition of the first
verse. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc16017.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p73"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p73.1"></span>Des
esprits malins.” “Of wicked spirits.”

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc16017.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p74.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p75"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p75.1"></span>Non pas
mesmes de l’espesseur d’une ongle.” “Not even the thickness of a nail.”

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc16017.htm#fr_201.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p78"></span> “The literal translation is Approach to
thyself;’ and as this implies removal from the speaker, the essential
meaning is correctly expressed, though in a very different form from the
original, both by the Septuagint (<span id="xviii.i-p78.1"></span>πόρ᾿ῥω
ἀπ ᾿ ἐμοῦ) and by the Vulgate (<span id="xviii.i-p78.2"></span>Recede a
me). The common English Version (Stand by thyself), and Henderson’s
improvement of it (Keep by thyself), both suggest an idea not contained
in the original, namely, that of standing alone; whereas all that is
expressed by the Hebrew phrase is the act of standing away from the
speaker, for which Lowth has found the idiomatic equivalent (Keep to
thyself.)” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc16017.htm#fr_202.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p81"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p81.1"></span>Avec
ceux qui leur remonstrent choses pour leur salut.” “With those whose
serious warnings are intended for their salvation.”

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc16017.htm#fr_203.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p85"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p85.1"></span>Si nous
ne changeons de vie.” “If we do not change our life.”

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc16017.htm#fr_204.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p94.2"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p95"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p95.1"></span>Et ne
veulent ouir autre chanson.” “And do not wish to hear any other song.”

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc16017.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p106"></span> “If it should please God to call the
natural descendants of the patriarch in that land, and convert them in a
body to the true faith, there would be an additional coincidence between
the prophecy and the event, even in minor circumstances, such as we
often find in the history of Christ. But if no such national restoration
of the Jews to Palestine should ever happen, the extension of the true
religion over that benighted region, which both prophecy and Providence
encourage us to look for, would abundantly redeem the pledge which God
has given to his people in this and other parts of Scripture.” —
*Alexander.*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc16017.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p110"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p110.1"></span>Par
les biens terriens.” “By earthly blessings.”

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc16017.htm#fr_207.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p116"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p116.1"></span>Et les
appelle apostats.” “And calls them apostates.”

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc16017.htm#fr_208.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p117.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p118"></span> “That prepare a table for that troop,
(or, Gad.)” — Eng. Ver. “A table. A <span
id="xviii.i-p118.1"></span>lectisternium the Romans called it. Gad and
Meni were heathen deities, or perhaps two appellations of the same idol,
according to the scriptural manner of expressing the same thing, in the
same sentence, by its different names; so in <span
id="xviii.i-p118.2"></span>[Jer
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#035.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p118.2"></span>, Baal and Moloch mean one false god. Gad, in
Arabic, is Goodness. Meni denoted the Moon, from <span
id="xviii.i-p118.3"></span>מנה *(manah),* to number; whence <span
id="xviii.i-p118.4"></span>μὴν, a month, and <span
id="xviii.i-p118.5"></span>μηνὴ, the ancient Greek name for the moon.” —
*Stock,* who quotes Rosenmuller as his authority.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc16017.htm#fr_209.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p122.3"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p123"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p123.1"></span>Et que
Mercure estoit le dieu des marchans qui out leurs livres de contes.”
“And because Mercury was the god of merchants, who have their
account-books.”

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc16017.htm#fr_210.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p125.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p126"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p126.1"></span>Comme
aux asnes qui font signe d’oreilles.” “As with asses that make a show of
ears.”  
Greek proverbs of the same kind are still more abundant. <span
id="xviii.i-p126.3"></span>́̓Ονῳ τὶς ἔλεγε μῦθον· ὁ δὲ τὰ ὦτα ἐκίνει “One
told a story to an ass, and he pricked up his ears.” <span
id="xviii.i-p126.4"></span> ́̓Ονος λύρας ἀκοῦων κίνει τὰ ὦτα “An ass,
listening to a lyre, pricks up his ears.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc16017.htm#fr_211.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p136"></span> “Oath is here put for curse, as it is
added to it in <span id="xviii.i-p136.1"></span>[Da
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#011.md)<span id="xviii.i-p136.1"></span>,
and the two are combined in <span id="xviii.i-p136.2"></span>[Nu
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021.md)<span id="xviii.i-p136.2"></span>,
where the oath of cursing may be regarded as the complete expression, of
which oath is here an ellipsis. To leave one’s name for a curse,
according to Old Testament usage, is something more than to leave it to
be cursed. The sense is, that the name shall be used as a formula of
cursing, so that men shall be able to wish nothing worse to others, than
a like character and fate. This is clear from <span
id="xviii.i-p136.3"></span>[Jer
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p136.3"></span>, compared with <span
id="xviii.i-p136.4"></span>[Zec
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002.md)<span id="xviii.i-p136.4"></span>,
as well as from the converse or correlative promise to the patriarchs
and their children, that a like use should be made of their names as a
formula of blessing. (<span id="xviii.i-p136.5"></span>[Gen.
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md), [Gen.
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#020.md)<span
id="xviii.i-p136.5"></span>.)” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc16017.htm#fr_212.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p142.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p143"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, Vol. 2, p. 70;
Vol. 3, p. 467.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc16017.htm#fr_213.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p158.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p159"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p159.1"></span>Tout
le vieil homme.” “All the old man.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc16017.htm#fr_214.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p165.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p166"></span> “<span id="xviii.i-p166.1"></span>Ou,
jouiront en vieil aage de l’oeuvre de leurs mains.” “Or, shall enjoy in
old age the work of their hands.”

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc16017.htm#fr_215.md) <span
id="xviii.i-p181.1"></span>

<span id="xviii.i-p182"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 1, p. 383.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 66](cc16018.md)
