[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16003)  [Next](cc16005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v"></span>

<span id="v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 52.

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span><span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
52:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>**1.** Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O
Zion; put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for
henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the
unclean.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>**1.** Excitare, excitare, indue fortitudinem
tuam, Sion, indue vestes decoris tui, Ierusalem, civitas sancta; quia
non fiet amplius ut veniat in to incircumcisus et immundus.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>**2.** Shake thyself from the dust; arise,
*and* sit down, O Jerusalem: loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O
captive daughter of Zion.

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Excute to de pulvere, surge, sede,
Ierusalem; extricate a vinculis colli tui, captiva filia Sion.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>**3.** For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold
yourselves for nought; and ye shall be redeemed without money.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quia sic dicit Iehova: Gratis venditi
estis; ideo sine pecunia redimemini.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>**4.** For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people
went down aforetime into Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian
oppressed them without cause.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quia sic dicit Dominus Iehova: In
*A*Egyptum olim descenderat populus meus ut peregrinaretur illic; verum
Assur absque causa oppressit eum.

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>**5.** Now therefore, what have I here, saith
the LORD, that my people is taken away for nought? They that rule over
them make them to howl, saith the LORD; and my name continually every
day *is* blasphemed.

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et nunc, Quid mihi hic, dicit Iehova,
ut ablatus sit populus meus gratis, et qui in eum dominantur faciant eum
ululare, dicit Iehova, et jugiter tota die nomen meum contumeliae
expositum sit?

<span id="v.i-p12"></span>**6.** Therefore my people shall know my name:
therefore *they shall know* in that day that I *am* he that doth speak;
behold, *it is* I

<span id="v.i-p13"></span>**6.** Propterea sciet populus meus nomen
meum; propterea in die illa, quod ego idem qui loquor; ecee, adero.

<span id="v.i-p14"></span>**7.** How beautiful upon the mountains are
the feet of him that bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that
bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith
unto Zion, Thy God reigneth!

<span id="v.i-p15"></span>**7.** Quam speciosi super montes pedes
annuntiantis, publicantis salutere, dicentis Sioni, Regnat Deus tuus.

<span id="v.i-p16"></span>**8.** Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice;
with the voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye,
when the LORD shall bring again Zion.

<span id="v.i-p17"></span>**8.** Vox speculatorum tuorum; levaverunt
vocem, pariterjubilabunt; quoniam oculo ad oculum videbunt, cum Iehova
reducet Sion.

<span id="v.i-p18"></span>**9.** Break forth into joy, sing together, ye
waste places of Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he
hath redeemed Jerusalem.

<span id="v.i-p19"></span>**9.** Laudate, exultate pariter, solitudines
Ierusalem; qnoniam consolatus est Iehova populum suum, redemit
Ierusalem.

<span id="v.i-p20"></span>**10.** The LORD hath made bare his holy arm
in the eyes of all the nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see
the salvation of our God.

<span id="v.i-p21"></span>**10.** Nudavit Iehova brachium sanctitatis
sum coram oculis omnium gentium; et videbunt omnes fines terrae salutem
Dei nostri.

<span id="v.i-p22"></span>**11.** Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from
thence, touch no unclean *thing;* go ye out of the midst of her; be ye
clean, that bear the vessels of the LORD.

<span id="v.i-p23"></span>**11.** Discedite, discedite, exite inde,
immundum ne attingite, exite e medio ejus, mundamini qui ferris vusa
Iehovae.

<span id="v.i-p24"></span>**12.** For ye shall not go out with haste,
nor go by flight: for the LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel
*will be* your rereward.

<span id="v.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam non in festinatione exibitis,
neque in fuga erit iter vobis; quandoquidem praecedet vos Iehova, et
congregabit vos Deus Israel.

<span id="v.i-p26"></span>**13.** Behold, my servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled, and be very high.

<span id="v.i-p27"></span>**13.** Ecce prosperum successum habebit
servus mens; exaltabitur, elevabitur, et valde sublimis erit.

<span id="v.i-p28"></span>**14.** As many were astonied at thee; his
visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than the sons
of men:

<span id="v.i-p29"></span>**14.** Quemadmodum obstupuerunt super to
multi, adeo deformata fuit ab hominibus species ejus, et forran ejus a
filiis hominum:

<span id="v.i-p30"></span>**15.** So shall he sprinkle many nations; the
kings shall shut their mouths at him: for *that* which had not been told
them shall they see; and *that* which they had not heard shall they
consider.

<span id="v.i-p31"></span>**15.** Sic asperget gentes multas; super eum
reges claudent os suum; quia quod non fuerat ipsis narratum videbunt; et
qued non audierant intelligent.

<span id="v.i-p32"></span> 

<span id="v.i-p33"></span><span id="v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p34"></span>**1.** *Awake, awake.* He confirms the former
doctrine, in order still more to arouse the people who had been weighed
down by grief and sorrow. These things were necessary to be added as
spurs, that the doctrine might more easily penetrate into their drowsy
and stupified hearts; for he addresses the Church, which appeared to be
in a benumbed and drowsy condition, and bids her “awake,” that she may
collect her strength and revive her courage, he repeats it a second
time, and with great propriety; for it is difficult to arouse and
reanimate those whose hearts have been struck, and even laid prostrate,
by a sense of God’s anger.

<span id="v.i-p35"></span>*Put on thy strength.* As if he had said,
“Formerly thou wast dejected, and wallowedst in filth and pollution; now
prepare for a happy and prosperous condition, to which the Lord will
restore thee.” Thus he contrasts *“strength”* with despondency, such as
is usually found when affairs are desperate; and he contrasts *garments
of beauty* with filth and pollution.

<span id="v.i-p36"></span>*For henceforth there shall not come to thee.*
The reason assigned by him is, that henceforth God will not permit
wicked men to indulge their sinful inclinations for destroying it. Freed
from their tyranny, the Church already has cause to rejoice; and
security for the future holds out solid ground for joy and gladness. Yet
Isaiah exhorts us to mutual congratulation when God is reconciled to his
Church; and indeed if we have any piety in us, we ought to be deeply
affected by her condition, that we may rejoice in her prosperity, and be
grieved in her adversity.  <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) In
short, it ought to be the height of our gladness, as also the Psalmist
says,

<span id="v.i-p38"></span>“Let my tongue cleave to my jaws, if I
remember not thee, and if thou be not the crown of my gladness.” (<span
id="v.i-p38.1"></span>[Ps 137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006)<span
id="v.i-p38.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p39"></span>By the word *come,* he means what we commonly
express by the phrase, *(Avoir e entree,)* “to have access.”

<span id="v.i-p40"></span>*By the uncircumcised and unclean,* he means
all irreligious persons who corrupt the worship of God and oppress
consciences by tyranny. It was customary to apply the term
“uncircumcised” to all who were estranged from the Church, which had for
its symbol “circumcision,” by which all believers were distinguished.
But as very many persons, though they bore this outward mark of the
covenant, were not better than others, in order to remove all doubt, he
added the word “unclean;” for the mark of “circumcision is nothing in
itself,” (<span id="v.i-p40.1"></span>[Ga
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006)<span id="v.i-p40.1"></span>,) and
(unless, as Paul says, there be added purity of heart) “is even reckoned
uncircumcision.” (<span id="v.i-p40.2"></span>[Ro
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)<span id="v.i-p40.2"></span>,)
Accordingly, he declares that henceforth such persons shall not be
admitted into the Church, in order that, by the removal of corruptions,
and the restoration of the worship of God, she may possess perfect joy.
Yet I do not object to viewing these words as applied to outward foes,
whom he calls by hateful names, that even the severity of the punishment
may warn the Jews of the heinousness of their offenses.

<span id="v.i-p41"></span><span id="v.i-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p42"></span>**2.** *Shake thyself from the dust; arise.*
He explains more fully the deliverance of the Church, and exhibits it
prominently by <span id="v.i-p42.1"></span>ὑποτύπωσιν*,* “a lively
description.” When he bids her “shake off the dust and arise,” let us
not on that account think that our liberty is in our power, so that we
can obtain it whenever we think fit; for it belongs to God alone to
raise us from the dust, to lift us up when we are prostrate, and, by
breaking or loosing our chains, to set us at liberty. Why then does the
Prophet make use of the imperative mood? for it is unreasonable to
demand what we cannot perform. I reply, the imperative form of address
has a much more powerful tendency to arouse than if he had employed
plain narrative; and therefore he declares that, when God shall have
restored her to her former freedom, she shall come out of the mire.

<span id="v.i-p43"></span>*Sit, O Jerusalem,.* The word “sit” denotes a
flourishing condition, and is contrasted with the word “to lie,” which
denotes the lowest calamity. Sometimes indeed it means “to be
prostrate,” as when he formerly said to Babylon, “sit in the dust.”
(<span id="v.i-p43.1"></span>[Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p43.1"></span>.) But
here the meaning is different; for, after ordering her to arise, he
likewise adds, “that she may sit;” that is, that she may no longer lie
down, but may regain her former condition, and not be in future laid
prostrate by enemies.

<span id="v.i-p44"></span><span id="v.i-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p45"></span>**3.** *For thus saith Jehovah.* This verse
has been badly expounded by many commentators, who have here chosen to
enter into philosophical subtleties; for they have dreamed of many
things at variance with the Prophet’s meaning. It agrees with what he
had formerly stated,

<span id="v.i-p46"></span>“To which of my creditors have I sold you?”
(<span id="v.i-p46.1"></span>[Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p46.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p47"></span>For here, in the same manner, he says, *“Ye*
*have been sold for nought;”* as if he had said that he has received no
price, and is under no obligations to a creditor who can claim them as
having been purchased by him. This tends greatly to confirm the promise;
because the Jews might entertain doubts of the liberty which was
promised to them, in consequence of their having been long held in
possession by the Babylonians, who were the most powerful of all
nations. The Lord meets this doubt. “I did not sell or make a conveyance
of you to them; for nought were ye sold; and therefore I can justly
claim you as nay property and sell you. Do not then consider how great
are your difficulties, when I promise you liberty, and do not reason on
this matter by human arguments; for the Babylonians have no right to
detain you, and cannot prevent your being set at liberty.

<span id="v.i-p48"></span>*Therefore shall ye be redeemed without
money.* Lastly, as he had formerly said, that he is not like a
spendthrift, who is compelled to sell his children, or offer them in
payment, so in this passage he declares that “for nought he sold” and
gave them up to their enemies, for no other reason than because they had
provoked him by their sins; and therefore that there will be no greater
difficulty in delivering them than in giving them up to their enemies.

<span id="v.i-p49"></span>Some explain it more ingeniously thus, that
Christ has redeemed us by free grace. This doctrine must indeed be
maintained, but does not agree with the Prophet’s meaning, who intended
to correct the distrust of the Jews, that they might have no doubt as to
their being set at liberty. Let it suffice to know, that when God shall
be pleased to deliver his people, it will not be necessary to make a
pecuniary bargain with the Babylonians, whom, in spite of their
opposition, he will have no difficulty in driving out of their unjust
possession.

<span id="v.i-p50"></span><span id="v.i-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p51"></span>**4.** *Into Egypt my people went down
aforetime.* Here also the commentators touch neither heaven nor earth;
for the Jews dream of three captivities, and Christians differ from them
by thinking that this denotes a third captivity, which shall be under
Antichrist, and from which Christ will deliver them. But the Prophet’s
meaning, in my opinion, is quite different; for he argues from the less
to the greater, by quoting the instance of the Egyptian captivity, from
which the people were formerly recalled by the wonderful power of God.
(<span id="v.i-p51.1"></span>[Ex
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)<span id="v.i-p51.1"></span>.)
The argument therefore stands thus: “If the Lord punished the Egyptians
because their treatment of his people was harsh and unjust, (<span
id="v.i-p51.2"></span>[Ge 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#014)<span
id="v.i-p51.2"></span>,) much more will he punish the Babylonians, who
have cruelly tyrannized over them.”

<span id="v.i-p52"></span>*But the Assyrian has oppressed them without
cause.* There was much greater plausibility in Pharaoh’s claim of
dominion over the Jews than in that of the Babylonians; for Jacob,
having voluntarily come down to Egypt with his family, (<span
id="v.i-p52.1"></span>[Ge 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#005)<span
id="v.i-p52.1"></span>,) undoubtedly became subject to the power of
Pharaoh, who, in return for the kindness received from Joseph,  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) had assigned to him a large country and
abundant pasturage. Pharaoh’s successors, ungrateful and forgetful of
the benefit conferred on them by Joseph, afflicted all the posterity of
Jacob in various ways. This ingratitude and cruelty the Lord severely
punished. But far more base and savage was the wickedness of the
Babylonians, who drove the Jews out of a lawful possession, and dragged
them into bondage. If then the Lord could not bear the Egyptians, who
were unthankful and ruled by unjust laws, though in other respects they
had a just title to possession, much less will he endure the violent and
cruel Babylonians, who have no right to govern his people and oppress
them by tyranny.

<span id="v.i-p54"></span>By “the Assyrian,” he means the Babylonians,
who were united under the same monarchy with the Assyrians; but he takes
special notice of “the Assyrian,” because he was the first that
grievously distressed the Jews, and that prepared the way for this
captivity.

<span id="v.i-p55"></span><span id="v.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p56"></span>**5.** *What have I here?* He follows out and
confirms what I have already said, that it; is not reasonable that he
should silently permit his people to be any longer oppressed. By these
words he reproves, in some measure, his own delay; as if he had said,
“Shall I not stretch out my hand? Shall I not avenge my people? If
Pharaoh did not hinder me, though he was a lawful master, shall the
violence of robbers hinder me?” He next enumerates the reasons which
ought to move him to bring back the people.

<span id="v.i-p57"></span>*That my people should be carried away for
nought.* There must be understood an implied contrast to the participle
“carried away;” for the Egyptians did not “carry away” Jacob by force;
he came down to it of his own accord when he was pressed by famine, yet
he was delivered from it;  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) how much
more shall he be rescued out of the hand of those who tore him from his
native country, and carried him by violence into captivity?

<span id="v.i-p59"></span>*That they should cause them to howl.* In
order to express more forcibly the baseness of this conduct, he says
that they are constrained to howl without ceasing. Some translate the
vero as neuter;  <span id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) but I think that
it is intended to express the strength of their hatred, and therefore I
consider it to be an active verb, expressive of the violence which the
Babylonians exercised towards the Jews; for they not only ruled unjustly
over them, but also treated them harshly. To “howl” is more than to sigh
or weep; for there is reason to believe that the pain which sends forth
loud and strong cries is exceedingly severe. The metaphor is taken from
wild beasts, and denotes extreme despair.

<span id="v.i-p61"></span>The third and principal reason why the Lord
will deliver his people is, that *his name is continually exposed to the
reproach* and blasphemy of wicked men. For the sake of his own honor the
Lord preserves the Church, and defends the pure worship of his name.
Because wicked men seize on the Church’s calamitous state as a reason
for blasphemy, and insolently mock God, with good reason does he say,
that by delivering his people, he will plead his own cause. I do not
here relate the various interpretations, or stay to refute them; for it
will be enough for me to have briefly explained the Prophet’s real
meaning.

<span id="v.i-p62"></span><span id="v.i-p62.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p63"></span>**6.** *Therefore shall my people know.* In
this verse he concludes what he had glanced at in the two preceding
verses, that at length the people must be redeemed by God, who cannot be
unlike himself; for, if he redeemed the fathers, if he always assisted
the Church, their posterity, whom he has adopted in the same manner,
will never be suffered by him to be overwhelmed. We ought carefully to
observe the word “know;” for to “know the name of the Lord” is to lay
aside every false opinion, and to know him from his word, which is his
true image, and next from his works. We must not imagine God according
to the fancy of men, but must comprehend him as he declares himself to
us. The Lord, therefore, concludes that he will actually assist them,
and will fulfill all that he has promised, that the people may know that
their hope has not been without foundation, and that they may be more
and more confirmed in the knowledge of his name. We must keep in
remembrance what we have elsewhere said about experimental knowledge,
which confirms the truth of the word.

<span id="v.i-p64"></span>*That it is I who speak.* The verb “to speak”
relates to the promises. <span id="v.i-p64.1"></span>הנני *(hinni,)
Behold I,* relates to actual power; as if he had said, “Although now
there be nothing more than that there sound in your ears the words by
which I promise what is hardly probable, yet you shall speedily obtain
it; for I will actually accomplish what I promise.” Hence we ought to
draw the universal doctrine, that the promises of God and the
fulfillment of them are linked together by an indissoluble bond.
Whenever, therefore, Satan tempts and urges us to distrust, as if God
had forsaken and abandoned us, we must come back to this point, and
place our confidence in God, who never promises anything in vain. “If
hitherto he does not perform, yet he will assist in due time.”

<span id="v.i-p65"></span><span id="v.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p66"></span>**7.** *How beautiful upon the mountains.* The
Prophet again confirms believers as to the certainty of the word of God,
that they may be fully persuaded that they shall be restored to their
former liberty, and may comfort their hearts by assured hope during that
hard bondage. He pronounces magnificent commendations on this message,
that believers may be convinced that God holds out to them, in their
calamity, the hope of future salvation; and indeed, when God speaks,
they ought to accept the consolation, that, relying on it, they may
calmly and patiently wait for the fulfillment of the promise. Thus, in
order that believers may bridle their desires by patience, he splendidly
adorns the word of God. “Will you be so ungrateful as not to rest
satisfied with that incomparable treasure of the word which contains so
many benefits? Will you give way to unruly passions? Will you complain
of God?” He wishes to guard against distrust the people who were drawn
away by various allurements, and did not fully rely on the word of God;
and therefore he praises the excellence of the doctrine, and shews that
the Lord bestows upon “us more than we can say or think.” (<span
id="v.i-p66.1"></span>[Eph 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#020)<span
id="v.i-p66.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p67"></span>He states that he does not now speak of every
kind of doctrine, but of that which is adapted to consolation, and
therefore shews that “beautiful” and lovely is the approach of those who
bring consolation from the mouth of God, which can not only alleviate
our grief, but even impart to us abundant joy. Here he speaks of the
doctrine of salvation, and consequently says that *peace, happiness,
salvation,* is proclaimed. By the word “peace” he denotes a prosperous
and happy condition, as we have already in other passages explained
fully the signification of this term.

<span id="v.i-p68"></span>*That saith to Zion.* Hence we infer what is
the beginning of that doctrine which Isaiah preaches, and what we ought
chiefly to desire, namely, that the kingdom of God may be erected among
us; for until he reign among us, everything must go in with us, and
therefore we must be miserable, as, on the other hand, when God is
pleased to take care of us, this of itself is the chief part of
salvation; and this, too, is the only way of obtaining peace, though the
state of affairs be ruinous and desperate. And let us remember that this
message is sent to the Church; for it cannot apply to heathens that know
not God.

<span id="v.i-p69"></span>Paul quotes this passage, in order to prove
that the preaching of the Gospel proceeds not from men but from God, and
that the ministers who bring the message of salvation are sent by him.
He employs this chain of reasoning, — “Whosoever shall call on the name
of the Lord shall be saved. But it is impossible for any one to call on
God till he know him; for there can be no entrance to calling on him
till it is opened up by faith, that, embracing God as our Father, we may
familiarly pour our cares into his bosom. Now, the foundation of it is
doctrine, by which the Lord has revealed himself to us, and for that
purpose employs the agency and ministry of men. Therefore he adds,
lastly, that there will be none to preach till he be sent by God.”
(<span id="v.i-p69.1"></span>[Ro
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015)<span id="v.i-p69.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p70"></span>But it may be thought that Paul tortures the
Prophet’s words; for Isaiah does not say that God sends ministers, but
that their approach and presence is desirable. I reply, Paul took this
principle for granted, that nothing is desirable but what comes from
God. But whence comes salvation? From men? No; for none but God can be
the author of such a distinguished benefit. Justly, therefore, does he
conclude that it proceeds from God, and not from man.

<span id="v.i-p71"></span><span id="v.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p72"></span>**8.** *The voice of thy watchmen.* He
continues his argument; for he shews that there shall be such a
restoration of the people, that the messengers shall venture boldly to
proclaim it. To *lift up the voice* has the same meaning with the
phrase, “on the mountains,” which he formerly employed. (Verse 7.) The
matter will not be hidden, but so clear and evident as to draw forth
universal admiration. They who speak of what is doubtful matter mutter
inaudibly,  <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) and do not venture to
“lift up the voice;” but here there will be nothing doubtful or
uncertain.

<span id="v.i-p74"></span>The Prophet borrowed the metaphor from
sentries which are commonly placed in cities, though the designation of
“watchmen” is usually given to all Prophets, because they are placed, as
it were, on watch-towers, to keep watch over the safety of the people.
When he says that they shall lift up the voice, he means that there will
be silence during the captivity, because the voice of the Prophets shall
not be heard; for although they warn every one privately, yet there will
be no freedom of speech. Hence also Jeremiah says, “I will put my mouth
in the dust.” (<span id="v.i-p74.1"></span>[La
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029)<span id="v.i-p74.1"></span>) But
when the Lord shall be pleased to lead forth the people, the mouth of
watchmen, who were formerly dumb, shall be opened to proclaim that they
are at liberty to return; for they will not speak within private walls,
or impart moderate consolation, but will openly proclaim that salvation.
On this subject I have spoken fully at the beginning of the fortieth
chapter.  <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="v.i-p76"></span>*Eye to eye*; that is, openly. This extends,
indeed, to spiritual conversion; but let us not on that account depart
from the literal sense, so as not to include also the benefit which the
Lord conferred on the ancient people; for, when he restored the Jews to
liberty, and employed the ministry of Zerubbabel, Ezra, and Nehemiah,
these things were fulfilled. Yet at the same time they ought to be
continued down to the coming of Christ, by which the Church was gathered
out of all parts of the world. But we ought also to go forward to
Christ’s last coming, by which all things shall be perfectly restored.

<span id="v.i-p77"></span><span id="v.i-p77.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p78"></span>**9.** *Praise ye, rejoice together.* He
exhorts believers to thanksgiving, but chiefly confirms them in the hope
and confidence of this salvation; as if the actual enjoyment of it
already called them to thank God for it.  <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42) We are not sufficiently moved, when the
Lord testifies that he will assist us, and think that we are deceived,
if he do not actually show it. On this account the Prophets insist much
on strengthening the hearts of believers, and placing the fact almost
before their eyes. Although it appears to be unreasonable and
inappropriate to prescribe a song of joy in the midst of grief, yet we
have elsewhere seen that this form of expression is well fitted to
arouse those who groan under the burden of sorrow, fear, and cares.

<span id="v.i-p80"></span>*Ye wildernesses of Jerusalem*. He calls them
“wildernesses” or waste places “of Jerusalem,” that, notwithstanding its
ruin and destruction, they might still hope that it would be restored.
And this appellation is better adapted for shaking off fear than if he
had called her prosperous or flourishing; for, in consequence of their
condition being very wretched, nothing would have led them to think that
these promises related to them except a description of their misery,
against which they needed to be fortified, in order that, though they
beheld nothing but desolation and hideous ruin, still they might look
for restoration with assured confidence.

<span id="v.i-p81"></span>*For Jehovah hath comforted his people*. The
Lord hath changed the mourning of the people into joy, and out of
captivity hath made them free. Yet some person will say  <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) that this had not yet happened. But in
the promises of God, as in a mirror, we ought to behold those things
which are not yet visible to our eyes, even though they appear to us to
be contrary to reason.

<span id="v.i-p83"></span>*He hath redeemed Jerusalem.* Here we see that
to deliver the Church is God’s own work. And if we ought to judge thus
of the redemption from Babylon, which was but of a shadowy nature, what
shall we say of the spiritual redemption? Can it be ascribed to men
without grossly insulting God? As it belongs to God alone to deliver the
Church, so to him it likewise belongs to defend its liberty.

<span id="v.i-p84"></span><span id="v.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p85"></span>**10.** *Jehovah hath made bare the arm of his
holiness.* The Prophet has borrowed this comparison from soldiers who
stretch out their arms when they make ready for the battle. To “make
bare” does not here mean to hold out the naked arm, but to exert it;
because, when we sit in idleness, we either have our arms folded or
conceal them; and in like manner, we conceive of God according to the
grossness of our senses, and think that, like a wearied or indolent man,
he does not move a finger till he publicly displays his power.

<span id="v.i-p86"></span>The Prophet calls it “the arm of holiness,”
because he intended to display his power for the salvation of the
people. This implies a mutual relation between God and the Church which
the Lord has consecrated to himself. True, “he maketh bare his arm” in
the government of the whole world; but he does not call it “the arm of
holiness,” as in this passage, when he renders peculiar assistance to
his Church. There are two points of view in which the power of God ought
to be regarded; first, universally, in preserving all the creatures;
next, specially, in defending the Church; for there is a peculiar care
which he exercises about his own people, and which the rest do not share
with them.

<span id="v.i-p87"></span>*Before the eyes of all nations.* He means
that this deliverance shall be worthy of so great admiration that it
shall be visible even to the blind. The extension of this magnificent
spectacle to the very ends of the earth makes it evident that the
Prophet does not speak of the return of the people, which would take
place a few years afterwards, but of the restoration of the whole
Church. This prophecy is maliciously restricted by the Jews to the
deliverance from Babylon, and is improperly restricted by Christians to
the spiritual redemption which we obtain through Christ; for we must
begin with the deliverance which was wrought under Cyrus, (<span
id="v.i-p87.1"></span>[2 Chr. 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#023)<span id="v.i-p87.1"></span>,) and
bring it down to our own time. Thus the Lord began to display his power
among the Medes and Persians, but afterwards he made it visible to all
the nations.

<span id="v.i-p88"></span><span id="v.i-p88.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p89"></span>**11.** *Depart ye, depart ye.* He now exhorts
the people to be always ready to set out, and at the same time to bear
their misery with patience. As the excessive haste of the people needed
to be restrained, so it was also proper to shake off their slothfulness;
for, before the time of deliverance arrived, they burned with
extravagant eagerness to depart; but when the period of the captivity
was fulfilled, they had grown languid through long delay, and had thrown
away all hope and wish to return, so that there were few who returned to
Judea.  <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44) They had mingled with the
Babylonians, whose customs had captivated and depraved them so much that
they disregarded their native country; and therefore they needed to be
aroused and admonished, that they might not lose heart through long
expectation, and might not suffer themselves to be corrupted by the
pollutions of the Babylonians.

<span id="v.i-p91"></span>*Touch not what is unclean.*  <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) This expresses more clearly what we have
already said. He bids them keep themselves pure and free from the
defilements with which the Babylonians polluted themselves; for there
was a risk of their being corrupted by the pollutions of the Gentiles,
as we are all prone to evil, and easily led away by bad examples.
Accordingly, he exhorts them, though they are captives, not to do
anything for the purpose of pleasing their masters, or of having their
condition improved; not to allow themselves to be drawn aside from the
pure worship of God; not to be polluted by their idolatries; not to
pretend that they worship idols or approve of their religion; for this
is detestable “uncleanness,” which the Prophet bids them shun. Captives
and those who groan under tyranny meet with temptations of this kind,
under which they frequently sink so as to allow themselves to do many
things that are unlawful and base, under the pretense of wishing to
mitigate the rage of tyrants. But how frivolous their excuse is we see
in this passage; for the Prophet does not exhort the Jews to be clean
when they shall be free, but so long as they shall be held captive, and
even when their life shall be in danger. These words undoubtedly relate
to us also, whom Paul exhorts to be unpolluted, not only “in spirit,”
but also “in the flesh.” (<span id="v.i-p92.2"></span>[2Co
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)<span id="v.i-p92.2"></span>).

<span id="v.i-p93"></span>*Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of
Jehovah.* This exhortation is especially directed to the priests and
Levites, who, being standard­bearers, ought to maintain greater
integrity; not that others have a right to pollute themselves, but he
addresses them chiefly, that they may give an example to others, to whom
they have been appointed to be guides. Besides, we must bear in
remembrance what we have already seen, and what Isaiah will again repeat
at the end of this book, that there will be a new priesthood among a
redeemed people. (<span id="v.i-p93.1"></span>[Isa
66:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#021)<span id="v.i-p93.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.i-p94"></span>Yet I approve of the simple meaning, that the
Levites and ministers of the temple are put, by way of eminence, (<span
id="v.i-p94.1"></span>κατ᾿ ἐξοχὴν) for the whole of the people. This
doctrine, therefore, relates in the present day, not only to ministers
of the word, but to all Christians, who are also called “a royal
priesthood,” (<span id="v.i-p94.2"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="v.i-p94.2"></span>,) and
not only are appointed to carry the vessels of the temple, but are
themselves “temples of God.” (<span id="v.i-p94.3"></span>[1 Cor.
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016), [1 Cor.
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span id="v.i-p94.3"></span>.)
Thus Ezekiel has predicted that at the restoration of the Church the
Levites shall be high priests, and the whole people shall be admitted
into the order of the Levites. Seeing, therefore, that the Lord has
raised all to so high a rank of dignity, it follows that this
“cleanness” is demanded from all without exception; and on this account
also Paul has applied this passage to the whole Church.

<span id="v.i-p95"></span><span id="v.i-p95.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p96"></span>**12.** *For not in haste shall ye go out.*
The Prophet again magnifies that benefit of redemption, for it appeared
to be incredible, so deep was the despair with which almost all of them
had been seized; for he chiefly addresses those who would be led into
captivity, that they might not lose courage in that wretched condition.
He promises that this deliverance shall not resemble a flight such as
that of Egypt; for there is an implied contrast between the deliverance
from Egypt. and the deliverance from Babylon. They fled “by night” out
of Egypt, (<span id="v.i-p96.1"></span>[Ex
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)<span id="v.i-p96.1"></span>,)
having pretended that they were only performing “a journey of three days
to offer sacrifice to God.” (<span id="v.i-p96.2"></span>[Ex
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#003)<span id="v.i-p96.2"></span>.) They
went out “with haste” (<span id="v.i-p96.3"></span>[Ex
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033)<span id="v.i-p96.3"></span>) and
bustle, as they were told to do, and Pharaoh pursued them in their
journey and attempted to destroy them. But the Prophet declares that the
present case shall be totally different, and that they shall go away
like conquerors, so that none shall venture to give them any annoyance,
or, as we commonly say, “They will go out with flying colors,” (*Ils
s’en iront a enseigne desployee,*) so that this deliverance will be more
excellent and wonderful.

<span id="v.i-p97"></span>*Jehovah will go before you*; that is, will be
the leader of your journey. It will be said that God was also the leader
of his ancient people when he led them out of Egypt. This is undoubtedly
true; but he did not at that time display his majesty, as now, when,
like a general, he brought back his army, after having vanquished his
enemies.

<span id="v.i-p98"></span>*And the God of Israel will assemble you.* The
word “assemble” will confirm the interpretation now given; for there
will be no scattering such as usually takes place when men are under the
influence of terror, nor will they wander about here and there, but will
march, as under banners, in a regular and ordinary manner. As if he had
said, “God will bring you out as a band or army drawn up; one shall not
follow another, like those who steal away secretly; but ye shall be
openly gathered in troops, and shall depart without any fear. None shall
molest you; for you will be assembled under God as your leader, that you
may return into your native country.

<span id="v.i-p99"></span><span id="v.i-p99.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p100"></span>**13.** *Behold, my servant shall have
prosperous success*  <span id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) After having
spoken of the restoration of the Church, Isaiah passes on to Christ, in
whom all things are gathered together. Some explain <span
id="v.i-p101.2"></span>ישכיל (*yashkil*) to mean shall “deal prudently;”
but, as it is immediately added that he shall be exalted, the context
appears to demand that we shall rather understand it to denote
“prosperous success,” for <span id="v.i-p101.3"></span>שכל (*shakal*)
also signifies “to be prosperous.” He speaks, therefore, of the
prosperity of the Church; and as this was not visible, he draws their
attention to the supreme King, by whom all things shall be restored, and
bids them wait for him. And here we ought carefully to observe the
contrasts which the Prophet lays down; for the mightiness of this king
whom the Lord will exalt is contrasted by him with the wretched and
debased condition of the people, who were almost in despair. He promises
that this king will be the head of the people, so that under him as the
leader the people shall flourish, though they be now in a state of the
deepest affliction and wretchedness; because he shall have a prosperous
course.

<span id="v.i-p102"></span>He calls Christ “his Servant,” on account of
the office committed to him. Christ ought not to be regarded as a
private individual, but as holding the office to which the Father has
appointed him, to be leader of the people and restorer of all things; so
that whatever he affirms concerning himself we ought to understand as
belonging also to us. Christ has been given to us, and therefore to us
also belongs his ministry, for the Prophet might have said, in a single
word, that Christ will be exalted and will be highly honored; but, by
giving to him the title of “Servant,” he means that he will be exalted
for our sake.

<span id="v.i-p103"></span><span id="v.i-p103.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p104"></span>**14.** *As many.* He makes use of an
anticipation; for the exalted state of Christ was not visible at first
sight, and on this pretense it might be rejected. On this account, he
informs them that Christ must first be rejected and humbled, and
anticipates that doubt which might have arisen from his singularly
debased and unseemly condition. As if he had said, “There is no reason
why men should be shocked at that unseemliness and disgrace which will
be speedily followed by eternal happiness.”

<span id="v.i-p105"></span>*So marred by men.* I have translated <span
id="v.i-p105.1"></span>כן (*ken)* as meaning *so;* for it is a mistake
to suppose that it opens the second part of the comparison.  <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47) I consider <span
id="v.i-p106.1"></span>מאיש (*meish*) to mean “by men;” for I do not
consider <span id="v.i-p106.2"></span>מ (*mem*) to be a particle
denoting comparison, as others explain it; that is “more than” men, or
“beyond” what is usually found among men; but I adopt a simpler meaning,
which is, that Christ was disfigured among men, or that his beauty was
defaced by the perverse judgment of men.

<span id="v.i-p107"></span>*Were amazed.*  <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) This “amazement” is considered by some
commentators to denote the astonishment with which men were seized on
account of the miracles performed by Christ, and next, that, when he
must come to the cross, he was immediately rejected by them. But they
have not caught the Prophet’s meaning; for he says that Christ will be
such that all men will be shocked at him. He came into the world so as
to be everywhere despised; his glory lay hid under the humble form of
the flesh; for though a majesty worthy of “the only­begotten Son of God”
(<span id="v.i-p108.2"></span>[Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="v.i-p108.2"></span>)
shone forth in him, yet the greater part of men did not see it, but, on
the contrary, they despised that deep abasement which was the veil or
covering of his glory.

<span id="v.i-p109"></span>The cause of their astonishment was this,
that he dwelt among men without any outward show; and the Jews did not
think that the Redeemer would come in that condition or attire. When he
came to be crucified, their horror was greatly increased. Paul describes
this humiliation and subsequent exaltation of Christ, when he says,

<span id="v.i-p110"></span>“Who, being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to make himself equal to God, but emptied himself, taking
upon him the form of a servant, made in the likeness of man, and found
in fashion as a man, humbled himself, being made obedient even to death,
and the death of the cross. Wherefore also God hath raised him to the
highest exaltation, and hath given him a name which is above every name;
that at the name of Jesus should bow every knee of those that are in
heaven and in earth and in hell; and that every tongue should confess
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.” (<span
id="v.i-p110.1"></span>[Php
2:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span id="v.i-p110.1"></span>)

<span id="v.i-p111"></span>It was therefore necessary that Christ should
first be humbled and covered with shame, and that exaltation to which he
was about to be raised was not all at once visible; but the shame of the
cross was followed by a glorious resurrection attended by the highest
honor.

<span id="v.i-p112"></span><span id="v.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p113"></span>**15.** *So shall he sprinkle many nations.*
Some explain it, “Shall cause to drop,” which they take to be a
metaphorical expression for “to speak.” But since <span
id="v.i-p113.1"></span>נזה signifies “to sprinkle,” and is commonly
found to have this sense in Scripture, I choose rather to adopt this
interpretation. He means that the Lord will pour out his Word over “many
nations.” He next mentions the effect of doctrine, that *kings shall
shut their mouth*, that is, in token of astonishment, but a different
kind of astonishment from that which he formerly described. Men “shut
their mouths,” and are struck with bewilderment, when the vast magnitude
of the subject is such that it cannot be expressed, and that it exceeds
all power of language.

<span id="v.i-p114"></span>*What they have not heard.* He means that
this astonishment will not arise merely from Christ’s outward
appearance, but, on the contrary, from the preaching of the Gospel; for,
though he had risen from the dead, yet all would have thought that he
was still a dead man, if the glory of his resurrection had not been
proclaimed. By the preaching of the Gospel, therefore, were revealed
those things which formerly had neither been seen nor heard; for this
doctrine was conveyed to kings and nations that were very far off, and
even to the very ends of the world.

<span id="v.i-p115"></span>Paul quotes this passage, and shows that it
was fulfilled in his ministry, and glories on this ground, that he
proclaimed the doctrine of the Gospel to those who had never heard of it
at all. (<span id="v.i-p115.1"></span>[Ro
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#021)<span id="v.i-p115.1"></span>)
This belongs to the office of an Apostle, and not to the office of every
minister. He means that the kingdom of Christ is more extensive than
merely to embrace Judea, and that it is not now confined within such
narrow limits; for it was proper that it should be spread through all
nations, and extended even to the ends of the world. The Jews had heard
something of Christ from the Law and the Prophets, but to the Gentiles
he was altogether unknown; and hence it follows that these words relate
strictly to the Gentiles.

<span id="v.i-p116"></span>*They shall understand.* By this word he
shows that faith consists in certainty and clear understanding.
Wherever, therefore, knowledge of this kind is wanting, faith is
unquestionably wanting. Hence it is evident how idle is the notion of
the Papists about implicit faith, which is nothing else than gross
ignorance, or rather a mere creature of imagination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc16004.htm#fr_36) <span
id="v.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p37"></span> “<span id="v.i-p37.1"></span>Pour rire et
chanter quand elle florit, et pleurer lors qu’elle est persecutee.” “To
laugh and sing when she is flourishing, and to weep when she is
persecuted.”

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc16004.htm#fr_37) <span
id="v.i-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p53"></span> “<span id="v.i-p53.1"></span>En
recognoissance du bien que Joseph avoit fait au royaume.” “In gratitude
for the benefit which Joseph had conferred on the kingdom.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc16004.htm#fr_38) <span
id="v.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p58"></span> “<span id="v.i-p58.1"></span>Toutes fois sa
posterite en a este delivree.” “Yet his posterity was delivered from
it.”

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc16004.htm#fr_39) <span
id="v.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p60"></span> That is, that the verb means “to howl,”
instead of “to cause to howl.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc16004.htm#fr_40) <span
id="v.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p73"></span> “<span id="v.i-p73.1"></span>Murmurent entre
les dents.” “Mutter between the teeth.”

<span id="fn_41"></span>[42](cc16004.htm#fr_41) <span
id="v.i-p74.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p75"></span> See Com. on Isaiah, Vol. 3, p. 197.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[43](cc16004.htm#fr_42) <span
id="v.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p79"></span> “<span id="v.i-p79.1"></span>A en remercier
Dieu.”

<span id="fn_43"></span>[44](cc16004.htm#fr_43) <span
id="v.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p82"></span> “<span id="v.i-p82.1"></span>Quelqu’un dira.”

<span id="fn_44"></span>[45](cc16004.htm#fr_44) <span
id="v.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p90"></span> “<span id="v.i-p90.1"></span>Tellement que le
nombre de ceux qui revindrent en Judee fut bien petit.” “So that the
number of those who returned to Judea was very small.”

<span id="fn_45"></span>[46](cc16004.htm#fr_45) <span
id="v.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p92"></span> “<span id="v.i-p92.1"></span>Ne touchcz point
la souillure.” “Touch not defilement.”

<span id="fn_46"></span>[47](cc16004.htm#fr_46) <span
id="v.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p101"></span> “Here some begin the 53d chapter, and
Salmeron says it is so divided in some copies which he had seen; the
subject is new, and has nothing ‘which smacks of Babylon,’ (<span
id="v.i-p101.1"></span>quod Babylonium olet,) according to the
expression of Sanctius, and is to be literally understood of the
Messiah, as all expositors that I have met with agree, except Grotius,
who thinks the words may in the first lower sense of them be understood
of Jeremiah the prophet, considered as a type of Christ.” — *White*.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[48](cc16004.htm#fr_47) <span
id="v.i-p105.2"></span>

<span id="v.i-p106"></span> Our author’s meaning is, that he has
rendered the clause, “He was so (much) marred,” while others render it,
*“So* he was marred;” making the *So* to correspond to the *As* in the
former clause, which he pronounces to be a mistake. ­ *Ed*.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[49](cc16004.htm#fr_48) <span
id="v.i-p107.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p108"></span> “<span id="v.i-p108.1"></span>Comme
plusieurs t’ont eu en horreur.” “As many were shocked at thee.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 53](cc16005)
