[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16017)  [Next](cc16019.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 66.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
66:1-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001.md)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus saith the LORD, The heaven *is*
my throne, and the earth *is* my footstool: where *is* the house that ye
build unto me? and where *is* the place of my rest?

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sic dicit Iehova, Coelum sedes mea, et
terra scabellum pedum meorum. Ubi ista domus quam aedificabitis mihi? et
ubi hic locus quietis meae?

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span>**2.** For all those *things* hath mine hand
made, and all those *things* have been, saith the LORD: but to this
*man* will I look, *even* to *him that is* poor and of a contrite
spirit, and trembleth at my word.

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Atqui manus mea haec omnia fecit, et
coeperunt ease haec omnia, dicit Iehova. Et ad hunc respicio qui humilis
eat ac contritus spiritu, tremitque ad sermonem meum.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span>**3.** He that killeth an ox, *is as if* he
slew a man; he that sacrificeth a lamb, *as if* he cut off a dog’s neck;
he that offereth an oblation, *as if he offered* swine’s blood; he that
burneth incense, *as if* he blessed an idol. Yea, they have chosen their
own ways, and their soul delighteth in their abominations.

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Qui mactat bovem, acsi hominem
occidat; qui sacrificat pecudem, acsi canem jugulet. Qui offert Minha,
acsi offeret sanguinem suillum; qui recordatur thuris, acsi benedicat
idolo (Hebrews iniquitati). Et sane elegerunt vias suas, et
abominationes eorum anima ipsorum desideravit.

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**4.** I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them; because when I called, none did
answer; when I spake, they did not hear: but they did evil before mine
eyes, and chose *that* in which I delighted not.

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ego quoque eligam illusiones eorum, et
terrorem ipsorum inducam illis; quia vocavi, et nemo respondit; loquutus
sum, et non audierunt; et fecerunt malum in oculis meis, et ea in quibus
non oblector elegerunt.

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>**5.** Hear the word of the LORD, ye that
tremble at his word; Your brethren that hated you, that cast you out for
my name’s sake, said, Let the LORD be glorified: but he shall appear to
your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Audite verbum Iehovae, qui tremitis
ad verbum ejus. Dixerunt fratres vestri odio vos habentes, rejicientes
vos propter nomen meum. Glorificetur (*vel*, gravis eat; *vel*,
onerosus; *vel*, glorificabitur) Iehova. Atqui videbitur cum laetitia
vestra; illi autem pudefient.

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>**6.** A voice of noise from the city, a
voice from the temple, a voice of the LORD that rendereth recompence to
his enemies.

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Vox tumultus ex urbe, vox e templo;
vox Iehovae reddentis mercedem hostibus suis.

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span>**7.** Before she travailed, she brought
forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Antequam parturiret, peperit;
antequam veniret illi dolor, enixa est masculum.

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**8.** Who hath heard such a thing? who hath
seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day?
*or* shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion travailed, she
brought forth her children.

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quis audivit huic simile? Quis simile
huic vidit? An parietur terra die uno? An nascetur gens vice una?
Quoniam simul doluit ad partum, simul peperit Sion illlos suos.

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>**9.** Shall I bring to the birth, and not
cause to bring forth? saith the LORD: shall I cause to bring forth, and
shut *the womb*? saith thy God.

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span>**9.** An ego foetus emitto, et non pariam?
dicit Iehova. An ego parere facio, et cohibebor? dicit Deus tuns.

<span id="xix.i-p20"></span>**10.** Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be
glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice for joy with her, all ye
that mourn for her:

<span id="xix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Laetamini cum Ierusalem, et exultate
in ea, omnes qui diligitis eam; gaudete cum ea gaudio, omnes qui lugetis
super eam.

<span id="xix.i-p22"></span>**11.** That ye may suck, and be satisfied
with the breasts of her consolations; that ye may milk out, and be
delighted with the abundance of her glory.

<span id="xix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Ut sugatis et saturemini ab ubere
consolationum ejus, ut mulgeatis et delectemini splendore gloria ejus.

<span id="xix.i-p24"></span>**12.** For thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles
like a flowing stream: then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon *her*
sides, and be dandled upon *her* knees.

<span id="xix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Quoniam sic dicit Iehova, Ecce ego
derivo super earn, quasi fluvium, pacem; et quasi torrentera inundantem
gloriam Gentium. Sugetis itaque, super latus portabimini, et super genua
delectabimini.

<span id="xix.i-p26"></span>**13.** As one whom his mother comforteth,
so will I comfort you; and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.

<span id="xix.i-p27"></span>**13.** Sicuti virum quem consolatur mater
sua, ita ego consolabor vos, et super Ierusalem erit vobis consolatio.

<span id="xix.i-p28"></span>**14.** And when ye see *this*, your heart
shall reioice, and your bones shall flourish like an herb: and the hand
of the LORD shall be known toward his servants, and *his* indignation
toward his enemies.

<span id="xix.i-p29"></span>**14.** Et videbitis, et hetabitur cot
vestrum, et ossa vestra quasi herba florebunt; et cognoscetur manus
Iehovae erga servos suos, et indignabitur hostibus suis.

<span id="xix.i-p30"></span>**15.** For, behold, the LORD will come with
fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his anger with
fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.

<span id="xix.i-p31"></span>**15.** Quoniam ecce Iehova in igne veniet,
et quasi turbo quadrigae ejus, ut reddat in furore iram suam, et
increpationem suam in flamma ignis.

<span id="xix.i-p32"></span>**16.** For by fire, and by his sword, will
the LORD plead with all flesh: and the slain of the LORD shall be many.

<span id="xix.i-p33"></span>**16.** Quoniam in igne lehova judicabit, et
in gladio suo omnem carnem; et multi erunt interfecti Iehovae.

<span id="xix.i-p34"></span>**17.** They that sanctify themselves, and
purify themselves in the gardens behind one *tree* in the midst, eating
swine’s flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, shall be consumed
together, saith the LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p35"></span>**17.** Qui sanctificant se, et qui se
purificant in hortis post unam in medio; qui comednut carnem suillam, et
abominationem et murem, simul tollentur, dicit Iehova.

<span id="xix.i-p36"></span>**18.** For I *know* their works and their
thoughts: it shall come, that I will gather all nations and tongues; and
they shall come, and see my glory.

<span id="xix.i-p37"></span>**18.** Nam ego opera eorum et cogitationes
eorum. Quia venit tempus ut congregem omnes gentes et linguas; et
venient, et videbunt gloriam meam.

<span id="xix.i-p38"></span>**19.** And I will set a sign among them,
and I will send those that escape of them unto the nations, *to*
Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, *to* Tubal, and Javan, *to*
the isles afar off, that have not heard my fame, neither have seen my
glory; and they shall declare my glory among the Gentiles.

<span id="xix.i-p39"></span>**19.** Et ponam in illis signum, et mittam
quosdam ex illis servatos ad gentes Tharsis, Pul, et Lud, qui trahunt
arcu, Thubal et Javan, insulas remotas; quae non audierunt nomen meum,
et non viderunt gloriam meam; et annuntiabunt gloriam meam in Gentibus.

<span id="xix.i-p40"></span>**20.** And they shall bring all your
brethren *for* an offering unto the LORD out of all nations upon horses,
and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon swift beasts,
to my holy mountain Jerusalem, saith the LORD, as the children of Israel
bring an offering in a clean vessel into the house of the LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p41"></span>**20.** Et adducent omnes fratres vestros ex
omnibus gentibus oblationem Iehovae in equis et quadrigis, in vehiculis,
et mulis, et celeribus animalibus, ad montem sanctum meum Ierusalem,
dicit Iehova; quemadmodum adferunt filii Israel in vase mundo in domum
Iehovae.

<span id="xix.i-p42"></span>**21.** And I will also take of them for
priests *and* for Levites, saith the LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p43"></span>**21.** Adeoque assurmam ex illis aliquos in
sacerdotes et Levitas, dicit Iehova.

<span id="xix.i-p44"></span>**22.** For as the new heavens and the new
earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, saith the LORD, so
shall your seed and your name remain.

<span id="xix.i-p45"></span>**22.** Nam sicut coeli novi, et terra nova,
quae ego facio, stant coram me, dicit Iehova; ira stabunt semen vestrum
et nomen vestrum.

<span id="xix.i-p46"></span>**23.** And it shall come to pass, *that*
from one new-moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all
flesh come to worship before me, saith the LORD.

<span id="xix.i-p47"></span>**23.** Et accidet, ut e mense in mensem
ejus, et ex Sabbatho in Sabbathum ejus, veniat omnis caro, ut adoret
coram me, dicit Jehova.

<span id="xix.i-p48"></span>**24.** And they shall go forth, and look
upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for
their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched; and they
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.

<span id="xix.i-p49"></span>**24.** Et egredientur, et videbunt cadavera
hominum qui praevarieati sunt in me; quia vermis eorum non morietur, et
ignis eorum non extinguetur, et erunt nausea onmi carni.

<span id="xix.i-p50"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p51"></span><span id="xix.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p52"></span>**1.** *This saith Jehovah.* This discourse
is different from the preceding one; for here the Prophet exclaims
against the Jews, who, puffed up with vain confidence in the sacrifices
and the temple, indulged freely in their pleasures, and flattered
themselves in their sins under this pretense. He shews that this
confidence is not only foolish and groundless, but diabolical and
accursed; for they grossly mock God who endeavor to serve and appease
him by outward ceremonies. Accordingly, he reproaches them with
endeavoring to frame an idol in place of God, when they shut him up in
the temple. Next, he speaks of the renovation of the Church, and of the
extension of it throughout the whole world.

<span id="xix.i-p53"></span>*Heaven is my throne.* His aim being to
shake off the self-complancency of the pretended or hypocritical
worshippers of God, he begins with his nature. By assigning “heaven” for
his habitation, he means that the majesty of God fills all things, and
is everywhere diffused; and that he is so far from being shut up in the
temple, that he is not shut up or confined within any place whatever.
The Scripture often teaches that God is in heaven; not that he is shut
up in it, but in order that we may raise our minds above the world, and
may not entertain any low, or carnal, or earthly conceptions of him; for
the mere sight of heaven ought to carry us higher, and transport us into
admiration. And yet, in innumerable passages, he protests that he is
with us, that his power is everywhere diffused, in order that we may not
imagine that he is shut up in heaven.

<span id="xix.i-p54"></span>It may be thought that this is beyond all
controversy, and was at that time acknowledged by all; for who did not
know that heaven and earth are filled by the majesty of God? They might
therefore object that there is no man who wishes to thrust God out of
heaven, and that the Prophet has no good reason for waxing wroth and
breaking out into such violent invective. And undoubtedly they rejected
with great haughtiness this doctrine of the Prophet, and were highly
irritated and enraged, as if great injury had been done to them. But it
is easy to reply that, when men endeavor to appease God according to
their own fancy, they frame an idol that is altogether contrary to his
majesty, Relying on their useless ceremonies, they thought that they had
performed their duty well when they went frequently to the temple, and
offered in it prayers and sacrifices. The Prophet shews that the majesty
of God must not be measured by this standard, and that all that they
bring forward, unaccompanied by purity of heart, are absolute trifles;
for since it is evident from his dwelling-place being in heaven that the
nature of God is spiritual, if the worship do not correspond to that
nature, it is undoubtedly wicked and corrupted.

<span id="xix.i-p55"></span>*Where is that house which ye will build for
me?* Under the word house or temple he includes all the ceremonies in
which they thought that the worship of God consisted; and because they
measured God and his worship by the temple as a standard, the Prophet
shews that it is unworthy of God’s majesty to view his presence as
confined to a visible and frail building. He does not argue merely about
God’s essence, but at the same time discourses concerning his true
worship, which he shews to be spiritual, in order that it may correspond
to the nature of God, who “is a Spirit.” (<span
id="xix.i-p55.1"></span>[Joh 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024.md)<span
id="xix.i-p55.1"></span>.) And if men diligently considered what is the
nature of God, they would not contrive foreign and new modes of worship
for him, or measure him by themselves.  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216.md) This common and often expressed
sentiment is more weighty and energetic than if the Prophet had brought
forward something new; for he shews that they are so stupid and dull as
to be ignorant of that which was well known to the merest idiot, and
that they resemble dumb beasts in imagining that God dwells and reposes
in the temple. He therefore asks contemptuously, “Where is that house?”
For it was absurd to think either that God dwells on the earth, or that
he is concealed and shut up in a prison. Besides, the temple was built
on a small mountain, and could not contain the glory of God within its
limited dimensions.

<span id="xix.i-p57"></span>*And where is this place of my rest?* And
yet the Lord had said of the temple, “This is my rest for ever; here
will I dwell, for I have chosen it,.” (<span id="xix.i-p57.1"></span>[Ps
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p57.1"></span>..md)
In another passage it was said, “Enter, O Lord, into thy rest.” (<span
id="xix.i-p57.2"></span>[2Ch 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041.md)<span
id="xix.i-p57.2"></span>.) Besides, we have seen, in a former part of
this book, that “the Lord’s rest shall be glorious in it.” (<span
id="xix.i-p57.3"></span>[Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p57.3"></span>..md)
Finally, this was the ordinary designation of the temple, and yet the
Prophet now finds fault with it. I reply, the temple is called God’s
rest, because he gave the token of his presence in the temple; for he
had chosen it as the place where men should call upon him, and from
which he would give a display of his strength and power. But he did not
command it to be built in order that men might conceive of his majesty
according to their own fancy,  <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md)
but rather that, reminded by the outward signs of God’s presence, they
might raise their minds higher and rise to heaven, and acknowledge that
God is greater and more excellent than the whole world. Yet, as the
minds of men are prone to superstition, the Jews converted into
obstacles to themselves those things which were intended to be aids; and
when they ought to have risen by faith to heaven, they believed that God
was bound to them, and worshipped him only in a careless, manner, or
rather made sport of worshipping him at their own pleasure.

<span id="xix.i-p59"></span>This passage is very appropriately quoted by
Stephen, (<span id="xix.i-p59.1"></span>[Ac
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#049)<span id="xix.i-p59.1"></span>,.md)
and is indirectly accommodated by Paul to the sense which we have now
stated; for they shew that those persons are grievously deceived and far
astray who bring to God carnal ceremonies, as if pure worship and
religion consisted of them, or who wickedly and profanely disfigure his
worship by statues and images. Stephen addresses the Jews, who, being
attached to the figures of the Law, disregarded true godliness; while
Paul, speaking to the Gentiles, affirms that “God dwelleth not in
temples made with hands.” (<span id="xix.i-p59.2"></span>[Ac
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p59.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p60"></span><span id="xix.i-p60.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p61"></span>**2.** *Yet my hand hath made all these
things.* The Prophet refutes the false opinion which men form about the
worship of God, by thinking that sacrifices and outward ceremonies are
of great value in themselves; for the state of the question is this. God
cares nothing about ceremonies, but they are empty and useless masks,
when men think that they satisfy God by means of them. When he says that
he made all these things, this must not be understood as referring
solely to the temple, but to all that was there offered to God. Now he
says that he “made all these things,” in order that men may know that
God has no need of this external worship, as he declares (<span
id="xix.i-p61.1"></span>[Ps 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#010.md)<span
id="xix.i-p61.1"></span>) that all the animals were created by him, and
are his own, though by sacrifices of them the Jews hoped to obtain his
favor. But foolish mortals have this disease deeply seated in them, that
they transform God according to their inclination, though he appointed
external worship not for his sake, but for our advantage; that is, that
we may be trained by it according to the capacity of our flesh.

<span id="xix.i-p62"></span>*And all these things began to be.* It is
the same as if he had said that he must not be compared to these things,
which at one time began to be; for he is eternal and had no beginning.
“I could dispense with your sacrifices,” saith the Lord, “for, before
they began to be, I was, and therefore they can be of no service to me.”
In short, he maintains that ceremonies are of no avail in themselves,
but aim at a different object. Isaiah takes for granted that it is
impossible that God could receive any addition; and hence it follows
that he is satisfied with himself alone; for he could do without the
world from all eternity.

<span id="xix.i-p63"></span>*And I look to him who is humble and
contrite in spirit.* Next, a definition of lawful worship is added; for,
when he says that God “looketh to the humble,” I have no doubt that he
who is “humble and contrite in spirit” is indirectly contrasted by him
with the array, and splendor, and elegance of ceremonies, by which the
eyes of men are commonly dazzled, so as to be carried away in
admiration. On the other hand, the Lord testifies that he demands humble
and downcast minds, and that tremble at his commandments. By these words
he describes inward purity of heart and sincere desire of godliness, and
at the same time shews in what way we ought to be prepared to please
God.

<span id="xix.i-p64"></span>*And trembleth at my word.* So far as
relates to “trembling,” it might be thought strange at first sight that
he demands it in believers, since nothing is more sweet or gentle than
the word of the Lord, and nothing is more opposite to it than to excite
terror. I reply, there are two kinds of trembling; one by which they are
terrified who hate and flee from God, and another which affects the
heart, and promotes the obedience, of those who reverence and fear God.
This clause, I am aware, is viewed by others as relating to the Law,
which threatens and terrifies, and proclaims the dreadful judgment of
God. But I take it in a more general acceptation; for even believers
tremble at the promises when they embrace them with reverence. Hence
infer that true godliness consists in having our senses brought into a
state of obedience to God, and in making no boastful or wicked claims
for ourselves. The nature of faith is to yield obedience to God, and to
listen to him attentively and patiently when he speaks. But when we are
puffed up and carried away by a vain confidence in ourselves, we have no
piety or fear of God; for we cannot make even the smallest claim for
ourselves without despising God.

<span id="xix.i-p65"></span>We ought carefully to mark the expression
which he employs, “Trembling at the word of God.” Many boast that they
reverence and fear God; but, by disregarding his word, they at the same
time shew that they are despisers of God. All the reverence that we owe
to God must be paid to his word, in which he wishes to be fully
recognised as in a lively image. The amount of what is said is, that God
prefers this sacrifice to all others, when believers, by true
self-denial, lie low in such abasement as to have no lofty opinion about
themselves, but to permit themselves to be reduced to nothing. Thus also
the Psalmist says, “The sacrifice acceptable to God is a contrite
spirit; an afflicted heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.” (<span
id="xix.i-p65.1"></span>[Ps 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md)<span
id="xix.i-p65.1"></span>.) Because this modesty of faith produces
obedience, this pious feeling is likewise added, that, laying aside all
obstinacy, they tremble at the word of God.

<span id="xix.i-p66"></span>From these words we ought to draw a
remarkable consolation, “Though we appear to be wretched in our
abasement and humility, and though we appear to be unworthy of being
beheld by men, yet we are truly happy; because the Lord looks upon us,
and bestows on us his favor.” When we are tempted to despair, let us
think that in this way the Lord exalts his servants to heaven, though
they have been cast down to hell, and almost sink under the burden.

<span id="xix.i-p67"></span><span id="xix.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p68"></span>**3.** *He that killeth an ox, as if he slew
a man.* There are two clauses in this verse. In the former, Isaiah
plainly declares that all the sacrifices of his nation are of no value
in the sight of God, but are held by him in abomination; in the latter,
he describes the dreadful corruption by which they mingled the
ceremonies of the Gentiles with the sacrifices of the Law, and in this
way corrupted and perverted everything. The greater part of commentators
think that these words repeal the sacrifices of the Law, but this is a
mistake; for Isaiah, in this passage, treats of the same subject of
which he had formerly treated in the first and fifty-eighth chapters,
and does not absolutely condemn sacrifices, but rather the blemishes and
corruptions of them, because the Jews thought that God was satisfied
with a deceitful and empty appearance, and at the same time cared not
about the true fear of God and a pure conscience. He does not speak,
therefore, of the thing itself, but censures men who abused sacrifices;
because this was as much as to offer to God the shell of an empty nut.
In a word, no sacrifices are acceptable to God but those which proceed
from a pure heart and an upright will.

<span id="xix.i-p69"></span>Yet it is probable that the Prophet alludes
to the sacrifices of the Gentiles, which were shocking and monstrous;
for they killed men, or buried them alive. Neither the Romans, (who
reckoned themselves to be more religious than other nations,) nor even
the Jews, abstained from this crime. Nay more, (<span
id="xix.i-p69.1"></span>κακόζηλοι) wicked imitators polluted themselves
by many child-murders, thinking that they followed their father Abraham.
Isaiah says that, “when they kill an ox, they do the same thing as if
they slew a man;”  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) and thus he
shews that the Jews, though they had a religion which was peculiar and
which God had appointed, yet were in no respect better than the
Gentiles, among whom everything was polluted and profane, and were not
more highly approved by God; because the name of God is profaned by
hypocrisy of religion not less than by corrupted and false worship. How
necessary this admonition was, we have formerly seen; for, while the
Jews were convicted of all crimes, yet, so long as they concealed
themselves under this shadow, they thought that they were safe. Justly
therefore does the Prophet meet them by saying, that they gain nothing
more by their attempts to appease God than if they sought to offer
sacrifices from the abominable sacrileges of the Gentiles.

<span id="xix.i-p71"></span>*And truly they have chosen their own ways.*
There are two interpretations of this passage; for the antecedent to the
pronoun may either be the Gentiles or the Jews; that is, either that the
Jews mingled and entangled themselves with the wicked ceremonies of the
Gentiles, or that they followed their own inventions. The former
exposition would not be inappropriate, were it not that it is unnatural,
because the word “Gentiles” has not been formerly expressed. It was the
most aggravated part of the wickedness of the Jews, that they not only
abused the pure worship of God, but likewise, through their contempt of
the Law, defiled the temple and every other place by wicked and
abominable superstitions. They built altars on high places, planted and
reared groves, took delight in games and public entertainments, and
copied everything else that was appointed by public authority for the
purpose of corrupting the hearts of men. Thus there was produced among
them a confused medley of superstitions, such as we now behold in
Popery, in which we see various patches sewed together, taken out of
every kind of superstitions, not only heathen and Jewish, but likewise
such as have been recently contrived by Satan, that he might more
easily, and with greater plausibility, impose on the world. These and
similar practices the Prophet would justly pronounce to be doubly worthy
of condemnation, because, while they boast of the name of God, and make
profession of his worship, still they are not ashamed to stain and
pollute that worship by the sacrileges of idolatrous nations.

<span id="xix.i-p72"></span>The other interpretation is not obscure, and
is equally appropriate, that the Jews were devoted to their own
inventions, and followed their own abominations, He affirms that they do
not worship God sincerely, who despise him according to their own
caprice, not only because they are full of avarice, hatred, ambition,
dishonesty, cruelty, and extortion, but because they corrupt the worship
of God by their own contrivances. Although the pronoun refers to the
Jews, yet the Prophet condemns all superstitions which they had borrowed
from the heathen nations. Consequently, there is little difference
between the two interpretations; for he merely teaches that, because
they have insolently and rebelliously shaken off the yoke of God,
because wickedness openly prevails among them, everything that proceeds
from them is polluted and detestable. Streams that bring down dirty and
offensive matter from a muddy and polluted fountain cannot be clean or
pure. Choice and desire reveal their obstinacy more clearly; that is,
because, knowingly and willingly, they despised God’s commandments, and
devoted their heart to everything that was opposed to them, as if they
wished intentionally to disdain everything that proceeded from God, that
they might obey their depraved lust.

<span id="xix.i-p73"></span><span id="xix.i-p73.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p74"></span>**4.** *I also will choose their delusions.*
 <span id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) The Prophet means that the Jews
gain nothing by holding out various and plausible pretences and by
searching for excuses; because God does not care for the cunning or fine
speeches of men. And indeed it is not proper to measure God by our own
capacity, and we ought not to depend on human judgment; but it is our
duty to judge of the works of God from his word. I will choose; that is,
“I will scatter the clouds which they endeavor to spread over
themselves, so that their delusions shall be manifest and visible to
all; for now they appear to be hidden, but one day they shall be dragged
forth to public view.” The meaning may be thus summed up. “Because the
Jews have indulged so freely in sinning that everything which they chose
was preferred by them to the command ments of God, so also, in his turn,
God will lay open their delusions at his pleasure.”

<span id="xix.i-p76"></span>*And will bring upon them their terror.*
 <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md) Under the word “terror” he
repeats the same thing, according to the custom of Hebrew writers. “I
will cause them to know that they have fallen into a mistake, and that
the terrors which they indulged shall fall on their own heads.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md) Thus their excuses or hypocritical
pretences will be of no avail for confounding truth and falsehood and
veiling superstitions; because the Lord will clearly distinguish between
them.

<span id="xix.i-p79"></span>*Because I called.* The Prophet again
condemns the Jews for obstinacy, in not having suffered the Lord to
correct them. This is the only remedy that remains for correcting our
vices, that we hear the Lord speaking, when he endeavors to bring us
back into the right way; but when we sear and harden our hearts, it is
the worst of all evils. Whenever therefore men prefer their own
inventions to the ordinances and commandments of God, they openly
despise God, to whose will they ought to have yielded. This is
especially the case when there is added such obstinate hardness of heart
as shuts the door against holy warnings, and it is vain for them to
allege that they cannot displease God by doing that which they undertake
for the purpose of worshipping him; for all that men, by neglecting the
word, choose and follow, the Lord rejects and abhors.

<span id="xix.i-p80"></span>*Before mine eyes.* He repeats what he had
formerly said, that the Jews sinned in the sight of God, as if they had
resolved to provoke him to anger. At length he adds their manner of
doing so, that, with perverse desire, they sought what God had
forbidden; nor is it without good reason that he so frequently censures
the wicked insolence of men, in defrauding God of his right, by treating
contemptuously what he approves.

<span id="xix.i-p81"></span><span id="xix.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p82"></span>**5.** *Hear the word of Jehovah.* He
directs his discourse to the true worshippers of God, and promises to
them what they could scarcely have expected during those terrible
calamities; and he expressly addresses them, because at that time there
were many who falsely boasted of the name of God. Nay more, leaving the
undistinguished multitude, he directs his discourse separately to a
small number, as he formerly said,

<span id="xix.i-p83"></span>“Seal the law, bind the testimony among my
disciples.”  
(<span id="xix.i-p83.2"></span>[Isa
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)<span id="xix.i-p83.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p84"></span>*Ye who tremble at my word.* He points out
the true and sincere children of God, by this mark, that they “tremble
at the word of the Lord.” This indeed is an uncommon virtue; and
therefore he contrasts it with the false profession of those who, by
bearing the outward mark of circumcision, wished to be reckoned among
the people of God, and made a great profession and show of holiness;
that we may know that they alone reverence and fear God who reverence
and fear his holy word; that is, who, in consequence of being powerfully
impressed by hearing the voice of God, constrain all their senses to
obey; for this is a remarkable proof of godliness.

<span id="xix.i-p85"></span>*Your brethren said.* Because it is
customary with hypocritical worshippers of God to make loud boasting of
their pompous ritual, the design of the Prophet is, to arm and fortify
believers for enduring their attacks, that they may not give way when
they are mocked and insulted. As if he had said, “You have to contend
not only with foreign nations, but with domestic foes, who hold a place
in the Church, and who are bound by the tie of brotherhood on account of
the covenant of God which is common to you all. If they mock at your
simplicity in the same manner as they haughtily despise God himself, you
must boldly and fearlessly resist that temptation.” He therefore calls
them “brethren,” although they were enemies of believers and of the word
of God, for it is by way of concession that he gives to them that name
which they falsely usurped. Hence we infer that this is not a new evil,
that enemies, who bear the name of brethren, are nourished in the bosom
of the Church. This internal war must be incessantly carried on with
hypocrites, who cannot patiently endure that we shall worship God with
an honest and upright conscience.

<span id="xix.i-p86"></span>*Casting you out for the sake of my name.*
Literally, “bidding you begone.” As we see the Pope thundering
dreadfully against us, as if we had been base and worthless persons; so
hypocrites were casting out the small number of believers; for, being
superior in number, authority, and wealth, they likewise exercise that
tyranny in such a manner that they approve or disapprove of everything
according to their own caprice, and cause that believers may be reckoned
as of no value, whom they not only overwhelm by their vast numbers, as
the chaff does the wheat, but also trample proudly under their feet.

<span id="xix.i-p87"></span>*Let Jehovah be glorified.* Or, in the
future tense, “Jehovah will be glorified.” Others translate it, “Jehovah
is severe;” but let us see which is the preferable meaning. They who
translate it, “Jehovah is severe,” think that wicked men complain of
God’s excessive severity, in not sparing his people and in acting
severely toward them; and they think that by this word the people were
tempted to despair; for, when wicked men endeavor to turn us aside from
God, they take away all hope and confidence of salvation. But I give the
preference to either of the other two expositions. That which is most
generally approved is the following. Wicked men laughed at the
prophecies and promises, because that glory which the Prophets had so
frequently mentioned was nowhere to be seen; as if they had said, “Let
the Lord display some testimony of his glory, that we may safely rely on
it;” and therefore the Prophet wishes to arm believers against such
blasphemy, that they may not allow their faith to be overturned by the
sneers of wicked men. But this passage might be appropriately and
perhaps more correctly interpreted to mean, that wicked men have
promised very great things for themselves, as if by their good deeds
they had deserved God’s favor, as <span id="xix.i-p87.1"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018.md)<span id="xix.i-p87.1"></span>
also reproaches them, that, while they fearlessly provoke God, they
confidently trust that he will be gracious to them. Since, therefore,
relying on their sacrifices, they scorned all threatenings, and boasted
that God would assist them, he replies that they shall see the glory of
God in a very different manner.  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md)

<span id="xix.i-p89"></span>*But he will be seen to your joy.* As if he
had said, “God, by his coming, will cause believers to know that they
have not hoped in vain; for he will appear for the advantage of
believers, and for the destruction of those who maintain that he will
appear as the defender of wickedness, of which he will be the severe
avenger. The former shall enjoy gladness and consolation, while the
latter shall be ashamed and shall blush, for they shall quickly feel
that the judgment of God, which they now laugh at, is at hand.”

<span id="xix.i-p90"></span><span id="xix.i-p90.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p91"></span>**6.** *A voice of tumult from the city, a
voice from the temple.* He confirms the preceding statement; namely,
that God hath not threatened in vain, that he will speedily come to take
vengeance on hypocrites, in order that what has been promised concerning
gladness may be more eagerly expected by believers. It is uncertain what
are the enemies whom he describes; for this passage may be explained as
relating to the Babylonians, whose destruction was the deliverance of
his Church. It may also be explained as relating to other enemies, who
were nourished in the bosom of the Church; and I am more favorable to
this opinion, though I do not deny that it may be viewed in reference to
any kind of enemies. But he has in his eye domestic foes, of whom he had
formerly spoken, who disdained the voice of God continually addressing
them by the mouth of the prophets. He therefore threatens that they
shall speedily hear another and more terrible voice; but there is
immediately added a mitigation, that the same terror may not discourage
the believing servants of God.

<span id="xix.i-p92"></span>The meaning may be thus summed up. “In vain
do wicked men boast and set their own obstinacy in opposition to the
judgments of God, for they shall not escape his hand, and even ‘from the
temple,’ which was their lurking-place of false confidence, his voice
shall come forth, and believers will then receive the fruit of their
patience.” Would that we did not at the present day experience similar
contempt in hypocrites, who set at nought all remonstrances and
threatenings, and have no respect for the word of God! To them,
therefore, instead of the mild and gentle voice which they now hear, we
are compelled to threaten “a tumultuous voice,” which they shall one day
hear from other and very different masters; for since the world, with
irreligious scorn, disdains the word of God, it shall be constrained not
only to hear, but likewise to experience, an armed voice, that is, fire
and sword.

<span id="xix.i-p93"></span><span id="xix.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p94"></span>**7.** *Before she travailed, she brought
forth.* Having formerly comforted believers, that they might not be
discouraged by the insolence and contempt of brethren, whom he would at
length punish, and having thus commanded them to wait for the coming of
the Lord with a steady and resolute heart, the Lord at the same time
adds, that he will punish them in such a manner that, by their
destruction, he will provide for the safety of believers. Nor does he
speak of one or two men, but of the whole Church, which he compares to a
woman. The same metaphor has already been sometimes employed by him; for
God chiefly aims at gathering us into one body, that we may have in it a
testimony of our adoption, and may acknowledge him to be a father, and
may be nourished in the womb of the Church as our mother. This metaphor
of a mother is therefore highly appropriate. It means that the Church
shall be restored in such a manner that she shall obtain a large and
numerous offspring, though she appear for a time to be childless and
barren.

<span id="xix.i-p95"></span>*Before her pain came upon her.* He repeats
the same statement which he has already employed on other occasions; but
he expresses something more, namely, that this work of God shall be
sudden and unexpected; for he guards believers against carnal views,
that they may not judge of the restoration of the Church according to
their own opinion. Women carry a child in the womb for nine months, and
at length give birth to it with great pain. But the Lord has a very
different manner of bringing forth children; for he says that he will
cause the child to see the light, before it be possible to perceive or
discern it by any feeling of pain. On this account he likewise claims
the whole praise for himself, because a miracle sets aside the industry
of men.

<span id="xix.i-p96"></span>*She brought forth a male.* He expressly
mentions “a male,” in order to describe the manly and courageous heart
of these children; for he means that they shall be a noble offspring,
and not soft or effeminate. In like manner we know that believers are
regenerated by the Spirit of Christ, that they may finish, with unshaken
fortitude, the course of their warfare; and in this sense Paul says that
they “have not the spirit of timidity.” (<span
id="xix.i-p96.1"></span>[Ro 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015.md)<span
id="xix.i-p96.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p97"></span><span id="xix.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p98"></span>**8.** *Who hath heard such a thing?* He
extols the greatness of the thing of which he has spoken; for he means
that there shall be a wonderful and “unheard of” restoration of the
Church; so that believers shall not judge of it from the order of
nature, but from the grace of God; for when men reflect upon it: they
think that it is like a dream, as the Psalmist says. (<span
id="xix.i-p98.1"></span>[Ps 126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.i-p98.1"></span>.) He does not mean that the Church shall be
restored perfectly and in a moment; for the advancement of this
restoration is great and long-continued, and is even slow in the
estimation of the flesh; but he shews that even the beginning of it
exceeds all the capacity of the human understanding. And yet he does not
speak hyperbolically; for we often see that the Church brings forth,
which previously did not appear to be pregnant. Nay more, when she is
thought to be barren, she is rendered fruitful by the preaching of the
gospel; so that we greatly admire the event, when it has happened, which
formerly we reckoned to be altogether incredible.

<span id="xix.i-p99"></span>These things were fulfilled in some measure,
when the people returned from Babylon; but a far brighter testimony was
given in the gospel, by the publication of which a diversified and
numerous offspring was immediately brought forth. In our own times, have
we not seen the fulfillment of this prophecy? How many children has the
Church brought forth during the last thirty years, in which the gospel
has been preached? Has not the Lord his people, at the present day, in
vast numbers, throughout the whole world? Nothing, therefore, has been
here foretold that is not clearly seen.

<span id="xix.i-p100"></span>*Shall a nation be born at once?* He
illustrates the glory of the miracle by a metaphor. No “nation” ever
came into the world in an instant; for it is by degrees that men
assemble, and grow in number, and spread their nation. But the case is
very different with the Church, which all at once, and in more than one
place, brings forth a vast number of children. It amounts to this, that
God, in a wonderful manner, will cause innumerable children of the
Church, in an extraordinary manner, to be born all at once and suddenly.

<span id="xix.i-p101"></span>*Shall a land be brought forth in one day?*
The word <span id="xix.i-p101.1"></span>ארף, (*eretz*,) “a land,” may be
taken either for any country, or for its inhabitants.

<span id="xix.i-p102"></span><span id="xix.i-p102.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p103"></span>**9.** *Do I bring to the birth?* As in the
preceding verse he extolled in lofty terms the work of God, so he now
shews that it ought not to be thought incredible, and that we ought not
to doubt of his power, which surpasses all the order of nature; for, if
we consider who it is that speaks, and how easy it is for him to perform
what he has promised, we shall not remain in such uncertainty as not
instantly to recollect that the renewal of the world is in the hand of
him, who would have no difficulty in creating a hundred worlds in a
moment. A little before, by a burst of astonishment, he intended to
magnify the greatness of the work. But now, lest the minds of good men
should be perplexed or embarrassed, he exhorts them to consider his
strength; and, in order that he may more fully convince them that
nothing is so difficult in the eyes of men as not to be in his power and
easily performed by him, he brings forward those things which we see
every day; for in a woman’s bringing forth a child we see clearly his
wonderful power. Shall not the Lord manifest himself to be far more
wonderful in enlarging and multiplying the Church, which is the
principal theater of his glory? It is therefore exceedingly wicked to
limit his strength, by believing that he is less powerful, when he shall
choose to act directly and by openly stretching out his hand, than when
he acts by natural means.

<span id="xix.i-p104"></span><span id="xix.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p105"></span>**10.** *Rejoice ye with Jerusalem.* He
promises that they who formerly were sad and melancholy shall have a
joyful condition; for Isaiah has in view not his own age, but the time
of the captivity, during which believers continually groaned, and,
overwhelmed with grief, almost despaired; and therefore he exhorts and
stimulates to joy all believers, who are moved by strong affection
toward the Church, and reckon nothing more desirable than her
prosperity. In this way he instructs them that none shall have a share
in so valuable a blessing but they who are prompted by a godly love of
the Church, and desire to seek her deliverance, and that too when she is
contemptible in the eyes of the world; as the Psalmist says,

<span id="xix.i-p106"></span>“For thy meek ones love her stones, and
will have compassion on her dust.”  
(<span id="xix.i-p106.2"></span>[Ps
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014.md)<span
id="xix.i-p106.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p107"></span>And therefore he adds, —

<span id="xix.i-p108"></span>*All ye that mourn for her;* for, since in
the captivity there was frightful and shocking desolation, and there
appeared to be no longer any hope of safety, he arouses believers, and
bids them be of good cheer, or at least prepare themselves for joy. And
this exhortation contains also a promise and something more, for a bare
promise would not have carried so much weight. But those statements must
not be limited exclusively to a single period; for we ought to abide by
the general rule, of which we have often spoken already, namely, that
those promises must be extended from the return of the people down to
the reign of Christ, and to the full perfection of that reign.

<span id="xix.i-p109"></span><span id="xix.i-p109.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p110"></span>**11.** *That ye may suck.* This verse
ought to be joined with the preceding verse; for the Prophet explains
what shall be the occasion of joy, namely, because the wretched and
miserable condition of the Church shall be changed into a happy and
prosperous condition. By the word “suck” he makes an allusion to young
infants; as if he had said, “That you may enjoy your mother with every
advantage, and may hang on her breasts.” Here all believers, whatever
may be their age, are compared by him to children, that they may
remember their infirmity and may be confirmed by the strength of the
Lord; and therefore this metaphor of “sucking” and “milking” ought to be
carefully observed.

<span id="xix.i-p111"></span>*From the breast of her consolations.* Some
take the word “consolations” in an active, and others in a passive
sense; but I prefer to adopt the passive signification; for he means the
consolations which the Church has received, and of which he makes his
children partakers. And indeed none can be greater or more abundant,
none can be more excellent, than that ground of joy; and this appears
more clearly from the following clause, “that ye may be delighted with
the brightness of her glory.”

<span id="xix.i-p112"></span><span id="xix.i-p112.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p113"></span>**12.** *I cause peace to flow on her like
a river.* He continues his metaphor, and compares the children of God to
infants, that are carried in the arms, and warmed in the bosom of their
mothers, who even play with them. And in order that he may express more
strongly his affection toward us, he compares himself to a mother, whose
love, as we have formerly seen, (page 30,) exceeds every other by a wide
interval. (<span id="xix.i-p113.2"></span>[Isa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015)<span id="xix.i-p113.2"></span>..md)
The Lord wishes to be to us in the room of a mother, that, instead of
the annoyances, reproaches, distresses, and anxieties, which we have
endured, he may treat us gently, and, as it were, fondle us in his
bosom. By the word “peace” he means prosperity.

<span id="xix.i-p114"></span>*And the glory of the Gentiles as an
overflowing torrent.* The word “glory” contains a repetition, by which
he denotes every kind of riches, so that nothing is wanting to full and
perfect peace; for, since the Gentiles had formerly lived luxuriously,
and had enjoyed a vast abundance of everything desirable, he affirms
that all riches, and everything that belongs to a happy life, shall be
possessed by believers, as the rivers run into the sea. By “constant
flowing” he denotes continuance; for, since God is an inexhaustible
fountain, his peace differs widely from the peace of the world, which
quickly passes away and is dried up. Whenever therefore we behold the
sad and melancholy condition of the Church, let us remember that these
promises relate to us not less than to that people. Seeing that the Lord
has rivers of peace which he wishes to cause to flow into his Church,
let us not despair even amidst the fiercest wars; but, in our distresses
and straits, let us cheer our hearts and rejoice. When he takes pleasure
in us as infants, and not as men of mature age, we ought to acknowledge
our condition, that we may be satisfied with such consolations. And
indeed it is a token of remarkable condescension that he thus bears with
our weakness.

<span id="xix.i-p115"></span><span id="xix.i-p115.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p116"></span>**13.** *As a man*  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) *whom his mother comforteth.* It is
wonderful that the Prophet, who appeared to have already spoken enough
about this renewal, dwells on it so largely. But, because he can neither
express the greatness and warmth of the love which God bears toward us,
nor satisfy himself with speaking about it, for that reason he mentions
and repeats it frequently.

<span id="xix.i-p118"></span>*And you shall have consolation in
Jerusalem.* There are two ways in which this may be explained. It may be
said that believers shall have joyful hearts, when they shall behold the
Church restored; or, that the Church, after having been restored, shall
discharge her duty by gladdening her children. I prefer the latter
interpretation, though either of them is admissible. The former appears
to be a richer interpretation; but we must consider what the Prophet
meant, and not what we think the most beautiful. In the first place,
indeed, he makes God the author of the joy, and justly; but, in the
second place, he adds that Jerusalem is his handmaid. But this is not
addressed to irreligious scorners, who are not moved by any solicitude
about the Church, but to those who, with holy zeal, declare that they
are her children.

<span id="xix.i-p119"></span><span id="xix.i-p119.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p120"></span>**14.** *And ye shall see.* By the word
“see,” he expresses undoubted experience, that believers may not doubt
as to the result, but, embracing this prediction with full belief, may
patiently endure for a time the barrenness of the Church.

<span id="xix.i-p121"></span>*And your bones shall flourish as grass.*
He illustrates his former statement by a metaphor, saying that “their
bones” shall regain their former vigor, as faded “grass” becomes fresh
and green again. He mentions the “bones,” which are commonly dried up by
a melancholy spirit, (<span id="xix.i-p121.1"></span>[Pr
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022)<span id="xix.i-p121.1"></span>,.md)
and, on the other hand, are replenished and invigorated by a happy and
cheerful disposition. Thus he describes an ardent and invaluable joy,
and seems to allude to the sadness by which believers had been almost
dried up during the captivity, and had become like dead men. The Lord
therefore comforts them, and promises that the Church shall flourish,
and shall abound in everything that is desirable; as if bones, that
wanted moisture, should regain their former vigor, or as grass, which
appears to be dead during the winter, recovers its freshness every year.

<span id="xix.i-p122"></span>*And the hand of Jehovah shall be known
toward his servants.* That they may cherish confidence, he nexts bids
them rise to God, who will then reveal his assistance. It follows from
this, that the hand of God has not always been known, but has sometimes
remained concealed, as if he had no care about his people. At first
sight, he appeared to have cast them off; for Daniel, and other good
men, (<span id="xix.i-p122.1"></span>[Da
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p122.1"></span>,.md)
not less than Zedekiah, (<span id="xix.i-p122.2"></span>[Jer
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009)<span id="xix.i-p122.2"></span>,.md)
were carried into captivity. He says, that when the fine weather shall
smile upon them, there shall be such a distinction between the good and
the bad, as to make manifest this hand, which formerly was in some
measure hidden; because he will no longer conceal himself, or permit the
wicked to ravage without control, but will openly shew how great is his
solicitude about his people. If therefore for a time the enemies have
the superiority, and pursue their lawless course without being punished,
if we appear to be overlooked and destitute of all assistance, let us
not despair; for the time will come when the Lord will reveal himself,
and will rescue us from their assaults and tyranny.

<span id="xix.i-p123"></span><span id="xix.i-p123.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p124"></span>**15.** *For, lo, Jehovah will come in
fire.* The object of this (<span id="xix.i-p124.1"></span>ὑποτύπωσις)
lively description is, that believers, when they see worthless men
laughing at their distresses, and growing more and more insolent, may
not on that account turn aside from the right path, or lose courage; for
he intended not only to smite wicked men, who are moved by no
threatenings, and scorn all instruction,  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) but to comfort good men, that they may
feel that they are happy, because they are under God’s protection; and
may not attach themselves to the wicked on account of the prosperity of
all their undertakings. Their advantage is, therefore, what he has
chiefly in view, that they may be satisfied with God’s protection and
grace. But it may admit of doubt whether or not he includes the last
judgment, along with the temporal punishments with which he now begins
to chastise the wicked. For my own part, I have no doubt that he intends
to include that judgment also, along with those which were only the
forerunners of eternal destruction.

<span id="xix.i-p126"></span>*Will come.* This began to be accomplished,
when, by carrying away the people to Babylon, God took vengeance on
domestic foes. Next, when the time of the deliverance was accomplished,
he attacked more severely the wicked Gentiles by an armed force, and
ceased not to give other and various proofs of his approach, by which he
shewed himself to be present with the elect people, and came in fire to
judge their enemies. Lastly, we know that he will come in fire at the
last day, to take vengeance on all the wicked. But this passage ought
not to be limited to the last judgment, so as to include all the rest.
Yet these threatenings, as we shall see soon afterwards, are especially
directed by the Prophet against hypocritical Jews.

<span id="xix.i-p127"></span>These metaphorical expressions are very
customary in Scripture; for we could not comprehend this dreadful
judgment of God in any other way than by the Prophets employing
metaphors drawn from known and familiar objects. (<span
id="xix.i-p127.1"></span>[2Th 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008.md)<span
id="xix.i-p127.1"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p127.2"></span>[2Pe
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)<span id="xix.i-p127.2"></span>..md)
By means of them the prophets endeavor to make a deep impression on our
senses, that, struck with the true fear of God, we may not envy the
wicked, for whom such dreadful vengeance is prepared. Hence we see how
trivial and useless are the speculations of the Sophists, who dispute
about the refined nature and qualities of that fire; for the design of
Scripture is to point out to us under figures the dreadful judgment of
God, which otherwise we could not imagine or understand. This is still
more evident from the word “sword,” in the following verse; for it
conveys the same meaning.

<span id="xix.i-p128"></span><span id="xix.i-p128.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p129"></span>**16.** *For Jehovah will judge in fire.*
Here he brings forward nothing new, but merely confirms the former
statement, and shews that this judgment will be dreadful; that none may
think that it is a matter of small importance. Accordingly, he describes
that horror in strong language, that the wicked may fear, and that
believers, on the other hand, may keep themselves holy and chaste, and
may withdraw from the society of the wicked. Yet let them endure
patiently the unjust and cruel attacks of enemies, till the armed
avenger come forth front heaven.  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md)

<span id="xix.i-p131"></span>*And many shall be the slain of Jehovah.*
He threatens the destruction of all men, so that there may be a
prodigious mass of corpses. And he expressly added this, because
ungodliness reigned everywhere, and believers were subjected to a
dangerous temptation on account of the prosperity of the wicked; for
such is the fickleness of our minds, that we allow ourselves to be led
away by a bad custom, and are alarmed by a multitude, as if it were
sufficient for restraining the hand of God. This sinful fear the Prophet
corrects by reminding’ them, that the more ungodliness shall abound, and
the greater the number of wicked men, so much the more will the wrath of
the Lord be kindled, that he may make a greater and more extensive
slaughter; and the multitude and conspiracy of the ungodly shall not
hinder him from carrying them away by the same ruin.

<span id="xix.i-p132"></span><span id="xix.i-p132.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p133"></span>**17.** *They who sanctify themselves.* He
now describes those enemies of whom he said, that God’s anger would be
kindled against them; for it might have been doubtful whether he spoke
of foreign and avowed enemies, or directed his discourse to the
despisers of God, although they had been mixed with those who were elect
and holy; and therefore he plainly addresses the false and degenerate
Jews. Nor have I any doubt that, in the first place, he rebukes
hypocrites, and, in the second place, when he says, “Who eat swine’s
flesh,” he describes men of immoral lives, that is, those who were
openly wicked and grossly licentious. Hypocrites sanctified themselves,
that is, assumed false disguises of holiness, and deceived many under
this pretense.

<span id="xix.i-p134"></span>They *purified themselves in the gardens;*
that is, they polluted themselves with various superstitions, although
they imagined that, by means of those superstitions, they rendered
themselves pure in the sight of God. Others, without any reserve,
despised God and all religion. It is therefore a general statement, in
which he includes all the ungodly, to whatever class they may belong;
that is, both those who openly display their wickedness, and those who
hide and cover it by various disguises.

<span id="xix.i-p135"></span>*Behind one in the midst.*  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226.md) Some commentators supply the word
“pool,” or “laver;” as if holy water had been placed “in the midst” of
the garden for ablutions. But another meaning would be equally
appropriate; that every one chose a God for himself exclusively, and
therefore every one out of many trees had his own tree.

<span id="xix.i-p137"></span><span id="xix.i-p137.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p138"></span>**18.** *For I* — *their works, and their
thoughts.*  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227.md) He confirms what he
said in the preceding verse; namely, that punishment shall be executed
on all the ungodly, in order that, although the Lord permit them for a
time to sin with impunity, yet believers, being convinced that they
shall one day be punished, may guard against following their example.
The Lord here testifies that he sees and observes their works, and that
one day he will actually manifest that none can be concealed from his
eyes. Others understand by it that the ungodly can accomplish nothing
without God’s permission. That statement is indeed true, but is not
applicable to this passage; for everybody sees that it is unnatural, and
at variance with the context of the Prophet, who merely confirms what he
formerly said, that hypocrites and wicked men shall not finally escape
with impunity, because God perceives all their actions, and schemes, and
thoughts; and that they gain nothing by their evasions, as if they were
never to be dragged to the judgment.

<span id="xix.i-p140"></span>*Because the time is come.* These words
confirm still more what has been already said, for he says that the time
is at hand when he shall assemble all the nations, that he may cast off
the hypocrites and ungodly, and gather and adopt a people to himself
from among them. The Jews were puffed up with pride, and despised all
other nations as unholy. But the Lord declares that he will adopt those
nations, that they may be partakers of his glory, of which the Jews
prove themselves to be unworthy.

<span id="xix.i-p141"></span>This is a remarkable passage, which teaches
us that God is not confined to any people, so as not to choose
whomsoever he pleases, by casting off unbelievers whom he formerly
called to himself. This is abundantly explained by Paul, (<span
id="xix.i-p141.1"></span>[Rom. 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019.md),
[Rom. 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025.md)<span
id="xix.i-p141.1"></span>,) where he shews that we have come into a
possession which was left empty, after the Jews were cast off through
their unbelief. Isaiah now threatens them in this manner. “Think not
that God is in want of peoples when you have revolted and have rendered
yourselves unworthy of his grace, for he will have others; but he will
shew that he is the judge, and will not finally permit you to abuse so
great forbearance.”

<span id="xix.i-p142"></span>*And they shall come.* He says that “they
shall come,” because, being ingrafted by unity of faith, they shall be
united in the Church with the true Jews, who have not swerved from the
adoption; for, in consequence of the Jews being near to God, the
Gentiles, who were at a distance, must be joined to them, that, by the
removal of disagreement, they might become one body.

<span id="xix.i-p143"></span>*And shall see my glory.* To “see the
glory” of the Lord, is nothing else than to enjoy that grace which he
had bestowed on the Jews; for the special privilege of that nation was,
that they beheld the glory of God, and had tokens of his presence, he
says that now the Gentiles, who had not enjoyed these benefits, shall
see and behold that glory, for the Lord will reveal himself to all
without exception.

<span id="xix.i-p144"></span><span id="xix.i-p144.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p145"></span>**19.** *And I will place in them a sign.*
This may be understood in two ways; either that God holds out a sign, or
that by some symbol or mark he seals his own people, that they may be
placed in safety. The former exposition is more generally approved, but
some reason childishly about it as relating to the sign of the cross,
while others refer it to the preaching of the Gospel. In my opinion both
are mistaken; for he seems rather to allude to what, Moses tells us,
happened at the departure and deliverance of the people. It is also
declared (<span id="xix.i-p145.1"></span>[Re
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003)<span id="xix.i-p145.1"></span>.md)
that “as many as the Lord hath sealed” shall be safe, even when his
anger shall be fiercely kindled throughout the whole world; just as they
whose door-posts were marked in Egypt escaped safely. (<span
id="xix.i-p145.2"></span>[Ex
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)<span id="xix.i-p145.2"></span>..md)
And thus he shews that none can escape God’s wrath, except the elect, on
whom the Lord has impressed his mark and seal.

<span id="xix.i-p146"></span>*And will send some of them, being
reserved.* In a word, the Prophet heightens the description of what has
been already said about the grievous and terrible vengeance which the
Lord will execute on the ungodly; for all would have perished without
distinction if the Lord had not marked some of them with his seal. From
the general destruction of the whole nation, therefore, he says that he
will reserve a small number. And this is the true meaning of the
Prophet; just as he had said, in other passages, that he would rescue “a
remnant” from the general conflagration. (<span
id="xix.i-p146.1"></span>[Isa. 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md),
[Isa. 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xix.i-p146.1"></span>.) Of this band, which had been reserved, he
says that some shall be his heralds to celebrate his name among the
Gentiles; just as we see that the doctrine of salvation, by the agency
of a few, was spread far and wide.

<span id="xix.i-p147"></span>*To the nations of Tarshish, Pul, and Lud.*
By the name “Tarshish” he denotes Cilicia, and includes the whole coast
of the Mediterranean Sea opposite to Judea. Others think that it denotes
Africa and Cappadocia; but I rather adopt the former view. By Lud, some
suppose Lydia to be meant; and others, Asia Minor. By “those who draw
the bow” are meant the Parthians, because they were skillful in archery.
By Tubal and Javan he denotes Italy and Greece, and by the Islands he
denotes unknown countries; for by the name “Islands,” as we have seen on
many former occasions, the Jews denoted all that lay beyond the sea.

<span id="xix.i-p148"></span>*Which have not heard my name.* He means
that the knowledge of God shall be spread throughout the whole world;
for the Greeks, Italians, Parthians, Cilicians, and other nations had
heard nothing about pure religion and the true worship of God; and the
whole world was plunged in the deepest darkness of ignorance. He
therefore promises that the glory of God shall be known in every part of
the world. The word “nations” is emphatic; for at that time the Lord was
known to not more than one people, but now he has revealed himself to
all.

<span id="xix.i-p149"></span><span id="xix.i-p149.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p150"></span>**20.** *And they shall bring.* Here he
clearly explains what was formerly said, namely, that all who shall
escape and survive, though they be few in number, shall nevertheless be
priests, who shall bring sacrifices to God from all places. He alludes
to the ancient ceremony of the Law, though he points out the difference
that will be between those oblations and the sacrifices of the ancient
Law; for he appoints a new kind of punishment and new sacrifices. As he
had said that he would gather all the nations, so he now shews that the
priests, whom he had appointed, shall not labor in vain; for God will
grant prosperity to their undertakings.

<span id="xix.i-p151"></span>*All your brethren.* He gives the name of
“brethren” to those who formerly were strangers; for he has in his eye
the new relation which arises from faith. We know that foreign nations
were ingrafted by faith into the family of Abraham. Yet others bring out
a different meaning, which I do not absolutely reject. “When God shall
gather a new people to himself out of foreign nations, the Jews, who had
been scattered in all directions, shall be brought into one place.” This
was also accomplished; but it seems more appropriate to refer it to the
calling of the Gentiles, because at that time, by the removal of the
difference, a brotherly relation began to be established among all whom
God wished to adopt to be his children. Abraham was the father of one
nation, and yet not all who were descended from him according to the
flesh are accounted his children; for the Ishmaelites and the Edomites
were rejected. (<span id="xix.i-p151.1"></span>[Ro
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="xix.i-p151.1"></span>..md)
The time when he became “the father of many nations” (<span
id="xix.i-p151.2"></span>[Ge 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005.md)<span
id="xix.i-p151.2"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p151.3"></span>[Ro
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017)<span id="xix.i-p151.3"></span>.md)
was when God adopted the Gentiles, and joined them to himself by a
covenant, that they might follow the faith of Abraham. And thus we see
the reason why the Prophet gives the name of “brethren” of the Jews to
us, who formerly were aliens from the Church of God. It is because he
had previously cast out of their place false and reprobate brethren.

<span id="xix.i-p152"></span>It is our duty to observe this fruit which
is produced by the godly labors of those who faithfully serve the Lord,
namely, that they “bring their brethren” from deadly errors to God, the
fountain of life. By this consolation they ought to cheer their hearts,
and to support them amidst the distresses and tribulations which they
endure. The Lord does not suffer any of his own people to perish. Thus
it is a high enjoyment and privilege, when he wishes to make use of our
labors for delivering our “brethren.”

<span id="xix.i-p153"></span>*Out of all nations.* He means that there
shall no longer be any difference between Jews and Gentiles; because God
will throw down “the partition-wall,” (<span
id="xix.i-p153.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p153.1"></span>,.md)
and will form a Church “out of all nations.” And thus was fulfilled the
saying of David concerning Christ,

<span id="xix.i-p154"></span>“Ask of me; I will give thee the nations
for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession.”
(<span id="xix.i-p154.1"></span>[Ps
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p154.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p155"></span>When he speaks of the “holy mountain,” he
accommodates himself to the customs and usages of that period; for at
Jerusalem God was worshipped in the temple. But now the temple is
everywhere diffused; for everywhere we are at liberty to “lift up holy
hands to God,” (<span id="xix.i-p155.1"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="xix.i-p155.1"></span>,.md)
and there is no longer any distinction of places. He likewise mentions
oblations and sacrifices, which were offered in the temple; although the
sacrifices which are now to be offered differ widely from the ancient
sacrifices. But the prophets, as we have frequently remarked, were under
a necessity of borrowing comparisons from known and familiar objects.
Formerly the sacrifices were taken from the flocks and herds; but the
Apostles and other priests of Christ slew men themselves, and offered
them as a living sacrifice to God by the Gospel. Paul testifies that he
discharged the office of the priesthood, when he slew men by the sword
of the Gospel, “that they might be an offering acceptable to God,
sanctified by the Holy Spirit.” (<span id="xix.i-p155.2"></span>[Rom.
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md), [Rom.
6:0](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#000)<span id="xix.i-p155.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p156"></span>It is not therefore a legal priesthood, and
does not resemble that of the Papists, who say that they sacrifice
Christ;  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) but it is the
priesthood of the Gospel, by which men are slain, in order that, being
renewed by the Spirit, they may be offered to the Lord. Thus, whomsoever
we can gain to Christ, we offer in sacrifice, that they may be wholly
consecrated to God. Moreover, every person sacrifices when he devotes
and dedicates himself to God, and offers to him unreserved obedience;
and this is the sacrifice which Paul calls “reasonable.” (<span
id="xix.i-p157.2"></span>[Ro 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.i-p157.2"></span>.) The end of our calling is here pointed out
to be, that, washing away our pollutions, and being dead to ourselves,
we may learn to devote ourselves to the cultivation of holiness.

<span id="xix.i-p158"></span>*With horses and chariots.* There are some
who endeavor to find an allegory here, and who think that the Prophet
made use of the word “bring” on this account, that the Gospel does not
constrain men by fear, but rather draws them gently, so that of their
own accord they betake themselves to God, and run with cheerfulness and
joy. But for my own part, I take a simpler view of this passage. Because
this doubt might arise in the minds of many persons, “How is it possible
that men shall come to us from countries so distant?” he replies,
“Horses, chariots, and carriages shall not be wanting; for the Lord has
at his command all that can be of service for assisting his people and
conducting them to the end which he has in view.” Yet I do not deny that
the Gospel may be called a “chariot,” because it conveys us to the hope
of eternal life; but I think that the Prophet simply declares that
nothing shall hinder God from gathering his Church, and that he will
have at his command all the necessary means, that none of the elect whom
he has called may fail in the middle of the course.

<span id="xix.i-p159"></span><span id="xix.i-p159.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p160"></span>**21.** *And I will even take some of them
for priests and Levites.* The Prophet heightens the description of that
which he had already declared about the extraordinary grace of God. He
had made known that the Church of God should be collected out of all
nations, so that, in spite of every difficulty and obstruction, even
distant nations should draw near to them. But now he proceeds further,
and instructs them that the Gentiles shall not only be adopted by God,
but shall also be elevated by him to the highest honor. Already it was a
great honor, that unclean and polluted nations were reckoned to be a
holy people; but now here is something far more wonderful, that they are
elevated to the highest pinnacle of rank.

<span id="xix.i-p161"></span>Hence we see that the priesthood under
Christ is very different from what it was under the Law; for under the
Law one tribe exclusively was admitted to the priesthood, and the
Gentiles, as unclean, were so far from having it in their power to
discharge that priesthood, that they were even forbidden to enter into
the temple; but now all are admitted without distinction. Some expound
this passage in a general manner, that the Gentiles shall be priests;
that is, shall offer themselves to God, as Scripture frequently
denominates all believers “a royal priesthood.” (<span
id="xix.i-p161.1"></span>[1Pe 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md)<span
id="xix.i-p161.1"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p161.2"></span>[Rev.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md), [Rev.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p161.2"></span>..md)
But he appears to describe in an especial manner ministers and teachers
whom the Lord also chose from among the Gentiles, and appointed to
execute this distinguished office; that is, to preach the Gospel; such
as Luke, Timothy, and others of the same class, who offered spiritual
sacrifices to God by the Gospel.

<span id="xix.i-p162"></span><span id="xix.i-p162.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p163"></span>**22.** *For as the new heavens.* Here he
promises that the restoration of the Church shall be of such a nature
that it shall last for ever. Many might be afraid that it would be
ruined a second time; and therefore he declares that henceforth, after
having been restored by God, its condition shall be permanent.
Accordingly, he mentions here two benefits of surpassing excellence,
restoration and eternity. When he speaks of “new heavens” and a “new
earth,” he looks to the reign of Christ, by whom all things have been
renewed, as the Apostle teaches in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Now the
design of this newness is, that the condition of the Church may always
continue to be prosperous and happy. What is old tends to decay; what is
restored and renewed must be of longer continuance. (<span
id="xix.i-p163.1"></span>[Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013)<span id="xix.i-p163.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p164"></span>*So shall your seed and your name remain.*
God had promised that “the sun and moon,” so long as they remained in
heaven, should be witnesses of the eternal succession, that the
posterity of David might not be cut off. But because some interruption
arose from the treachery and ingratitude of the people, the restoration
effected by Christ actually confirmed that prediction. Justly,
therefore, does Isaiah say, “Your sons shall succeed to you, and your
grandsons shall succeed to your sons;” and as God will establish the
world, that it may never perish, so the succession of the Church shall
be perpetual, that it may be prolonged through all ages.

<span id="xix.i-p165"></span>In a word, he explains what he had formerly
said about renewing the world, that none may think that this relates to
trees, or beasts, or the order of the stars; for it must be referred to
the inward renewal of man. The ancients were mistaken when they thought
that these things related absolutely to the last judgment; and they had
not sufficiently weighed the context of the Prophet or the authority of
the Apostle. Yet I do not deny that they extend as far as to that
judgment, because we must not hope for a perfect restoration before
Christ, who is the life of the world, shall appear; but we must begin
higher, even with that deliverance by which Christ regenerates his
people, that they may be new creatures. (<span
id="xix.i-p165.1"></span>[2Co 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.i-p165.1"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p166"></span><span id="xix.i-p166.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p167"></span>**23.** *From a month to his month, and
from a Sabbath to his Sabbath.*  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md)
The Prophet again points out what shall be the difference between the
nature of the spiritual worship of God which shall be under the reign of
Christ and of the carnal worship which was under the Law. Sacrifices
were offered every month at the new moon. There were Sabbaths, and other
festivals, and solemn days, which they carefully observed. But under the
reign of Christ there shall be a constant and uninterrupted solemnity;
for there are not fixed and stated days of sacrifices on which we must
go to Jerusalem, or offer anything in one place or in another; but our
oblations, festivals, and rejoicings are continued from day to day in
unbroken succession. Yet he alludes to the ancient custom of sacrifices
as we have already said that the prophets are frequently accustomed to
do.

<span id="xix.i-p169"></span>So then the Lord wishes to have “pure
sacrifices” offered to him daily, (<span id="xix.i-p169.1"></span>[1Pe
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)<span id="xix.i-p169.1"></span>,.md)
not such as were formerly offered under the Law or are now offered by
Papists, who either rely foolishly on their ceremonies, as if they were
expiations of crime, or basely venture to sacrifice Christ,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) but spiritual sacrifices, that we may
reverence and adore God with a pure and sincere worship. (<span
id="xix.i-p170.2"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="xix.i-p170.2"></span>..md)
As to the opinion held by some, that this passage proves the abrogation
of the Law and of ancient ceremonies, it does not appear to me to rest
on sufficient grounds, it is indeed certain that those legal ceremonies
have been set aside, and that may be gathered from this passage; but in
proof of that point I would choose to employ other passages which
contain stronger evidence. There is only here a contrast between the
Sabbath and festivals which were celebrated under the Law, and the
perpetual Sabbath which we have at the present day. (<span
id="xix.i-p170.3"></span>[Heb. 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#010)<span id="xix.i-p170.3"></span>..md)

<span id="xix.i-p171"></span><span id="xix.i-p171.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p172"></span>**24.** *And they shall go forth.* We must
not here attempt to obtain subtle and ingenious interpretations; for he
simply informs those who shall be adopted into the Church that they
shall see, all around them, the dreadful vengeance of God. Yet there is
an implied contrast between the straits of the calamity and the free
departure; as if he had said, “Out of the dark prison in which they had
been confined they shall again come forth to the light.”

<span id="xix.i-p173"></span>*And shall see the dead bodies of men.* He
does not mean that this slaughter shall take place in the assembly of
believers; for this would greatly diminish the happiness of the Church,
in which God displays all testimonies of joy and gladness. But as he
formerly spoke of the perpetual glory by which he shall dignify his
people, so he now threatens the punishment which he shall inflict on the
reprobate, that the godly may be more careful to keep themselves in the
fear of God.

<span id="xix.i-p174"></span>*And their fire shall not be extinguished.*
When he says that they shall be tormented by “fire,” this mode of
expression, as I have formerly remarked,  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) is metaphorical. And this is clearly
evident from the succeeding clause; for worms will not be formed out of
the earth to gnaw the hearts of unbelievers. The plain meaning,
therefore, is, that the wicked shall have a bad conscience as an
executioner, to torment them without end, and that torment awaits them
greater than all other torments; and finally, that they shall tremble
and be agitated in a dreadful and shocking manner, as if a worm were
gnawing the heart of a man, or a fire were consuming it, and yet thus
consumed, he did not die.

<span id="xix.i-p176"></span>*And they shall be an abhorrence to all
flesh*. Because the wicked are now held in the highest honor, and from
their lofty position look down with contempt on good men, the Prophet
threatens a shocking change; for, along with unutterable torments, they
shall also endure the deepest disgrace; as it is just and right that
they who despised and reproached the glory of God shall be loaded with
every reproach, and shall be the objects of abhorrence to angels and to
the whole world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc16018.htm#fr_216.md) <span
id="xix.i-p55.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p56"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p56.1"></span>Et ne
mesureroyent sa grandeur infinie a leur petitesse.” “And would not
measure his infinite greatness by their littleness.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc16018.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="xix.i-p57.4"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p58"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p58.1"></span>Afin que les
hommes creussent de sa majeste tout ce que bon leur sembleroit.” “In
order that men might believe concerning his majesty whatever they
thought fit.”

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc16018.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="xix.i-p69.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p70"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p70.1"></span>Qu’ en
sacrifiant un boeuf, e’est autant que s’ils coupoyent la gorge a un
homme.” “That, in sacrificing an ox, it is the same as if they were
cutting a man’s throat.”

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc16018.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="xix.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p75"></span> “‘That I may mock them.’ Here the word
<span id="xix.i-p75.1"></span>תעלוליהם *(tagnalulehem)* means <span
id="xix.i-p75.2"></span>להתעולל בם, *(lehithgnolel bam,),* that I may
mock them,’ in the same sense as the words used in another passage,
<span id="xix.i-p75.3"></span>כי התעללת בי, (ki *hith-gnallalt* bi)
‘because thou hast mocked me.’ (<span id="xix.i-p75.4"></span>[Nu
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#029)<span id="xix.i-p75.4"></span>..md)”
— *Jarchi.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc16018.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="xix.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p77"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p77.1"></span>Et leur
feray venir les choses qu’ils craignoyent.” “And will bring (or cause to
come) upon them the things which they dreaded.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc16018.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="xix.i-p77.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p78"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p78.1"></span>Je feray qu
ils cognoistront avoir failli, tellement que ce qu ils craignoyent leur
tombera dessus la teste.” “I will cause them to know that they have been
mistaken, and that what they dreaded has fallen on their own head.”

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc16018.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="xix.i-p87.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p88"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p88.1"></span>His verront
la gloire de Dieu autrement qu’ils ne pensent.” “They shall see the
glory of God in a different manner from what they think.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc16018.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="xix.i-p116.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p117"></span> “The English version, which in multitudes
of cases inserts ‘man’ where the original expression is indefinite,
(translating <span id="xix.i-p117.1"></span>οὐδείς, for example, always
‘no man’) here reverses the process, and dilutes ‘a man’ to ‘one.’ The
same liberty is taken by many other versions, old and new, occasioned no
doubt by a feeling of the incongruity of making a full-grown man the
subject of maternal consolations. The difficulty might, if it were
necessary, be avoided by explaining <span id="xix.i-p117.2"></span>איש
(*ish*) to mean a man-child, as it does in <span
id="xix.i-p117.3"></span>[Ge 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001.md)<span
id="xix.i-p117.3"></span>; <span id="xix.i-p117.4"></span>[1Sa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011.md)<span id="xix.i-p117.4"></span>;
and in many other cases. But the truth is, that the solecism, which has
been so carefully expunged by these translators, is an exquisite trait
of patriarchal manners, in their primitive simplicity. Compare <span
id="xix.i-p117.5"></span>[Ge
24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067.md)<span id="xix.i-p117.5"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p117.6"></span>[Jud
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#002.md)<span id="xix.i-p117.6"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p117.7"></span>[1 Kings
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#020.md)<span id="xix.i-p117.7"></span>,
and the affecting scenes between Thetis and Achilles in the Iliad.” —
*Alexander.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc16018.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="xix.i-p124.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p125"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p125.1"></span>Et se
moquent de tout ce qu’on leur dit.” “And mock at everything that is said
to them.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc16018.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="xix.i-p129.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p130"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p130.1"></span>Jusques a
tant que Dieu vienne du ciel a main armee pour en faire vengeance.”
“Till God come from heaven with an armed force, to take vengeance on
them.”

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc16018.htm#fr_226.md) <span
id="xix.i-p135.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p136"></span> “Gessenius attaches to it here (as he does
in <span id="xix.i-p136.1"></span>[2Sa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#006)<span id="xix.i-p136.1"></span>.md)
the sense of the interior or court of an oriental house, and applies it
to the edifice in which the lustrations were performed before entering
the gardens; which may also be the meaning of the Septuagint version,
<span id="xix.i-p136.2"></span>εἰς τοὺς κήπους, ἐν τοῖς προθύροις.
Maurer and others follow Scaliger, who makes it mean the midst of the
grove or garden, where the idol was commonly erected. But Knobel, by
ingeniously combining <span id="xix.i-p136.3"></span>[Ge
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#005.md)<span id="xix.i-p136.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p136.4"></span>[Ps
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005.md)<span id="xix.i-p136.4"></span>;
<span id="xix.i-p136.5"></span>[Ps
68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026.md)<span id="xix.i-p136.5"></span>,
makes it not improbable that “in the midst,” means in the crowd or
procession of worshippers.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc16018.htm#fr_227.md) <span
id="xix.i-p138.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p139"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p139.1"></span>Car je voy
leurs oeuvres et leurs pensees.” “For I see their works and their
thoughts.”

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc16018.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="xix.i-p156.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p157"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p157.1"></span>Qui se
vantent de sacrifier Iesus Christ.” “Who boast of sacrificing Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc16018.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="xix.i-p167.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p168"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p168.1"></span>Depuis un
mois jusques a un autre mois, et depuis un Sabbat jusques a son autre
Sabbat.” “From one month till another month, and from one Sabbath till
his other Sabbath.”

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc16018.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="xix.i-p169.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p170"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p170.1"></span>Ou mesmes
d’une audace desesperee osent se vanter qu’ils sacrifient Jesus Christ.”
“Or even with desperate audacity dare to boast that they sacrifice Jesus
Christ.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc16018.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="xix.i-p174.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p175"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2 p. 387.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of Isaiah 49-66](cc16019.md)
