[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16009)  [Next](cc16011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi"></span>

<span id="xi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 58.

<span id="xi.i"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p1"></span><span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
58:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sins.

<span id="xi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Clama in gutture, ne cohibeas; quasi
tuba exalta vocem tuam, et annuntia populo meo peccatum suum, et domui
Iacob iniquitatem snare.

<span id="xi.i-p4"></span>**2.** Yet they seek me daily, and delight to
know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
ordinance of their God: they ask of me the ordinances of justice; they
take delight in approaching to God.

<span id="xi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Me tamen quotidie quaerunt, et scire
vias meas nolunt; quasi gens quae justitiam fecerit, et judicium Dei sui
non intermiserit; sciscitandur ex me judicia justitiae, appropinquare
Deo volunt.

<span id="xi.i-p6"></span>**3.** Wherefore have we fasted, *say they,*
and thou seest not? *Wherefore* have we afflicted our soul, and thou
takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure,
and exact all your labours.

<span id="xi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quare jejunavimus, et non aspexisti?
humiliavimus animas nostras, et nesciisti? Ecce quo die jejunatis,
invenitis voluntatem, et omnes facultates vestras exigitis.

<span id="xi.i-p8"></span>**4.** Behold, ye fast for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness: ye shall not fast as *ye do
this* day, to make your voice to be heard on high.

<span id="xi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Ecce, ad litem et contentionem
jejunatis; atque ut percutiatis pugno impio. Ne jejunetis sicut hodie,
ut audiri faciatis in excelso vocem vestram.

<span id="xi.i-p10"></span>**5.** Is it such a fast that I have chosen?
a day for a man to afflict his soul? *is it* to bow down his head as a
bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes *under him*? wilt thou call
this a fast, and an acceptable day to the LORD?

<span id="xi.i-p11"></span>**5.** An tale est jejunium quod elegi? ut
die affligat homo animam suam, et quasi juncus demittat caput suum,
sternat saccum et cinerem? An hoc vocabis jejunium, et diem gratum
Iehovae?

<span id="xi.i-p12"></span>**6.** *Is* not this the fast that I have
chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and
to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?

<span id="xi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Annon hoc est jejunium quod elegi?
solvere colligationes impias, dissolvere fasciculos graves, oppressos
dimittere liberos, atque ut omne jugum abrumpatis?

<span id="xi.i-p14"></span>**7.** *Is it* not to deal thy bread to the
hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house?
when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; and that thou hide not
thyself from thine own flesh?

<span id="xi.i-p15"></span>**7.** Annon ut partiaris esurienti panem
tuam, et pauperes vagos inducas domum? Si videris nudum, operias eum, et
a carne tua ne to abscondas?

<span id="xi.i-p16"></span>**8.** Then shall thy light break forth as
the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily: and thy
righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy
rereward.

<span id="xi.i-p17"></span>**8.** Tunc proferetur ut aurora lux tua; et
sanitas tua protinus germinabit; justitia anteibit faciem tuam, et
gloria Iehovae colliget to.

<span id="xi.i-p18"></span>**9.** Then shalt thou call, and the LORD
shall answer; thou shalt cry, and he shall say, Here I *am.* If thou
take away from the midst of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the
finger, and speaking vanity;

<span id="xi.i-p19"></span>**9.** Tunc invocabis, et Iehova exaudiet;
clamabis, et dicet, Ecce adsum; si abstuleris e medio tui onus, et
emissionem digiti, et sermonem vanitatis, (*vel, inutilem*.)

<span id="xi.i-p20"></span>**10.** And *if* thou draw out thy soul to
the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul; then shall thy light rise in
obscurity, and thy darkness *be* as the noonday:

<span id="xi.i-p21"></span>**10.** Si effuderis famelico animam tuam, et
animam afflictam satiaveris, orietur in tenebris lux tua, et caligo tua
erit sicut meridies.

<span id="xi.i-p22"></span>**11.** And the LORD shall guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones:
and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water,
whose waters fail not.

<span id="xi.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et deducet to Iehova semper, et
saturabit in siccitatibus animam tuam, et ossa tua saginabit. Et eris
quasi hortus irriguus, et scaturigo aquarum, cujus aquae non deficiunt.

<span id="xi.i-p24"></span>**12.** And *they that shall be* of thee
shall build the old waste places: thou shalt raise up the foundations of
many generations; and thou shalt be called, The repairer of the breach,
The restorer of paths to dwell in.

<span id="xi.i-p25"></span>**12.** Et erunt ex to qui instaurent deserta
seculi; fundamenta generationis et generationis excitabis. Et voeaberis
rupturae reparator, director semitarum ad inhabitandum.

<span id="xi.i-p26"></span>**13.** If thou turn away thy foot from the
sabbath, *from* doing thy pleasure on my holy day; and call the sabbath
a delight, the holy of the LORD, honourable; and shalt honour him, not
doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking
*thine own* words:

<span id="xi.i-p27"></span>**13.** Si averteris a sabbato pedem tuum,
nec facies voluntatem tuam, in die sancto meo, et vocaveris sabbatum
delicias ad consecrandum Iehovae, eo quod sit honorabile, et honorem
illi tribueris, ut non exequaris vias tuas, nec inveniatur voluntas tua,
nec loquutus faeris verbum;

<span id="xi.i-p28"></span>**14.** Then shalt thou delight thyself in
the LORD; and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the
earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for the
mouth of the LORD hath spoken *it.*

<span id="xi.i-p29"></span>**14.** Tunc delectaberis in Iehova, et
equitare to faciam super excelsa terrae, et pascam to haereditatis Iacob
patris tui; quia os Iehovae loquutum est.

<span id="xi.i-p30"></span> 

<span id="xi.i-p31"></span><span id="xi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p32"></span>**1.** *Cry with the throat.* This chapter
has been badly divided; for these words are connected with what goes
before; and therefore, if we wish to understand the Prophet’s meaning,
we ought to read them as if there had been no separation. The Prophet
has testified that the people shall be punished in such a manner as to
leave some hope of peace, and next has threatened that the wicked, who
by indolent pride endeavor to escape from God, shall have continual war.
He now confirms that doctrine, and informs them that God has given him
this command, to “cry with the throat,” that is, to use a common
expression, (*a plein gosier*) “at the full stretch of the voice.”

<span id="xi.i-p33"></span>Why is this? It is to *make known to the
people their sins* He does not speak merely of the stretch of the voice,
but means by it that keenness and severity of language which hypocrites
especially need, as if God were throwing thunderbolts against them from
heaven; for they are delighted with their vices, if they be not severely
reproved and dragged forth to the light, or rather if they be not
violently thrown down.

<span id="xi.i-p34"></span>When he adds, *Spare not,* it is a mode of
expression very frequently employed by Hebrew writers, such as, “I cry,
and am not silent.” (<span id="xi.i-p34.1"></span>[Ps
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)<span id="xi.i-p34.1"></span>) It
is equivalent to a common expression, (*Crie sans espargner,*) “Cry
without sparing.” We have said that the Prophet does not speak of the
mere sound of the voice, but means a severe and harsh reproof, which is
very necessary to be sharply used towards hypocrites. For instance, if
the prophets merely spoke of the Law of the Lord, and showed what is the
rule of a good and holy life, and recommended the worship of God, and
likewise reproved vices, but. without employing any vehemence of
language, what impression would they produce on hypocrites, whose
conscience is lulled in such a manner that they cannot be aroused but by
applying spurs? And so a simple manner of teaching would not be enough,
unless they were sharply attacked, and the thunderbolts of words were
launched against them.

<span id="xi.i-p35"></span>Paul also, imitating the prophets, after
having condemned all mankind, breaks out with greater vehemence against
those who made some profession of holiness and abused God’s patience.
“Behold, thou art called a Jew, and restest in the Law, and boastest in
God, and knowest his will, and approvest what is excellent, being
instructed out of the Law; and trustest that thou thyself art a guide of
the blind, a light of those who are in darkness, an instructor of fools,
a teacher of the ignorant, having the form of knowledge and of truth by
the Law. Thou therefore that teachest another, teachest thou not
thyself? Thou who preachest that men ought not to steal, dost thou
steal? (<span id="xi.i-p35.1"></span>[Ro
2:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)<span id="xi.i-p35.1"></span>)
Against such persons he threatens the judgment of God and terrible
vengeance, because they have abused his goodness, and vainly boast of
his name.

<span id="xi.i-p36"></span>Thus the Prophet, in this passage, sharpens
his pen expressly against the Jews, who gloried in the name of God, and
yet proudly rose up against him. This is the method, therefore, that
ought to be followed against hypocrites, who hold out an empty show of
holiness; at least, if we wish to discharge our duty in a proper and
useful manner. As the Lord exercised the prophets in this kind of
combat, so we must be exercised in it at the present day; so that we
must not hold our peace, or give them a slight reproof, but must exclaim
against them with all our might.

<span id="xi.i-p37"></span>It might be objected, “If the Lord commands
his servants to reprove the sins of the people, to whom he promises
peace, he undoubtedly intended to leave to them the hope of salvation.
And yet it is certain that those words are addressed to the reprobate,
against whom he had formerly declared war.” I reply, believers were at
that time reduced to a small number; for there were few who embraced the
peace that was offered to them. Accordingly, when Isaiah holds out the
hope of approaching peace, he has his eye on that little flock; when he
threatens war, his aim is to terrify the multitude, who were estranged
from God and despised his warnings; for the state of the people was
such, as we have formerly seen, (<span id="xi.i-p37.1"></span>[Isa
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021)<span id="xi.i-p37.1"></span>)
that scarcely any pure or sound morality remained.

<span id="xi.i-p38"></span>*And to the house of Jacob their iniquity.*
With good reason does he call them “the house of Jacob,” when the
greater part of the people were corrupted. And we ought carefully to
observe this distinction: that the prophets sometimes address the
multitude at large, and sometimes limit their discourse to a few
believers. Nor is it without witty and bitter mockery that he gives the
designations of “his people” and “children of Jacob” to those who had
degenerated from their stock and had basely revolted from the faith of
the fathers. The concession made is therefore ironical; as if he had
said that there is no privilege which hinders them from hearing what
they deserve.

<span id="xi.i-p39"></span><span id="xi.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p40"></span>**2.** *Yet they seek me daily.* Here he
intended to take away every ground of objection from hypocrites, who had
their answers ready. “We fear, serve, and love God, and seek him with
the whole heart. Why do you rebuke us as if we were irreligious persons;
for we wish to regulate our life according to the injunctions of the
Law.” To meet this objection, he affirms that they do nothing in a pure
or sincere manner, that everything is pretended and hypocritical, and
consequently is of no value before God, who demands the whole heart.
(<span id="xi.i-p40.1"></span>[Ge
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001)<span id="xi.i-p40.1"></span>)

<span id="xi.i-p41"></span>It is proper to observe this order which the
Prophet has followed. After having threatened war against wicked men and
hypocrites, he now rebukes them severely, and takes away the pretenses
and disguises under which they shrouded themselves. This is the manner
in which hypocrites should be treated, and dragged, as it were, out of
their lurking­places; for otherwise doctrine could produce no good
effect upon them. And not only should godly teachers observe this order,
but every person ought to apply this manner of teaching for his own use,
that he may not be satisfied with himself or flatter his vices; that he
may not practice hypocrisy on himself, or suffer himself to be deceived
by the tricks of Satan. Let him therefore bring a pure and upright
heart, if he wish to profit by the doctrine of the word, and to be
acceptable to God.

<span id="xi.i-p42"></span>*And wish to know my ways.* Although Isaiah
admits that traitors and liars have some show of holiness, yet, on the
other hand, by a bitter figure of speech, he censures them, as if he had
said that in their shameful boasting there was excessive wickedness.
Thus it is not simple irony, but there is likewise added a complaint,
that, while they apparently labor to serve God, still, if any person
examine them more closely, and inquire into their whole manner of life,
he will perceive that their hearts are altogether estranged from God.

<span id="xi.i-p43"></span>*They ask of me the judgments of
righteousness.*  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117) Those who think
that in these words hypocrites blame God, and rise up against him, as if
they would enter into controversy with him, have not understood the
Prophet’s meaning. I acknowledge that he does this soon afterwards; but
before coming down to it, he tears off their mask of pretended
godliness. After having said that they “seek God daily,” as if there
were nothing that occupied their thoughts more earnestly than religion,
he proceeds in the same strain, and says, that they “ask judgments,”
that they may serve God, and observe the rule of a holy life, that is,
by pretending to burn with zeal for religion. And indeed the Prophet
here enumerates the most important exercises of believers, which
sometimes are ostentatiously imitated by the wicked. Now, the chief
point of religion is, to inquire into the will of God, that we may
regulate our life by the rule which he has laid down for us, and to
depend on his mouth. But the children of God, in this respect, are
falsely copied by hypocrites, so that they appear to practice all that
relates to the true worship of God, and sometimes to exceed the very
best of men.

<span id="xi.i-p45"></span><span id="xi.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p46"></span>**3.** *Wherefore have we fasted?* He
proceeds farther with the same subject, and says that feigned and
perverse worshippers of God are not only blinded by their hypocrisy, but
likewise swell with pride, so that they venture openly to murmur at God,
and to complain when he presses hard upon them, as if he had done them a
grievous injury. “Dost thou reject our services, fastings, and prayers?
Why are they not acceptable to thee? Do we not vex ourselves in vain?“

<span id="xi.i-p47"></span>He has admitted, as we have already said,
that hypocrites have some outward show of holiness, by which they
deceive men; but now he declares that inwardly they are also puffed up
and intoxicated by pride, while they have pretended good works, by which
they think that they satisfy God, and, on this pretense, they carry
themselves high against the prophets, and indulge in the worst vices,
such as unbelief, rebellion, and obstinacy against God, distrust,
cruelty, fraud, and pillage. These are light matters in themselves, and
are easily washed away by other external exercises; for the former are
their pre­eminent merits, in which they think that the worship of God
consists, and from which they hope to obtain the pardon of all their
sins. Thus they “strain out a gnat,  <span
id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) and do not scruple to swallow a whole
camel.” (<span id="xi.i-p48.2"></span>[Mt
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#024)<span id="xi.i-p48.2"></span>) If
such characters had been found among the Jews only, and if the world had
changed its disposition, we should have needed to seek far for examples;
but since we have experience of the same thing every day, there is no
necessity for giving ourselves much trouble about the exposition of this
passage.

<span id="xi.i-p49"></span>This complaint may be viewed as referring
both to the word and to the hand of God. In both ways God judges
hypocrites; for he rebukes by the word, and punishes for their obstinate
malice; and therefore those words may be viewed as referring both to the
chastisements and to the preceding reproof. For my own part, I interpret
it as relating to the word, and as a rebuke to hypocrites, who boasted
of their fastings, and contrasted them with the censures of the
prophets; as if they were the true worshippers of God, and were unjustly
rebuked. I differ from those who think that the people blame God for
treating them harshly during their captivity. On the contrary, it
appears to me that they complain of the prophets for rebuking them with
great sharpness and severity; for the Jews wished to be regarded as
devout and religious persons, and could not patiently endure to be
condemned for impiety and wickedness. For this reason the Prophet
exposes their dispositions, and shows that they make war with God, that
they may not suppose that they have to deal with him as a private
individual.

<span id="xi.i-p50"></span>*Ye find pleasure and exact all your labors.*
In the second part of the verse he refutes, in the name of God, those
virtues which hypocrites proclaim with the sound of a trumpet. It is,
because they do not nevertheless lay aside the sinful dispositions of
the flesh, or begin to deny themselves; for he condemns them chiefly on
the ground of having been devoted to their desires, and next he
enumerates particular kinds of vices. Hence we may easily infer that
their heart is not moved by any anxiety to repent.

<span id="xi.i-p51"></span><span id="xi.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p52"></span>**4.** *Behold, for strife and contention ye
fast.* This verse ought to be connected with the end of the preceding
verse; for, having in the former clause introduced hypocrites as
complaining of the violence and harshness of the prophets, he assigns,
in the latter clause, the reason why the Lord loathes their fasts and
their other performances. It is because they do not proceed from pure
affection of heart. What the inclination of their heart is, he shows
from its fruits; for he sends them back to the duties of the second
table, from which it is easily seen what we are. Purity of heart is
manifested by our living innocently, and abstaining from all deceit and
injustice. These are the marks of pure affection, in the absence of
which the Lord rejects, and even abhors, all external worship. Wherever,
on the other hand, cheating, and plunder, and extortion prevail, it is
very certain that there is no fear of God.

<span id="xi.i-p53"></span>Thus he reproaches hypocrites with making
their fasts to give greater encouragement to sin, and with giving a
looser rein to their lusts. We have experience of this every day. Not
only do many people fast in order to atone for their cheating and
robberies, and to plunder more freely, but even that, during the time of
the fast, they may have greater leisure for examining their accounts,
perusing documents, and calculating usury, and contriving methods by
which they may lay hold on the property of their debtors. On that
account they frequently throw this labor on Lent and on the stated times
of fasts; and, in like manner, other notable hypocrites hear many Masses
every day, that they may more freely, and with less interruption, and
under the pretense of religion, contrive their cheating and treachery.

<span id="xi.i-p54"></span>*Fast not, as ye do this day.* At length he
rejects their fasts, however highly they may value them; because in this
manner the wrath of God is still more provoked. Immediately afterwards
he rejects also their prayers.

<span id="xi.i-p55"></span>*That ye may make your voice to be heard on
high.*  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) Hence it is evident, (as
we have explained fully in our exposition of <span
id="xi.i-p56.5"></span>[Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)<span
id="xi.i-p56.5"></span>,) that God approves of no duties which are not
accompanied by sincere uprightness of heart. Certainly no sacrifice is
more excellent than calling upon God; and yet we see how all prayers are
stained and polluted by impurity of heart. Besides, in consequence of
fasting being usually joined to prayer, the Prophet takes this for
granted; for it is an appendage to prayer, he therefore forbids such men
to offer up solemn prayer accompanied by fasting; because they will gain
nothing, except that the Lord will punish them more severely. And hence
we infer (as has been already said) that the Lord pays no regard to
external works, if they be not preceded by sincere fear of God.

<span id="xi.i-p57"></span>Such fasting as was customary among the Jews
is not here blamed in itself, as if it were a superstitious ceremony,
but abuse of fasting, and false confidence. This ought to be carefully
observed; for we would need to deal very differently with the Papists,
if we blamed their fasts. They contain nothing but superstition, being
tied to this or that day, or to fixed seasons, as if during the rest of
the time they were at liberty to gormandize; while they think that the
flesh is unclean, and yet allow every kind of indulgence to it; provided
only that they do not once gormandize on a fast­day, they think that
they have discharged their duty admirably well. Since therefore there is
nothing in them that can be approved, we may absolutely condemn them.

<span id="xi.i-p58"></span>But the dispute on this occasion was
different. That fasting which the Jews observed was laudable in itself,
because God had appointed it; but a false opinion respecting it was
censurable. Among the Papists, on the other hand, we must condemn both
the false opinion and the institution itself; because it is wicked. The
Papists have this in common with the Jews, that they think that they
serve God by it, and that it is a meritorious work. Yet fasting is not
the worship of God, and is not in itself commanded by him, in the same
manner as those works which he enjoins in the Law; but it is an external
exercise, which is auxiliary to prayer, or is useful for subduing the
flesh, or testifying our humiliation, when, as guilty persons, we
implore that the wrath of God may be turned away in adversity. But the
reader will find the use and design of fasting more fully discussed in
our Institutes. (Book 4, chapter 12:15­21)

<span id="xi.i-p59"></span><span id="xi.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p60"></span>**5.** *Is it such a fast as I have chosen?*
He confirms the preceding statement, and shows that fasting is neither
desired nor approved by God in itself, but so far as it is directed to
its true end. He did not wish that it should be altogether abolished,
but the improper use of it; that is, because they believed the worship
of God to consist in it, and by neglecting or even despising true
godliness, thought that bodily exercise was enough; just as hypocrites
always put forward external ceremonies, as if they were satisfactions to
appease God.

<span id="xi.i-p61"></span>Again, because men, through their rashness,
define what is the worship of God, he expressly refers us to his own
will, that we may not suppose that he approves of everything which our
own judgment pronounces to be right. Although men are well pleased with
themselves, and swell with astonishing haughtiness, and indulge in
insolent boasting, the Lord rejects and abhors them, because he claims
for himself alone the right to “choose.” Now, “to choose” a thing is of
the same import as “to take pleasure in it.”

<span id="xi.i-p62"></span>*And hanging his head like a bulrush.* He
says that he is not delighted if a man passes a day in hunger, and then
walks with a sad and downcast look. The Prophet employs all appropriate
metaphor; because the bulrush, though it is straight, is easily bent. So
hypocrites bend themselves, and bow down the head, as if under the
influence of oppressive leanness, or display some empty appearance of
humility. The Prophet therefore intended to censure superstitious
attitudes, in which hypocrites imagine that there is some holiness.

<span id="xi.i-p63"></span>*And spread sackcloth and ashes.* These
things also were added to fasting, especially when they made solemn
professions of repentance; for they clothed themselves with “sackcloth,”
and threw “ashes” on their head. (<span id="xi.i-p63.1"></span>[Joe
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013)<span id="xi.i-p63.1"></span>)
Now, such an exercise was holy and approved by God; and we see that the
prophets, while they exhort the people to repentance, cry aloud for
“sackcloth and ashes.” But as we have said that fasting is not here
condemned on its own account, so Isaiah does not condemn those outward
ceremonies, but reproves hypocrites for separating them from reality.

<span id="xi.i-p64"></span>If it be asked, Are “sackcloth” and “ashes”
suitable to our time? I reply, they are indifferent matters, which may
be used for edification; but in the light of the Gospel, which has
brought liberty to us, we have no need of such figures. At the same
time, we should attend to the difference between Eastern nations, which
make use of a great abundance and variety of ceremonies, and Western
nations, whose habits are far more simple. If we wished to imitate the
former, it would be nothing else than to enact the part of apes, or of
stage­players. Yet there is nothing to hinder those who intend to
confess their guilt, from wearing soiled and faltered garments, after
the manner used by suppliants.  <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120)

<span id="xi.i-p66"></span>*A day acceptable to Jehovah.* Hence it is
evident that to solemn prayer, when a holy assembly was held, there was
added fasting; for fasting, as we have already said, is an appendage to
prayer; as we see that it was added to prayer by Christ himself. (<span
id="xi.i-p66.1"></span>[Mt 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)<span
id="xi.i-p66.1"></span>) It is not appointed, therefore, for its own
sake, but is directed to a different end.

<span id="xi.i-p67"></span><span id="xi.i-p67.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p68"></span>**6.** *Is not this the fast which I have
chosen?* The Prophet shows what are the real duties of piety, and what
God chiefly recommends to us; namely, to relieve those who are wretched
and pressed with a heavy burden. But the Prophet appears to abolish
fasting universally, when, in place of it, he enumerates those works
which are most highly acceptable to God. I reply, fasting is approved
when it is accompanied by that love which we owe to our fellow­men; and
therefore the Prophet directs that we shall be tried by this principle,
that our consciences be entire and pure, that we exercise mutual
kindness towards each other; for if this order prevail, then fasting,
which shall be added to it, will be pleasing and acceptable to God. But
here he does not at all mention purity of heart. I reply, it is
described by works, as by its fruits, from which it is easily seen what
kind of heart we have. Next, he enumerates the duties of the Second
Table, under which, as we have elsewhere seen, by a figure of speech in
which a part is taken for the whole, he includes the whole observation
of the Law; for it would not be enough to assist our neighbor by kind
offices, if at the same time we despised God. But we must observe the
Prophet’s design; because the love which we owe to our neighbors cannot
be sincerely cultivated, unless when we love them in God. In order to
make trial of our fear of God, he demands these as more immediate signs,
if we live justly, inoffensively, and kindly with each other. Besides,
he was not satisfied with outward appearance; and indeed the love of our
neighbor does not thrive where the Spirit of God does not reign; and
therefore Paul includes it in the enumeration of “the works of the
Spirit.” (<span id="xi.i-p68.1"></span>[Ga
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)<span id="xi.i-p68.1"></span>)
Thus when the observation of the Law is spoken of, not only outward
works, but likewise the dispositions of the heart, must be taken into
the account.

<span id="xi.i-p69"></span>*To loose wicked bindings.* Some explain it
to mean “sinful thoughts,” by which the hearts of men are entangled. But
Isaiah appears to me to have had another object in view, namely, that
hypocrites are exceedingly cruel in distressing the poor, and lay heavy
burdens upon them. He therefore calls them “bonds,” or “bindings,” or,
as we commonly say, “oppressions.” Of the same import is what he adds,
*to undo the heavy burdens,* under the weight of which the poor groan
and are overwhelmed. he again adds, “to let the oppressed go free,” and
expresses the same thing in a variety of words. Thus the Prophet does
not define what is meant by “fasting,” but shows what the Lord requires
in the first place and chiefly, and in what manner our obedience can be
approved by him, and what ought to be the dispositions of those who
endeavor to fast in a right manner.

<span id="xi.i-p70"></span><span id="xi.i-p70.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p71"></span>**7.** *Is it not to break thy bread to the
hungry?* He goes on to describe the duties of love of our neighbor,
which he had described briefly in the preceding verse; for, having
formerly said that we must abstain from every act of injustice, he now
shows that we ought to exercise kindness towards the wretched, and those
who need our assistance. Uprightness and righteousness are divided into
two parts; first, that we should injure nobody; and secondly, that we
should bestow our wealth and abundance on the poor and needy. And these
two ought to be joined together; for it is not enough to abstain from
acts of injustice, if thou refuse thy assistance to the needy; nor will
it be of much avail to render thine aid to the needy, if at the same
time thou rob some of that which thou bestowest on others. Thou must not
relieve thy neighbors by plunder or theft.; and if thou hast committed
any act of injustice, or cruelty, or extortion, thou must not, by a
pretended compensation, call on God to receive a share of the plunder.
These two parts, therefore, must be held together, provided only that we
have our love of our neighbor approved and accepted by God.

<span id="xi.i-p72"></span>By commanding them to “break bread to the
hungry,  <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) he intended to take
away every excuse from covetous and greedy men, who allege that they
have a right to keep possession of that which is their own. “This is
mine, and therefore I may keep it for myself. Why should I make common
property of that which God has given me?“ He replies, “It is indeed
thine, but on this condition, that thou share it with the hungry and
thirsty, not that thou eat it thyself alone.” And indeed this is the
dictate of common sense, that the hungry are deprived of their just
right, if their hunger is not relieved. That sad spectacle extorts
compassion even from the cruel and barbarous. He next enumerates various
kinds, which commonly bend hearts of iron to <span
id="xi.i-p73.1"></span>συμπάθειαν fellow­feeling or compassion; that the
savage disposition of those who are not moved by feeling for a brother’s
poverty and necessity may be the less excusable. At length he concludes
—

<span id="xi.i-p74"></span>*And that thou hide not thyself from thine
own flesh.* Here we ought to observe the term flesh, by which he means
all men universally, not one of whom we can behold, without seeing, as
in a mirror, “our own flesh.” It is therefore a proof of the greatest
inhumanity, to despise those in whom we are constrained to recognize our
own likeness.

<span id="xi.i-p75"></span><span id="xi.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p76"></span>**8.** *Then shall break forth as the dawn*
 <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) *thy light.* The Prophet shows
that God is not too rigorous, and does not demand from us more than what
is proper; and that hypocrites complain of him without cause, when they
accuse him of excessive severity. When their works are condemned, they
murmur, and reply that God can never be satisfied, that they do not know
what they should do, or what course they should follow. He replies that
he demands nothing else than a pure and honest heart, that is, an
upright conscience; that if they have this, God will graciously receive
them, and will bear testimony to their holiness, and will bestow every
kind of blessing on those whose faults he justly chastises; and lastly,
that there is no reason why they should murmur at him as excessively
stern and harsh, because they will find him to be kind and bountiful
when they shall lay down all hypocrisy, and devote themselves sincerely
to his service.

<span id="xi.i-p78"></span>We should observe the particle *then;* for it
means that hypocrites, on the contrary, are very far from the true
worship of God, though they wish to be reckoned very holy persons. But
he holds them to be fully convicted, when he shows from their works that
they neither worship nor fear God. By the word light he means
prosperity, as by the word “darkness” is meant a wretched and afflicted
life; and this mode of expression occurs frequently in Scripture.

<span id="xi.i-p79"></span>*And thy health.* By “health” he means
prosperity and safety, as we shall afterwards see in another passage,
because the wounds inflicted by the hand of God on account of their sins
had brought the people so low that they wasted away like a sick man
under terrible disease. No kind of disease is more severe than to be
pursued by God’s righteous vengeance, or consumed under his curse.

<span id="xi.i-p80"></span>*Righteousness shall go before thy face.*
“Righteousness” may be taken in two senses, either for the testimony of
“righteousness,” or for good order; because God will put an end to the
confusion, and will restore everything to its proper place. Thus the
former meaning amounts to this, “When God shall be pacified towards
thee, the testimony of thy righteousness shall be visible before God and
men, as if some herald went before thee.” There are some who prefer to
expound the word “righteousness” as meaning just government, which is
the gift of God, and a token of his kindness as a Father; and we have
seen that this word is sometimes used in that sense by Hebrew writers.
But the latter clause which follows, *And the glory of Jehovah will
gather thee,* leads me to prefer the former exposition, “Thy
righteousness shall go forth;“ that is, “All shall acknowledge thee to
be holy and righteous, though formerly thou wast guilty and convicted.
So shalt thou also be adorned with the glory of the Lord, though
formerly thou wast loaded with reproaches.” For we are reproached and
disgraced, while we suffer the punishment of our sins.

<span id="xi.i-p81"></span><span id="xi.i-p81.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p82"></span>**9.** *Then shalt thou call.* Isaiah follows
out what he had formerly begun, that everything shall prosper well with
the Jews, if they shall be just and inoffensive and free from doing
wrong to any one, so that it shall manifest their piety and religion. He
pronounces what is said by Hosea, (<span id="xi.i-p82.1"></span>[Ho
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006)<span id="xi.i-p82.1"></span>) and
repeated by Christ, that “mercy shall be preferred to sacrifice.” (<span
id="xi.i-p82.2"></span>[Matt. 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013),
[Matt. 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007)<span
id="xi.i-p82.2"></span>) Thus after having spoken of the duties which
men owe to one another, and testified that it shall be well with those
who shall perform those duties, he adds, “Then shalt thou call, and the
Lord will listen to thee.” The chief part of our happiness is, if God
listen to us; and, on the other hand, nothing could be more miserable
than to have him for an enemy. In order to try our faith, he attributes
to our prayers what he bestows willingly and by free grace; for if he
always bestowed his blessings while we were asleep, the desire to pray
would become utterly cold, and indeed would cease altogether; and so the
kindness of God would be an encouragement to slothfulness. Although he
anticipates us by his free grace, yet he wishes that our prayers for his
blessings should be offered, and therefore he adds, *Thou shalt cry, and
he shall say, Behold, here I am*. This promise likewise contains an
exhortation, that we may not lie idle. When he says that he is present,
this indeed is not visible to our eyes; but he gives a practical
declaration that he is near and reconciled to us.

<span id="xi.i-p83"></span>*If thou shalt take away from the midst of
thee the yoke.* In the latter part of the verse he again repeats that
God will be reconciled to the Jews if they repent. Under the word “yoke”
he includes all the annoyances that are offered to the poor; as if he
had said, “If thou shalt cease to annoy thy brethren, and shalt abstain
from all violence and deceit, the Lord will bestow upon thee every kind
of blessing.”

<span id="xi.i-p84"></span>*And the pointing of the finger.*  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) This includes every kind of attack;
for we are said to “point the finger,” when we threaten our neighbors,
or treat them cruelly, or offer any violence.

<span id="xi.i-p88"></span>*And speech of vanity, or unprofitable
speech.* This is the third class of acts of injustice, by which we
injure our neighbor when we impose upon him by cunning and deceitful
words or flatteries; for every iniquity consists either of concealed
malice and deceit, or of open violence.

<span id="xi.i-p89"></span><span id="xi.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p90"></span>**10.** *If thou shalt pour out thy soul to
the hungry.* He goes on to recommend the duties of that love which we
owe to one another. The sum of the whole discourse is this, that in vain
do men serve God, if they only offer to him trivial and bare ceremonies;
and that this is not the right and proper worship of God, who rigidly
commands and enjoins us to lead an upright and innocent life with our
neighbors, willingly to give ourselves and our labors to them, and to be
ready to assist, them readily and cheerfully, whenever it is necessary.
We should observe the two parts of this duty which the Prophet has
expressly described; for in the first place, he recommends to us the
feeling of mercy and kindness; and, in the second place, he exhorts us
to the work itself and the effect. It would not be enough to perform
acts of kindness towards men, if our disposition towards them were not
warm and affectionate. “If I give all my goods to the poor,” says Paul,
“and have not love, I am nothing.” (<span id="xi.i-p90.1"></span>[1Co
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p90.1"></span>) To
“pour out the soul,” therefore, is nothing else than to bewail their
distresses, and to be as much affected by their own poverty as if we
ourselves endured it; as, on the other hand, all who are limited and
devoted to themselves are said to have a hard and seared heart, to “shut
up their bowels,” (<span id="xi.i-p90.2"></span>[1Jo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#017)<span id="xi.i-p90.2"></span>) and
to restrain their feelings.  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)
Another translation given by some commentators, “If thou shalt offer thy
soul,” is unworthy of notice.

<span id="xi.i-p92"></span>*Thy light shall arise in darkness.* Again,
there follows the same promise, and under the same figure or metaphor.
By “darkness” he denotes adversity, and by “light” prosperity; as if he
had said to the people, “The Lord will cause all the miseries by which
thou art now oppressed to cease, and sudden prosperity shall spring up.”
He shows, therefore, that there is no reason why they should blame God
for punishing them so severely; for they would immediately be delivered
and enjoy prosperity if they sincerely worshipped and obeyed God.

<span id="xi.i-p93"></span><span id="xi.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p94"></span>**11.** *And Jehovah will always conduct
thee.* He now describes more clearly what he had spoken briefly and
figuratively, that God will be their guide, so that they shall be in
want of nothing for a full abundance of blessings. God is said to
“conduct” us, when we actually feel that he goes before us, as if he
were placed before our eyes.

<span id="xi.i-p95"></span>*And will satisfy thy soul in drought.* The
Prophet adds that the aid promised shall not be of short duration,
because God never forsakes his people in the middle of the journey, but
continues his kindness towards them with unwearied regularity, and for
this reason promises that they shall be satisfied amidst the deepest
poverty; because God never is in want of any benefits for relieving
their poverty, and his act of blessing is of more value than the most
abundant rains of the whole year. And yet he does not promise to
believers a rich and abundant produce of fruits, or a plentiful harvest,
but that God will nourish them, though the earth yield no food. In this
way he bids them depend on God’s assistance and be satisfied with it,
though they be not altogether free from the distresses of famine. In
this sense he adds, —

<span id="xi.i-p96"></span>*And will make fat thy bones.* He does not
say that they shall be fully and highly fattened, but that they shall be
so lean that the “bones” shall protrude even through the skin. Thus he
gives the appellation of” bones” to those who have been worn bare by
hunger or famine, men who have hardly anything remaining but dry skin
and “bones;” and he means that the Jews will have to contend with want
of all things and with leanness, till God shall restore them.

<span id="xi.i-p97"></span>Of the same import are the metaphors which he
adds, *a watered garden*, and *a spring of waters*. Isaiah cannot
satisfy himself in describing the kindness of God, which he displays
towards his sincere worshippers, that men may not seek anywhere else
than in themselves the causes of barrenness. It amounts to this, that
this fountain of God’s kindness never dries up, but always flows, if we
do not stop its course by our own fault.

<span id="xi.i-p98"></span><span id="xi.i-p98.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p99"></span>**12.** *And from thee shall be those who
shall restore the deserts of the age.* By “deserts” Isaiah means
frightful desolation, which befell the Jews, when they were carried into
captivity; for the country was reduced to a wilderness, the city was
sacked, the temple was razed, and the people were brought into bondage
and scattered. He calls them “deserts of the age,” (or of perpetuity,)
because the temple could not be immediately repaired, and there was no
hope of rebuilding it or of delivering the people. If any city has been
ruined or destroyed, while its inhabitants remain, it may be speedily
restored; but if none of the inhabitants survive, and if they have been
carried away into a distant country, and are very far off, there can be
no hope of rebuilding that city; and it will be reckoned monstrous if,
after it has lain for a long time in ruins, some person shall say that
the people who appear to have perished shall restore and rebuild it.

<span id="xi.i-p100"></span>Since therefore the promise appeared to be
incredible, the Prophet intended to meet the doubt; for they might have
objected, “If God wishes to restore us, why does he suffer us to
languish so long?” He replies that no continuance of delay prevents God
from raising again to a lofty situation those who had been sunk low for
a long period. Nor must this be limited to the rebuilding of the temple,
which was begun by Zerubbabel, (<span id="xi.i-p100.1"></span>[Eze
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p100.1"></span>) and
continued by Nehemiah; but it includes the restoration of the Church,
which followed after the lapse of several centuries.

<span id="xi.i-p101"></span>The phrase “From thee,” means that from that
people, though seemingly half dead, there shall arise those who shall
repair the melancholy ruins, and shall be architects or workmen to
rebuild Jerusalem. The verb <span id="xi.i-p101.1"></span>בנו (*banu*)
“shall build,” is translated by some in a passive sense; but as that way
renders the meaning doubtful, the active signification ought to be
retained.  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) A little afterwards,
he appears to ascribe to the whole people what he had said of a few
individuals; but the meaning is the same; for, if the question be put,
“Who rebuilt Jerusalem?“ undoubtedly it was that people; but out of that
vast multitude the Lord selected a small number and cut off the rest.
Some suppose the meaning to be, that the cities will be insufficient for
the number of inhabitants, so that they shall be constrained to rebuild
other cities which had been formerly destroyed; but this appears to be
too unnatural.

<span id="xi.i-p103"></span>*Thou wilt raise up the foundations of
generation and generation.* Some think that this clause conveys what the
Prophet had formerly said, and that by “the foundations of generation
and generation” are meant those which lay long in a ruinous state;
because out of them must the building be immediately raised and set up;
for various hinderances had arisen, by which that work was interrupted.
But we may view it as referring to the time to come: “Thou wilt raise up
buildings, which shall last for a very long period;” for he seems to
promise that the condition of the Church shall be of long duration; as
if he had said, “Other buildings do not last long, but this shall last
for many ages.” Yet if any one prefer to view it as referring to the
past, I am not much disposed to dispute with him.

<span id="xi.i-p104"></span>*And thou shalt be called.* Here the Prophet
includes both statements; namely, that the people would resemble a
ruined building, and next, that they would be perfectly restored. He
ascribes this to the Jews, that they shall be repairers and directors of
the ways; that is, that the Lord will make use of their labors; for we
ought to ascribe everything to the power of God, who is pleased to
bestow upon us so high an honor as to permit our hands to be applied to
his work. We have here a remarkable promise about gathering and raising
up the ruins of the Church; and since the Lord is pleased to make use of
our labor, let us not hesitate to be entirely devoted to it; and
although the world oppose and mock at us, and account us fools, let us
take courage and conquer every difficulty. Our hearts ought to cherish
assured confidence, when we know that it is the work of the Lord, and
that he has commanded us to execute it.

<span id="xi.i-p105"></span><span id="xi.i-p105.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p106"></span>**13.** *If thou shalt turn away thy foot
from the sabbath.* Some think that the Prophet alludes to the external
observation of the Sabbath, because it was not lawful to perform a
journey on that day. (<span id="xi.i-p106.1"></span>[Ex
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008)<span id="xi.i-p106.1"></span>)
Though I do not reject that opinion, yet I think that the meaning is far
more extensive; for by a figure of speech, ill which a part is taken for
the whole, he denotes the whole course of human life; as it is very
customary to employ the word “going” or “walking” to denote our life. He
says, therefore, “If thou cease to advance in thy course, if thou shut
up thy path, walk not according to thine own will,”’ etc. For this is to
“turn away the foot from the Sabbath,” when we lay ourselves under the
necessity of wandering freely and without restraint in our own sinful
desires. As he formerly included under the class of fasting all
ceremonies and outward masks, in which they made their holiness to
consist, and showed that they were vain and unprofitable; so in this
passage he points out the true observation of the Sabbath, that they may
not think that it consists in external idleness but in true self­denial,
so as to abstain from every act of injustice and wickedness, and from
all lusts and wicked thoughts. First, by the word “foot” he denotes
actions; because the Jews, though they did not venture to perform a
journey, or to cook flesh on a Sabbath­day, yet did not scruple to
harass their neighbors and to mock at the afflicted. Yet he immediately
passes on to the will and to speeches, so as to include every part of
the obedience which we owe to God.

<span id="xi.i-p107"></span>*And shalt call the Sabbath a delight* This
word, “delight,” must be viewed as referring to God, and not to men;
because nothing can be more pleasing or acceptable to God, titan the
observation of the Sabbath, and sincere worship. He carefully inculcates
this, that men do wrong, if, laying aside the commandments of God, they
esteem highly those things which are of no value; and he warns them that
they ought to form their judgment from his will alone. Certain classes
of duties are again enumerated by him, by which he shows clearly that
the true observation of the Sabbath consists in self­denial and thorough
conversion. And thus he pronounces the foundation to be the will, from
which proceed speeches, and next actions; for we speak what we have
conceived in our heart, and by speech we make known our will, and
afterwards carry it into effect. Whoever then wishes to serve God in a
proper manner, must altogether renounce his flesh and his will. And
hence we see the reason why God so highly recommends, in the whole
Scripture, the observation of the Sabbath; for he contemplated something
higher than the outward ceremony, that is, indolence and repose, in
which the Jews thought that the greatest holiness consisted. On the
contrary, he commanded the Jews to renounce the desires of the flesh, to
give up their sinful inclinations, and to yield obedience to him; as no
man can meditate on the heavenly life, unless he be dead to the world
and to himself. Now, although that ceremony has been abolished,
nevertheless the truth remains; because Christ died and rose again, so
that we have a continual sabbath; that is, we are released from our
works, that the Spirit of God may work mightily in us.

<span id="xi.i-p108"></span><span id="xi.i-p108.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p109"></span>**14.** *Then wilt thou delight in Jehovah.*
He appears to allude to the word *delight* in the preceding verse; for
the verb <span id="xi.i-p109.1"></span>תתעגג (*tithgnanneg*) which the
Prophet employs, is derived from the same root as <span
id="xi.i-p109.2"></span>עגג (*gnoneg*) which he formerly used, when he
said that the Lord takes the highest delight in the true observation of
the Sabbath. In a word, he means that the people take no delight in God,
because they provoke him, and do not obey his will; for if we framed our
life in obedience to God, we should be his delight, and, on the other
hand, he would be our delight. Thus he affirms that it is owing entirely
to the Jews themselves that they do not, by relying on a reconciled God,
lead a cheerful and joyful life. By these words he indirectly reproaches
them with bringing upon themselves, by their own fault, many calamities.

<span id="xi.i-p110"></span>*And I will cause thee to ride on the high
places of the earth.* By these words he promises a return to their
native country, and a safe habitation in it. We know that Judea was
situated on a lofty place above the neighboring countries; while the
situation of Babylon was much lower, so that the people trembled as if
they had been shut up in a cave. He next tells more plainly what he
meant by the word *ride*  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) for he
promises the possession of that country which had been promised and
given to the fathers,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) and which
they at that time enjoyed, and of which they were afterwards deprived
for a time.

<span id="xi.i-p113"></span>*For the mouth of Jehovah hath spoken it.*
He added this, that they might know, beyond all controversy, that all
these things were true; and this must be viewed as referring not only to
those promises, but likewise to the beginning of the chapter. For he
rebuked hypocrites, who thought that they were defending themselves in a
just cause, and showed that they were suffering the just punishment of
their sins; and that it was in vain to contend with God, and to bring
forward in opposition to him their own works, which were altogether
empty and worthless. On that account he brings them back to the true
observation of the Sabbath, and shows that it will be well with them, if
they shall worship God in a right manner. At length he concludes that
they have not to deal with a mortal man, but that he who pronounces
these things is God the Judge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc16010.htm#fr_117) <span
id="xi.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p44"></span> “They consult the priests and prophets as to
those laws and statutes about which there is any uncertainty, as if they
were afraid of breaking the commandments of God through ignorance. ­
*Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc16010.htm#fr_118) <span
id="xi.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p48"></span> For the meaning of this phrase, see our
author’s Commentary on the harmony of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, Vol. 3,
p. 93. ­ Ed.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc16010.htm#fr_119) <span
id="xi.i-p55.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p56"></span> “Luther and other early writers understand
the last clause as a prohibition of noisy quarrels, ‘to make the voice
heard on high,’ being taken as equivalent to letting it be heard in the
street. (<span id="xi.i-p56.1"></span>[Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)<span id="xi.i-p56.1"></span>)
Vitringa and the later writers give it a meaning altogether different,
by taking <span id="xi.i-p56.2"></span>מרום (*marom*) in the sense of
heaven, (<span id="xi.i-p56.3"></span>[Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)<span id="xi.i-p56.3"></span>,)
and the whole clause as a declaration that such fasting would not have
the desired effect of gaining audience and acceptance for their prayers.
(See <span id="xi.i-p56.4"></span>[Joel
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014), [Joel
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012)<span id="xi.i-p56.4"></span>)” —
Alexander.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc16010.htm#fr_120) <span
id="xi.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p65"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p65.1"></span>Selon la
coustume des criminels qui demandent misericorde.” “According to the
custom of criminals who implore mercy.”

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc16010.htm#fr_121) <span
id="xi.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p73"></span> Grotius says that “the bread in those
countries was such as could be easily ‘broken,’ \[like the thin cakes
which are still common in the East\]; and that to ‘break,’ consequently,
meant to ‘impart,’ or to distribute. The phraseology is borrowed from
the breaking of the bread which is distributed by the head of a family
to the domestics at his table.” — *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc16010.htm#fr_122) <span
id="xi.i-p76.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p77"></span> “As the pillar of the dawn bursts through
the clouds.” ­ *Jarchi*.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc16010.htm#fr_123) <span
id="xi.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p85"></span> “Grotius thus explains this clause, ‘If thou
shalt cease to point at good men with “the disreputable finger,” (as
Persius calls it,)and to mock at their simplicity.’ In like manner
Juvenal says, (Sat. 10:52)

<span id="xi.i-p86"></span><span id="xi.i-p86.1"></span>Quum fortunic
ipsi minaci  
Mandaret \]aqueum, mediumque ostenderet unguem.

<span id="xi.i-p87"></span>On this passage scholiasts observe, that it
was an ancient custom, when any person was the object of scorn, or was
treated with marked contempt or disgraceful reproach, to point at him by
holding out the middle finger.” ­ *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc16010.htm#fr_124) <span
id="xi.i-p90.3"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p91"></span> “<span id="xi.i-p91.1"></span>Qui ferment
les entrailles, et sont sans affection.” “Who shut up their bowels, and
are without affection.”

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc16010.htm#fr_125) <span
id="xi.i-p101.2"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p102"></span> “Ewald reads <span
id="xi.i-p102.1"></span>בנו (*bunnu*,) \[in the Puhal form,\] ‘They
shall be built by thee;’ but this passive form does not occur elsewhere,
and is here sustained by no external evidence.” — *Alexander*

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc16010.htm#fr_126) <span
id="xi.i-p110.1"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p111"></span> “The word *ride* is borrowed from a
powerful conqueror, who, riding on a horse or in a chariot, while
carrying on battle, seizes mountains, hills, citadels, castles,
fortifications, and subjects them to his donfinion. By ‘high places of
the earth,’ he means what I have just now enumerated, lofty places
difficult of ascent, on which citadels and fortresses are commonly
situated, and the storming and seizing of which brings applause to the
conqueror. See <span id="xi.i-p111.1"></span>[De
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)<span id="xi.i-p111.1"></span>.”
­ *Vitringa*.  
“The whole phrase is descriptive, not of a mere return to Palestine, the
highest of all lands (*Kimchi*), nor of more security from enenfies by
being placed beyond their reach (*Vitringa*), but of conquest and
triumphant possession, as in <span id="xi.i-p111.3"></span>[De
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)<span id="xi.i-p111.3"></span>,
from which the expression is derived by all the later writers who employ
it.” ­ *Alexander*.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc16010.htm#fr_127) <span
id="xi.i-p111.4"></span>

<span id="xi.i-p112"></span> “To eat the heritage is to enjoy it, and
derive subsistence from it. Kimchi correctly says that it is called the
heritage of Jacob, as distinct from that of Ishmael and Esau, although
equally descended from the father of the faithful.” ­ *Alexander*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 59](cc16011)
