[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc16007)  [Next](cc16009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 56.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
56:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment,
and do justice: for my salvation *is* near to come, and my righteousness
to be revealed.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Sic dicit Iehova: Custodite judicium,
et facite justitiam; quonoiam propinqua est salus mea, ut veniat; et
justitia mea, ut reveletur.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span>**2.** Blessed *is* the man *that* doeth this,
and the son of man *that* layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath
from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any evil.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span>**2.** Beatus homo qui fecerit hoc, et filius
hominis qui hoc apprehenderit; custodiens sabbatum, ita ut non violet
illud; et custodiens manum suam ut ab omni male abstineat.

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**3.** Neither let the son of the stranger,
that hath joined himself to the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath
utterly separated me from his people: neither let the eunuch say,
Behold, I *am* a dry tree.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>**3.** Et ne dicat filius alienus aggregatus
ad Iehovam, dicendo, Separando separavit me Iehova a populo suo; et ne
dicat eunuchus, Ego sum lignum aridum.

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span>**4.** For thus saith the LORD unto the
eunuchs that keep my sabbaths, and choose *the things* that please me,
and take hold of my covenant;

<span id="ix.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quoniam sic dicit Iehova, eunuchis qui
custodiunt sabbata mea, et eligunt quae mihi placent, atque apprehendunt
foedus meum;

<span id="ix.i-p10"></span>**5.** Even unto them will I give in mine
house and within my walls a place and a name better than of sons and of
daughters: I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut
off.

<span id="ix.i-p11"></span>**5.** Dabo eis in domo mea et intra
murosmeos locum, et nomen melius quam filiorum et filiarum; nomen
perpetuum dabo eis, qued non delebitur.

<span id="ix.i-p12"></span>**6.** Also the sons of the stranger, that
join themselves to the LORD, to serve him, and to love the name of the
LORD, to be his servants, every one that keepeth the sabbath from
polluting it, and taketh hold of my covenant;

<span id="ix.i-p13"></span>**6.** Filios, inquam, alieni, qui aggregati
erant ad Iehovam, ut ministrent ei, et diligant nomen Iehovae; ut sint
illi in servos, quisquis custodierit sabbatum, ita ut non profanet
illud, et amplexus fuerit foedus meum.

<span id="ix.i-p14"></span>**7.** Even them will I bring to my holy
mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt
offerings and their sacrifices *shall be* accepted upon mine altar; for
mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.

<span id="ix.i-p15"></span>**7.** Hos adducam in montes sanctitatis
meae; et laetificabo eos in domo orationis meae. Holocausta eorum et
sacrificia grata erunt in altari meo; quoniam domus mea Domus orationis
vocabitur cunctis populis.

<span id="ix.i-p16"></span>**8.** The Lord GOD, which gathereth the
outcasts of Israel, saith, Yet will I gather *others* to him, beside
those that are gathered unto him.

<span id="ix.i-p17"></span>**8.** Dicit Dominus Iehova, qui congregat
expulsos Israel: Adhuc congregabo super eum congregatos ejus.

<span id="ix.i-p18"></span>**9.** All ye beasts of the field, come to
devour, *yea,* all ye beasts in the forest.

<span id="ix.i-p19"></span>**9.** Omnes bestiae agri, venitead
devorandum, omnes bestiae sylvestres.

<span id="ix.i-p20"></span>**10.** His watchmen *are* blind: they are
all ignorant, they *are* all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber.

<span id="ix.i-p21"></span>**10.** Speculatores ejus caeci, omnes
nescierunt, omnes canes muti, nesciunt latrare, jacentes dormiunt, amant
dormitationem.

<span id="ix.i-p22"></span>**11.** Yea, *they are* greedy dogs *which*
can never have enough, and they *are* shepherds *that* cannot
understand: they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from
his quarter.

<span id="ix.i-p23"></span>**11.** Et canes illi anima fortes nesciunt
saturitatem; pastores ipsi nesciunt, nec intelligunt; universi
respiciunt ad vias suas; quisque ad commodum suum a fine ejus (*vel,
suo*).

<span id="ix.i-p24"></span>**12.** Come ye, *say they*, I will fetch
wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink; and to morrow shall
be as this day, *and* much more abundant.

<span id="ix.i-p25"></span>**12.** Venite, accipiam vinum, potabimus
siceram; et erit sicut hodie, ita crastinus dies, vel major,
excellentior multo.

<span id="ix.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p27"></span><span id="ix.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p28"></span>**1.** *Thus saith Jehovah.* This is a
remarkable passage, in which the Prophet shows what God demands from us,
as soon as he holds out tokens of his favor, or promises that he will be
ready to be reconciled to us, that our reconciliation may be secured. He
demands from us such a conversion as shall change our minds and hearts,
that they may forsake the world and rise towards heaven; and next he
likewise calls for the fruits of repentance.

<span id="ix.i-p29"></span>*Keep ye judgment, and do righteousness.*
Under the names “judgment” and “righteousness,” he includes all the
duties which men owe to each other, and which consist not only in
abstaining from doing wrong, but also in rendering assistance to our
neighbors. And this is the sum of the second table of the Law, in
keeping which we give proof of our piety, if we have any. For this
reason the prophets always draw our attention to that table; because by
means of it our real character is better known, and true uprightness is
ascertained; for hypocrites, as we have formerly seen,  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92) often practice deceit by ceremonies.

<span id="ix.i-p31"></span>*For my salvation is near, and my
righteousness.* He assigns the reason, and at the same time points out
the source and the cause why it is the duty of all to devote themselves
to newness of life. It is because “the righteousness of the Lord
approaches to us,” that we, on our part, ought to draw near to him. The
Lord calls himself “righteous,” and declares that this is “his
righteousness,” not because he keeps it shut up in himself, but because
he pours it out on men. In like manner he calls it “his salvation,” by
which he delivers men from destruction.

<span id="ix.i-p32"></span>Although this discourse was addressed to the
Jews, that, by sincere affection of heart, and by the practice of
integrity, they might show their gratitude to God their Redeemer, yet it
refers to every one of us; for the whole world is ruined in itself, if
it do not obtain salvation from God alone. We must therefore attend to
this exhortation, which instructs us that the nearer we are to God, so
much the more powerfully ought we to be excited to the practice of
godliness. Hence also Paul admonishes believers,  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) “Cast away the works of darkness; put on
the armor of light; for our salvation is nearer than we thought.” (<span
id="ix.i-p33.2"></span>[Rom. 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p33.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p34"></span><span id="ix.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p35"></span>**2.** *Happy is the man that shall do this.*
When he calls those persons “happy” who, having embraced this doctrine,
devote themselves to walk uprightly, he indirectly leads us to conclude
that many will be deaf or disobedient; but, lest their wickedness or
indifference should retard the elect, he recommends the exhortation
which he has given from the advantage which it yields. Thus, in order
that believers may abandon all delay, he exclaims that they are “happy”
to whom it hath been given  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) to
possess such wisdom.

<span id="ix.i-p37"></span>*Keeping the Sabbath.* We have said that the
words “justice” and “judgment,” in the preceding verse, include all the
duties of the second table; but here he mentions the Sabbath, which
belongs to the first table. I reply, as I have already mentioned
briefly, that they who live inoffensively and justly with their
neighbors, testify that they serve God; and therefore we need not wonder
that the Prophet, after having glanced at the second table, mentions
also the first; for both ought to be joined together In a word, Isaiah
declares that he who shall obey God by keeping his law perfectly shall
be “happy;” for the salvation and the righteousness of God shall belong
to him. Since, therefore, men wander at random amidst their
contrivances, and adopt various methods of worshipping God, he shows
that there is only one way, that is, when men endeavor to frame and
regulate their life by the injunction of the Law; for otherwise they
will weary themselves in vain by taking other roads. In short, this is a
remarkable passage, showing that nothing pleases God but keeping the
Law.

<span id="ix.i-p38"></span>If the question be put, “Can men obtain
righteousness and salvation by their own works?” the reply will be easy;
for the Lord does not offer salvation to us, as if he had been
anticipated by our merits, (for, on the contrary, we are anticipated by
him,) but offers himself freely to us, and only demands that we, on our
part, draw near to him. Since therefore he willingly invites us, since
he offers righteousness through free grace, we must make every effort
not to be deprived of so great a benefit.

<span id="ix.i-p39"></span>Again, because the Sabbath, as Moses
declares, (<span id="ix.i-p39.1"></span>[Exod.
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#017)<span id="ix.i-p39.1"></span>) and
as <span id="ix.i-p39.2"></span>[Eze
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#012)<span id="ix.i-p39.2"></span>
repeats, was the most important symbol of the worship of God, so by that
figure of speech in which a part is taken for the whole, and which is
called a *synecdoche*, the Sabbath includes all the exercises of
religion. But we must view the Sabbath in connection with everything
that attends it; for God does not rest satisfied with outward ceremony,
or delight in our indolence, but demands from us earnest self­denial,
that we may be entirely devoted to his service.

<span id="ix.i-p40"></span>*So that he may not profane it.* This clause
is commonly rendered, “That he may not profane it;“ and literally it
runs thus, “From profaning it;“ and therefore we have thought it proper
to prefix the word *“so”* to the clause, “So that he may not profane
it,” in order to remove all ambiguity.

<span id="ix.i-p41"></span>*And keeping his hand, that he may abstain
from all that is evil.* He now adds another *synecdoche*, to describe
the duties which men owe to each other. The amount of it is, that there
is no other way of serving God aright but by sincere piety and a
blameless life, as he has also included in these two parts the rule of
leading a holy life. In a word, it is an exposition of true
righteousness which is contained in the Law of the Lord, that we may
acquiesce in it; for in vain do men seek any other road to perfection.
Here also are thrown down all false worship and superstitions, and,
finally, everything that is contrived by men in opposition to the word
of God.

<span id="ix.i-p42"></span><span id="ix.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p43"></span>**3.** *And let not the son who is a
foreigner*  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) *say.* The Prophet
shows that this grace of God shall be such that even they who formerly
were estranged from him, and against whom the door might be said to have
been shut, may obtain a new condition, or may be perfectly restored. And
he meets their complaint, that they may not say that they are rejected,
or unworthy, or “foreigners,” or excluded by any mark; for the Lord will
remove every obstacle. This may refer both to Jews, who had been brought
into a condition similar to that of foreign nations by a temporary
rejection, and to the heathen nations themselves. For my own part, I
willingly extend it to both, that it may agree with the prediction of
Hosea,

<span id="ix.i-p45"></span>“I will call them my people who were not my
people.” (<span id="ix.i-p45.1"></span>[Ho
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)<span id="ix.i-p45.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p46"></span>*Joined to Jehovah.* When he says that they
are “joined to God,” he gives warning that this consolation belongs to
those only who have followed God when he called them; for there are many
“eunuchs” on whom God does not bestow his favor, and many “foreigners”
who do not join themselves to the people of God. This promise is
therefore limited to those who have been called and have obeyed.

<span id="ix.i-p47"></span>By calling them “foreigners” and “eunuchs,”
he describes under both classes all who appear to be unworthy of being
reckoned by God in the number of his people; for God had separated for
himself a peculiar people, and had afterwards driven them out of his
inheritance. The Gentiles were entirely shut out from his kingdom, as is
sufficiently evident from the whole of Scripture. Paul says,

<span id="ix.i-p48"></span>“Ye were aliens from the commonwealth of
Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope, and
without God in the world. But now by Christ Jesus, ye who formerly were
far off have been made nigh by the blood of Christ.”  
(<span id="ix.i-p48.2"></span>[Eph.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013)<span id="ix.i-p48.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p49"></span>The Gentiles, therefore, might at first doubt
whether or not the benefit of adoption, which was literally intended for
the Jews, belonged to them. We see also how much the Apostles shrunk
from it, when the Lord commanded them (<span id="ix.i-p49.1"></span>[Mr
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015)<span id="ix.i-p49.1"></span>) to
“preach the Gospel through the whole world;” for they thought that the
doctrine of salvation was profaned if it was communicated
indiscriminately to Gentiles as well as to Jews. The same hesitation
might harass the elect people, from the time that their banishment from
the holy land became a sign of the rejection of them; and therefore the
Prophet commands them to dismiss their doubts.

<span id="ix.i-p50"></span>*And let not the eunuch say.* By the same
figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the whole, he includes
under this designation all who bore any mark of disgrace which kept them
apart\~ from the people of God; for “eunuchs,” and those who had no
children, appeared to be rejected by God and shut out from the promise
which the Lord had made to Abraham, that “his seed should be as the
stars of heaven, (<span id="ix.i-p50.1"></span>[Ge
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005)<span id="ix.i-p50.1"></span>) and
as the sand of the sea.” (<span id="ix.i-p50.2"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span id="ix.i-p50.2"></span>) In
a word, he warns all men against looking at themselves, that they may
fix their minds exclusively on God’s calling, and may thus imitate the
faith of Abraham, (<span id="ix.i-p50.3"></span>[Ge
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span id="ix.i-p50.3"></span>) who
did not look at either his own decayed body or the barren womb of Sarah,
so as through unbelief to dispute with himself about the power of God,
but hoped above all hope. (<span id="ix.i-p50.4"></span>[Ro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018)<span id="ix.i-p50.4"></span>­20)
The Prophet addresses persons who were despised and reproached; for, as
Peter says,

<span id="ix.i-p51"></span>“there is no respect of persons with God, but
in every nation he who feareth him, and worketh righteousness, is
accepted by him.” (<span id="ix.i-p51.1"></span>[Acts
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035)<span id="ix.i-p51.1"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p52"></span><span id="ix.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p53"></span>**4.** *For thus saith Jehovah.* Now follows
a confirmation; for the sincere worshippers of God, who keep the
sabbaths and follow the righteousness of the Law, though they be
“eunuchs,”  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96) or labor under any
other obstruction, shall nevertheless have a place in the Church. He
appears to annihilate in this manner all the external marks  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) in which alone the Jews gloried; for the
high rank of the Church is not external, but spiritual; and although
believers have no emblems of distinction in the eyes of the world, and
are even despised and reproached, yet they rank high in the sight of
God.

<span id="ix.i-p56"></span>*And choose the things that please me, and
take hold of my covenant.* With the “keeping of the Sabbath,” he
connects obedience and adherence to “the covenant;” and hence we may
readily infer that, when he spoke hitherto about the Sabbath, he had in
view not an idle ceremony but perfect holiness. At the same time, he
again lays a restraint on the children of God, not to make even the
smallest departure from the injunction of the Law; for they are
permitted to “choose,” not whatever they think fit, but that which God
declares to be pleasing and acceptable to himself. Wherefore both
hypocrisy and inconsiderate zeal are here condemned, when God not only
contrasts his own commandments with the inventions of men, but enjoins
them earnestly to “take hold of his covenant.”

<span id="ix.i-p57"></span><span id="ix.i-p57.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p58"></span>**5.** *I will give to them in my house.*
Here we see that all men, however unworthy, may obtain admission into
the kingdom of God: he alludes to Jerusalem, and to the temple in which
the Lord placed a memorial of his name. No place was given in it to any
but to the Jews alone; and they would have reckoned the temple to be
polluted, if any of the Gentiles had entered into it. Hence also a
serious insurrection arose against Paul for having brought into the
temple uncircumcised persons. The Lord now admits, without distinction,
those whom he previously forbade; and indeed he set aside this
distinction, when we, who were the children of strangers, were brought
by him into the temple, that is, into his Church, which is not confined,
as formerly, within those narrow limits of Judea, but is extended
through the whole world.

<span id="ix.i-p59"></span>*A place and a name.* <span
id="ix.i-p59.1"></span>יד *(yad)* is here put for place, as in many
other passages. It might also be supposed to denote “authority,” or
“power;“ for they shall be elevated to such dignity as to be accounted
the children of God.

<span id="ix.i-p60"></span>*Better than of sons and of daughters.* A
question may arise, Does the Lord compare the Jews who were at that time
in the Church, with the believers whom he shall afterwards place in
their room; or, does he contrast the future condition of the people with
their condition at that time? For it is certain that “the name” of the
Gentiles is “better” than that of the Jews, who were “cut off on account
of their unbelief;“ and we have succeeded in their room, “as wild olives
ingrafted into a good olive tree,” as Paul says. (<span
id="ix.i-p60.1"></span>[Ro 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span
id="ix.i-p60.1"></span>) The meaning’ might therefore be, that “eunuchs”
and “foreigners” shall have “a better name” than children and domestics,
who were regarded as God’s heritage. But I choose rather to explain it
in a different manner, namely, that the dignity of believers shall be
higher under Christ than it was under the Law. The patriarchs had a very
excellent “name,” when they called upon God as their Father, and were
joined in covenant with him; but the grace of God has been far more
abundantly poured out upon us since the coming of Christ; and therefore
we have obtained in him a far more excellent name.

<span id="ix.i-p61"></span>*A perpetual name.* He calls this name
“perpetual,” because it is written in heaven, where it shall live and
flourish throughout all ages. Wicked men wish to have their name made
illustrious in this world, and labor to promote their reputation, that
the remembrance of their name may last for ever; but it is fading and of
short duration. But far different is this name; for it makes us heirs of
the heavenly kingdom, so that in the presence of angels we are reckoned
to be the children of God.

<span id="ix.i-p62"></span>We might also interpret <span
id="ix.i-p62.1"></span>מבנים (*mibbanim*) to mean, “than the name which
is derived from children;  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) for men,
by having children, do in some respect perpetuate their own name. He
promises that this name shall be far more excellent. But I prefer to
follow the former exposition.

<span id="ix.i-p64"></span><span id="ix.i-p64.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p65"></span>**6.** *The children of the foreigner who
shall be joined to Jehovah.* He repeats the same thing which he had
formerly said, that God will open the doors of his temple to all men
without distinction, so that there shall no longer be a distinction
between the Jew and the Greek. He declares that those whom God brings
into a state of friendship with himself by the word, which is the bond
of our adoption, are “joined to God.” This is “the betrothing in mercy
and faithfulness” which is mentioned by Hosea. (<span
id="ix.i-p65.1"></span>[Hos. 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020)<span id="ix.i-p65.1"></span>) Not
only does he grant to them a temple in which they may adore him as the
body of the people were wont to do, but he assigns to them a more
honorable rank, that they, nay minister to him; that is, God
acknowledges as priests or Levites those who were formerly heathens.

<span id="ix.i-p66"></span>*And that they may love the name of Jehovah.*
We must observe the end of the calling, which is here stated; for he
says that they shall be God’s ministers on condition that they love his
name. Thus hypocrites are here excluded; for the calling joins two
things together, that we serve God, and that our service be with a ready
and cheerful disposition of mind. There can be no worship of God, if we
do not willingly and readily yield obedience. What is said about alms,
that “God loveth a cheerful giver,” (<span id="ix.i-p66.1"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="ix.i-p66.1"></span>)
ought to be applied to every part of life, that we render to God willing
service.

<span id="ix.i-p67"></span>*Whosoever shall keep my Sabbath.* He again
mentions the Sabbath; and we have said that under this word is included
the whole worship of God. In observing it the people overlooked that
which was of the highest importance; for, by resting satisfied with
outward ceremony, they neglected the truth, that is, reformation of
life. The Lord enjoined them to rest in such a manner as to keep both
their hands and their minds from all crime and wickedness.

<span id="ix.i-p68"></span>*And shall embrace my covenant.* Here he
describes the zeal and steadfastness of those who submit themselves to
God and cleave to his word; and therefore, if we are joined to God by a
covenant, we ought to hold by it constantly, and adhere firmly to sound
doctrine, so that it may not be possible to withdraw or separate us from
him in any manner.

<span id="ix.i-p69"></span><span id="ix.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p70"></span>**7.** *These will I bring.* By these modes
of expression he describes what he had formerly stated, that foreigners
who were formerly excluded from the Church of God, are called to it; so
that henceforth the distinction between circumcision and uncircumcision
shall be abolished. This cannot refer to proselytes, who were received
into the number of God’s people by circumcision, for that would have
been nothing new or uncommon; but he testifies that the grace of God
shall be diffused throughout the whole world; and this cannot be
accomplished without uniting the Gentiles to the Jews so as to form one
body, which happened when the difference between circumcision and
uncircumcision was taken out of the way. There is therefore nothing now
to prevent Gentiles from ministering to God, seeing that they have been
called into the temple, that is, into the assembly of believers. Not
only so, but we saw a little before, that the priesthood is removed from
the tribe of Levi, not only to the whole body of the people, but even to
foreigners.

<span id="ix.i-p71"></span>How strongly the Jews abhor this sentiment is
well known; for, although they read these words of the Prophet, yet they
reckon it to be utterly monstrous that the Gentiles should be called to
this distinguished benefit of God which was especially intended for
them. Yet the Prophet’s meaning is so plain, that it cannot without the
greatest impudence be called in question. He extols this grace from the
fruit which it yields; for true and perfect happiness is, to be
reconciled to God and to enjoy his favor. We know, indeed, that wicked
men indulge excessively in mirth; but that mirth is turned into gnashing
of teeth, because the curse of God rests upon it. But God fills the
hearts of believers with the most delightful joy, not only by showing
that he is reconciled to them, but by the manifestation of his favor and
kindness in their prosperity. Yet their highest joy is that which
springs from “peace” of conscience, which Paul ascribes to “the kingdom
of God,” (<span id="ix.i-p71.1"></span>[Ro
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p71.1"></span>)
and which we enjoy when we are reconciled to God by Christ. (<span
id="ix.i-p71.2"></span>[Ro 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="ix.i-p71.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p72"></span>*Their burnt-offerings and sacrifices shall
be acceptable.* He promises that their sacrifices shall be acceptable to
him, because all have been called on this condition, that they shall
offer themselves and all that they have to God. By the word
“sacrifices,” he means such spiritual worship of God as is enjoined in
the Gospel; for the Prophet spoke in accordance with what was customary
in his time, when the worship of God was wrapped up in a variety of
ceremonies. But now, instead of sacrifices, we offer to God praises,
thanksgivings, good works, and finally ourselves. When he declares that
they shall be acceptable, let us not imagine that; this arises from
their own value or excellence, but from God’s undeserved kindness; for
he might justly reject them, if he looked at them in themselves. This
ought to be a spur to excite in us a strong desire to worship God, when
we see that our works, which are of no value, are accepted by God as if
they had been pure sacrifices.

<span id="ix.i-p73"></span>He adds, *On my altar;* because in no other
manner could the sacrifices be acceptable to God than “on the altar,” by
which “they were sanctified.” (<span id="ix.i-p73.1"></span>[Mt
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#019)<span id="ix.i-p73.1"></span>)
Thus all that we offer will be polluted, if it be not “sanctified” by
Christ, who is our altar.

<span id="ix.i-p74"></span>*For my house shall be called a house of
prayer.* Formerly the temple was appointed for the Jews alone, whom in
an especial manner the Lord desired to call upon him; for, when Paul
shows that the Jews have a superiority over the Gentiles, he says that
<span id="ix.i-p74.1"></span>λατρεία, that is, “the worship of God,” is
theirs. (<span id="ix.i-p74.2"></span>[Ro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p74.2"></span>) Thus
by an extraordinary privilege, such as the rest of the nations were not
permitted to enjoy, a temple was built among them. But now the
distinction has been removed, and all men, to whatsoever nation or place
they belong, are freely admitted into the temple, that is, into the
house of God. This temple has been enlarged to such a degree, that it
extends to every part of the whole world; for all nations have been
called to the worship of God.

<span id="ix.i-p75"></span>Here we have the manifest difference between
the Law and the Gospel; for under the Law the true worship of God was
observed by one nation only, for whose sake the temple was especially
dedicated to him; but now all are freely admitted without distinction
into the temple of God, that they may worship him purely in it, that is,
everywhere. We must attend to the form of expression, which is customary
and familiar to the Prophets, who employ, as we have already said,
figures that correspond to their own age, and, under the name of
“Sacrifices” and of “the Temple,” describe the pure worship of God. He
paints the spiritual kingdom of Christ, under which we may everywhere
“lift up pure hands,” (<span id="ix.i-p75.1"></span>[1Ti
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008)<span id="ix.i-p75.1"></span>) and
call upon God; and, as Christ saith, God is not now to be adored in that
temple, but “the true worshippers worship him in spirit and in truth.”
(<span id="ix.i-p75.2"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ix.i-p75.2"></span>)

<span id="ix.i-p76"></span>For this reason we see a fulfillment of this
plain prophecy, namely, that “to all peoples the house of God hath
become the house of prayer,” that all may “call upon him, Abba, Father,”
(<span id="ix.i-p76.1"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span id="ix.i-p76.1"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p76.2"></span>[Ga
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span id="ix.i-p76.2"></span>) that
is, in every language; that henceforth the Jews may not boast that they
alone have God. Thus the prophets were under a necessity of
accommodating their discourse to their own time, and to the ordinary
services of religion, that they might be understood by all; for the time
of full revelation was not yet come, but the worship of God was clothed
with various figures. Yet undoubtedly the temple, which had been
consecrated to the name of God, was actually his house; for he testified
by Moses that he would be in all places where he made mention of his
name, (<span id="ix.i-p76.3"></span>[Ex
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024)<span id="ix.i-p76.3"></span>)
and Solomon, at the dedication of the temple, said, “When they shall
come to pray in this house, thou wilt hear in heaven, in thy
habitation.” (<span id="ix.i-p76.4"></span>[1Ki
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030)<span id="ix.i-p76.4"></span>) And
accordingly Christ reproves the Jews for “turning his Father’s house
into a den of robbers,” (<span id="ix.i-p76.5"></span>[Mt
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013)<span id="ix.i-p76.5"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p76.6"></span>[Mr
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#017)<span id="ix.i-p76.6"></span>)
and connects this passage with a passage in the book of the Prophet
<span id="ix.i-p76.7"></span>[Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011)<span id="ix.i-p76.7"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p77"></span>Christ calls the temple “the house of
prayer,” with reference to that time when the Gospel had not yet been
published; for although he was come, he was not yet known, and the
ceremonies of the Law were not abolished. But when “the vail of the
temple was rent,” (<span id="ix.i-p77.1"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span id="ix.i-p77.1"></span>)
and pardon of sins was proclaimed, these applauses of the temple ceased
along with other ceremonies; for God began to be everywhere called upon
by “all peoples.”

<span id="ix.i-p78"></span>Yet it must here be observed that we are
called into the Church, in order that we may call on God; for in vain do
they boast who neglect prayer and true calling upon God, and yet hold a
place in the Church. In whatever place we are, therefore, let us not
neglect this exercise of faith; for we learn from the words of Isaiah,
as it is also said, (<span id="ix.i-p78.1"></span>[Ps
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p78.1"></span>)
that this is the highest and most excellent sacrifice which God demands;
so that the holiness of the temple consists in prayers being there
offered continually.

<span id="ix.i-p79"></span><span id="ix.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p80"></span>**8.** *The Lord Jehovah saith.* Isaiah again
confirms what he formerly testified as to the restoration of the people;
for although he extolled in lofty terms the grace of God, by which he
would deliver his people, yet the condition of the Church was such that
promises of this kind appeared to be ridiculous. Such repetitions,
therefore, are not superfluous, but were necessarily added in order to
strengthen feeble minds, that they might be fully convinced of that
which was otherwise incredible.

<span id="ix.i-p81"></span>*Who gathereth the outcasts of Israel.* It is
with reference to the subject in hand that he bestows on God this title;
for it belongs to him to gather a scattered church, and the same words,
“he gathereth the outcasts of Israel,” are used here in the same sense.
(<span id="ix.i-p81.1"></span>[Ps
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p81.1"></span>)
Thus he promises that he will assemble them, and not them only, but that
he will add to them various “peoples,” that the Church may be very
numerously increased and multiplied. Whenever therefore we are drawn by
various calamities of the Church to doubt as to his gathering them
together, we ought to interpose this shield: “It belongeth to the Lord
to gather the dispersed of Israel; and, though they are widely dispersed
and scattered, yet he will easily and perfectly restore them.”

<span id="ix.i-p82"></span>*Still more will I gather upon him his
gathered.* I willingly keep by the literal meaning of the words of the
Prophet. <span id="ix.i-p82.1"></span>על *(gnal)* that is, “To,’ or
“Upon;“ for he appears to me to have in view what he had said in the
former verse, that the temple would be opened to all peoples; and he
means that he will yet add many others to the Jews who have been
gathered. This actually happened; for not only did he gather the
dispersed in Babylon, but he also gathered other dispersions, which were
frequent and almost of daily occurrence. Nor has he ever ceased to
gather; so that he has added a large mass to those who have been
gathered.

<span id="ix.i-p83"></span><span id="ix.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p84"></span>**9.** *All ye beasts of the field.* This
prediction appears to be at variance with what goes before; for what the
Prophet has hitherto said was full of the most delightful consolation,
but now he appears to threaten fiercely, and to predict frightful ruin.
These statements might indeed appear to be contradictory; but, after
having comforted believers, it ought not to be thought inconsistent if
he forewarn them of a future calamity that they might not lose courage
when they saw everything near destruction, and that necessity might
likewise prompt them to betake themselves more warmly and earnestly to
the grace of God. There is also another reason, that hypocrites abuse
the promises of God and hold them out under false pretenses, cherish
unfounded hope, and insolently boast of those things which do not at all
belong to them; and therefore Isaiah intended to take from them the
ground of false boasting.

<span id="ix.i-p85"></span>And thus his design was twofold; first, that
the hearts of believers might not be discouraged by various calamities,
which should bring them almost, to utter destruction, and that even
when, amidst prosperity and peace, they beheld by faith at a distance a
future calamity, they might rest satisfied with this single consolation;
and secondly, that he might strike hypocrites with dread and horror, so
that they might not exalt themselves by vain confidence, or freely
indulge their sinful inclinations under the pretense of these promises.
For this reason God calls not men, but savage “beasts,” that they might
devour the people. He therefore forbids believers to be alarmed and
tempted to unbelief, when these wild beasts shall be sent. And yet he
intended also to strike terror into them, that he might arouse them to
repentance, and to exhort them to seek the mercy of God, that the
promises might not lose their value.

<span id="ix.i-p86"></span>When he calls them “beasts *of the field*,”
he means beasts of every kind, and includes not only the Babylonians and
Assyrians, but Antiochus, the Romans, and other enemies of the people,
who brought various calamities upon them. But he has chiefly in view the
defeat which they received from the Babylonians, who carried them away
into wretched bondage.

<span id="ix.i-p87"></span><span id="ix.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p88"></span>**10.** *Her watchmen are blind.* He now
assigns the reason why the people must be destroyed. It is because they
are governed by wicked princes and pastors; not that he wishes to throw
the blame on them alone, and thinks that the people are innocent, but
because this was the beginning of the evil. We are not exempted from
blame, if we follow blind guides, but, on the contrary, are justly
punished for our transgressions; for the Lord takes away good guides
from those whom he intends to punish for their ingratitude.

<span id="ix.i-p89"></span>By the word “Watchmen”  <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) he means not only the prophets, to whom
was committed the office of teaching, but likewise judges, princes, and
kings, who ought to have governed everything in a proper manner. He
includes both kinds of government, that of princes, and that of the
ministers of the word, whom the Lord has placed, as the two eyes in the
body, to govern the Church. Consequently, if they are wicked or
unfaithful, there cannot arise a more destructive plague to a
commonwealth.

<span id="ix.i-p91"></span>*All are ignorant.* First, he reproaches them
with want of knowledge; for, as it is the chief excellence of a good
shepherd to know his duty, that he may judge what is profitable and what
is pernicious to the flock, and to watch laboriously, and to stand, as
it were, on a watch­tower, that he may promote their safety in every
respect, so nothing is more inconsistent with that office than ignorance
and blindness. No man, therefore, will be a good shepherd, unless he
understands the right method of governing the people. And hence we see
what we ought to think of the idols of our time, who haughtily and
insolently boast of the name of shepherds or pastors; for they are
untaught and ignorant beasts.

<span id="ix.i-p92"></span>*All are dumb dogs.* By calling them,
secondly, “dumb dogs,” he charges them with slothfulness and
indifference; for, since it is the duty of a good shepherd to be
industrious and careful, when he calls them slothful and indifferent, he
shows that they had nothing about them that ought to belong to a
shepherd. Thus, when we are deprived of good shepherds, and when lazy or
even savage beasts come in their room, let us acknowledge God’s wrath,
and let us know that destruction is not far off; for the Prophet
threatens and foretells the ruin of the people, when shepherds are
“dumb.”

<span id="ix.i-p93"></span>Hence also it follows, that God appoints them
to discharge the office of “dogs,” that is, to keep watch, to drive away
robbers and thieves, and not to permit them to enter into the fold. And
if dogs are so faithful guardians and so warmly attached to their
masters, that they continually watch for their safety, and do not cease
to drive away, by barking, those from whom danger is apprehended,
shepherds, when they give themselves up to sloth and drowsiness, ought
to be ashamed of being surpassed by a brute beast.

<span id="ix.i-p94"></span><span id="ix.i-p94.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p95"></span>**11.** *And those dogs strong of appetite.*
The third vice which he remarks in wicked pastors is insatiable avarice.
Though they are lazy in all that relates to good government, yet they
have a strong and ravenous appetite for food. Some view the Prophet’s
words as still more extensive, and as meaning that they rule
tyrannically. Ezekiel expressly reproves them for this vice; for false
prophets are commonly fierce, and act cruelly and barbarously towards
the people of God. (<span id="ix.i-p95.1"></span>[Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004)<span id="ix.i-p95.1"></span>) But
if any person examine the matter carefully, he will perceive that the
Prophet speaks of their insatiable avarice, which he afterwards
describes by a variety of expressions.

<span id="ix.i-p96"></span>*They look to their ways.* That is, “They
attend eagerly to their own affairs; every person consults his own
advantage.” In short, he means that there is no man who does not wish to
be preferred to others, as if every man had been born for himself.

<span id="ix.i-p97"></span>*Every one to his gain from his end.*  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) <span id="ix.i-p98.5"></span>מקצהו
(*mikkatzehu*) has received various expositions. Some render it, “In his
end,” that is, “In his affairs;” as if the reading had been, <span
id="ix.i-p98.6"></span>בקצהו, (*bekatzehu*) But this does not agree with
the Prophet’s meaning. Others render it, “From the end of his avarice.”
I think that a more simple interpretation is, “From his end,” that is,
“On his part;“ or as we commonly say, (<span
id="ix.i-p98.7"></span>*Chacun en son endroict*,) “Every one in his
place.” Thus every one is bent on avarice, and draws and appropriates
everything to himself, and consults his own advantage, without attending
to the duties of his office.

<span id="ix.i-p99"></span>Hence we learn, that no man can serve God who
is given up to wicked desires; and he who shall labor to amass wealth,
will not apply his mind to build up the Church of the Lord. No kind of
blindness can be more dangerous than avarice; and so much the more ought
it to be avoided by pastors, if they wish to be faithful servants of
God. When we see the Prophet complaining of the bad pastors of his time,
let us not be alarmed if we meet with the same thing in the present day,
and let us not look upon it as an unusual occurrence that so few are
earnestly employed in the work of the Lord.

<span id="ix.i-p100"></span><span id="ix.i-p100.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p101"></span>**12.** *Come ye, I will fetch wine.* After
having spoken of the avarice and carelessness of pastors, he points out
their desperate wickedness and obstinacy; for he represents them as
speaking,  <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) and brings forward
their hard­hearted speeches, from which it is evident that they could
not be brought back to the right path by any admonitions or
threatenings, but fearlessly despised them all. In another passage the
Prophet quoted the words of scorners, who, when the servants of God
exhorted them to sackcloth and ashes, invited each other to feasting and
drinking. “Let us eat and drink; for tomorrow we shall die.” (<span
id="ix.i-p102.1"></span>[Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013)<span id="ix.i-p102.1"></span>)
Why do those prophets annoy us? It will never fare well with us, if we
give ear to them. (<span id="ix.i-p102.2"></span>[Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015)<span id="ix.i-p102.2"></span>) A
similar complaint is here repeated by Isaiah, that the pastors held out
obstinately and seared themselves against the judgments of God.

<span id="ix.i-p103"></span>Nor does he merely reprove them for drinking
*wine and strong drink*, which in itself is not sinful, but for that
mental drunkenness and brutality by which men haughtily and insolently
despise the word of God. In other passages drunkenness and the abuse of
wine are condemned; but here the Prophet exclaims against the madness
and insolence with which pastors exalted themselves against God, and
trampled under foot all threatenings, warnings, reproofs, and, in short,
all religion. Yet there can be no doubt that he reproves the gross and
shameful wickedness of burying reflection, as if on purpose, by excess
of wine and feasting, that no shame or fear, no reverence for God or
men, might disturb their repose; as ungodly persons do all they can to
stupefy themselves by unlawful pleasures, that they may more daringly,
and with less reserve, abandon themselves to wickedness.

<span id="ix.i-p104"></span>It is a shocking and monstrous sight to
behold such contempt of God and of religion, not in foreigners, not in
the common people, but in governors and princes themselves, who ought to
have instructed others by their example, in that sacred order which bore
the image of Christ; for both kings and priests bore his likeness and
image. How intolerable this pride is, by which men furiously oppose the
word, is well known. We are ruined and undone, when this medicine, which
is the last, is rejected by us; for we do not permit the Lord to lead us
back into the right path.  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) For
this reason he has threatened in another passage that “this wickedness
shall not be expiated.” (<span id="ix.i-p105.2"></span>[Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)<span id="ix.i-p105.2"></span>)
Thus he rebukes the height of impiety; and it is of great importance for
us to weigh carefully the words which follow —

<span id="ix.i-p106"></span>*As today, so tomorrow.* That is, “If it is
well with us today, it shall be well tomorrow. Let us not be miserable
before the time.”  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) He describes
their aggravated guilt, in treating with mockery God’s gentleness and
forbearance, and assuring themselves that they would escape punishment,
as if God were asleep or enjoyed luxurious ease in heaven, whenever he
suspended his judgments. By such diabolical proverbs, do men, even in
the present day, labor to soothe and even to fascinate their
consciences, that they may more fully wallow in every kind of pleasures,
and indulge in their iniquities and crimes. That we may not fall,
therefore, under this terrible judgment of the Lord, let every one
examine himself, and perceive at a distance the wrath of God, that it
may not attack us suddenly and unprepared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc16008.htm#fr_92) <span
id="ix.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p30"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, Vol. 1, pp. 56, 57

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc16008.htm#fr_93) <span
id="ix.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p33"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p33.1"></span>Admonneste les
fideles.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc16008.htm#fr_94) <span
id="ix.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p36"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p36.1"></span>Ausquels la
grace a este faite.” “To whom grace hath been given.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc16008.htm#fr_95) <span
id="ix.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p44"></span> “The essential meaning of this verse is,
that all external disabilities shall be abolished, whether personal or
national. To express the latter, he makes use of the phrase <span
id="ix.i-p44.1"></span>בן נכר, (*ben nekar*,) which strictly means not
‘the son of the stranger,’ as the common version has it, but ‘the son of
strangeness,’ or ‘of a strange country;’ <span
id="ix.i-p44.2"></span>נכר (*nekar*) corresponding to the German <span
id="ix.i-p44.3"></span>*Fremde*, which has no equivalent in English. ­
*Alexander*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc16008.htm#fr_96) <span
id="ix.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p54"></span> “According to the Law, (<span
id="ix.i-p54.1"></span>[De 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#001)<span
id="ix.i-p54.1"></span>) eunuchs could not be received into the Hebrew
nation; so that their situation, in that respect, was the same as that
of the foreigners who were formerly mentioned. Of what use (might such a
person say) are those splendid promises to me, who cannot be admitted
into the Jewish commonwealth?” — *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc16008.htm#fr_97) <span
id="ix.i-p54.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p55"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p55.1"></span>Toutes les
marques exterieures.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc16008.htm#fr_98) <span
id="ix.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p63"></span> “A place and name more excellent than that
which comes from children.” ­ *Doederlein*.  
“More excellent and longer lived than that name which the fathers of
families procure for themselves by the succession of posterity.” ­
*Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc16008.htm#fr_99) <span
id="ix.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p90"></span> “The prophets are called ‘Watchmen,’ (<span
id="ix.i-p90.1"></span>[Jer 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017)<span
id="ix.i-p90.1"></span>; <span id="ix.i-p90.2"></span>[Ezek.
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017), [Ezek.
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007)<span id="ix.i-p90.2"></span>; <span
id="ix.i-p90.3"></span>[Isa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008)<span
id="ix.i-p90.3"></span>) because it is their duty to see far, and to
look out, and carefully to observe the evils, and the causes of the
evils which may be pernicious to the people. The metaphor is drawn from
guards or military sentinels, who, being placed on the watch-towers of
fortified cities, carefully attend to everything that may bring mischief
on the city.” ­ *Rosenmuller*.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc16008.htm#fr_100) <span
id="ix.i-p97.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p98"></span> “From his quarter.” (Eng. Ver.) “Heb. ‘this
extremity,’ his quarter, be it ever so remote; that is, universally.” ­
*Stock*.  
“Literally, ‘From his extremity.’ Jerome correctly renders it, ‘From
first to last,’ that is, without any exception; and that is the meaning
which the word bears in <span id="ix.i-p98.2"></span>[Gen.
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004), [Gen.
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p98.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.i-p98.3"></span>[Eze
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002)<span id="ix.i-p98.3"></span>.” ­
*Rosenmuller*.  
“All to a man.” ­ *Doederlein*.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc16008.htm#fr_101) <span
id="ix.i-p101.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p102"></span> “Thus they spoke one to another.” ­
*Jarchi*.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc16008.htm#fr_102) <span
id="ix.i-p104.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p105"></span> “<span id="ix.i-p105.1"></span>Au bon
chemin.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc16008.htm#fr_103) <span
id="ix.i-p106.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p107"></span> “Thus, in all probability, these drunken
guardians of the people said, in derision of the prophets, who were
continually threatening them with destruction. They tell us of imminent
danger and strange calamities which hang over our heads. But mind them
not. Let us cheer our hearts with wine, and drown the thoughts of such
improbable chimeras. Let us take our pleasure today, and never doubt but
tomorrow we shall be full as merry, and so on for many years.” —
*White*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 57](cc16009)
