[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16012)  [Next](cc16014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiv"></span>

<span id="xiv-p1"></span>CHAPTER 61.

<span id="xiv.i"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
61:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001.md)<span id="xiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** The Spirit of the Lord GOD *is* upon
me; because the LORD hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the
meek; he hath sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to *them that are* bound;

<span id="xiv.i-p3"></span>**1.** Spiritus Domini Iehovae super me; ob
id unxit me Iehova; ad praedicandum afflictis misit me; ad obligandum
contritos corde, ad publicandam captivis libertatem, vinctis apertionem
careeris.

<span id="xiv.i-p4"></span>**2.** To proclaim the acceptable year of the
LORD, and the day of vengeance of our God; to comfort all that mourn;

<span id="xiv.i-p5"></span>**2.** Ad publicandum annum beneplaciti
Iehovae, et diem ultionis Deo nostro, ad consolandum onmes lugentes.

<span id="xiv.i-p6"></span>**3.** To appoint unto them that mourn in
Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning,
the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness; that they might be
called trees of righteousness, the planting of the LORD, that he might
be glorified.

<span id="xiv.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ad constituendum lugentibus in Sion,
ut dem illis decorem pro cinere, oleum gaudii pro luctu, pallium
laetitiae pro spiritu angusto, ad vocandum eos arbores justitiae,
plantationem Iehovae ad glorificandum.

<span id="xiv.i-p8"></span>**4.** And they shall build the old wastes,
they shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the
waste cities, the desolations of many generations.

<span id="xiv.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et aedificabunt deserta seculi,
priscas solitudines erigent; et instaurabunt urbes vastitatis,
solitudines multarum aetatum.

<span id="xiv.i-p10"></span>**5.** And strangers shall stand and feed
your flocks, and the sons of the alien *shall be* your ploughmen and
your vinedressers.

<span id="xiv.i-p11"></span>**5.** Et stabunt alieni, et pascent oves
vestras; et filii alieni erunt agricolae et vinitores vestri.

<span id="xiv.i-p12"></span>**6.** But ye shall be named the Priests of
the LORD: *men* shall call you the Ministers of our God: ye shall eat
the riches of the Gentiles, and in their glory shall ye boast
yourselves.

<span id="xiv.i-p13"></span>**6.** Vos autem sacerdotes Iehovae
vocabimini; ministri Dei nostri dicetur vobis; substantiam Gentium
comedetis, et in gloria eorum vos elevabitis.

<span id="xiv.i-p14"></span>**7.** For your shame *ye shall have*
double, and *for* confusion they shall rejoice in their portion:
therefore in their land they shall possess the double: everlasting joy
shall be unto them.

<span id="xiv.i-p15"></span>**7.** Pro pudore vestro erit duplex
praemium, et pro ignominia exultabunt de portione eorum; quia in terra
eorum duplicia possidebunt, et gaudium perpetuum illis erit.

<span id="xiv.i-p16"></span>**8.** For I the LORD love judgment, I hate
robbery for burnt offering; and I will direct their work in truth, and I
will make an everlasting covenant with them.

<span id="xiv.i-p17"></span>**8.** Quia ego Iehova diligens judicium,
odio habens rapinam in holocausto, et constituam opus eorum in veritate,
et foedus perpetuum feriam eum ipsis.

<span id="xiv.i-p18"></span>**9.** And their seed shall be known among
the Gentiles, and their offspring among the people: all that see them
shall acknowledge them, that they *are* the seed *which* the LORD hath
blessed.

<span id="xiv.i-p19"></span>**9.** Et cognoscetur in Gentibus semen
eorum, et germina eorum in medio populorum. Omnes qui viderint eos
cognoscent eos quod semen sint benedictum Iehovae..

<span id="xiv.i-p20"></span>**10.** I will greatly rejoice in the LORD,
my soul shall be joyful in my God; for he hath clothed me with the
garments of salvation, he hath covered me with the robe of
righteousness, as a bridegroom decketh *himself* with ornaments, and as
a bride adorneth *herself* with her jewels.

<span id="xiv.i-p21"></span>**10.** Gaudens gaudebo in Iehova; exultabit
anima mea in Deo meo; quoniam induit me vestibus salutis, indumento
justitiae circumdedit me: quasi sponsum ornavit me, et quasi sponsam
ornatam monilibus suis.

<span id="xiv.i-p22"></span>**11.** For as the earth bringeth forth her
bud, and as the garden causeth the things that are sown in it to spring
forth; so the Lord GOD will cause righteousness and praise to spring
forth before all the nations.

<span id="xiv.i-p23"></span>**11.** Quoniam sicut terra profert germen
suum, et sicut hortus germinare facit semen suum; ita Dominus Iehova
germinare faciet justitiam et laudem coram omnibus gentibus.

<span id="xiv.i-p24"></span> 

<span id="xiv.i-p25"></span><span id="xiv.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p26"></span>**1.** *The Spirit of the Lord Jehovah.* As
Christ explains this passage with reference to himself, (<span
id="xiv.i-p26.1"></span>[Lu 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p26.1"></span>) so commentators limit it to him without
hesitation, and lay down this principle, that Christ is introduced as
speaking, as if the whole passage related to him alone. The Jews laugh
at this, as an ill­advised application to Christ of that which is
equally applicable to other prophets. My opinion is, that this chapter
is added as a seal to the former, to confirm what had hitherto been said
about restoring the Church of Christ; and that for this purpose Christ
testifies that he has been anointed by God, in consequence of which he
justly applies this prophecy to himself; for he has exhibited clearly
and openly what others have laid down ill an obscure manner.

<span id="xiv.i-p27"></span>But this is not inconsistent with the
application of this statement to other prophets, whom the Lord has
anointed; for they did not speak in their own name as individuals, or
claim this authority for themselves, but were chiefly employed in
pointing out the office of Christ, to whom belongs not only the
publication of these things, but likewise the accomplishment of them.
This chapter ought, therefore, to be understood in such a sense, that
Christ, who is the Head of the prophets, holds the chief place, and
alone makes all those revelations; but that Isaiah, and the other
prophets, and the apostles, contribute their services to Christ, and
each performs his part in making known Christ’s benefits. And thus we
see that those things which Isaiah said would be accomplished by Christ,
have now been actually accomplished.

<span id="xiv.i-p28"></span>*On that account Jehovah hath anointed me.*
This second clause is added in the room of exposition; for the first
would have been somewhat obscure, if he had said nothing as to the
purpose for which he was endued with the Spirit of God; but now it is
made far more clear by pointing out the use, when he declares that. he
discharges a public office, that he may not be regarded as a private
individual. Whenever Scripture mentions the Spirit, and says that he
“dwelleth in us,” (<span id="xiv.i-p28.1"></span>[Ro
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span id="xiv.i-p28.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p28.2"></span>[1Co
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p28.2"></span>.md)
let us not look upon it as something empty or unmeaning, but let us
contemplate his power and efficacy. Thus, after having spoken of the
Spirit of God, the Prophet next mentions the “anointing,” by which he
means the faculties which flow from him, as Paul teaches that the gifts
are indeed various, but the Spirit is one. (<span
id="xiv.i-p28.3"></span>[1Co 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#004.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p28.3"></span>)

<span id="xiv.i-p29"></span>This passage ought to be carefully observed,
for no man can claim right or authority to teach unless he show that he
has been prompted to it by the Spirit of God, as Paul also affirms that
“no man can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p29.1"></span>[1Co 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p29.1"></span>) But, it will be said, we see that almost all
men boast of having the Spirit of God; for the Pope, and the
Anabaptists, and other heretics and fanatics, have his name continually
in their mouth, as if they were governed by him. How, then, shall we
judge that any man has been sent by God, and is guided by his Spirit? By
“anointing;“ that is, if he is endued with the gifts which are necessary
for that orate. If therefore, having been appointed by the Lord, he
abound in the graces of the Spirit and the ability which the calling
demands, he actually has the Spirit. And if he wish to make profession
of enjoying that teacher, and if he have no doctrine,  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164.md) let him be held as an impostor.

<span id="xiv.i-p31"></span>*He hath sent me to preach.* The Prophet
does not claim for himself right and authority to teach, before he has
shown that the Lord “hath sent him” The authority is founded on his
having been “anointed,” that is, furnished by God with necessary gifts.
We ought not to hear him, therefore, as a private individual, but as a
public minister who has come from heaven.

<span id="xiv.i-p32"></span>*To the afflicted.* Some render it, “To the
meek;“ and both ideas are conveyed by the word <span
id="xiv.i-p32.1"></span>ענוים (*gnanavim*). But I preferred to adhere to
the former signification, because the Prophet is speaking of captives
and prisoners. Yet I think that he includes both; for he means those
who, while they are altogether forsaken and abandoned, are also wretched
in themselves. Christ is promised to none but those who have been
humbled and overwhelmed by a conviction of their distresses, who have no
lofty pretensions, but keep themselves in humility and modesty. And
hence we infer that Isaiah speaks literally of the Gospel; for the Law
was given for the purpose of abasing proud hearts which swelled with
vain confidence, but the Gospel is intended for “the afflicted,” that
is, for those who know that they are destitute of everything good, that
they may gather courage and support. For what purpose were prophets, and
apostles, and other ministers, anointed and sent, but to cheer and
comfort the afflicted by the doctrine of grace?

<span id="xiv.i-p33"></span>*To bind up the broken in heart.* Numerous
are the metaphors which the Prophet employs for explaining more clearly
the same thing. By “binding up,” he means nothing else than “healing,”
but now he expresses something more than in the preceding clause; for he
shows that. the preaching of the word is not an empty sound, but a
powerful medicine, the effect of which is felt, not by obdurate and
hard­hearted men, but by wounded consciences.

<span id="xiv.i-p34"></span>*To proclaim liberty to the captives.* This
also is the end of the Gospel, that they who are captives may be set at
liberty. We are prisoners and captives, therefore, till we are set free
(<span id="xiv.i-p34.1"></span>[Joh
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#036)<span id="xiv.i-p34.1"></span>.md)
through the grace of Christ; and when Christ wishes to break asunder our
chains, let us not refuse the grace that is offered to us. It ought to
be observed in general, that the blessings which are here enumerated are
bestowed upon us by heavenly doctrine, and that none are fit for the
enjoyment of them but those who, conscious of their poverty, eagerly
desire the assistance of Christ, as he himself says,

<span id="xiv.i-p35"></span>“Come to me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden,  
and I will relieve you.” (<span id="xiv.i-p35.2"></span>[Mt
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)<span id="xiv.i-p35.2"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p36"></span><span id="xiv.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p37"></span>**2.** *To proclaim the year of the
good-pleasure of Jehovah.* Here he expressly mentions the time of
bestowing such distinguished grace, in order to remove the doubts which
might arise. We know by daily experience how numerous and diversified
are the anxious cares which distract the heart,. He affirms that he is
the herald of future grace, the time of which he fixes from the
“good­pleasure” of God; for, as he was to be the Redeemer of the Church
by free grace, so it was in his power, and justly, to select the time.

<span id="xiv.i-p38"></span>Perhaps he alludes to the Jubilee, (<span
id="xiv.i-p38.1"></span>[Le 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p38.1"></span>) but undoubtedly he affirms that we must wait
calmly and gently till it please God to stretch out his hand. Paul calls
this year “the time of fullness.” (<span id="xiv.i-p38.2"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="xiv.i-p38.2"></span>.md) We
have likewise seen that the Prophet says, “Behold, now is the accepted
time; behold, now is the day of salvation.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p38.3"></span>[Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p38.3"></span>) Paul applies this to his own preaching; for,
while the Lord addresses us by the Gospel, the door of heaven is thrown
open to us, that we may now, as it were, enter into the possession of
God’s benefits. (<span id="xiv.i-p38.4"></span>[2Co
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#002)<span id="xiv.i-p38.4"></span>.md) We
must not delay, therefore, but must eagerly avail ourselves of the time
and the occasion when such distinguished blessings are offered to us.

<span id="xiv.i-p39"></span>*And the day of vengeance to our God.* But
those expressions appear to be inconsistent with each other, namely,
“The day of good­pleasure,” and “The day of vengeance.” Why did Isaiah
join together things so opposite? Because God cannot deliver his Church
without showing that he is a just judge, and without taking vengeance on
the wicked. He therefore employs the term “good­pleasure,” with
reference to the elect, and the term “day of vengeance,” with reference
to the wicked, who cease not to persecute the Church, and consequently
must be punished when the Church is delivered. In like manner Paul also
says, that “It is righteous with God to grant relief to the afflicted,
(<span id="xiv.i-p39.1"></span>[2Th
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)<span id="xiv.i-p39.1"></span>.md) and
to reward the enemies of believers who unjustly afflict them;” and the
Jews could not expect a termination of their distresses till their
enemies had been destroyed.

<span id="xiv.i-p40"></span>Yet we ought to observe the cause of our
deliverance; for to his mercy alone, and not to our merits, or
excellence, or industry, must it be ascribed, he appears, indeed, as I
briefly remarked a little before, to allude to the Jubilee; but above
all things we should attend to this, that our salvation lies entirely in
the gracious will of God.

<span id="xiv.i-p41"></span>*To comfort all that mourn.* We ought to
keep in remembrance what we formerly remarked, that the end of the
Gospel is, that we may be rescued from all evils, and that, having been
restored to our former freedom, and all tears having been wiped from our
eyes, we may partake of spiritual joy. And if we are not partakers of so
great a benefit, it must be ascribed to our unbelief and ingratitude, by
which we refuse and drive away God, who freely offers himself to us.

<span id="xiv.i-p42"></span><span id="xiv.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p43"></span>**3.** *To appoint to the mourners in Zion.*
He proceeds with the same subject; for he means that the punishment
which was to be inflicted on the people shall be such as still to leave
room for forgiveness. And, in order more fully to convince them of it,
he says that the Lord has charged him with this office, that he may
proclaim this deliverance; and not to himself only, but also to others,
till the chief messenger arrive, namely, Christ, who actually bestows
and exhibits what God at that time commanded to be made known for a
future period. Yet he means that the “mourning” shall not hinder God
from giving ground of joy, when he shall think proper; for “to appoint”
has the same meaning as “to fix the time,” that the tediousness of delay
may not discourage them.

<span id="xiv.i-p44"></span>*That I may give to them beauty for ashes.*
By the word, *give* he speaks with commendation of the efficacy of the
prediction, that they may be fully convinced of the event. The allusion
is to the ancient customs of the Jews, who, when any calamity pressed
hard upon them, sprinkled ashes on their heads, and wore sackcloth.
(<span id="xiv.i-p44.1"></span>[Es
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003)<span id="xiv.i-p44.1"></span>.md) By
these he denotes the filth and mourning which necessarily attend the
wretched condition of the people, and contrasts them with the joy and
gladness which they shall have when they are restored to liberty. I
think that we ought not to pass by the allusion contained in the words
<span id="xiv.i-p44.2"></span>פאר (*peer*) and <span
id="xiv.i-p44.3"></span>אפר (*epher;*) for, by the mere transposition of
letters, he intended to denote very different things, and, by an elegant
inversion, a change of condition.

<span id="xiv.i-p45"></span>*Trees of righteousness.* By these words he
points out the restoration of the people; as if he had said, “Whereas
they had formerly been rooted out and resembled a dry stock, they shall
be planted and settled.” Thus he reminds them that they ought to
contemplate the divine power, so that, though they are slain and dead,
still they may confidently hope that they shall be restored so as to
take root and to receive strength and increase. From this ought to be
drawn a universal doctrine, namely, that there is no other way in which
we are restored to life than when we are planted by the Lord. We are
indeed called his “planting,” because he elected us from the beginning.
(<span id="xiv.i-p45.1"></span>[Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004)<span id="xiv.i-p45.1"></span>.md) But
there is also another kind of “planting” which follows the former,
namely, the Calling, by which we are ingrafted through faith into
Christ’s body. The Lord does this by the agency and ministry of the
Gospel; but it must be wholly ascribed to him, for “it is he alone that
giveth the increase.” (<span id="xiv.i-p45.2"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p45.2"></span>.md) We
must always bear in mind the emblematical meaning of the first
deliverance as illustrating the spiritual kingdom of Christ,.

<span id="xiv.i-p46"></span>He gives the appellation of “trees of
righteousness” to those in whom the justice of God or good order shines
forth. Yet let us know that the Lord adopts us on this condition, that
we shall become new creatures, and that true righteousness shall reign
in us. And hence it follows that we are by nature depraved and
corrupted, and cannot yield fruit in any other way than by being changed
and planted by the Lord. This sets aside the vain and haughty opinion of
the Papists, who, by contriving either preparations or the aids of free
will, claim what belongs to God alone; for if we are planted by the
Lord, it follows that we are by nature dry and unfruitful.

<span id="xiv.i-p47"></span>*To glorify him.* This is the design of our
“planting;“ but we have already spoken of these things in expounding the
twenty-first verse of the preceding chapter.

<span id="xiv.i-p48"></span><span id="xiv.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p49"></span>**4.** *And they shall build the deserts of
the age.* He goes on to describe more largely that restoration of the
Church; and chiefly with this view, that the Jews may entertain
confident hope of deliverance, because those promises appeared to be
altogether incredible. And this is the reason why he adorns with
extensive and magnificent terms that benefit of redemption. It is a
mistake to suppose that these words, “the age” and “many ages, relate to
a future period; as if he had said that the building of which he speaks
shall be firm and permanent. The Prophet’s meaning was widely different;
for he shows (as I have explained at another passage) that the
long­continued ruins of the city shall not prevent it from rising anew.
When the inhabitants of any city, scattered in all directions, have been
absent for a very long time, there can be no hope of rebuilding it; just
as no person in the present day takes any concern about rebuilding
Athens. Thus, when the Jews had been banished into a distant country,
and Jerusalem had been forsaken for seventy years, who would have hoped
that it would be built by the citizens themselves?

<span id="xiv.i-p50"></span>For this reason Isaiah employs the
designations of “deserts of the age, ancient wildernesses, cities of
desolation, wildernesses of many ages,” in order to show that all this
cannot prevent the Lord from restoring the city to be inhabited by his
elect at the proper time. Yet these statements ought also to be
accommodated to our time, so that, although the Lord permits his Church,
when it has fallen down, to lie long in ruins, and though there is no
remaining hope of rebuilding it, yet we may strengthen our heart by
these promises; for it is God’s peculiar office to raise up and renew
what had formerly been destroyed, and devoted as it were to eternal
rottenness. But we have formerly treated of these matters at the
fifty­eighth chapter.

<span id="xiv.i-p51"></span><span id="xiv.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p52"></span>**5.** *And strangers shall stand.* He means
that foreigners and strangers shall be ready to yield obedience to them;
for, in consequence of their being at that time separated from the rest
of the nations, none was willing to assist them, and therefore he says
that “strangers stand;“ that is, are ready to meet and assist them. As
to what follows, about “feeding sheep” and “cultivating fields and
vines,” these are metaphorical expressions; for the Prophet treats of
the kingdom of Christ, which is spiritual, but by means of these figures
describes its perfect happiness, that we may understand it better from
examples drawn from those things which are known to us. Let us therefore
understand that we shall be truly happy when Christ shall exercise his
dominion over us; for in this way shall we likewise obtain, beyond
expectation, many advantages of which the children of Adam are justly
deprived.

<span id="xiv.i-p53"></span><span id="xiv.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p54"></span>**6.** *But ye shall be called the priests
of Jehovah.* This verse sheds somewhat more light on the preceding; for
in the second part of it the Prophet foretells that believers shall
enjoy the riches of the Gentiles, and shall be raised to glory as their
successors. The Jews, indeed, seize eagerly on such declarations, and
already devour by covetousness the wealth of all the nations, as if they
would one day possess it, and vaunt as if the glory of the whole world
would become their own.

<span id="xiv.i-p55"></span>But there are chiefly two things that ought
to be observed in these words, that we may more fully understand them.
First, the prophets, when they wish to describe the glory and happiness
of the Kingdom of Christ, borrow comparisons from human affairs.
Secondly, when they speak of the Church, they connect the Head with the
members in such a manner that sometimes they look more at the Head than
at the members. We must not understand the enjoyment of the wealth of
others to mean that they who are converted to Christ shall seize on the
wealth, or glory, or rank of others, which is most inconsistent with
true religion; but because all things shall be brought under the
dominion of Christ, so that he alone shall hold authority and rule. And
that is what I have already said, that he looks both at the members and
the Head. But when they come into the power of Christ, they are called
ours, because Christ possesses nothing separate from his Church.

<span id="xiv.i-p56"></span>In the same manner it is said elsewhere,
(<span id="xiv.i-p56.1"></span>[Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)<span id="xiv.i-p56.1"></span>.md)
that the enemies of Christ “shall kiss his feet and supplicate pardon,”
although this is done in the Church, in which they acknowledge Christ
and yield to his doctrine. Thus Isaiah shows what the Father will give
to the Son, who has lawful authority over the whole world, (<span
id="xiv.i-p56.2"></span>[Mt 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p56.2"></span>) and to whom

<span id="xiv.i-p57"></span>“all things must be made subject.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>[Heb 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#008.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p57.1"></span>)

<span id="xiv.i-p58"></span>Yet we must not omit what I mentioned a
little before, that God gives large and kind support to his elect in the
world, in order that they may feel that their condition is far better
than that of unbelievers; for, though they are in want of many things,
yet, being content with a little, they cheerfully give thanks to God, so
that their hunger is better than all the abundance of unbelievers.

<span id="xiv.i-p59"></span>*Priests of Jehovah.* By this term he shows
that the condition of the people shall be far more excellent than
formerly; as if he had said, “Hitherto the Lord had chosen you to be his
heritage; but he will adorn you with gifts much more excellent, for he
will elevate you to the honor of the priesthood.” Although the whole
people was “a kingdom of priests,” (<span id="xiv.i-p59.1"></span>[Ex
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md)<span id="xiv.i-p59.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p59.2"></span>[De
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#010)<span id="xiv.i-p59.2"></span>.md)
yet we know that the tribe of Levi only discharged this office; but the
Prophet declares that in future it shall be common to all. This was not
manifested but under the reign of Christ. The restoration of the Church,
indeed, began at the time when the people returned from Babylon; but at
the coming of Christ believers were at length adorned and honored by
this dignity; for all the saints have been consecrated to Christ, and
discharge that office. To this belong the words of Peter,

<span id="xiv.i-p60"></span>“Ye are a holy nation, a royal priesthood.”
(<span id="xiv.i-p60.1"></span>[1Pe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009)<span id="xiv.i-p60.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p61"></span>What is the nature of this kind of
priesthood ought to be carefully observed; for we must no longer offer
to God earthly sacrifices,  <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) but
men must be offered and slain in obedience to Christ, as Paul declares
that he slew the Gentiles by the sword of the Gospel, that thenceforth
they might obey the Lord.  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166.md)
(<span id="xiv.i-p63.1"></span>[Ro
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#016)<span id="xiv.i-p63.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p64"></span>Hence infer how childish is the folly of the
Papists, who abuse this passage to prove their priesthood; for the Pope
and his lackeys ordain priests to sacrifice Christ, not to teach the
people. But Christ offered himself “by eternal redemption,” (<span
id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>[Heb 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p64.1"></span>) and he alone has once exercised this
priesthood, and commands that the priest of the sacrifice shall be
offered to us by the doctrine of the Gospel. Those persons, therefore,
who usurp this office, and wish to repeat what he has completed, are
guilty of sacrilege.

<span id="xiv.i-p65"></span>But every person ought to offer himself,
(<span id="xiv.i-p65.1"></span>[Ro
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001)<span id="xiv.i-p65.1"></span>.md)
and all that he has, in sacrifice to God, that he may exercise this
lawful priesthood; and next, ministers, who have been specially called
to this office of teaching, ought to make use of the sword of the word
to slay men and consecrate them to God. Lastly, those are lawful
ministers who do not of themselves attempt or undertake anything, but
faithfully and diligently execute the commands which they have received
from God.

<span id="xiv.i-p66"></span><span id="xiv.i-p66.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p67"></span>**7.** *Instead of your shame.* He confirms
the former statement, in which he said that believers who, clothed with
sackcloth and covered with ashes, mourned, shall be sprinkled with the
oil of gladness. This change of mourning into joy is again promised.

<span id="xiv.i-p68"></span>*There shall be a double reward.* Some
interpret the word double as meaning that they who have been redeemed by
God shall be happy both before God and before men. But I do not know
that there are solid grounds for that interpretation. I choose rather to
adopt a more simple view; as if the Prophet had said, “The prosperity of
the Church shall be so great as togo far beyond all the calamities and
afflictions by which she is now oppressed.” If, therefore, she is now
weary of her condition, she ought to look to that day when she shall be
most happy, as Paul contrasts “an eternal weight of glory” with “the
momentary lightness of afflictions.” (<span id="xiv.i-p68.1"></span>[2Co
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017)<span id="xiv.i-p68.1"></span>.md)

<span id="xiv.i-p69"></span>*And instead of disgrace they shall rejoice
in their portion.* Wicked men vaunt over us and indulge in wantonness,
because they think that they have the superiority; but the Lord promises
that ere long he will cause good men, rescued from their tyranny, to
obtain their portion. This began to be done, indeed, when the people
returned from captivity; but a clearer proof has been exhibited in
Christ, and is exhibited every day, and will at length be completed at
his last coming, when all things shall be fully renewed, and the wicked
shall be thrown down, that we may obtain the inheritance of the world.
This is the reason why he says, by way of acknowledgment, that the earth
is the portion of those wicked men; for they now boast that they are the
lords of the world, but they shall at length feel that it belongs
peculiarly and specially to the children of God.

<span id="xiv.i-p70"></span>*And they shall have everlasting joy.* This
may relate to the outward condition of the Church; ibr he daily supplies
his people with ground of thanksgiving; but as they must also devour
many griefs, and are surrounded by manifold sorrow, this prediction is
not fulfilled but when joy of spirit reigns and holds the pre-eminence
in our hearts, accompanied by that “peace which (as Paul says) surpasses
all understanding,” (<span id="xiv.i-p70.1"></span>[Php
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p70.1"></span>,.md)
which the children of God alone enjoy when they have the testimony of
adoption, He calls it everlasting, in order to shew how greatly it
differs from the joy of wicked men, which is momentary and quickly
passes away, and is even changed into “gnashing of teeth.” (<span
id="xiv.i-p70.2"></span>[Mt 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p70.2"></span>.)

<span id="xiv.i-p71"></span><span id="xiv.i-p71.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p72"></span>**8.** *For I Jehovah love judgment.* He not
only confirms what he promised in the name of the Lord, but likewise
exhorts the Jews to repent, and shews whence they ought to expect
salvation, and what and how great is the Judge with whom we have to do;
for lie reasons from the nature of God in what manner they ought to
regulate their life, that they may not by their wickedness reject the
grace that is offered to them.

<span id="xiv.i-p73"></span>Under the word *judgment* he includes all
that is just and equitable; for he contrasts this word with the useless
inventions of the Jews, by which they thought that they satisfied God,
and at the same time concealed their malice. The Lord cares not, as we
have often seen, for such masks and vain pretences, but demands true
cleanness of heart and hands pure from all unrighteousness. He who
wishes to obtain the approbation of God for himself and for all that he
does must have an upright heart and an unblemished life.

<span id="xiv.i-p74"></span>*And hate robbery in the burnt-offering.* By
a single part he figuratively denotes all hypocritical worship of God;
and under “burnt-offering” is included every kind of sacrifice. Nothing
is more abominable than when men, from cheating and robbery, sacrifice
to God, or when they mingle their lies, hypocrisy, and impurity of
heart, with their sacrifices, or corrupt the worship of God by basely
defrauding him. This vice abounds not only in a single age, but at all
times; for all men pretend to worship God, and even the wicked are
ashamed of not having an appearance of religion, the impression of a
Divine Ruler being so deeply engraven on the hearts of all that it
cannot be erased. Yet the greater park of men sport with God, and
endeavor to satisfy him by childish trifles.

<span id="xiv.i-p75"></span>Isaiah therefore condemns and abhors this
hypocrisy, and teaches that the Lord demands from us “mercy rather than
sacrifice.” (<span id="xiv.i-p75.1"></span>[Ho
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md)<span id="xiv.i-p75.1"></span>;
<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>[Matt.
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md), [Matt.
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#007)<span id="xiv.i-p75.2"></span>..md)
We cannot worship God in a right manner, if we do not observe the Second
Table, and abstain from all dishonesty and violence; for he who defrauds
or injures his neighbors does violence also to God. In a word, the
design of the Prophet is to teach what is the true character of
repentance; namely, when, laying aside hypocrisy, and dismissing all
inventions, the worshippers of God cherish natural kindness to one
another.

<span id="xiv.i-p76"></span>*And I will establish their work in truth.*
Some explain it to mean the “reward.” of work. But I rather think that
it denotes all the undertakings of life, to which the Lord promises a
prosperous issue. The undertakings of men succeed very ill; because they
do not choose to ask counsel of God, or attempt anything under his
guidance. Thus they are justly punished for their rashness; because they
trust in their own counsels, or depend on a blind stroke of fortune, in
which there is no reality whatever, but only a deceitful shadow. But
that they who are guided by the Spirit of God, and who commit themselves
wholly to his protection, should succeed prosperously and to their wish,
is not at all wonderful; for all prosperity flows from his blessing
alone.

<span id="xiv.i-p77"></span>By the word *truth* is meant a uniform
course; for even unbelievers are often puffed up with transitory joy,
but it speedily vanishes away.

<span id="xiv.i-p78"></span>*And will make an everlasting covenant with
them.* In the conclusion of the verse he assigns the cause of the
stability. It is because God is pleased not once only to stretch out his
hand to them, but to be the continual guide of the journey. And the true
support of our perseverance is, that he deigns to enter into an
everlasting covenant with us, in which he voluntarily makes himself our
debtor, and freely bestows upon us all things, though he owes us nothing
whatever.

<span id="xiv.i-p79"></span><span id="xiv.i-p79.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p80"></span>**9.** *And their seed shall be known among
the Gentiles.* Here the Prophet treats more clearly of the extension of
the Church, which at that time might be said to be confined within a
narrow corner of the earth, and afterwards, as we have already seen, was
exceedingly diminished and impaired. (<span
id="xiv.i-p80.1"></span>[Isa. 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009.md),
[Isa. 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p80.1"></span>.) Isaiah therefore discourses concerning the
Church, which, after having suffered so great a diminution, would be
spread throughout the whole world, so as to be visible to all the
nations. And yet this did not happen even in the reign of Solomon, when
the Jews flourished most in wealth and splendor. (<span
id="xiv.i-p80.2"></span>[1 Kings
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#021.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027)<span id="xiv.i-p80.2"></span>..md)
Now this appeared to be altogether incredible; and that is the reason
why the prophets take such pains to convince men of it, and repeat it
very frequently, that the Jews may not measure this restoration by their
own understanding or by the present appearance of things.

<span id="xiv.i-p81"></span>A question now arises, When did these things
happen? I reply (as I have often done before) that they began when the
people returned to their native country; for at that time, and in
uninterrupted succession, they experienced the manifold kindness of God
towards them. But as nothing more than feeble sparks appeared, the full
brightness shone forth in Christ, in whose reign those things are
entirely accomplished; for where there was the utmost barrenness of
godliness, the offspring of Abraham sprouted, because foreigners were
ingrafted by faith into the elect people. Thus foreign and barbarous
nations acknowledged that the Jews were the blessed seed of God, (<span
id="xiv.i-p81.1"></span>[Ge 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p81.1"></span>,) when they united with them in the same
confession of faith; nor was this fulfilled but once only, but is in
course of being fulfilled every day.

<span id="xiv.i-p82"></span>As to the Jews going before, and holding the
first rank in God’s covenant, this ought to be ascribed to the mercy of
God, and not to their own excellence, as Paul (<span
id="xiv.i-p82.1"></span>[Ro 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002.md)<span
id="xiv.i-p82.1"></span>) teaches; for, after having shown that by
nature they differ nothing at all from the Gentiles, and after having
subjected them to the same condemnation, he likewise teaches that they
hold this privilege of pre-eminence, because they were the very first
that received the word of God and the promises. But this proceeded from
God’s undeserved kindness, and not from their merits or excellence.

<span id="xiv.i-p83"></span><span id="xiv.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p84"></span>**10.** *Rejoicing I shall rejoice in
Jehovah.* He represents the Church as giving thanks to God, in order to
convince them more fully of the truth of what he formerly said. It may
be regarded as (<span id="xiv.i-p84.1"></span>ὑποτύτωσις) a lively
description, by which the thing is, as it were, painted and laid before
the eyes of men, so as to remove all doubt; for by nature we are prone
to distrust, and so fickle, that we place confidence rather in the
inventions of men than in the word of God. As to this form of
confirmation, we have spoken at chapter 12:1; 26:1, and at other
passages.

<span id="xiv.i-p85"></span>*For he hath clothed me.* These things were
still, indeed, at a great distance, but must have been seen and
understood by the eyes of faith; as the eyes should undoubtedly be
raised to heaven, when the Prophet discourses concerning salvation and
righteousness. Nothing is visible here, and much less could so great
happiness have been perceived by the senses, while everything tended to
destruction. But because even now we do not see any such beauty of the
Church, which is even contemptible in the eyes of the world under the
revolting dress of the cross, we need faith, which comprehends heavenly
and invisible things.

<span id="xiv.i-p86"></span>*With the garments of salvation.* He
connects “righteousness” with “salvation,” because the one cannot be
separated from the other. “Garments” and “mantles” are well-known
metaphors. It is as if he had said, that righteousness and salvation had
been bestowed upon them. Since the Lord bestows these benefits, it
follows that from him alone we should seek and expect them.

<span id="xiv.i-p87"></span>*He hath adorned me.* The metaphor is
supposed to be drawn from priestly ornament; and accordingly there are
some who speculate here about the priesthood of Christ. But I do not
think that the Prophet spoke so ingeniously; for he brings forward the
comparison of the bridegroom and the bride  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167.md) Formerly the Church lay in filth and
rags, and was universally despised, as a forsaken woman; but now, having
been received into favor with her husband, she shines with amazing
lustre. A parallel passage occurs in <span id="xiv.i-p88.3"></span>[Ho
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020.md)<span id="xiv.i-p88.3"></span>.
This was accomplished at the coming of Christ; but it is also bestowed
upon us daily, when the Lord adorns his people with righteousness and
salvation. But all these things, as we have often said already, shall be
accomplished at Christ’s last coming.

<span id="xiv.i-p89"></span><span id="xiv.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p90"></span>**11.** *For as the earth putteth forth.* By
a beautiful comparison the Prophet confirms the former promises; for he
reminds the Jews of the ordinary power of God, which shines brightly in
the creatures themselves. The earth every year puts forth her bud, the
gardens grow green after the sowing time, and, in short, herbs and
plants, which appear to be dead during the winter, revive in the spring
and resume their vigor. Now these are proofs and very clear
illustrations of the divine power and kindness toward us; and since it
is so, ought men to doubt of it? Will not he who gave this power and
strength to the earth display it still more in delivering his people?
And will he not cause to bud the elect seed, of which he promised that
it should remain in the world for ever?

<span id="xiv.i-p91"></span>*Before all the nations.* He again shews
that the boundaries of the Church shall no longer be as narrow as they
formerly were, for the Lord will cause her to fill the whole world.

<span id="xiv.i-p92"></span>*Will cause righteousness and praise to
spring forth,* He mentions “righteousness,” which was fully displayed
when the Lord redeemed his people; but the righteousness of God was
chiefly seen, when Christ was manifested to the world; not that God kept
his righteousness concealed till that time, but that men did not know
it. It is, as if he had said, “God will deliver and restore his people
in such a manner that all shall acknowledge him to be righteous.” For
redemption is a striking proof of the justice of God.

<span id="xiv.i-p93"></span>He next mentions *praise*; because such a
benefit ought to be accompanied by thanksgiving. The end of
“righteousness” is, that glory may be given to God; and therefore he
exhorts us to gratitude; for it is exceedingly base to be dumb after
having received God’s benefits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc16013.htm#fr_164.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p30"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p30.1"></span>S’il veut
contrefaire le docteur, et n’a doctrine ni savoir.” “If he wishes to
counterfeit the teacher, and has not any doctrine or knowledge.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc16013.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p61.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p62"></span> “<span id="xiv.i-p62.1"></span>Il ne faut
plus offrir a Dieu des bestes brutes.” “We must no longer offer to God
brute beasts.”

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc16013.htm#fr_166.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p62.2"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p63"></span> See our author’s exposition of that
remarkable passage. ­ *Ed*.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc16013.htm#fr_167.md) <span
id="xiv.i-p87.1"></span>

<span id="xiv.i-p88"></span> “‘As a bridegroom halloweth himself with
ornament,’ that is, maketh himself respectable, as a priest in his
secret vestments.” — *Stock.  
*“The reference is, no doubt, to the sacerdotal mitre, which was
probably regarded as a model of ornamental head-dress, and to which
<span id="xiv.i-p88.2"></span>פאר *(peer)* is explicitly applied.” —
*Alexander.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 62](cc16014.md)
