[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc16015)  [Next](cc16017.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 16: Isaiah, Part IV*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 64.

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Isaiah
64:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001.md)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Oh that thou wouldest rend the
heavens, that thou wouldest come down, that the mountains might flow
down at thy presence,

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span>**1.** O si (*vel, Si forte*) disrumpas
coelos; descendas, et a facie tua montes diffluant!

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span>**2.** As *when* the melting fire burneth,
the fire causeth the waters to boil; to make thy name known to thine
adversaries, *that* the nations may tremble at thy presence!

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Tanquam incendio ignis
liquefactionum, ignis aquas ebullire fecit, ad manifestandum nomen tuum
hostibus tuis; a fade tua gentes tremebant.

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span>**3.** When thou didst terrible things
*which* we looked not for, thou camest down, the mountains flowed down
at thy presence.

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Cum faceres terribilia, quae non
expectavimus, descendisti; a fade tua montes defluxerunt.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span>**4.** For since the beginning of the world
*men* have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither hath the eye
seen, O God, besides thee, *what* he hath prepared for him that waiteth
for him.

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span>**4.** A seculo non audirerunt, neque
auribus perceperunt; oculus non vidit Deum praeter to, qui faciat (*vel,
Dens quae facit*) expectanti se.

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**5.** Thou meetest him that rejoiceth and
worketh righteousness; *those that* remember thee in thy ways: behold,
thou art wroth; for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we
shall be saved.

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Occurristi laetanti et facienti
justitiam. In viis tuis recordabantur tui.; ecce tu iratus es, et nos
peecavimus; in ipsis seculum, et salvabimur (*vel, saluti sumus*).

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>**6.** But we are all as an unclean
*thing*, and all our righteousnesses *are* as filthy rags; and we all do
fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span>**6.** Et fuimus quasi immundus nos omnes,
et tanquam vestimentum inquinatum omnes justitiae nostrae. Et decidimus
instar folii onmes nos; et iniquitates nostrae, quasi ventus,
abstulerunt nos.

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**7.** And *there is* none that calleth
upon thy name, that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee: for thou
hast hid thy face from us, and hast consumed us, because of our
iniquities.

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span>**7.** Non est qui invocet nomen tuum, nee
qui se excitet ut to apprehendat; quia abscondisti faciem tuam a nobis,
et tabescere nos fecisti in manu iniquitatis nostrum.

<span id="xvii.i-p16"></span>**8.** But now, O LORD, thou *art* our
father; we *are* the clay, and thou our potter; and we all *are* the
work of thy hand.

<span id="xvii.i-p17"></span>**8.** Et nune, Iehova, tu es pater noster;
nos lutum, et tu figulus noster; opus, inquam, manuum tuarum sumus
omnes.

<span id="xvii.i-p18"></span>**9.** Be not wroth very sore, O LORD,
neither remember iniquity for ever: behold, see, we beseech thee, we
*are* all thy people.

<span id="xvii.i-p19"></span>**9.** Ne irascaris, Iehova, ultra modum;
ne in seculum memineris iniquitatis. Ecce respice, quaeso; nos omnes
populus tuus sumus.

<span id="xvii.i-p20"></span>**10.** Thy holy cities are a wilderness,
Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.

<span id="xvii.i-p21"></span>**10.** Urbes sanctitatis tuae fuerunt
desertum; Sion desertum fuit, Ierusalem solitudo.

<span id="xvii.i-p22"></span>**11.** Our holy and our beautiful house,
where our fathers praised thee, is burned up with fire: and all our
pleasant things are laid waste.

<span id="xvii.i-p23"></span>**11.** Doritos sanctuarii nostri, et
gloriae nostrae, in qua to celebrarunt patres nostri, fuit in
combustionem ignis; et omnia nostra desiderabilia in vastationem.

<span id="xvii.i-p24"></span>**12.** Wilt thou refrain thyself for these
*things*, O LORD? wilt thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very sore?

<span id="xvii.i-p25"></span>**12.** An super his to continebis, Iehova?
Tacebis, et affliges nos ultra modum?

<span id="xvii.i-p26"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p27"></span><span id="xvii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p28"></span>**1.** *O that thou wouldest rend the
heavens!* The particle <span id="xvii.i-p28.1"></span>לוא (*lu*) appears
to me, in this passage, to denote a wish; for, although it has many
significations, yet the context shews that this signification is more
appropriate to this passage than any other. Here believers burst forth
into earnest prayer, as usually happens, when in sore adversity we do
not find plain terms to be sufficiently forcible for our purpose.

<span id="xvii.i-p29"></span>God is said to “rend the heavens,” when he
unexpectedly gives some uncommon and striking proof of his power; and
the reason of this mode of expression is, not only that men, when they
are hard pressed, commonly look up to heaven, from which they expect
assistance, but that miracles, by interrupting the order of nature, open
up for themselves an unusual path. Now, when God renders no assistance,
he appears to be shut up in heaven, and to disregard what is taking
place on earth. For this reason he is said to open and “rend the
heavens,” when he holds out to us some testimony of his presence;
because otherwise we think that he is at a great distance from us.

<span id="xvii.i-p30"></span>*That thou wouldest come down*. This
expression, like the former, is adapted to the estimation of our flesh;
for God does not need to move from one place to another, but
accommodates himself to us, that we may understand those subjects
better.  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184.md) (<span
id="xvii.i-p31.2"></span>[Gen. 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#005.md),
[Gen. 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#021.md)<span
id="xvii.i-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="xvii.i-p32"></span>*Let the mountains flow down.* That is,

<span id="xvii.i-p33"></span>“Let thy majesty be openly displayed, and
let the elements, struck by the perception of it, yield and obey.”
(<span id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>[Ps
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p33.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvii.i-p34"></span>This will appear more plainly from what
immediately follows.

<span id="xvii.i-p35"></span><span id="xvii.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p36"></span>**2.** *As by the burning of a melting
fire,*  <span id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185.md) the fire hath made the
water to boil. All this might be read either in the future or in the
subjunctive; as if he had said, “O Lord, if thou camest down, the
nations would tremble at thy presence; thine enemies would instantly be
melted away.” But I think that the translation which I have given is
more simple; for it is very certain that the Prophet here alludes to
Mount Sinai, where the Lord openly revealed himself to the people. Hence
we see also the gross absurdity of the division of this chapter;  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186.md) since those events are related in
support of that prayer which ought rather to have been placed at the
beginning of the chapter.  <span id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187.md)

<span id="xvii.i-p40"></span>We have formerly seen that the prophets,
when they relate that God assisted his people, bring forward an instance
in the history of redemption.  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188.md)
Whenever therefore the prophets mention this history, they include all
the benefits that were ever bestowed by God on his people; not only when
he delivered them from the tyranny of Pharaoh, when he appeared to them
in Mount Sinai, but also when, during forty years, he supplied them with
all that was necessary in the wilderness, when he drove out their
enemies, and led them into the possession of the land of Canaan. In a
word, they include all the testimonies by which he formerly proved
himself to be gracious to his people and formidable to his enemies.

<span id="xvii.i-p42"></span>He says that “the melting fire made the
waters boil,” because, contrary to custom, fire and lightning were
mingled with violent showers; as if he had said that the fire of God
melted the hardest bodies, and that the waters were consumed by its
heat. To the same purpose is what he adds, that “the mountains flowed at
his presence;” for he opened up a passage for his people through the
most dreadful obstacles.

<span id="xvii.i-p43"></span><span id="xvii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p44"></span>**3.** *Terrible things which we did not
look for.* He says that the Israelites saw what they did not at all
expect; for, although God had forewarned them, and had given them
experience of his power in many ways, yet that alarming spectacle of
which he speaks goes far beyond our senses and the capacity of the human
mind.

<span id="xvii.i-p45"></span><span id="xvii.i-p45.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p46"></span>**4.** *From of old they have not heard.*
This verse confirms what has been already said, that believers do not
here ask anything strange or uncommon, but only that God may shew
himself to be to them what he formerly shewed himself to be to the
fathers, and that he may continue to exercise his kindness, and that,
since he has been wont to assist his people, and to give them undoubted
tokens of his presence, he may not cease in future to cause his strength
and power to shine forth more and more brightly. He represents believers
as praying to God in such a manner that they strengthen themselves by
the remembrance of the past, and betake themselves; with greater courage
to God’s assistance.

<span id="xvii.i-p47"></span>*Eye hath not seen a God besides thee.* The
Prophet’s design unquestionably is, to celebrate God’s immense goodness,
by relating the numerous benefits which he bestowed upon his people in
ancient times; and this kind of praise is highly magnificent, when,
rising to rapturous admiration, of them, he exclaims that there is no
God besides him, and that those things which the Lord has carried into
effect for the sake of his people are unheard-of and uncommon. But there
are two ways in which these words may be read, for <span
id="xvii.i-p47.1"></span>אלהים (*elohim*) may either be in the
accusative or in the vocative case. “O Lord, no one hath seen besides
thee what thou doest for them that wait for thee.” But another reading
is more generally approved, “No one hath ever seen or ever heard of such
a God.” Yet in this reading we must supply the particle of comparison,
as; for otherwise the sentence would be incomplete. The verb <span
id="xvii.i-p47.2"></span>יעשה (*yagnaseh*) is put absolutely, “No ear
hath heard, and no eye hath seen, such a God as doeth such things.” And
thus God is distinguished from idols, from which superstitious men
imagine that they obtain all good things; for they are the mere
inventions of men, and can do neither good nor harm, seeing that God
bestows on his worshippers benefits of every kind.

<span id="xvii.i-p48"></span>Paul appears to explain this passage
differently, and to torture it to a different purpose, and even quotes
it in different words, that is, because he followed the Greek version.
(<span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>[1Co
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="xvii.i-p48.1"></span>..md)
In this respect the Apostles were not squeamish; for they paid more
attention to the matter than to the words, and reckoned it enough to
draw the attention of the reader to a passage of Scripture, from which
might be obtained what they taught. As to the addition which Paul
appears to have made of his own accord, “Nor hath entered into the heart
of man what God hath prepared for them that love him,” he did so for the
purpose of explanation; for he added nothing that does not fully agree
with the Prophet’s doctrine.

<span id="xvii.i-p49"></span>That we may understand better how
thoroughly he agrees with the Prophet, we must understand his design. In
that passage he treats of the doctrine of the Gospel, which he
demonstrates to surpass the capacity of the human understanding; for it
contains knowledge that is widely different and far removed from the
perception of our flesh, and, in short, is “hidden wisdom,” so that Paul
is justly led to view it with astonishment. And as the Prophet, when he
takes into consideration the wonderful acts of God’s kindness, exclaims,
like one who is lost in amazement, that nothing like this was ever heard
of; so, in the most excellent of all benefits, namely, that in which
Christ is offered to us by the Gospel, we may exclaim in the same
manner, “O Lord, what thou bestowest on thy people exceeds all the
capacity of the human mind: no eye, no ear, no senses, no mind can reach
such loftiness.” Thus Paul applies this passage admirably to his
reasoning, and does not make an improper use of the statement made by
the Prophet when he elevates above the world that peculiar grace which
God bestows on his Church.

<span id="xvii.i-p50"></span>There remains but one difficulty, namely,
that Paul applies to spiritual blessings what the Prophet here says
about blessings of a temporal nature. But we may say that Isaiah here
looks merely at the cause of God’s benefits, though he has in his eye
the condition of the present life; for all the benefits that we receive
from God, for the sake of food and nourishment, are proofs of his
fatherly kindness toward us; and it is the peculiar excellence of faith,
to rise from visible favors to those which are invisible. Although
therefore the Prophet appears to speak of external deliverance and other
benefits of this life, yet he rises higher, and looks chiefly at those
things which belonged especially to the people of God. What stupidity
would it be, if, while we enjoy God’s benefits, we did not consider the
fountain itself, that is, his fatherly kindness! Ordinary favors are
enjoyed indiscriminately by the good and the bad; but that favor with
which he embraces us belongs especially to citizens. The consequence is,
that we do not merely observe those things which fall under the senses
of men, but contemplate the cause itself. Although therefore neither
eyes nor ears reach so far as to comprehend the grace of adoption, by
which the Lord testifies that he is our Father, yet he reveals it by the
testimony of his Spirit.

<span id="xvii.i-p51"></span>It is even probable that the Prophet, when
he spoke of a particular instance of God’s kindness, was elevated, by
means of it, to a general reflection; for, in considering God’s works,
it was frequent and customary for good men to pass from a single
instance to the whole class. In that way might this single but
remarkable instance of the divine goodness raise the mind of the Prophet
to so high a pitch as to meditate on that infinite abundance of
blessings which is laid up for believers in heaven. We even see clearly
that this commendation includes the gracious covenant by which God
adopted the children of Abraham into the hope of eternal life. (<span
id="xvii.i-p51.1"></span>[Ge 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007.md)<span
id="xvii.i-p51.1"></span>.) What has been said amounts to this: “Seeing
that the goodness and power of God are so great, we have no reason to
distrust him; but we ought to place our confidence in him, so as to hope
that he will assuredly assist us.” And such is the design of those
excellent benefits which are here mentioned by the Prophet.

<span id="xvii.i-p52"></span><span id="xvii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p53"></span>**5.** *Thou hast met.* He proceeds with
the same subject; for the people deplore their hard lot, that they feel
no alleviation in their adversity, although formerly God was wont to
stretch out the hand to the fathers. Believers, therefore, speak in this
manner: “Thou wast wont to meet our fathers; now thy face is turned away
from us; and thou appearest to be irreconcilable:, because we gain
nothing by calling on thee. Whence comes this diversity, as if thy
nature had been changed, and thou wert now different from what thou hast
been?” They next add, and make an acknowledgment, that they are punished
justly, because “they have sinned.” I have formerly stated that nothing
is better in adversity than to remember God’s benefits, and not only
those which we have ourselves experienced, but likewise those which are
related in Scripture; for we cannot be armed by a stronger shield
against temptations of every kind.

<span id="xvii.i-p54"></span>This verse, in my opinion, is inaccurately
explained by those who think that we ought to read those words as
closely connected, *Him that rejoiceth and doeth righteousness,* as if
he had said, “Thou hast met them that willingly serve thee, and whose
highest pleasure is to do what is right.” I think that rejoicing denotes
here those who were glad in prosperity; for at that time the people were
in sadness and mourning. There is an implied contrast. “Formerly thou
wast wont to meet the fathers, before they were distressed by any
affliction, and to cheer them by thy approach; now thou art far distant,
and permittest us to languish in mourning and grief.”

<span id="xvii.i-p55"></span>*In thy ways they remembered thee.* In
accordance with what he has now said, he adds that they “remembered
God,” because they enjoyed his present grace, and felt that he was the
author and director of their salvation; and so by “the ways of God,” he
means prosperity; either that in this way he was near to them, when he
treated them softly and gently as his children, or because God is by
nature inclined to acts of kindness. But since he said that God was wont
to “meet him that doeth righteousness,” the “remembrance” may relate to
the practice of piety, that is, that they devoted themselves earnestly
to the worship of God; and so it will be an explanation of the former
clause, for the prophets frequently confirm by a variety of expressions
what they have formerly said. To “remember” God, is to be captivated by
the pleasant remembrance of him, so that we shall desire nothing more,
and to place all our happiness in him. There is nothing that delights us
more than the remembrance of the mercy of God; and, on the other hand,
if we feel that God is angry, the mention of him fills us with alarm.

<span id="xvii.i-p56"></span>*And we have sinned.* The reason is
assigned; for, when they find that God is so unlike what he formerly
was, they do not murmur against him, but throw all the blame on
themselves. Let us learn from this, that we ought never to think of the
chastisements which the Lord inflicts, without at the same time calling
to mind our sins, that we may confess that we are justly punished, and
may acknowledge our guilt.

<span id="xvii.i-p57"></span>*In them is perpetuity.* In this passage
<span id="xvii.i-p57.1"></span>עולם (*gnolam*) denotes nothing else than
“long duration;” but it may refer either to “sins” or to “the ways of
the Lord.” To sins it may refer in this way, “Though we obstinately
persisted in our sins, and deserved that thou shouldst destroy us a
thousand times, yet hitherto we have been saved by thy mercy.” If we
understand it to relate to “the ways of the Lord,” it will assign the
reason why the people did not perish, because “the ways of the Lord” are
steadfast and perpetual, and his mercy never comes to an end; and that
meaning appears to me to agree best with this passage. Some supply the
words, that “the age,” or “perpetuity,” is founded on the ways of the
Lord. But I prefer to take the words in their literal acceptation, as
when David says that the Lord “is not angry but for a moment,” (<span
id="xvii.i-p57.2"></span>[Ps 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#005.md)<span
id="xvii.i-p57.2"></span>,) that he is easy to be reconciled, and always
compassionate; for his anger is not suddenly kindled, or with immoderate
rage, after the manner of men, but he is unchangeable in benevolence and
favor.

<span id="xvii.i-p58"></span>*And we shall be saved,* or, *we have been
saved* We have not yet got at the whole of the Prophet’s statement; for
he says that the people “are saved,” although they had been led into
captivity, as into a grave, and deplored their calamity. On that account
I consider the preterite to be put for the future, for it is rather a
wish or a prayer than an affirmation. Nor do the saints boast that they
have obtained salvation, but, deploring their misery, they betake
themselves to God’s everlasting mercy; and consequently, they praise
that which they wish, and not that which they have already obtained.

<span id="xvii.i-p59"></span><span id="xvii.i-p59.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p60"></span>**6.** *We have all been as the unclean.*
The believers go on in their complaint; for they deplore their
condition, because God appears to take no account of them. Hebrew
writers are not agreed as to the meaning of the words <span
id="xvii.i-p60.1"></span>בגד עדים (*beged* *gniddim*.)  <span
id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189.md) Yet it is certain that it denotes
something which is vile and worthless, and which, on account of its
filthiness, stinks in the noses of men. But here two things ought to be
observed; first, that believers confess their guilt, and are justly
punished for it; and, secondly, that they nevertheless complain of the
severity of the punishments which they endure, not to blame God, but to
move him to compassion; just as a culprit, when he endeavors to mitigate
the severity of a judge, lays before him his own distresses and
calamities. Some commentators torture this passage, by alleging that the
Prophet, when he speaks of the pollutions of sins, describes all Jews
without exception, though there still remained some of them who were
sincere worshippers of God. But there are no good grounds for this; for
the Prophet does not speak of individuals, but of the whole body, which,
being trodden under foot by all men, and subjected to the utmost
indignity, he compares to a filthy garment.

<span id="xvii.i-p62"></span>There are some who frequently quote this
passage, in order to prove that so far are our works from having any
merit in them, that they are rotten and loathsome in the sight of God.
But this appears to me to be at variance with the Prophet’s meaning, who
does not speak of the whole human race, but describes the complaint of
those who, having been led into captivity, experienced the wrath of the
Lord against them, and therefore, acknowledged that they and their
righteousnesses were like a filthy garment. And first, he exhorts them
to a confession of their sin, that they may acknowledge their guilt; and
next, that they should nevertheless ask pardon from God, the manner of
obtaining which is, that, while we complain that we are wretched and
distressed, we at the same time acknowledge that we are justly punished
for our sins.

<span id="xvii.i-p63"></span>*And we all fade as a leaf.* This is a very
beautiful comparison, which shews that men utterly fade and decay when
they feel that God is angry with them; as is admirably described in
<span id="xvii.i-p63.1"></span>[Ps.
90:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#006.md), [Ps.
103:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#016.md)<span id="xvii.i-p63.1"></span>
 <span id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190.md) Justly, therefore, are we
compared to leaves; for “our iniquities, like the wind, carry us away.”

<span id="xvii.i-p65"></span><span id="xvii.i-p65.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p66"></span>**7.** *There is none that calleth on thy
name.* He confirms what was formerly said; for he exhorts believers,
even though God’s punishment of them appears to be severe, still to
believe that they deserve such a punishment. Heinous sins are mentioned
by him; and though it would be tedious to go over all of them in detail,
he points out the fountain itself, and says that the worship of God is
neglected. Under the word “calleth on,” he includes, as is customary in
Scripture, the whole worship of God; for the most important part of
God’s worship is to “call upon” him, and to testify our confidence in
him. Prayers and supplications, undoubtedly, were always practiced among
them; but, because the heart was far removed, he reckons all pretended
ceremonies as of no value.

<span id="xvii.i-p67"></span>*Or that stirreth up himself to take hold
of thee*. He now explains more clearly the former clause, by saying that
no one earnestly applies his mind, or gives his endeavor to seek God,
but that all are consumed and wasted away through their own
slothfulness. And first, he shews that nothing is more desirable than to
be perfectly joined to God; for, when we are alienated from him,
everything must go ill with us. We are indolent and sluggish by nature;
and therefore we need to have spurs applied to us. Seeing that by nature
we indulge our slothfulness, we must listen to the advice of the Prophet
so as not to become utterly stupid; for, otherwise he in his turn will
reject us, or contemptuously drive us away. The Prophet describes the
miserable condition of the people, in which there was no desire to seek
God, and no means were used to stir up the heart to godliness.

<span id="xvii.i-p68"></span>*Thou hast made us to languish.* They again
complain that they are overwhelmed by the severity of distress, and
obtain from God no alleviation; for Isaiah asserts these things in the
name of the whole people, and prays to God not to permit them any longer
to languish amidst so great miseries.

<span id="xvii.i-p69"></span><span id="xvii.i-p69.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p70"></span>**8.** *And now, O Jehovah.* After having
complained of their miseries, by which they were almost overwhelmed,
they now more openly ask pardon from God and a mitigation of their
distresses, and with greater boldness plead with God that still they are
his children. Adoption alone could encourage them to cherish favorable
hopes, that they might not cease to rely on their Father, though
overwhelmed by the load of afflictions. And this order should be
carefully observed; for, in order that we may be truly humbled in our
hearts, we need to be cast down, and laid low, and almost crushed. But
when despair seizes us, we must lay hold on this altar of consolation,
that, “since God has been pleased to elect us to be his children, we
ought to expect salvation from him, even when matters are at the worst.”
Thus, with a view to the gracious covenant, the Israelites affirm that
they are the children of God, in order that they may experience his
fatherly kindness, and that his promise may not be made void.

<span id="xvii.i-p71"></span>*We are the clay, and thou our potter*. By
means of a comparison they magnify the grace of God, and acknowledge
that they were formed of despicable clay; for they do not seek the
ground of superiority in themselves, but in their origin celebrate the
mercy of God, who out of mean and filthy clay determined to create
children to himself.

<span id="xvii.i-p72"></span>*We all are the work of thy hands*. Of the
same import as the former is this second clause, in which God is called
the Creator, and his people are called the work of his hands; because to
God alone they ascribe all that they are and all that they have. This is
true gratitude; for, so long as men advance the smallest claim to
anything as their own, God is defrauded of his right. Now, Isaiah speaks
not of the ordinary creation of men, but of regeneration, on account of
which believers are especially called “the work of God;” as we have
frequently stated in the exposition of other passages:  <span
id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191.md) Here they acknowledge a remarkable act
of God’s kindness, in having elected them to be his people, and adorned
them with benefits so numerous and so great.

<span id="xvii.i-p74"></span><span id="xvii.i-p74.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p75"></span>**9.** *Be not angry, O Jehovah, beyond
measure.*  <span id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192.md) The people pray that
the severity of punishment and the fierceness of the wrath of God may be
abated; not that God goes beyond measure, but because they would be
altogether overwhelmed, if he should choose to act toward them with the
utmost strictness of justice. They therefore ask a mitigation of
punishment; as Jeremiah also says, “Chasten me, O Lord, but in
judgment,” (<span id="xvii.i-p76.2"></span>[Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024)<span id="xvii.i-p76.2"></span>,.md)
that is, moderately; for he draws a contrast between “judgment” and
“wrath;” as it is elsewhere said that God chastises us “by the hand of
man,” (<span id="xvii.i-p76.3"></span>[2Sa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014)<span id="xvii.i-p76.3"></span>,.md)
because he does not put forth the power of his hand to punish us, lest
we should be utterly destroyed.

<span id="xvii.i-p77"></span>*Neither remember iniquity for ever.* It
deserves notice that they do not absolutely shrink from the judgment of
God, or pray that they may wholly escape from it, but present themselves
to be corrected, so as not to faint under the strokes. And this is the
reason why they desire to have the remembrance of their iniquities
blotted out; for, if God do not mercifully pardon them, there will be no
end of the chastisements.

<span id="xvii.i-p78"></span>*We all are thy people.* The Prophet
repeats what he said a little before, that God elected the family of
Abraham; because the best ground for the confident expectation of
obtaining pardon was, that God, who is true to his promises, cannot east
away those whom he had once elected. By employing the word all, he does
not speak of each individual, as I formerly remarked, but includes the
whole body of the Church. Although the greater part had withdrawn
through wicked revolt, yet still it was true that the Jews were God’s
peculiar people; and this prayer was offered, not for every one of them
without distinction, but only for the children of God who were still
left.  <span id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193.md) The people do not plead
their own merits before God, but betake themselves to the covenant of
free grace, by which they had been adopted. This is the sure and only
refuge of believers, this is the remedy for all evils; and that is the
reason why Moses and the other prophets repeat it so frequently. (<span
id="xvii.i-p79.2"></span>[Ex
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013)<span id="xvii.i-p79.2"></span>..md)

<span id="xvii.i-p80"></span><span id="xvii.i-p80.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p81"></span>**10.** *The cities of thy holiness.* The
Church again recounts her miseries, that she may move God to mercy and
obtain pardon. She says that the cities have been reduced to “a
wilderness;” and, for the sake of amplification, adds that “Zion is a
desert;” because it was the royal residence, in which God wished that
men should call upon him. She adds also Jerusalem, in which Zion was;
for it appeared to be shameful that a city, which God had consecrated to
himself, should be ruined and destroyed by enemies.

<span id="xvii.i-p82"></span>She calls them “cities of holiness,”
because, as the Lord had sanctified a people, so he also wished that the
cities, and even the whole country, should be consecrated to himself.
Seeing, therefore, that the cities were dedicated to God, they are
justly called “cities of his holiness;” for in them God reigned, and men
called upon him. In the same manner we may at the present day give the
appellation of “cities of God’s holiness” to those which, laying aside
superstitions, worship him in a sincere and right manner.

<span id="xvii.i-p83"></span><span id="xvii.i-p83.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p84"></span>**11.** *The house of our sanctuary and of
our glory.*  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194.md) It is called “the
sanctuary of the people” in a different sense from that in which it is
called “the sanctuary of God;” for, being the testimony of a sacred
union between God and the people, it is often called “God’s holy house;”
that is, because it corresponds to his holiness. But now, in a passive
sense, believers call it “their sanctuary,” because from it they must
seek their sanctification.

<span id="xvii.i-p86"></span>This is more plainly confirmed by the
words, “of our glory.” They acknowledge that they have nothing in which
they ought to glory, except the temple, in which God wished to be adored
and worshipped. And yet we see that this glorying was often without
foundation, and for that reason was reproved by Jeremiah,

<span id="xvii.i-p87"></span>“Trust not in words of falsehood, saying,
The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord, The temple of the Lord,
are we.” (<span id="xvii.i-p87.1"></span>[Jer
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#004)<span id="xvii.i-p87.1"></span>..md)

<span id="xvii.i-p88"></span>But while the glorying of those who were
proud and insolent on account of empty titles was without foundation,
yet true and well-grounded was the glorying of those who embraced with
the heart the Lord’s ordinance, and, relying on the testimony of his
word, knew that they dwelt under the shadow of him who had reared for
himself a constant dwelling-place in the midst of them; for the temple
was built by the command of the Lord, so that the Jews might justly
glory in having God for the protector of their salvation.

<span id="xvii.i-p89"></span>In which our fathers praised thee. Because
the worship of God was at that time corrupted and adulterated, and
almost all had revolted to superstition and ungodliness, for this reason
he mentions not the present but the former age. As if he had said,
“Though we have not rendered to thee such worship as we ought to have
rendered, yet this is the temple in which our fathers worshipped thee in
purity; wilt thou permit it to be profaned and destroyed? Will not this
disgrace recoil on thyself, since it relates to the worship of thy
name?” Here the Jews say nothing about their life, and bring forward no
excuses, and rather confess their guilt, but offer their worship to God,
that he may be mindful of his covenant, and not allow his promises to be
made void. This example ought to be imitated by all believers. The word
“praise” denotes thanksgiving; as if he had said, “In that temple, the
melancholy ruins of which draw forth mourning and tears from all
believers, the praises of God at one time resounded, when he treated his
people with kindness and gentleness.  <span
id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195.md)

<span id="xvii.i-p91"></span><span id="xvii.i-p91.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p92"></span>**12.** *Wilt thou restrain thyself for
these things, O Jehovah?* The people strengthen themselves by assured
confidence, that God will not permit his glory to be trampled under
foot, though men provoke him by innumerable transgressions. This can
yield no consolation of any kind to hypocrites, but relates solely to
those who are moved by a true sense of the mercy of God. Such persons
believe and are fully persuaded, though death threaten them, that God
will nevertheless have regard to his own glow, and will at least be
gracious to the remnant, that the seed may not perish.

<span id="xvii.i-p93"></span>*And wilt thou afflict us beyond measure?*
 <span id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196.md) He shews that it is impossible
for God not to be mindful of his mercy; for “he cannot deny himself.”
(<span id="xvii.i-p94.1"></span>[2Ti
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#013)<span id="xvii.i-p94.1"></span>..md)
But our salvation is connected with his glory. This ought to be
carefully observed; for, after having spoken of the glory of God, he
adds, “Thou wilt not afflict us beyond measure.” The Lord will therefore
restrain his chastisements; for his glory, which he cannot disregard, is
deeply involved in our deliverance from death. To this prayer,
therefore, let us betake ourselves whenever we are attacked by our
enemies; not in the manner of hypocrites, (who haughtily boast of the
glory of God, of which they have no experience whatever,) but with
repentance and faith, that we may actually obtain the fruit of that
glory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc16016.htm#fr_184.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p31"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p31.1"></span>Afin que
nous comprenions mieux ce qui nons est dit de luy.” “That we may
understand better what is said to us about him.”

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc16016.htm#fr_185.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p37"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p37.1"></span>Comme par
feu ardent qui fait fondre.” “As by a burning fire that melteth.”

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc16016.htm#fr_186.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p37.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p38"></span> Calvin alludes to the fact, that, in the
Hebrew Bible, the last verse of chapter 63 corresponds to what usually
is the first verse of chapter 64. For the convenience of the reader, I
have exchanged the author’s arrangement for that which is followed in
the English version. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc16016.htm#fr_187.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p39"></span> “I have followed our common version, the
LXX., Vulgate, and Syriac, in departing from the Masoretic division of
the chapters, according to which the words (‘O that thou wouldst,’ etc.)
are very improperly made to conclude chapter 63.” — *Henderson.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc16016.htm#fr_188.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p41"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p41.1"></span>En
l’histoire de la deliverance d’Egypte.” “In the history of the
deliverance from Egypt.”

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc16016.htm#fr_189.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p60.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p61"></span> “Vitringa and Gessenius dwell with great
zest and fullness on the strict sense of <span
id="xvii.i-p61.1"></span>בגר עדים *(beged gniddim.)* Some understand the
comparison with withered leaves as a part of the description of their
sin, while others apply it to their punishment. The first hypothesis is
favored by the difference of the tenses; the last by the parallelism of
the clauses. It is probable, however, that here, as in <span
id="xvii.i-p61.2"></span>[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004.md)<span
id="xvii.i-p61.2"></span>, the two things run together in the writer’s
mind, and that no refined distinction as to this point was intended.” —
*Alexander.*

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc16016.htm#fr_190.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p63.2"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p64"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 3, p. 210.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc16016.htm#fr_191.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p72.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p73"></span> Commentary on Isaiah, vol. 2, pp. 26, 83,
121, 264; vol. 3, pp. 132, 318, 338.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc16016.htm#fr_192.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p75.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p76"></span> “‘Be not angry, oh Jehovah, to extremity.’
The common version of <span id="xvii.i-p76.1"></span>עד מאד *(gnad
meod)* (very sore) fails to reproduce the form of the original
expression, as consisting of a preposition and a noun. This is
faithfully conveyed in Lowth’s version, (to the uttermost,) and still
more in Henderson’s, (to excess;) although the latter is objectionable
as suggesting the idea of injustice or moral wrong, which is avoided in
the version above given.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc16016.htm#fr_193.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p78.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p79"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p79.1"></span>Mais
seulement pour la petite troupe des fideles.” “But only for the small
company of believers.”

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc16016.htm#fr_194.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p84.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p85"></span> “Our holy and our beautiful house.” —
(Eng. Ver.)  
“Our house of holiness and beauty.” — *Alexander.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc16016.htm#fr_195.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p89.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p90"></span> “They press him closer still, and make use
of an argument which was most likely to affect him. The temple wherein
our pious fathers praised thee, the beautiful sanctuary in which thy
honor used to dwell, is burnt with fire; the precious materials it was
made of are nothing but rubbish and dust.” — *White.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc16016.htm#fr_196.md) <span
id="xvii.i-p93.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p94"></span> “That is, Canst thou hold out against so
many moving considerations? Is it possible that thou canst behold thy
children in chains, thy city in ruins, thy temple a heap of stones, and
not be prevailed on to pity and put an end to our great afflictions?” —
*White.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 65](cc16017.md)
