[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb06)  [Next](ttb08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

### STICK GAME

Among the aborigines of these regions gambling was one of the ruling
passions. Although they had dice and throwing games, the most popular
was the stick game. Each tribe had its own method of marking the sticks
as well as of playing the game. Some were games of chance where luck
prevailed; others required skill and the art of self-control.

Their games helped them in many ways to protect themselves from the
forces of nature and from their enemies. They developed their powers of
observation, trained the eye and hand. All these accomplishments stood
them in good stead when attacked by the enemy with spear or club. A
quick twist of the body or a movement of the hand or arm enabled them to
ward off a fatal blow, thus saving their lives and often overcoming
their antagonists as well.

Stick games were played in many ways. One game, "Le-hal", was played
with thirty to fifty sticks of bone or wood from four to six inches in
length. Each stick was marked with a symbol denoting its value. The
players, sometimes as many as twenty, took their positions opposite each
other. The sticks were divided among the players who covered them with a
blanket, pieces of bark, or grass. A captain was appointed for each
side. The player then took two sticks of different values and began to
switch them from hand to hand with such lightning speed that it would
puzzle the observer as to which hand held the winning stick. This was
accompanied by the beating of drums or the rattle of deer's hoofs tied
together and a rhythm of song. Oftentimes the spectators would join in
the noise, making it harder for the one who was doing the guessing to
control his emotions and judge the facial expressions of his opponent.
If the stick was guessed rightly, it was then tossed over to the winner.
If not, the guesser paid one himself.

There were many other games: dice, made of the curved teeth of the
beaver. These were divided with threads of sinew and marked with dots
between each strand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tootooch, The Thunder Bird](ttb08.md)
