[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb05)  [Next](ttb07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### THE ARISTOCRATIC ABORIGINES

The Indians of the Northwest Coast had a method of binding the head of
the growing infant with leather thongs, fastened to a flat board. This
caused the skull to decrease in diameter and make it grow out behind,
giving the effect shown by the **Kloochman** in the picture. These
cone-like heads were a mark of distinction and were not permitted to
other than the children of freemen. This custom prevailed among some of
the tribes until thirty-five years ago. Indians now living have the
so-called sugar-loaf heads, one of the last marks from their barbarian
ancestors.

The labret was also used by members of these tribes. It had several
forms, the most popular being a piece of flat wood, grooved around the
edge and inserted in a hole below the lower lip. When it was in use the
lip was held out firm and straight but when it was taken out the lip
fell down into place so that the tongue could be thrust through the
opening, creating the impression among early explorers that the people
had two mouths.

The natives [tattooed](errata.htm#12.md) the body as well as painting their
faces with the symbols of their clan. Tattooing was generally applied on
the backs of the arms and on the front of the legs, less frequently than
on other parts of the body. The painting on their faces was done at
potlatch feasts and was the identification mark of the clan or sept to
which the individual belonged. Many older Totem Pole figures of men
carry the facial markings, a custom that is now dying out.

The Indian woman shown in the frontispiece is weaving grass baskets. She
is sitting on a cedar mat and wearing a double woven cape-like garment,
made from the same material. Capes of this kind are still in use on
Vancouver Island. They are very useful in the rainy season. With them
the natives wear a flat, round hat, this also sheds the water. The
chronicles of Captain Vancouver and other early voyagers, recorded that
much of the clothing used by these uncivilized people was made of root
fibers interwoven with the woolly hair of dogs which were bred for the
purpose; these dogs, also used for food, are now extinct.

The Indians along the coast secured their food from the adjacent waters
and were not land travellers. They did not use footwear of any kind
either in summer or winter. In the cold weather these primitive people
clothed themselves in garments of such value that the early adventurers
chanced the hazards of the seven seas to barter for them. A small piece
of iron often sufficed to buy a sea-otter hide or cloak, to be sold in
China or American ports for a hundred dollars or more. These sea mammals
have since been exterminated. A specimen of one may be seen in the
Provincial Museum in Victoria.

Returning to the picture again: the Indian woman has to use a model of
probably the original "Rock-a-bye-baby-in-the-tree-top." When the
papoose frets, the cord is pulled with her toe. The wooden cradle then
swings up and down and then to and fro. The house is decorated with the
Black Fish (Killer Whale) Crest, showing that the inmate is a member of
that clan, a sept of the Ocean people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Stick Game](ttb07.md)
