[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb15)  [Next](ttb17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

<span id="img_02900"></span> ![Shwah Kuk, The Frog](img/02900.jpg.md)

### Shwah Kuk, THE FROG

According to the mythology of the Nootka Tribes of Vancouver Island,
**Saghalie Tyee**, Creator of the Universe, lived in the Celestial
Regions, where two gigantic frogs were the guardians of his household.
When **Huloima Tillicum** (strangers) approached, the frogs would croak
loudly to warn their master of their coming. The frogs had many other
duties to perform. When the sun became too hot, it was the task of the
frogs to regulate the heat. They also had means of correcting the
**Kula-Kula** (birds) who made too much noise, disturbing the Creator's
rest. They also acted as heralds, going around the **Tenas-Town**
(village), giving out the orders of the day.

Another mythical story comes from the Tsim’shian tribes, Skeena River,
British Columbia. As the voice of the frog was very strong and could be
heard for long distances across the **chuck** (water), and was therefore
a guide for the Indians in foggy weather, great attention was paid to
his croaking. Long ago, a man and his wife were crossing a large bay. It
was very foggy. They heard the croaking of a frog which guided them to
the shore, for the frog was croaking all the time in their language,
saying over and over again: "I will show you a place of safety." The
Indians turned their canoe towards the place where this voice seemed to
come from and finally reached the shore: "This frog is mine." The woman
screamed: "No, it is mine! I will keep it!" Thus they argued until at
last the woman took the frog and treated it like her own child. She took
it to a lake in the woods and left it there, praising it for the noise
it made which had helped them to find the shore.

A chief of great importance, whose presence was particularly desired at
a Potlatch, was invited. When he appeared he surprised the other guests
by wearing a **kamo-suk** (necklace) of live frogs tied leg to leg.
Since that time his family have used the frog for a crest.

According to other Indian legends the supernatural **Siam itchwoot**
(Grizzly Bear) was mortally afraid of frogs. Frogs were often put on
Totem Poles or houses to prevent them falling down or being destroyed.
The frog is used on the Totem Poles of Kit-wanga, along the Sheen,.
River, also on Poles of Alaska, the most popular being Kicksetti or
Tlingets.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chee-Che-Ka, The Mink](ttb17.md)
