[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb11)  [Next](ttb13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span id="img_02500"></span> ![Kee-War-Kow, The Sun](img/02500.jpg.md)

### Kee-War-Kow, THE SUN

This symbol belongs to the Shining Heavens, the town of the Sky People.
It is the clan totem of the Tsimshians, living along the Nass and Skeena
Rivers. The Indians have legends of the influence of the Sun upon their
predecessors who lived in a rich mountain valley abundant in game and
fruits and rivers which teemed with salmon.

In the Skyland there were the houses of the Sun, Moon, Stars and the
Rainbow. Living within the Rainbow House was the Son of the Sun, the
Creator of the Sunbeams. In the other houses lived the **Smoke
Kloochman** (Cloud Woman), the Fair-Weather Woman, The power of Sleep
Woman, the **Hiyu-wind Kloochman** (Storm Woman), Woman Watch Her
Husband and the Story Woman. These are all the Grandmothers of Indian
mythology.

Sun controlled the destinies of the Indians and was looked upon as the
Creator of the Universe. In this house it was perpetual sunlight and the
light was controlled for the use of mortals by opening and closing the
great doors in the East and the West.

A great well called the Well of Sickness and Death went down from
Skyland to the Earth. When the cover of the well was removed, the
inhabitants of the earth were seen below whose spirits, after death,
were drawn up the well into the celestial regions. Then the good and
evil spirits are separated by burning them in the fires of life. The
ashes were then cast to the Earth to be reincarnated in unborn souls.

Sun revealed to the Indians the arts of the chase and gaming. as Sun was
a gambler. He also gave them **Nanitsh** (insight) into the natures of
the animals of the wilds, which enabled them to hunt with success. He
hardened them for the labor of life, taught them how to erect their
fishing weirs and traps, to acquire stores of salmon by spearing them
from the walls of steep canyons. Sun taught the womenfolk the crafts of
the household, the weaving of clothing from the wool of the mountain
goat and from cedar bark and the preserving of food.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sisuith or Se-Sook, The Two Headed Snake](ttb13.md)
