[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb24)  [Next](ttb26.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span id="img_03800"></span> ![Shaman, the Medicine Man](img/03800.jpg.md)

### Shaman, THE MEDICINE MAN

The Shaman, to whom all the Indians looked for wisdom, was their
counsellor in sickness and health. At all times he was looked to to keep
the evil spirits under control. This spiritual power was generally
hereditary although it could be acquired by going into the fastnesses of
the forest. He had to be clean so he lived in seclusion, fasting often,
only eating fruits and roots and living in such a state of
near-starvation as would produce delirium and trance-like dreams and
visions. After arriving at that state, with wondrous eyes he would
choose a **Tahmahnawis** (Spirit) from among the surrounding ghosts. It
might be a beast or a bird, a rock or even a mountain. This he would
call upon to give him special magical and spiritual powers to cure the
sick, insure the success of the hunt, to bring success in fishing and to
foretell events and happenings in distant places. The newly made
Medicine man would then stagger back to his village if he had the
strength and did not die on the way. There he would proclaim to the
tribe the things he had encountered. After his family had nursed him
back to health the chiefs would consult with him and, if he possessed an
active imagination, which he usually did, the tribe would call "Wild
Man's Society" together in the assembly house where the wonders which he
had seen in the forest would be recounted, emphasis being placed on the
magic the Totem had given him.

Then there would be feasting, the Shaman would speak in a mumble of
words, supposedly the language the Spirit used, wearing a peculiar nose
ornament, dressed as the Spirit for whom he was speaking, using an oval
rattle and blowing through a carved, hollow, white bone, suspended by a
cord from his neck. He would also wear a long bone thrust through the
septum of his nose. He would destroy the spirits of the enemies of the
invited guests. This would cause much disorder. Food was then put in the
fire to keep the spirits well fed. Incidentally, thereafter they had to
generously supply the living as well, for he controlled this spirit and
was in good repute with the demon so that their desires would be
granted.

If this was not done the **Shaman** would oftentimes be put to death.

When a **Shaman** died his body was put into a carved box and placed in
the branches of a tree or on a high stump. His soul was supposed to go
to some special place. in the Skyland. Most **Shamans** had great power
over their people and generally were very **halo-klahowya** (wealthy).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chak-Chak, the Eagle](ttb26.md)
