[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ttb21)  [Next](ttb23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

<span id="img_03500"></span> ![Pi-Chikamin, The Gift
Copper](img/03500.jpg)

### Pi-Chikamin, THE GIFT COPPER

The gift coppers were curiously shaped plates two and a half feet in
length and weighing from fifteen to twenty pounds. They were made from
native copper brought from Alaska and the Nass River. These coppers were
beautifully etched and painted with the symbols of the owner's clan.

The typical shape of the copper was a raised "T" in the centre. The
lower part was called the hind end and the upper part, which was
decorated, was called the face. The actual value of the piece of copper
was small but, like our bills of high denomination, they represented a
large number of blankets made from the hides of fur-bearing animals, and
of buckskin. Later, when the white man traded among them, the Indians
used the cotton and woolen blanket.

Some coppers had the value of five thousand to seventy-five hundred
blankets. The most valuable coppers were etched with Sea Bear, Beaver,
and the Moon, the one shown here is of the Sea Bear who was Lord and
Ruler of the deep.

Coppers were sometimes offered for sale by a rival. If the offer was not
accepted it was an acknowledgment that the chief and members of the
tribe did not have blankets enough to make the purchase. However, if the
rival tribe had bought the copper, it could then be sold back to the
original owner, but always at a higher price.

The ceremonies when selling these .coppers were very elaborate and were
conducted during the winter festivals. Wealthy Chiefs, giving
potlatches, would sometimes break their coppers in pieces and present
them to the most important guests or throw the pieces into the sea. This
was to show his utter disregard for its value on account of his wealth.
This act would give him greater prestige in the community.

A copper was considered an insignia of distinguished leadership,
bringing luck to its owner and warding off evil spirits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Property Woman, or Great Grandmother](ttb23)
