[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb27)  [Next](ttb29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<span id="img_04100"></span> ![Skam-m, The Halibut](img/04100.jpg.md)

### Skam-m, THE HALIBUT

Long ago, when the Raven was performing the miracle of making the
creatures of the universe, his work always made him tired and hungry. He
stopped to do a little fishing, catching a peculiar fish which he wished
to keep fresh so he did not kill it. How to keep the fish from flapping
around and probably leaping out of the canoe puzzled him so going to the
shore he went to the spruce trees and took some of the gum from their
bark. This he fashioned into a woman whom he called **Skam-m**. He then
commanded her to grow quickly and be beautiful. Then he told her to sit
on the fish he had caught, promising her a part of it when he was
through fishing. As the day was hot, for the sun was high, he wanted to
get a good mess of fish as soon as possible, so without looking behind
him he called: "Skam-m, are you there?" Skam-m answered "Oh." Shortly
after he called again: "Skam-m, **kla howya** (How are you)?" To which
she replied again: "Oh." As the sun was getting warmer, Raven called
again: "Skam-m, are you still there?" To which she replied, in a weak
voice, "Oh."

Raven looked around, trying to locate the small, feeble voice, only to
find that a sticky pitch had taken her place. He was so surprised and
angry that he cursed, for he could not eat a fish that was covered with
pitch and had to throw it overboard. That is why the Halibut skin is
dark on the top side and white beneath, burnt by hot pitch, has
misplaced, pop-eyes and is flat by being sat upon by **Skam-m**. Halibut
is flat even today. The Indians, when fishing, remembering Raven's
experience always kill a halibut when caught, with a stout club.

The further experiences of Raven tell of him coming to the place where
**Siam Itchwood** (Grizzly Bear) lived. He asked Grizzly Bear if he
would like to go fishing for halibut, so they agreed to start early the
next morning. Taking the canoe they went to a place where it was known
to be good fishing. They fixed their fish hooks and put them in the sea.
Only Raven caught halibut. When the canoe was full. Grizzly Bear asked
Raven what he used for bait. Raven replied: "**Gildasquyil**." This
Indian word has never been identified.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Welala, The Mountain Spirit](ttb29.md)
