[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ttb28)  [Next](ttb30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<span id="img_04200"></span> ![Welala, The Mountain
Spirit](img/04200.jpg)

### Welala, THE MOUNTAIN SPIRIT

**Welala** is the mountain spirit of the Tsimshian tribes of the Nass
and Skeena Rivers of British Columbia. It is also used by the Tlingets
of Alaska and is found on the well known Kicksetti Totem Pole at
Wrangell. The Indians believe that everything has a spirit. The soul
came from the body and the body changed to stone, hence the Mountain
Spirit.

The legend of **Welala** tells of a great hunter who was pursuing a bear
he had wounded. The bear reached a steep cliff on a mountain where a
door opened through which he entered. As the hunter came to the doorway
he heard the voice of **Welala** singing: "Hap, hap." Then he fainted.
The soul from his body was then levitated and transported into a secret
council chamber in the mountain's hollow interior and into the presence
of the great **Chief Welala**, who was wearing a bear skin.

The great **Welala** gave the hunter the right to use the ornaments that
he himself was wearing and, from a carved box he took a dance mask, a
small bearskin, a cedar-bark neck ring and other articles like those
used at Winter dances. Welala also gave the hunter power to fly all over
the world to seek and devour his enemies.

With the ornaments the hunter adorned himself and flew over **Illahie**
(The Earth) for the space of four years, killing and devouring all whom
he found in the woods.

Finally he came to his own village where the Medicine Men of his tribe
succeeded in capturing him. He was then taken to his family where he was
cured of his wandering and evil ways with the aid of magic herbs and was
allowed to dance **Welala** dances until he was exhausted. The Village
Chief then gave him back his slaves, coppers and canoes.

The Mountain Spirit of Welala is very secretive. It is looked upon by
the Indian as giving special **Tamahnous Skookum** (Magical Power) of
greatness and benevolence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Quil-Tum-Tum](ttb30)
