[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb25)  [Next](ttb27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

<span id="img_03900"></span> ![Chak-Chak, the Eagle](img/03900.jpg.md)

### Chak-Chak, THE EAGLE

Years ago the ancestors of the Eagle Clan believed in an after-life for
all creatures. Food cast into the fire became invisible and everlasting
and was for the departed spirits to partake of on their journey to the
spirit land where they entered a greater and more wonderful life.

When **Od-euons** (The Great Eagle) is shown on totem poles of the Eagle
Clan, it [sometimes](errata.htm#18.md) signifies this legend:

A fearless, strong brave was killed in battle. At death his spirit
strayed to Eagleland, a remote mythical village of the sky region on the
West coast of the Queen Charlotte Islands. Upon his arrival he was
received with a welcome by **Od-euons**, the Great Eagle Chief. As time
went on, the brave proved that he was an untiring and fearless hunter of
whales, the Eagle's mortal enemies, who dominated all oceans. The Whale
Chief was the Right Whale, who had never been conquered. He could blow
spouts of water high above the clouds, which was a warning of death for
those who had many combats with the Right Whale, leaving many scars on
the Whale's tough hide from his sharp claws. He would relate these
adventures of strength and cunning to his fellow Eagles who regarded him
as a cowardly old braggart.

The young brave was determined that he would show that the power of the
Right Whale was a myth. He would conquer this master of the seas
single-handed. Making his way high over the ocean he sighted the mammoth
whale. Soaring high above, he waited for an opportunity to attack the
whale unawares, and, when his chance came, he swooped down, digging his
powerful talons deep into the flesh of the enemy, flapping his wings,
straining every muscle, he could not raise the foe. The young eagle had
to call his fellow eagles for help. As the ethics of their brotherhood
demands that they always lend a hand to a brother, they flew to his aid.
The wise old Eagle, hearing the call, sharpened his talons and rushed
into the fray just in time for his fellows were badly weakened. Not only
were they likely to lose the battle, but all of them might be destroyed
as well. The coming of the old eagle changed the tide of battle. He
showed his strength and daring by picking up the whale and carrying it
homeward.

Thus the oldest and wisest saved his tribe from destruction. The old
eagle was so pleased with the young eagle's conduct and daring that he
gave him his daughter in marriage in celebration of the victory.

Ever after, the wise one, named **Od-euons**, means Great Eagle, the
Mighty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kwel-Kwel, The Owl](ttb27.md)
