[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](ttb33)  [Next](ttb35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

<span id="img_04700"></span> ![He’-e-tlik, The Lightning
Snake](img/04700.jpg)

### He’-e-tlik, THE LIGHTNING SNAKE

This legend comes from the West Coast of Vancouver Island:
**He’-e-tlik** was born supernatural. At a tender age he refused to eat
the food given him by his mother. When asked by his parents why he did
not eat the good things they liked, he replied: "The fragrant smell of
the pines at the dawn of day is enough for me."

One day when **He’-e-tlik** was roaming alone in the forest, he came
upon Tootooch (Thunder Bird), who was lonely for a companion. They soon
became fast friends, agreeing never to part. **He’-e-tlik** then assumed
the form of the Lightning Snake and entwined himself around the body of
Thunder Bird who flew to his abode at the top of a high mountain.

Tootooch lived on the flesh of whales and when in search of this food he
would put on his feathered coat, wings and mask. Lightning Snake would
attach himself to his master and they would then fly over the sea. When
the whale was sighted Thunder Bird would [maneuver](errata.htm#21) in
such a way as to be able to drop Lightning Snake onto the whale's back
so as to pierce the animal's body. The shock of the lightning would kill
the whale instantly. Thunder Bird would then seize the prey in his
powerful talons and make off home.

The power of Lightning Snake was often felt by mortals of the earth for
their evil deeds. Once he [visited](errata.htm#22) his wrath upon a
whole tribe, punishing them for forgetting Nature's Code of Morals and
the rules of hunting and fishing, thereby becoming selfish and
aggressive to their neighbors instead of working for themselves. To
punish them he cut off their arms and legs. Thunder Bird then appeared
among the people and, by sprinkling water on them, he enabled them to
get up and put themselves together again. Some, in their hurry, picked
up the wrong legs and arms which of course did not fit their bodies. On
this account they were ever after known as the **Wake delate** (deformed
people) among the other Indian tribes.

The Indians believed that anything of a material form was at the mercy
of the Lightning Spirit and could be worn, broken or destroyed by it.
Fish or game could be eaten but still existed elsewhere through its aid
as long as they followed the Moral Law of Lightning Snake he would
provide all their wants. He is now always spoken of as "One who lived on
high." His power is never worshipped but is held in reverence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eh-Kolie, The Whale](ttb35)
