[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Northwest](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](ttb32)  [Next](ttb34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Thunder Bird Tootooch Legends*, by W.L. Webber, \[1936\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

<span id="img_04600"></span> ![Skana, The Black Fish](img/04600.jpg.md)

### Skana, THE BLACK FISH

The Black Fish (Killer Whale) always fired the imagination of the
ancient Indian of the North Pacific who had a great admiration for his
ferocious strength. A pack of three or four would attack and kill a
large sized whale.

The people who lived among the islands were essentially fishermen of
adventurous spirit, often pursuing the whale far out in the ocean in
their Wolf canoes. They were constantly in dread of Black Fish and held
them in great reverence. Some considered them to be evil spirits as
sometimes they took great delight in attacking the canoes, overturning
them and drowning the occupants. The Indians believed that when the
**tenas tillicum** (younger members) of the [tribe](errata.htm#20.md) were
lost at sea, their spirits, if they did not wish to live in Dreamland,
at the Northern lights, could return, to be reincarnated as Black Fish,
to roam the waters they loved so well. In the sea there was a stream
that was forever flowing Southward and on its bank was Dorsal Fin Town
and in one of the many great lodges lived a powerful Prince who had all
the Ocean People for his subjects.

A legend of long ago tells of two strong warriors who, in their canoe,
were challenged by the Black Fish to mortal combat. The Indians were
hard pressed and, as there seemed no way of escape, one of the warriors
swore on oath to his comrade saying, that if he were to be done to death
he would stab as many Black Fish as came within his reach before he was
transformed into one of them. When he sank into the water many bodies of
dead Black Fish began to rise to the surface and, after a terrible
commotion, there appeared also the body of the Prince. For this fear the
members of the warrior's family were permitted to use the Black Fish
Crest ever afterward.

The Killer Whale belongs to the clan of the Ocean People who praise him
highly and, when attending potlatch gatherings, always come in canoes
elaborately decorated with his effigy to signify that he was accustomed
to travel and use his body as a canoe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He’-e-tlik, The Lightning Snake](ttb34.md)
