[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41002)  [Next](cc41004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>CHRISTOPER,

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>DUKE OF WIRTEMBERG, EARL OF MONTEBELIARD,
ETC.

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>Though personally unknown to you, most
illustrious Prince, I venture unhesitatingly  <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) to dedicate to you one of my productions. It
may be thought that so bold a step will be censured by some persons as
rash, and therefore demands an apology. Nothing is more easy. A few
words shall suffice. My motives to address you are chiefly two.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>You have hitherto, indeed, pursued the right
course with great spirit and energy. Yet I thought that it might not be
altogether unnecessary to excite you, by a direct appeal, to the perusal
of a work not a little fitted to strengthen your resolutions. One
advantage you possess, in the kind providence of God, above most princes
of the present day. Having enjoyed an early and liberal education in the
Latin language, you are enabled to employ your leisure in reading
profitable and religious books. If ever there was a time when the
consolations derived from religious instruction were necessary, what
other resource is left to the most heroic minds by the present distress
of the Church, and by greater and heavier distresses which appear to be
approaching? Whoever, therefore, wishes to remain unmoved to the last,
let him rely entirely on this support; whoever desires to have a sure
protection, let him learn to betake himself to this refuge. Besides, in
these four Epistles,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) of which I now
present to you my Expositions, you will find, noble Prince, many
subjects of consolation exceedingly adapted to the present times; but to
which I do not now more particularly refer, because they will occur to
yourself with much better effect in their own places.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>I come now to my second reason for dedicating
to you this work. During the present confusion of affairs, while some
are shaken, and others are entirely thrown down, you have preserved an
astonishing composure and moderation, accompanied by a remarkable
steadfastness, amidst all the storms which have arisen. I consider,
therefore, that it is highly advantageous to the whole Church, to hold
out in you, as in a bright mirror, an example which all may imitate.
For, while the Son of God enjoins on all his followers, without
exception, that they shall choose rather to fight under the banner of
his cross than to triumph with the world, yet very few are found who are
ready to engage in that kind of warfare. It is the more necessary that
all should be stimulated and taught, by such uncommon examples as yours,
to correct their effeminacy.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>Of my Commentaries I shall only say, that
they perhaps contain more than it would become me to acknowledge. On
this point, however, I wish you to read and judge for yourself.
Farewell, most illustrious Prince. May the Lord Jesus long preserve you
for himself and his Church, and guide you by His Spirit!

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>Geneva,  
1st February 1548.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc41003.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p6.1"></span>Sans En Faire
Difficulte.” “Without Any Scruple”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc41003.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span> The Volume To Which This Dedication Was
Prefixed, Contained The Commentaries On The Epistles To The Galatians,
Ephesians, Philippians, And Colossians. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc41004)
