[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41006)  [Next](cc41008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="iii.v.i"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="iii.v.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p2"></span>**1.** O foolish Galatians, who hath
bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth, before whose eyes
Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you?

<span id="iii.v.i-p3"></span>**1.** O stulti Galatae, quis vos
fascinavit, ut non obediatis veritati? quibus ante oculos Iesus Christus
depictus est inter vos crucifixus.

<span id="iii.v.i-p4"></span>**2.** This only would I learn of you,
Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of
faith?

<span id="iii.v.i-p5"></span>**2.** Hoc solum volo discere a vobis: Ex
operibus Legis Spiritum accepistis, an ex praedicatione fidei?

<span id="iii.v.i-p6"></span>**3.** Are ye so foolish? having begun in
the Spirit, are ye now made perfect by the flesh?

<span id="iii.v.i-p7"></span>**3.** Ita stulti estis, ut, exorsi a
Spiritu, nunc carne eonsummemini?

<span id="iii.v.i-p8"></span>**4.** Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? if *it be* yet in vain.

<span id="iii.v.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tanta passi estis frustra? si tamen
etiam frustra.

<span id="iii.v.i-p10"></span>**5.** He therefore that ministereth to
you the Spirit, and worketh miracles among you, *doeth he it* by the
works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?

<span id="iii.v.i-p11"></span>**5.** Qui ergo subministrat vobis
Spiritum, et operatur in vobis virtutes; ex operibus legis, an ex
praedieatione fidei id (facit)?

<span id="iii.v.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p14"></span>**1.** *O foolish Galatians*. An
expostulation is here interwoven — I should rather say, inserted —
amidst his doctrinal statements. Some will wonder that he did not delay
it to the close of the Epistle, but the very serious nature of the
errors which he has brought forward unquestionably roused him to a burst
of passion. When we hear that the Son of God, with all his benefits, is
rejected, that his death is esteemed as nothing, what pious mind would
not break out into indignation? He therefore declares that those who
allowed themselves to be involved in so heinous a crime must have been
ἀνόητοι, that is, “disordered in mind.” He accuses them not only of
having suffered themselves to be deceived, but of having been carried
away by some sort of magical enchantment,  <span
id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53) which is a still more serious charge. He
insinuates that their fall partook more of madness than of folly.

<span id="iii.v.i-p16"></span>Some think that Paul refers to the temper
of the nation, that, being sprung from barbarians, it was more difficult
to train them; but I rather think that he refers to the subject itself.
It looks like something supernatural, that, after enjoying the gospel in
such clearness, they should be affected by the delusions of Satan. He
does not merely say that they were “bewitched” and “disordered in mind,”
because they did not obey the truth; but because, after having received
instruction so clear, so full, so tender, and so powerful, they
immediately fell away. Erasmus has chosen to interpret the words, “that
ye should not *believe* the truth.” I am not quite prepared to set aside
that rendering, but would prefer the word *obey*, because Paul does not
charge them with having, from the outset, rejected the gospel, but with
not having persevered in obedience.

<span id="iii.v.i-p17"></span>*Before whose eyes*. This is intended, as
I have already hinted, to express an aggravation; for, the better
opportunities they had of knowing Christ, the more heinous was the
criminality of forsaking him. Such, he tells them, was the clearness of
his doctrine, that it was not naked doctrine, but the express, living
image of Christ.  <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) They had known
Christ in such a manner, that they might be almost said to have seen
him.

<span id="iii.v.i-p19"></span>*Jesus Christ hath been evidently set
forth*. Augustine’s interpretation of the word προεγράφη, (“hath been
set forth,”) is harsh, and inconsistent with Paul’s design. He makes it
to signify that Christ was to be thrust out from possession. Others
propose a different phrase, (*proscriptus*,) which, if used in the sense
of “openly proclaimed,” would not be inapplicable. The Greeks,
accordingly, borrow from this verb the word προγράμματα, to denote
boards on which property intended to be sold was published, so as to be
exposed to the view of all. But the participle, *painted*, is less
ambiguous, and, in my own opinion, is exceedingly appropriate. To shew
how energetic his preaching was, Paul first compares it to a picture,
which exhibited to them, in a lively manner, the image of Christ.

<span id="iii.v.i-p20"></span>But, not satisfied with this comparison,
he adds, *Christ hath been crucified among you,* intimating that the
actual sight of Christ’s death could not have affected them more
powerfully than his own preaching. The view given by some, that the
Galatians had “crucified to themselves (<span
id="iii.v.i-p20.1"></span>[Heb
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#006)<span id="iii.v.i-p20.1"></span>)
the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame;” that they had
withdrawn from the purity of the gospel; or, at least, had lent their
ear, and given their confidence, to impostors who crucified him, —
appears to me overstrained. The meaning therefore is, that Paul’s
doctrine had instructed them concerning Christ in such a manner as if he
had been exhibited to them in a picture, nay, “crucified among them.”
Such a representation could not have been made by any eloquence, or by
“enticing words of man’s wisdom,” (<span id="iii.v.i-p20.2"></span>[1Co
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.i-p20.2"></span>,)
had it not been accompanied by that power of the Spirit, of which Paul
has treated largely in both the Epistles to the Corinthians.

<span id="iii.v.i-p21"></span>Let those who would discharge aright the
ministry of the gospel learn, not merely to speak and declaim, but to
penetrate into the consciences of men, to make them see Christ
crucified, and feel the shedding of his blood.  <span
id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) When the Church has painters such as
these, she no longer needs the dead images of wood and stone, she no
longer requires pictures; both of which, unquestionably, were first
admitted to Christian temples when the pastors had become dumb and been
converted into mere idols, or when they uttered a few words from the
pulpit in such a cold and careless manner, that the power and efficacy
of the ministry were utterly extinguished.

<span id="iii.v.i-p23"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p24"></span>**2.** *This one I wish to learn from
you.* He now proceeds to support his cause by additional arguments. The
first is drawn from their experience, for he reminds them in what manner
the gospel was introduced among themselves. When they heard the gospel,
they received the Spirit. It was not to the law, therefore, but to
faith, that they owed the reception of this benefit. This same argument
is employed by Peter in the defense which he makes to his brethren for
having baptized uncircumcised persons. (<span
id="iii.v.i-p24.1"></span>[Ac
10:47](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#047)<span
id="iii.v.i-p24.1"></span>.) Paul and Barnabas followed the same course
in the debate which they maintained at Jerusalem on this subject. (<span
id="iii.v.i-p24.2"></span>[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)<span id="iii.v.i-p24.2"></span>.)
There was therefore manifest ingratitude in not submitting to the
doctrine, by means of which they had received the Holy Spirit. The
opportunity which he gives them to reply is expressive not of doubt, but
of greater confidence: for their convictions, founded on their own
experience, forced them to acknowledge that it was true.

<span id="iii.v.i-p25"></span>*Faith* is here put, by a figure of
speech, for the gospel, which is elsewhere called “the law of faith,”
(<span id="iii.v.i-p25.1"></span>[Ro
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027)<span id="iii.v.i-p25.1"></span>,)
because it exhibits to us the free grace of God in Christ, without any
merit of works. *The Spirit* means here, I think, the grace of
regeneration, which is common to all believers; though I have no
objection to understand it as referring to the peculiar gifts by which
the Lord, at that period, honored the preaching of the gospel.  <span
id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56)

<span id="iii.v.i-p27"></span>It may be objected, that the Spirit was
not, in this respect, given to all. But, it was enough for Paul’s
purpose, that the Galatians knew that the power of the Holy Spirit in
his Church had accompanied Paul’s doctrine, and that believers were
variously endowed with the gifts of the Spirit for general edification.
It may likewise be objected, that those gifts were not infallible signs
of adoption, and so do not apply to the present question. I reply, that
it was enough that the Lord had confirmed the doctrine of Paul by the
visible gifts of his Spirit. A still simpler view of the case is, that
they had been distinguished by the ordinary privilege of adoption,
before those impostors had brought forward their additions. “In whom,”
says he to the Ephesians,

<span id="iii.v.i-p28"></span>“ye also trusted, after that ye heard the
word of truth, the gospel of your salvation; in whom also, after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise.” (<span
id="iii.v.i-p28.1"></span>[Eph
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#013)<span id="iii.v.i-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p30"></span>**3.** *Are ye so foolish?* Commentators
are not agreed as to what he means by *the Spirit* and by *the flesh*.
He alludes, in my opinion, to what he had said about the Spirit. As if
he had said, “As the doctrine of the gospel brought to you the Holy
Spirit, the commencement of your course was spiritual; but now ye have
fallen into a worse condition, and may be said to have fallen from the
Spirit into the flesh.” The flesh denotes either outward and fading
flyings, such as ceremonies are, particularly when they are separated
from Christ; or it denotes dead and fading doctrine. There was a strange
inconsistency between their splendid commencement and their future
progress.

<span id="iii.v.i-p31"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p32"></span>**4.** *Have ye suffered so many things?*
This is another argument. Having suffered so many things in behalf of
the gospel, would they now, in an instant, lose it all? Nay, he puts it
in the way of reproach, if they were willing to lose the advantage of so
many illustrious struggles which they had made for the faith. If the
true faith had not been delivered to them by Paul, it was rash to suffer
anything in defense of a bad cause; but they had experienced the
presence of God amidst their persecutions. Accordingly, he charges the
false apostles with ill-will in depriving the Galatians of such valuable
ornaments. But to mitigate the severity of this complaint, he adds, *if
it be yet in vain*; thus inspiring their minds with the expectation of
something better, and rousing them to the exercise of repentance. For
the intention of all chastisement is, not to drive men to despair, but
to lead them to a better course.

<span id="iii.v.i-p33"></span><span id="iii.v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p34"></span>**5.** *He therefore that ministereth*. He
is not now speaking of the grace of regeneration, but of the other gifts
of the Spirit; for a subject different from the preceding one is
manifestly introduced. He warns them that all the gifts of the Holy
Spirit, in which they excelled, are the fruits of the gospel, of that
gospel which had been preached among them by his own lips. Their new
teachers deprived them of those gifts when they left the gospel, and
fled to another kind of doctrine. In proportion to the value which they
attached to those gifts, to which the apostle here adds *miracles*, they
ought the more carefully and resolutely to adhere to the gospel.

<span id="iii.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)<span id="iii.v.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Even as Abraham believed God, and
it was accounted to him for righteousness.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Quemadmodum Abraham credidit Deo,
et imputatum est illi in justitiam. (<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ge
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.1"></span>
<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.2"></span>[Ro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.2"></span>
<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.3"></span>[Jas
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023)<span id="iii.v.ii-p3.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Know ye therefore, that they which
are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Cognoscite ergo, quod qui ex fide
sunt, ii sunt filii Abrahae.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p6"></span>**8.** And the scripture, foreseeing that
God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel
unto Abraham, *saying*, In thee shall all nations be blessed.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Scriptura autem, quia praevidebat,
quod ex fide justificet Deus Gentes, ante evangelizavit Abrahae: In to
benedicentur omnes Gentes. (<span id="iii.v.ii-p7.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p8"></span>**9.** So then they which be of faith are
blessed with faithful Abraham.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Itaque qui ex fide sunt,
benedicuntur cure fideli Abraham.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p12"></span>Having appealed to facts and experience,
he now gives quotations from Scripture. And first, he brings forward the
example of Abraham. Arguments drawn from examples are not always so
conclusive, but this is one of the most powerful, because neither in the
subject nor in the person is there any ground of exception. There is no
variety of roads to righteousness, and so Abraham is called “the father
of all them that believe,” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p12.1"></span>,) because he is a pattern adapted to all;
nay, in his person has been laid down to us the universal rule for
obtaining righteousness.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p13"></span>6. *Even as Abraham*. We must here supply
some such phrase as *but rather*; for, having put a question, he
resolved instantly to cut off every ground of hesitation. At least the
phrase “*even as*,” (καθὼς,) refers only to the verse immediately
preceding, to the “ministration of the Spirit and of miracles by the
hearing of faith;” as if he had said, that, in the grace bestowed on
them, a similarity might be found to the case of Abraham.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p14"></span>*Believed God*. By this quotation he
proves both here, and in the 4th chapter of the Epistle to the Romans,
that men are justified by faith, because the faith of Abraham *was
accounted to him, for righteousness*. (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ro
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003)<span id="iii.v.ii-p14.1"></span>.)
We must here inquire briefly, first, what Paul intends by *faith*;
secondly, what is *righteousness*; and thirdly, why faith is represented
to be a cause of justification. Faith does not mean any kind of
conviction which men may have of the truth of God; for though Cain had a
hundred times exercised faith in God when denouncing punishment against
him, this had nothing to do with obtaining righteousness. Abraham was
justified by believing, because, when he received from God a promise of
fatherly kindness, he embraced it as certain. Faith therefore has a
relation and respect to such a divine promise as may enable men to place
their trust and confidence in God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p15"></span>As to the word *righteousness*, we must
attend to the phraseology of Moses. When he says, that

<span id="iii.v.ii-p16"></span>“he believed in the Lord,  
and he counted it to him for righteousness,” (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p16.2"></span>[Ge
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p16.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p17"></span>he intimates that that person is
righteous who is reckoned as such in the sight of God. Now, since men
have not righteousness dwelling within themselves, they obtain this by
imputation; because God holds their faith as accounted for
righteousness. We are therefore said to be “justified by faith,” (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p17.1"></span>[Rom. 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028),
[Rom. 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p17.1"></span>,) not because faith infuses into us a habit
or quality, but because we are accepted by God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p18"></span>But why does faith receive such honor as
to be entitled a cause of our justification? First, we must observe,
that it is merely an instrumental cause; for, strictly speaking, our
righteousness is nothing else than God’s free acceptance of us, on which
our salvation is founded. But as the Lord testifies his love and grace
in the gospel, by offering to us that righteousness of which I have
spoken, so we receive it by faith. And thus, when we ascribe to faith a
man’s justification, we are not treating of the principal cause, but
merely pointing out the way in which men arrive at true righteousness.
For this righteousness is not a quality which exists in men, but is the
mere gift of God, and is enjoyed by faith only; and not even as a reward
justly due to faith, but because we receive by faith what God freely
gives. All such expressions as the following are of similar import: We
are “justified freely by his grace.” (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p18.1"></span>[Ro
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p18.1"></span>.) Christ is our righteousness. The mercy of
God is the cause of our righteousness. By the death and resurrection of
Christ, righteousness has been procured for us. Righteousness is
bestowed on us through the gospel. We obtain righteousness by faith.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p19"></span>Hence appears the ridiculousness of the
blunder of attempting to reconcile the two propositions, that we are
justified by faith, and that we are justified at the same time by works;
for he who is “just by faith” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p19.1"></span>[Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.ii-p19.1"></span>
<span id="iii.v.ii-p19.2"></span>[Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p19.2"></span>) is poor and destitute of personal
righteousness, and relies on the grace of God alone. And this is the
reason why Paul, in the Epistle to the Romans, concludes that Abraham,
having obtained righteousness by faith, had no right to glory before
God. (<span id="iii.v.ii-p19.3"></span>[Ro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002)<span id="iii.v.ii-p19.3"></span>.)
For it is not said that faith was imputed to him for a part of
righteousness, but simply for righteousness; so that his faith was truly
his righteousness. Besides, faith looks at nothing but the mercy of God,
and a dead and risen Christ. All merit of works is thus excluded from
being the cause of justification, when the whole is ascribed to faith.
For faith, — so far as it embraces the undeserved goodness of God,
Christ with all his benefits, the testimony of our adoption which is
contained in the gospel, — is universally contrasted with the law, with
the merit of works, and with human excellence. The notion of the
sophists, that it is contrasted with ceremonies alone, will presently be
disproved, with little difficulty, from the context. Let us therefore
remember, that those who are righteous by faith, are righteous out of
themselves, that is, in Christ.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p20"></span>Hence, too, we obtain a refutation of the
idle cavilling of certain persons who evade Paul’s reasoning. Moses they
tell us, gives the name of righteousness to goodness; and so means
nothing more than that Abraham was reckoned a good man, because he
believed God. Giddy minds of this description, raised up in our time by
Satan, endeavor, by indirect slanders, to undermine the certainty of
Scripture. Paul knew that Moses was not there giving lessons to boys in
grammar, but was speaking of a decision which God had pronounced, and
very properly viewed the word righteousness in a theological sense. For
it is not in that sense in which goodness is mentioned with approbation
among men, that we are accounted righteous in the sight of God, but only
where we render perfect obedience to the law. Righteousness is
contrasted with the transgression of the law, even in its smallest
point; and because we have it not from ourselves, it is freely given to
us by God.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p21"></span>But here the Jews object that Paul has
completely tortured the words of Moses to suit his own purpose; for
Moses does not here treat of Christ, or of eternal life, but only
mentions an earthly inheritance. The Papists are not very different from
the Jews; for, though they do not venture to inveigh against Paul, they
entirely evade his meaning. Paul, we reply, takes for granted, what
Christians hold to be a first principle, that whatever promises the Lord
made to Abraham were appendages of that first promise,

<span id="iii.v.ii-p22"></span>“I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great
reward.”  
(<span id="iii.v.ii-p22.2"></span>[Ge
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p23"></span>When Abraham received the promise,

<span id="iii.v.ii-p24"></span>“In multiplying I will multiply thy seed
as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand which is upon the
sea-shore” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p24.1"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p24.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p25"></span>he did not limit his view to that word,
but included it in the grace of adoption as a part of the whole, and, in
the same manner, every other promise was viewed by him as a testimony of
God’s fatherly kindness, which tended to strengthen his hope of
salvation. Unbelievers differ from the children of God in this respect,
that, while they enjoy in common with them the bounties of Providence,
they devour them like cattle, and look no higher. The children of God,
on the other hand, knowing that all their blessings have been sanctified
by the promises, acknowledge God in them as their Father. They are often
directed, in this way, to the hope of eternal life; for they begin with
the faith of their adoption, which is the foundation of the whole.
Abraham was not justified merely because he believed that God would
“multiply his seed,” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p25.1"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p25.1"></span>,) but because he embraced the grace of God,
trusting to the promised Mediator, in whom, as Paul elsewhere declares,
“all the promises of God are yea and amen.” (<span
id="iii.v.ii-p25.2"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p26"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p27"></span>**7.** *Know ye therefore*, or, *ye
know*; for both readings are equally agreeable to the Greek termination
γινώσκετε. But it matters little which is preferred, for the meaning is
the same, only that the old translation, (*know ye*,) which I have
followed, is more energetic.  <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) He
says that those “are of faith,” who have relinquished all confidence in
works, and rely on the promise of God alone. It is on the authority of
Paul himself that we give this interpretation; for in the Epistle to the
Romans he thus writes:

<span id="iii.v.ii-p29"></span>“To him that worketh is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt. But to him that worketh not, but
believeth on him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
righteousness.” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p29.1"></span>[Rom.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.ii-p29.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.ii-p30"></span>To be *of faith*, therefore, is to rest
their righteousness and hope of salvation on the mercy of God. That such
are the children of God he concludes from the preceding statement; for
if Abraham was justified by faith those who wish to be his children must
likewise abide firmly by faith. He has omitted one remark, which will be
readily supplied, that there is no place in the church for any man who
is not a son of Abraham.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p31"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p32"></span>**8.** *The scripture foreseeing*. What
he had said in a general manner is now applied expressly to the
Gentiles; for the calling of the Gentiles was a new and extraordinary
occurrence. Doubts existed as to the manner in which they should be
called. Some thought that they were required “to be circumcised and to
keep the law,” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p32.1"></span>[Ac
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)<span
id="iii.v.ii-p32.1"></span>,) and that otherwise they were shut out from
having a share in the covenant. But Paul shews, on the other hand, that
by faith they arrive at the blessing, and by faith they must be “in
grafted” (<span id="iii.v.ii-p32.2"></span>[Rom.
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024)<span id="iii.v.ii-p32.2"></span>,)
into the family of Abraham. How does he prove this? Because it is said,
*In thee shall all nations be blessed*. These words unquestionably
recall that all must be blessed in the same manner as Abraham; for he is
the model, nay, the rule, to be universally observed. Now, he obtained
the blessing by faith, and in the same manner must it be obtained by
all.

<span id="iii.v.ii-p33"></span><span id="iii.v.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p34"></span>**9.** *Faithful Abraham*. This
expression is very emphatic. They *are blessed*, not with Abraham as
circumcised, nor as entitled to boast of the works of the law, nor as a
Hebrew, nor as relying on his own excellence, but with Abraham, who by
faith alone obtained the blessing; for no personal quality is here taken
into the account, but faith alone. The word Blessing is variously
employed in Scripture: but here it signifies Adoption into the
inheritance of eternal life.

<span id="iii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p2"></span>**10.** For as many as are of the works
of the law are under the curse: for it is written, Cursed *is* every one
that continueth not in all things which are written in the book of the
law to do them.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p3"></span>**10.** Quictrnque enim ex operibus Legis
sunt, sub maledictione sunt. Scripture est enim (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p3.1"></span>[De
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p3.1"></span>): Maledictus omnis, qui non permanet in
omnibus, quae scripta sunt in libro Legis, ut facial ca.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p4"></span>**11.** But that no man is justified by
the law in the sight of God, *it is* evident: for, The just shall live
by faith.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p5"></span>**11.** Quod autem in Lege nerno
justificetur apud Deum, patet, quia justus ex fide rivet. (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p5.1"></span>[Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.iii-p5.1"></span>
<span id="iii.v.iii-p5.2"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.iii-p5.2"></span>
<span id="iii.v.iii-p5.3"></span>[Heb
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#038)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p5.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p6"></span>**12.** And the law is not of faith: but,
The man that doeth them shall live in them.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p7"></span>**12.** Lex autern non estex fide, sed,
Qui fecerit haec homo, rivet in ipsis. (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p7.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p7.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p8"></span>**13.** Christ hath redeemed us from the
curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed
*is* every one that hangeth on a tree:

<span id="iii.v.iii-p9"></span>**13.** Christus nos redemit a
maledictione Legis, factus pro nobis maledictio: (scriptum est enim,
maledictus omnis qui pependerit in ligno, (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p9.1"></span>[De
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p9.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p10"></span>**14.** That the blessing of Abraham
might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ; that we might receive
the promise of the Spirit through faith.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p11"></span>**14.** Ut in Gentes benedictio Abrabae
perveniat per Christum Iesnrn; quo promissionern Spiritus aecipiaruns
per fidem.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.iii-p13"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p14"></span>**10.** *For as many as are of the works
of the law*. The argument is drawn from the contradictory nature of the
two schemes; for the same fountain does not yield both hot and cold. The
law holds all living men under its curse; and from the law, therefore,
it is in vain to expect a blessing. They are declared to be *of the
works of the law* who place their trust for salvation in those works;
for such modes of expression must always be interpreted by the state of
the question. Now, we know that the controversy here relates to
righteousness. All who wish to be justified by the works of the law are
declared to be liable to the curse. But how does he prove this? The
sentence of the law is, that all who have transgressed any part of the
law are cursed. Let us now see if there be any living man who fulfils
the law. But no such person, it is evident, has been, or ever can be
found. All to a man are here condemned. The minor and the conclusion are
wanting, for the entire syllogism would run thus: “Whoever has come
short in any part of the law is cursed; all are held chargeable with
this guilt; therefore all are cursed.” This argument of Paul would not
stand, if we had sufficient strength to fulfill the law; for there would
then be a fatal objection to the minor proposition. Either Paul reasons
badly, or it is impossible for men to fulfill the law.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p15"></span>An antagonist might now object: “I admit
that all transgressors are accursed; what then? Men will be found who
keep the law; for they are free to choose good or evil.” But Paul places
here beyond controversy, what the Papists at this day hold to be a
detestable doctrine, that men are destitute of strength to keep the law.
And so he concludes boldly that all are cursed, because all have been
commanded to keep the law perfectly; which implies that in the present
corruption of our nature the power of keeping it perfectly is wanting.
Hence we conclude that the curse which the law pronounces, though, in
the phrase of logicians, it is *accidental*, is here perpetual and
inseparable from its nature. The blessing which it offers to us is
excluded by our depravity, so that the curse alone remains.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p16"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p17"></span>**11.** *But that no man, is justified
by the law*. He again argues from a comparison of contradictory schemes.
“If we are justified by faith, it is not by the law: but we are
justified by faith therefore it is not by the law.” The minor is proved
by a passage from Habakkuk, which is also quoted in the Epistle to the
Romans. (<span id="iii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>[Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.iii-p17.1"></span>;
<span id="iii.v.iii-p17.2"></span>[Ro
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p17.2"></span>.) The major is proved by the difference in
the methods of justification. The law justifies him who fulfils all its
precepts, while faith justifies those who are destitute of the merit of
works, and who rely on Christ alone. To be justified by our own merit,
and to be justified by the grace of another, are two schemes which
cannot be reconciled: one of them must be overturned by the other. Such
is the amount of the argument: let us now attend to the separate
clauses.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p18"></span>*The just shall live by faith*. As we
had occasion to expound this passage where it occurs in the Epistle to
the Romans, it will be unnecessary to repeat the exposition of it here.
The prophet evidently describes a proud confidence in the flesh as
contrasted with true faith. He declares, that “the just shall live;” by
which he means, not that they are supported for a short period, and
liable to be overwhelmed by an approaching storm; but that they shall
continue to live, and that, even amidst the most imminent danger, their
life shall be preserved. There is therefore no weight in the scornful
reproaches of our adversaries, who allege that the prophet there employs
the word Faith in a wider acceptation than Paul does in this passage. By
Faith he evidently means the exercise of a calm, steady conscience,
relying on God alone; so that Paul’s quotation is properly applied.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p19"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p20"></span>**12.** *And the law is not of faith*.
The law evidently is not contrary to faith; otherwise God would be
unlike himself; but we must return to a principle already noticed, that
Paul’s language is modified by the present aspect of the case. The
contradiction between the law and faith lies in the matter of
justification. You will more easily unite fire and water, than reconcile
these two statements, that men are justified by faith, and that they are
justified by the law. “The law is not of faith;” that is, it has a
method of justifying a man which is wholly at variance with faith.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p21"></span>*But the man who shall do these things.*
The difference lies in this, that man, when he fulfils the law, is
reckoned righteous by a legal righteousness, which he proves by a
quotation from Moses. (<span id="iii.v.iii-p21.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p21.1"></span>.) Now, what is the righteousness of faith?
He defines it in the Epistle to the Romans,

<span id="iii.v.iii-p22"></span>“If thou shalt confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised
him from the dead,  
thou shalt be saved.” (<span id="iii.v.iii-p22.2"></span>[Ro
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p23"></span>And yet it does not follow from this,
that faith is inactive, or that it sets believers free from good works.
For the present question is not, whether believers ought to keep the law
as far as they can, (which is beyond all doubt,) but whether they can
obtain righteousness by works, which is impossible. But since God
promises life to the doers of the law, why does Paul affirm that they
are not righteous? The reply to this objection is easy. There are none
righteous by the works of the law, because there are none who do those
works. We admit that the doers of the law, if there were any such, are
righteous; but since that is a conditional agreement, all are excluded
from life, because no man performs that righteousness which he ought. We
must bear in memory what I have already stated, that to do the law is
not to obey it in part, but to fulfill everything which belongs to
righteousness; and all are at the greatest distance from such
perfection.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p24"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p25"></span>**13.** *Christ hath redeemed us*. The
apostle had made all who are under the law subject to the curse; from
which arose this great difficulty, that the Jews could not free
themselves from the curse of the law. Having stated this difficulty, he
meets it, by shewing that Christ hath made us free, which still farther
aids his purpose. If we are saved, because we have been freed from the
curse of the law, then righteousness is not by the law. He next points
out the manner in which we are made free.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p26"></span>*It is written, Cursed is every one that
hangeth on a tree*. Now, Christ hung upon the cross, therefore he fell
under that curse. But it is certain that he did not suffer that
punishment on his own account. It follows, therefore, either that he was
crucified in vain, or that our curse was laid upon him, in order that we
might be delivered from it. Now, he does not say that Christ was cursed,
but, which is still more, that he was *a curse*, — intimating, that the
curse “of all men  <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58) was laid upon
him” (<span id="iii.v.iii-p27.2"></span>[Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p27.2"></span>.) If any man think this language harsh, let
him be ashamed of the cross of Christ, in the confession of which we
glory. It was not unknown to God what death his own Son would die, when
he pronounced the law, “He that is hanged is accursed of God.” (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p27.3"></span>[De
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p27.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iii-p28"></span>But how does it happen, it will be
asked, that a beloved Son is cursed by his Father? We reply, there are
two things which must be considered, not only in the person of Christ,
but even in his human nature. The one is, that he was the unspotted Lamb
of God, full of blessing and of grace; the other is, that he placed
himself in our room, and thus became a sinner, and subject to the curse,
not in himself indeed, but in us, yet in such a manner, that it became
necessary for him to occupy our place. He could not cease to be the
object of his Father’s love, and yet he endured his wrath. For how could
he reconcile the Father to us, if he had incurred his hatred and
displeasure? We conclude, that he “did always those things that pleased”
(<span id="iii.v.iii-p28.1"></span>[Joh
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.1"></span>) his Father. Again, how would he have freed
us from the wrath of God, if he had not transferred it from us to
himself? Thus, “he was wounded for our transgressions,” (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.2"></span>[Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.2"></span>,) and had to deal with God as an angry
judge. This is the foolishness of the cross, (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.3"></span>[1Co
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.3"></span>,) and the admiration of angels, (<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.4"></span>[1Pe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p28.4"></span>,) which not only exceeds, but swallows up,
all the wisdom of the world.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p29"></span><span id="iii.v.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p30"></span>**14.** *That the blessing of Abraham*.
Having said that “Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law” he
now applies that statement more closely to his purpose. The promised
blessing of Abraham is founded on this, and flows from it to the
Gentiles. If the Jews must be delivered from the law, in order to become
the heirs of Abraham, what shall hinder the Gentiles from obtaining the
same benefit? And if that blessing is found in Christ alone, it is faith
in Christ which alone brings it into our possession.

<span id="iii.v.iii-p31"></span>*The promise of the Spirit* appears to
me to mean, agreeably to a Hebrew idiom, a spiritual promise. Although
that promise relates to the New Testament, “I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh,” (<span id="iii.v.iii-p31.1"></span>[Joe
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028)<span
id="iii.v.iii-p31.1"></span>,) yet, in this passage, Paul refers to
another subject. The spirit is here contrasted with all outward things,
not with ceremonies merely, but with lineal descent, so as to leave no
room for diversity of rank. From the nature of the promise, he proves
that Jews differ nothing from Gentiles; because, if it is spiritual, it
is received by faith alone.

<span id="iii.v.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p2"></span>**15.** Brethren, I speak after the manner
of men; Though *it be* but a man’s covenant, yet *if it be* confirmed,
no man disannulleth, or addeth thereto.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p3"></span>**15.** Fratres, (secundum hominem dico)
Hominis licet pactum, tamen si sit comprobatum, nemo rejicit aut addit
aliquid.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p4"></span>**16.** Now to Abraham and his seed were
the promises made. He saith not, And to seeds, as of many; but as of
one, And to thy seed, which is Christ.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p5"></span>**16.** Porro Abrahae dictae sunt
promissiones, et semini ejus. Non dicit, Et seminibus, tanquam
Deuteronomy multis, sed tanquam Deuteronomy uno, Et semini tuo, qui est
Christus.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p6"></span>**17.** And this I say, *that* the
covenant, that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the law, which was
four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should
make the promise of none effect.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p7"></span>**17.** Hoc autem dico: pactum ante
comprobatum a Deo erga Christum, Lex, quae post annos quadringentos et
triginta coepit, non facit irritum, ut abroget Promissionem.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p8"></span>**18.** For if the inheritance *be* of the
law, *it is* no more of promise: but God gave *it* to Abraham by
promise.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p9"></span>**18.** Nam si ex Lege haereditas, non jam
ex Promissione; atqui Abrahae per Promissionem donavit Deus.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.iv-p11"></span><span id="iii.v.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p12"></span>**15.** *I speak after the manner of
men*. By this expression he intended to put them to the blush. It is
highly disgraceful and base that the testimony of God should have less
weight with us than that of a mortal man. In demanding that the sacred
covenant of God shall receive not less deference than is commonly
yielded to ordinary human transactions, he does not place God on a level
with men. The immense distance between God and men is still left for
their consideration.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p13"></span>*Though it be but a man’s covenant*. This
is an argument from the less to the greater. Human contracts are
admitted on all hands to be binding: how much more what God has
established? The Greek word διαθήκη, here used, signifies more
frequently, what the Latin versions here render it, (*testamentum*,) a
*testament*; but sometimes too, a *covenant*, though in this latter
sense the plural number is more generally employed. It is of little
importance to the present passage, whether you explain it *covenant* or
*testament*. The case is different with the Epistle to the Hebrews,
where the apostle unquestionably alludes to testaments, (<span
id="iii.v.iv-p13.1"></span>[Heb. 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.iv-p13.1"></span>;)
but here I prefer to take it simply for the covenant which God made. The
analogy from which the apostle argues, would not apply so strictly to a
testament as to a covenant. The apostle appears to reason from human
bargains to that solemn covenant into which God entered with Abraham. If
human bargains be so firm that they can receive no addition, how much
more must this covenant remain inviolable?

<span id="iii.v.iv-p14"></span><span id="iii.v.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p15"></span>**16.** *Now to Abraham, and his seed*.
Before pursuing his argument, he introduces an observation about the
substance of the covenant, that it rests on Christ alone. But if Christ
be the foundation of the bargain, it follows that it is of free grace;
and this too is the meaning of the word *promise*. As the law has
respect to men and to their works, so the promise has respect to the
grace of God and to faith.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p16"></span>*He saith not, And to seeds.* To prove
that in this place God speaks of Christ, he calls attention to the
singular number as denoting some particular seed. I have often been
astonished that Christians, when they saw this passage so perversely
tortured by the Jews, did not make a more determined resistance; for all
pass it slightly as if it were an indisputed territory. And yet there is
much plausibility in their objection. Since the word *seed* is a
collective noun, Paul appears to reason inconclusively, when he contends
that a single individual is denoted by this word, under which all the
descendants of Abraham are comprehended in a passage already quoted, “In
multiplying I will multiply thy seed, <span
id="iii.v.iv-p16.1"></span>ערז (*zerang*,) or <span
id="iii.v.iv-p16.2"></span>ךערז (*zargnacha*,) as the stars of the
heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea-shore.” (<span
id="iii.v.iv-p16.3"></span>[Ge
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p16.3"></span>.) Having, as they imagine, detected the
fallacy of the argument, they treat us with haughty triumph.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p17"></span>I am the more surprised that our own
writers should have been silent on this head, as we have abundant means
of repelling their slander. Among Abraham’s own sons a division began,
for one of the sons was cut off from the family. “In Isaac shall thy
seed be called.” (<span id="iii.v.iv-p17.1"></span>[Ge
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p17.1"></span>.) Consequently Ishmael is not included in
the reckoning. Let us come a step lower. Do the Jews allow that the
posterity of Esau are the blessed seed? nay, it will be maintained that
their father, though the first-born, was struck off. And how many
nations have sprung from the stock of Abraham who have no share in this
“calling?” The twelve patriarchs, at length, formed twelve heads, not
because they were descended from the line of Abraham, but because they
had been appointed by a particular election of God. Since the ten tribes
were carried away, (<span id="iii.v.iv-p17.2"></span>[Ho
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p17.2"></span>,) how many thousands have so degenerated
that they no longer hold a name among the seed of Abraham? Lastly, a
trial was made of the tribe of Judah, that the real succession to the
blessing might be transmitted among a small people. And this had been
predicted by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.v.iv-p18"></span>“Though thy people Israel be as the sand
of the sea,  
yet a remnant of them shall return.” (<span
id="iii.v.iv-p18.2"></span>[Isa
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iv-p19"></span>Hitherto I have said nothing which the
Jews themselves do not acknowledge. Let them answer me then; how comes
it that the thirteen tribes sprung from the twelve patriarchs were the
seed of Abraham, in preference to Ishmaelites and Edomites? Why do they
exclusively glory in that name, and set aside the others as a spurious
seed? They will, no doubt, boast that they have obtained it by their own
merit; but Scripture, on the contrary, asserts that all depends on the
calling of God; for we must constantly return to the privilege conveyed
in these words, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called.” (<span
id="iii.v.iv-p19.1"></span>[Ge
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p19.1"></span>.) The uninterrupted succession to this
privilege must have been in force until Christ; for, in the person of
David, the Lord afterwards brought back by recovery, as we might say,
the promise which had been made to Abraham. In proving, therefore, that
this prediction applies to a single individual, Paul does not make his
argument rest on the use of the singular number. He merely shews that
the word *seed* must denote one who was not only descended from Abraham
according to the flesh, but had been likewise appointed for this purpose
by the calling of God. If the Jews deny this, they will only make
themselves ridiculous by their obstinacy.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p20"></span>But as Paul likewise argues from these
words, that a covenant had been made in Christ, or to Christ, let us
inquire into the force of that expression,

<span id="iii.v.iv-p21"></span>“In thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed.”  
(<span id="iii.v.iv-p21.2"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iv-p22"></span>The Jews taunt the apostle with making a
comparison, as if the seed of Abraham were to be quoted as an example in
all disastrous omens and prayers; while, on the contrary, to curse in
Sodom or Israel is to employ the name of Sodom or Israel in forms of
cursing. This, I own, is sometimes the case, but not always; for to
bless one’s self in God has quite a different meaning, as the Jews
themselves admit. Since, therefore, the phrase is ambiguous, denoting
sometimes a cause and sometimes a comparison, wherever, it occurs, it
must be explained by the context. We have ascertained, then, that we are
all cursed by nature, and that the blessing of Abraham has been promised
to all nations. Do all indiscriminately reach it? Certainly not, but
those only who are “gathered” (<span id="iii.v.iv-p22.1"></span>[Isa
66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)<span id="iii.v.iv-p22.1"></span>)
to the Messiah; for when, under His government and direction, they are
collected into one body, they then become one people. Whoever then,
laying disputing aside, shall inquire into the truth, will readily
acknowledge that the words here signify not a mere comparison but a
cause; and hence it follows that Paul had good ground for saying, that
the covenant was made in Christ, or in reference to Christ.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p23"></span><span id="iii.v.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p24"></span>**17.** *The law which was four hundred
and thirty years after*. If we listen to Origen and Jerome and all the
Papists, there will be little difficulty in refuting this argument. Paul
reasons thus: “A promise was given to Abraham four hundred and thirty
years before the publication of the law; therefore the law which came
after could not disannul the promise; and hence he concludes that
ceremonies are not necessary.” But it may be objected, the sacraments
were given in order to preserve the faith, and why should Paul separate
them from the promise? He does so separate them, and proceeds to argue
on the matter. The ceremonies themselves are not so much considered by
him as something higher, — the effect of justification which was
attributed to them by false apostles, and the obligation on the
conscience. From ceremonies, accordingly, he takes occasion to discuss
the whole subject of faith and works. If the point in dispute had no
connection with obtaining righteousness, with the merit of works, or
with ensnaring the conscience, ceremonies would be quite consistent with
the promise.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p25"></span>What, then, is meant by this
*disannulling* of the promise, against which the apostle contends? The
impostors denied that salvation is freely promised to men, and received
by faith, and, as we shall presently see, urged the necessity of works
in order to merit salvation. I return to Paul’s own language. “The law,”
he says, “is later than the promise, and therefore does not revoke it;
for a covenant once sanctioned must remain perpetually binding.” I again
repeat, if you do not understand that the promise is free, there will be
no force in the statement; for the law and the promise are not at
variance but on this single point, that the law justifies a man by the
merit of works, and the promise bestows righteousness freely. This is
made abundantly clear when he calls it a *covenant* founded on Christ.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p26"></span>But here we shall have the Papists to
oppose us, for they will find a ready method of evading this argument.
“We do not require,” they will say, “that the old ceremonies shall be
any longer binding; let them be laid out of the question; nevertheless a
man is justified by the moral law. For this law, which is as old as the
creation of man, went before God’s covenant with Abraham; so that Paul’s
reasoning is either frivolous, or it holds against ceremonies alone.” I
answer, Paul took into account what was certainly true, that, except by
a covenant with God, no reward is due to works. Admitting, then, that
the law justifies, yet before the law men could not merit salvation by
works, because there was no covenant. All that I am now affirming is
granted by the scholastic theologians: for they maintain that works are
meritorious of salvation, not by their intrinsic worth, but by the
acceptance of God, (to use their own phrase,) and on the ground of a
covenant. Consequently, where no divine covenant, no declaration of
acceptance is found, — no works will be available for justification: so
that Paul’s argument is perfectly conclusive. He tells us that God made
two covenants with men; one through Abraham, and another through Moses.
The former, being founded on Christ, was free; and therefore the law,
which came after, could not enable men to obtain salvation otherwise
than by grace, for then, “it would make the promise of none effect.”
That this is the meaning appears clearly from what immediately follows.

<span id="iii.v.iv-p27"></span><span id="iii.v.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iv-p28"></span>**18.** *If the inheritance be of the
law*. His opponents might still reply, that nothing was farther from
their intention than to weaken or disannul God’s covenant. To deprive
them of every kind of subterfuge, he comes forward with the assertion,
that salvation by the law, and salvation by the promise of God, are
wholly inconsistent with each other. Who will dare to explain this as
applying to ceremonies alone, while Paul comprehends under it whatever
interferes with a free promise? Beyond all doubt, he excludes works of
every description. “For,” says he to the Romans,

<span id="iii.v.iv-p29"></span>“if they which are of the law be heirs,
faith is made void,  
and the promise made of none effect.” (<span
id="iii.v.iv-p29.2"></span>[Ro
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#014)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iv-p30"></span>Why so? Because salvation would be
suspended on the condition of satisfying the law; and so he immediately
concludes:

<span id="iii.v.iv-p31"></span>“Therefore it is of faith, that it might
be by grace, in order that the promise might be sure to all the seed.”
(<span id="iii.v.iv-p31.1"></span>[Ro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016)<span
id="iii.v.iv-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.iv-p32"></span>Let us carefully remember the reason why,
in comparing the promise with the law, the establishment of the one
overturns the other. The reason is, that the promise has respect to
faith, and the law to works. Faith receives what is freely given, but to
works a reward is paid. And he immediately adds, *God gave it to
Abraham*, not by requiring some sort of compensation on his part, but by
free promise; for if you view it as conditional, the word *gave*,
(κεχάρισται,) would be utterly inapplicable.

<span id="iii.v.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.v-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)<span id="iii.v.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p2"></span>**19.** Wherefore then *serveth* the law?
It was added because of transgressions, till the seed should come to
whom the promise was made; *and it was* ordained by angels in the hand
of a mediator.

<span id="iii.v.v-p3"></span>**19.** Quid igitur Lex? transgressionum
causa adjuneta fuit, donee veniret semen, cui promissum fuerat, ordinata
per angelos in manu mediatoris.

<span id="iii.v.v-p4"></span>**20.** Now a mediator is not *a mediator*
of one, but God is one.

<span id="iii.v.v-p5"></span>**20.** Porro mediator unius non est; Deus
autem unus est.

<span id="iii.v.v-p6"></span>**21.** *Is* the law then against the
promises of God? God forbid: for if there had been a law given which
could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the law.

<span id="iii.v.v-p7"></span>**21.** Lexne igitur adversus promissiones
Dei? absit; nam si data esset Lex, quae posset vivificare, vere ex Lege
esset justitia.

<span id="iii.v.v-p8"></span>**22.** But the scripture hath concluded
all under sin, that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given
to them that believe.

<span id="iii.v.v-p9"></span>**22.** Sed conclusit Scriptura omnia sub
peccatum, ut promissio ex fide Iesu Christi daretur credentibus.

<span id="iii.v.v-p10"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.v-p11"></span><span id="iii.v.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p12"></span>When we are told that the law has no
influence in obtaining justification, various suggestions immediately
arise, that it must be either useless, or opposed to God’s covenant, or
something of that sort. Nay, it might occur, why should we not say of
the law, what Jeremiah says of the New Testament, (<span
id="iii.v.v-p12.1"></span>[Jer
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031)<span
id="iii.v.v-p12.1"></span>,) that it was given at a later period, in
order to supply the weakness of the former doctrine? Objections of this
kind must be answered, if Paul wished to satisfy the Galatians. First,
then, he inquires, — what is the use of the law? Having come after the
promise, it appears to have been intended to supply its defects; and
there was room at least for doubting, whether the promise would have
been effectual, if it had not been aided by the law. Let it be observed,
that Paul does not speak of the moral law only, but of everything
connected with the office held by Moses. That office, which was peculiar
to Moses, consisted in laying down a rule of life and ceremonies to be
observed in the worship of God, and in afterwards adding promises and
threatenings. Many promises, no doubt, relating to the free mercy of God
and to Christ, are to be found in his writings; and these promises
belong to faith. But this must be viewed as accidental, and altogether
foreign to the inquiry, so far as a comparison is made between the law
and the doctrine of grace. Let it be remembered, that the amount of the
question is this: When a promise had been made, why did Moses afterwards
add that new condition, “If a man do, he shall live in them;” and,
“Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do them?”
(<span id="iii.v.v-p12.2"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.v-p12.2"></span>;
<span id="iii.v.v-p12.3"></span>[De
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)<span
id="iii.v.v-p12.3"></span>.) Was it to produce something better and more
perfect?

<span id="iii.v.v-p13"></span>19. *Because of transgressions*. The law
has manifold uses, but Paul confines himself to that which bears on his
present subject. He did not propose to inquire in how many ways the law
is of advantage to men. It is necessary to put readers on their guard on
this point; for very many, I find, have fallen into the mistake of
acknowledging no other advantage belonging to the law, but what is
expressed in this passage. Paul himself elsewhere speaks of the precepts
of the law as profitable for doctrine and exhortations. (<span
id="iii.v.v-p13.1"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span id="iii.v.v-p13.1"></span>.)
The definition here given of the use of the law is not complete, and
those who refuse to make any other acknowledgment in favor of the law do
wrong. Now, what is the import of the phrase, *because of
transgressions*? It agrees with the saying of philosophers, that “The
law was made for restraining evil-doers,” and with the old proverb,
“From bad manners have sprung good laws.” But Paul’s meaning is more
extensive than the words may seem to convey. He means that the law was
published in order to make known transgressions, and in this way to
compel men to acknowledge their guilt. As men naturally are too ready to
excuse themselves, so, until they are roused by the law, their
consciences are asleep.

<span id="iii.v.v-p14"></span>“Until the law,” says Paul, “sin was in
the world:  
but sin is not imputed where there is no law.” (<span
id="iii.v.v-p14.2"></span>[Ro
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#013)<span id="iii.v.v-p14.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.v-p15"></span>The law came and roused the sleepers, for
this is the true preparation for Christ. “By the law is the knowledge of
sin.” (<span id="iii.v.v-p15.1"></span>[Ro
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)<span id="iii.v.v-p15.1"></span>.)
Why?

<span id="iii.v.v-p16"></span>“That Sin by the commandment might become
exceeding sinful.” (<span id="iii.v.v-p16.1"></span>[Ro
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)<span id="iii.v.v-p16.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.v-p17"></span>Thus, “the law was added because of
transgressions,” in order to reveal their true character, or, as he
tells the Romans, that it might make them to abound. (<span
id="iii.v.v-p17.1"></span>[Ro
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span id="iii.v.v-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.v-p18"></span>This passage has tortured the ingenuity of
Origen, but to no purpose. If God summon consciences to his tribunal,
that those qualities in their transgression, which would otherwise give
them pleasure, may humble them by a conviction of guilt, — if he shake
off the listlessness which overwhelmed all dread of his judgment-seat, —
if he drag to light; sin, which lurked like a thief in the den of
hypocrisy, — what is there in all this that can be reckoned absurd? But
it may be objected: “As the law is the rule of a devout and holy life,
why is it said to be added ‘because of transgressions,’ rather than
‘because of obedience?’” I answer, however much it may point out true
righteousness, yet, owing to the corruption of our nature, its
instruction tends only to increase transgressions, until the Spirit of
regeneration come, who writes it on the heart; and that Spirit is not
given by the law, but is received by faith. This saying of Paul, let the
reader remember, is not of a philosophical or political character, but
expresses a purpose of the law, with which the world had been always
unacquainted.

<span id="iii.v.v-p19"></span>*Till the seed should come*. If it has
respect *to seed*, it must be to that on which the blessing has been
pronounced, and therefore it does not interfere with the promise. The
word till, (ἄχρις οὗ,) signifies *so long as* the seed is expected: and
hence it follows, that it must have been intended to occupy not the
highest, but a subordinate rank. It was given in order to rouse men to
the expectation of Christ. But was it necessary that it should last only
until the coming of Christ? For if so, it follows that it is now
abolished. The whole of that administration, I reply, was temporal, and
was given for the purpose of preserving among the ancient people an
attachment to the faith of Christ. And yet I do not admit that, by the
coming of Christ, the whole law was abolished. The apostle did not
intend this, but merely that the mode of administration, which for a
time had been introduced, must receive its accomplishment in Christ, who
is the fulfillment of the promise.  <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59)
But on this subject we shall have occasion to speak more fully
afterwards.

<span id="iii.v.v-p21"></span>*Ordained by angels*. The circumstance,
that it was delivered through angels, tends to the commendation of the
law. This is declared by Stephen (<span id="iii.v.v-p21.1"></span>[Ac
7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053)<span id="iii.v.v-p21.1"></span>)
also, who says, that they had “received the law, (εἰς διαταγὰς ἀγγέλων,)
into the dispositions of angels.” The interpretation given by some, that
Moses and Aaron, and the priests, are the angels here meant, is more
ingenious than solid. Nor is it wonderful that angels, by whom God
bestows on us some of the smallest of his blessings, should have been
intrusted also with this office of attending as witnesses at the
promulgation of the law.

<span id="iii.v.v-p22"></span>*In the hand of a Mediator* *Hand* usually
signifies ministration; but as angels were ministers in giving the law,
I consider “the hand of the Mediator” to denote the highest rank of
service. The Mediator was at the head of the embassy, and angels were
united with him as his companions. Some apply this expression to Moses,
as marking a comparison between Moses and Christ; but I agree rather
with the ancient expositors, who apply it to Christ himself.  <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) This view, it will be found, agrees
better with the context, though I differ from the ancients likewise as
to the meaning of the word. *Mediator* does not, as they imagine,
signify here one who makes reconciliation, which it does in these words,

<span id="iii.v.v-p24"></span>“There is one Mediator between God and
men,  
the man Christ Jesus,” (<span id="iii.v.v-p24.2"></span>[1Ti
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.v-p24.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.v-p25"></span>— but an ambassador employed in
promulgating a law.

<span id="iii.v.v-p26"></span>We are thus to understand, that, since the
beginning of the world, God has held no intercourse with men, but
through the agency of his eternal Wisdom or Son. Hence Peter says, that
the holy prophets spake by the “Spirit of Christ,” (<span
id="iii.v.v-p26.1"></span>[1Pe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#011)<span id="iii.v.v-p26.1"></span>,)
and Paul makes him the leader of the people in the wilderness. (<span
id="iii.v.v-p26.2"></span>[1Co
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iii.v.v-p26.2"></span>.)
And certainly the Angel who appeared to Moses, (<span
id="iii.v.v-p26.3"></span>[Ex 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)<span
id="iii.v.v-p26.3"></span>,) can be no other person; for he claims to
himself the peculiar and essential name of God, which is never applied
to creatures. As he is the Mediator of reconciliation, by whom we are
accepted of God, — the Mediator of intercession, who opens up for us a
way to “call on the Father,” (<span id="iii.v.v-p26.4"></span>[1Pe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.v-p26.4"></span>,)
— so he has always been the Mediator of all doctrine, because by him God
has always revealed himself to men. And this he intended to state
expressly, for the purpose of informing the Galatians, that he who is
the foundation of the covenant of grace, held also the highest rank in
the giving of the law.

<span id="iii.v.v-p27"></span><span id="iii.v.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p28"></span>**20.** *Now, a mediator is not a mediator
of one.* Some are disposed to philosophize on this expression, and would
make Paul’s meaning to be, that the twofold nature of Christ is not one
in essence. But that Paul is here speaking of the contracting parties,
no man of sound judgment entertains a doubt. And so they commonly
expound it, that there is no room for a Mediator, unless when one of the
parties has a matter to transact with the other. But why that statement
should have been introduced they leave undetermined, though the passage
manifestly deserves the most careful attention. There may, perhaps, be
an Anticipation (πρόληψις) of some wicked thought that might arise about
a change of the divine purpose. Some one might say, “As men, when they
change their mind about their covenants, are wont to retract them, so
has it happened with the covenants of God.” If you take this to be the
meaning, then, in the former clause, Paul would acknowledge that men,
who occupy one side of this contract, are unsteady and changeable, while
God nevertheless remains the same, is consistent with himself, and
partakes not of the unsteadiness of men.

<span id="iii.v.v-p29"></span>But when I take a closer view of the whole
subject, I rather think that it marks a difference between Jews and
Gentiles. Christ is not the Mediator of one, because, in respect of
outward character, there is a diversity of condition among those with
whom, through his mediation, God enters into covenant. But Paul asserts
that we have no right to judge in this manner of the covenant of God, as
if it contradicted itself, or varied according to the diversities of
men. The words are now clear. As Christ formerly reconciled God to the
Jews in making a covenant, so now he is the Mediator of the Gentiles.
The Jews differ widely from the Gentiles; for circumcision and
ceremonies have erected “the middle wall of partition between them.”
(<span id="iii.v.v-p29.1"></span>[Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span id="iii.v.v-p29.1"></span>.)
They were “nigh” to God, (<span id="iii.v.v-p29.2"></span>[Eph
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#013)<span id="iii.v.v-p29.2"></span>,)
while the Gentiles were “afar off;” but still God is consistent with
himself. This becomes evident, when Christ brings those who formerly
differed among themselves to one God, and makes them unite in one body.
*God is one*, because he always continues to be like himself, and, with
unvarying regularity, holds fixed and unalterable the purpose which he
has once made.  <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61)

<span id="iii.v.v-p31"></span><span id="iii.v.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p32"></span>**21.** *Is the law then against the
promises of God?* The certainty and steadiness of the divine purpose
being admitted, we are bound equally to conclude that its results are
not contrary to each other. Still there was a difficulty to be resolved,
arising from the apparent contradiction between the Law and the covenant
of grace. This is, perhaps, an exclamation. Dreading no farther
contradiction, now that the point is settled, Paul concludes, that the
former arguments have placed it beyond a doubt, and exclaims: “Who will
now dare to imagine a disagreement between the law and the promises?”
And yet this does not prevent Paul from proceeding to remove the
difficulties that might still arise.

<span id="iii.v.v-p33"></span>Before answering the question, he
expresses, in his usual manner, a high disdain of such folly; thus
intimating the strong abhorrence with which pious men must regard
whatever brings reproach on the Divine character. But another instance
of high address, which claims our notice, is found in this turn of
expression. He charges his adversaries with the offense of making God
contradict himself. For from him the Law and the promises have evidently
proceeded: whoever then alleges any contradiction between them
blasphemes against God: but they do contradict each other, if the Law
justifies. Thus does Paul most dexterously retort upon his adversaries
the charge which they falsely and calumniously brought against him.

<span id="iii.v.v-p34"></span>*For if there had been a law given*. The
reply is (what is called) indirect, and does not plainly assert an
agreement between the law and the promises, but contains all that is
necessary to remove the contradiction. At first sight, you would say
that this sentence departs from the context, and has nothing to do with
the solution of the question; but this is not the case. The law would be
opposed to the promises, if it had the power of justifying; for there
would be two opposite methods of justifying a man, two separate roads
towards the attainment of righteousness. But Paul refuses to the law
such a power; so that the contradiction is removed. I would admit, says
he, that righteousness is obtained by the law, if salvation were found
in it. But what?

<span id="iii.v.v-p35"></span><span id="iii.v.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p36"></span>**22.** *The Scripture hath concluded*. By
the word Scripture is chiefly intended the law itself. It “hath
concluded all under sin,” and therefore, instead of giving, it takes
away righteousness from all. The reasoning is most powerful. “You seek
righteousness in the law: but the law itself, with the whole of
Scripture, leaves nothing to men but condemnation; for all men, with
their works, are pronounced to be unrighteous: who then shall live by
the law?” He alludes to these words,

<span id="iii.v.v-p37"></span>“He who shall do these things, shall live
in them.” (<span id="iii.v.v-p37.1"></span>[Le
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.v-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.v-p38"></span>Shut out by it, says he, from life through
guilt, in vain should we seek salvation by the law. — The word
translated *all* (τὰ πάντα) signifies *all things*, and conveys more
than if he had said *all men*; for it embraces not only men, but every
thing which they possess or can accomplish.

<span id="iii.v.v-p39"></span>*That the promise by faith*. There is no
remedy but to throw away the righteousness of works, and betake
ourselves to the faith of Christ. The result is certain. If works come
into judgment, we are all condemned; therefore we obtain, by the faith
of Christ, a free righteousness. This sentence is full of the highest
consolation. It tells us that, wherever we hear ourselves condemned in
Scripture, there is help provided for us in Christ, if we betake
ourselves to him. We are lost, though God were silent: why then does he
so often pronounce that we are lost? It is that we may not perish by
everlasting destruction, but, struck and confounded by such a dreadful
sentence, may by faith seek Christ, through whom we “pass from death
into life.” (<span id="iii.v.v-p39.1"></span>[1Jo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014)<span id="iii.v.v-p39.1"></span>.)
By a figure of speech, (μετωνυμία,) in which the thing containing is put
for the thing contained, the *promise* denotes that which is promised.

<span id="iii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
3:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#023)<span
id="iii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p2"></span>**23.** But before faith came, we were
kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be
revealed.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p3"></span>**23.** Antequam autem veniret fides, sub
Lege custodiebamur, conclusi sub fidem, quae revelanda erat.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p4"></span>**24.** Wherefore the law was our
schoolmaster *to bring us* unto Christ, that we might be justified by
faith.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p5"></span>**24.** Itaque Lex paedagogus noster fuit
in Christum, ut ex fide justificaremur.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p6"></span>**25.** But after that faith is come, we
are no longer under a schoolmaster.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p7"></span>**25.** Adveniente autem fide, non amplius
sub paedagogo sumus.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p8"></span>**26.** For ye are all the children of God
by faith in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p9"></span>**26.** Nam omnes filii Dei estis per
fidem in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p10"></span>**27.** For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ have put on Christ.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p11"></span>**27.** Siquidem quicunque in Christum
baptizati estis, Christum induistis.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p12"></span>**28.** There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p13"></span>**28.** Non est Iudaeus neque Graecus,
non est servus neque liber, non est masculus neque femina; onmes enim
vos unus estis in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p14"></span>**29.** And if ye *be* Christ’s, then are
ye Abraham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p15"></span>**29.** Si autem vos Christi, ergo semen
Abrahae estis, et secundum promissionem haeredes.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p16"></span> 

<span id="iii.v.vi-p17"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p18"></span>**23.** *Before faith came*. The question
proposed is now more fully defined. He explains at great length the use
of the law, and the reason why it was temporal; for otherwise it would
have appeared to be always unreasonable that a law should be delivered
to the Jews, from which the Gentiles were excluded. If there be but one
church consisting of Jews and Gentiles, why is there a diversity in its
government? Whence is this new liberty derived, and on what authority
does it rest, since the fathers were under subjection to the law? He
therefore informs us, that the distinction is such as not to interrupt
the union and harmony of the church.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p19"></span>We must again remind the reader that Paul
does not treat exclusively of ceremonies, or of the moral law, but
embraces the whole economy by which the Lord governed his people under
the Old Testament. It became a subject of dispute whether the form of
government instituted by Moses had any influence in obtaining
righteousness. Paul compares this law first to a *prison*, and next to a
*schoolmaster*. Such was the nature of the law, as both comparisons
plainly show, that it could not have been in force beyond a certain
time.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p20"></span>*Faith* denotes the full revelation of
those things which, during the darkness of the shadows of the law, were
dimly seen; for he does not intend to say that the fathers, who lived
under the law, did not possess faith. The faith of Abraham has already
come under our notice, and other instances are quoted by the author of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. (<span id="iii.v.vi-p20.1"></span>[Heb
11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#000)<span id="iii.v.vi-p20.1"></span>.)
The doctrine of faith, in short, is attested by Moses and all the
prophets: but, as faith was not then clearly manifested, so the *time of
faith* is an appellation here given, not in an absolute, but in a
comparative sense, to the time of the New Testament. That this was his
meaning is evident from what he immediately adds, that they were *shut
up under the faith which should afterwards be revealed;* for this
implies that those who were under the custody of the law were partakers
of the same faith. The law did not restrain them from faith; but, that
they might not wander from the fold of faith, it kept possession of
themselves. There is an elegant allusion, too, to what he had formerly
said, that “the scripture hath concluded all under sin.” They were
besieged on every hand by the curse, but this siege was counteracted by
an imprisonment which protected them from the curse; so that the
imprisonment by the law is here proved to have been highly generous in
its character.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p21"></span>Faith was not yet *revealed*, not because
the fathers wanted light, but because they had less light than we have.
The ceremonies might be said to shadow out an absent Christ, but to us
he is represented as actually present, and thus while they had the
mirror, we have the substance. Whatever might be the amount of darkness
under the law, the fathers were not ignorant of the road in which they
ought to walk. Though the dawn is not equal to the splendor of noon,
yet, as it is sufficient to direct a journey, travelers do not wait till
the sun is fully risen. Their portion of light resembled the dawn, which
was enough to preserve them from all error, and guide them to
everlasting blessedness.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p22"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p23"></span>**24.** *Wherefore the law was our
schoolmaster* This is the second comparison, which still more clearly
expresses Paul’s design. A schoolmaster is not appointed for the whole
life, but only for childhood, as the etymology of the Greek word
παιδαγωγός implies.  <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62) Besides, in
training a child, the object is to prepare him, by the instructions of
childhood, for maturer years. The comparison applies in both respects to
the law, for its authority was limited to a particular age, and its
whole object was to prepare its scholars in such a manner, that, when
its elementary instructions were closed, they might make progress worthy
of manhood. And so he adds, that it was our schoolmaster (εἰς Χριστὸν)
*unto Christ*. The grammarian, when he has trained a boy, delivers him
into the hands of another, who conducts him through the higher branches
of a finished education. In like manner, the law was the grammar of
theology, which, after carrying its scholars a short way, handed them
over to *faith* to be completed. Thus, Paul compares the Jews to
children, and us to advanced youth.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p25"></span>But a question arises, what was the
instruction or education of this schoolmaster? First, the law, by
displaying the justice of God, convinced them that in themselves they
were unrighteous; for in the commandments of God, as in a mirror, they
might see how far they were distant from true righteousness. They were
thus reminded that righteousness must be sought in some other quarter.
The promises of the law served the same purpose, and might lead to such
reflections as these: “If you cannot obtain life by works but by
fulfilling the law, some new and different method must be sought. Your
weakness will never allow you to ascend so high; nay, though you desire
and strive ever so much, you will fall far short of the object.” The
threatenings, on the other hand, pressed and entreated them to seek
refuge from the wrath and curse of God, and gave them no rest till they
were constrained to seek the grace of Christ.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p26"></span>Such too, was the tendency of all the
ceremonies; for what end did sacrifices and washings serve but to keep
the mind continually fixed on pollution and condemnation? When a man’s
uncleanness is placed before his eyes, when the unoffending animal is
held forth as the image of his own death, how can he indulge in sleep?
How can he but be roused to the earnest cry for deliverance? Beyond all
doubt, ceremonies accomplished their object, not merely by alarming and
humbling the conscience, but by exciting them to the faith of the coming
Redeemer. In the imposing services of the Mosaic ritual, every thing
that was presented to the eye bore an impress of Christ. The law, in
short, was nothing else than an immense variety of exercises, in which
the worshippers were led by the hand to Christ.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p27"></span>*That we might be justified by faith*. He
has already said that the law is not perfect, when he compared it to the
training of childhood; but it would make men perfect if it bestowed upon
them righteousness. What remains but that faith shall take its place?
And so it does, when we, who are destitute of a righteousness of our
own, are clothed by it with the righteousness of Christ. Thus is the
saying accomplished, “he hath filled the hungry with good things.”
(<span id="iii.v.vi-p27.1"></span>[Lu
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#053)<span
id="iii.v.vi-p27.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.vi-p28"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p29"></span>**25.** *But after that faith is come*.
This phrase has been already considered. It denotes the brighter
revelation of grace after that “the vail of the temple was rent in
twain,” (<span id="iii.v.vi-p29.1"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span
id="iii.v.vi-p29.1"></span>,) which, we know, was effected by the
manifestation of Christ. He affirms that, under the reign of Christ,
there is no longer any childhood which needs to be placed under a
schoolmaster, and that, consequently, the law has resigned its office, —
which is another application of the comparison. There were two things
which he had undertaken to prove, — that the law is a preparation for
Christ, and that it is temporal. But here the question is again put, Is
the law so abolished that we have nothing to do with it? I answer, the
law, so far as it is a rule of life, a bridle to keep us in the fear of
the Lord, a spur to correct the sluggishness of our flesh, — so far, in
short, as it is

<span id="iii.v.vi-p30"></span>“profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that believers may be
instructed in every good work,” (<span id="iii.v.vi-p30.1"></span>[2
Tim. 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.vi-p30.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v.vi-p31"></span>— is as much in force as ever, and
remains untouched.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p32"></span>In what respect, then, is it abolished?
Paul, we have said, looks at the law as possessing certain qualities,
and those qualities we shall enumerate. It annexes to works a reward and
a punishment; that is, it promises life to those who keep it, and curses
all transgressors. Meanwhile, it requires from man the highest
perfection and most exact obedience. It makes no abatement, gives no
pardon, but calls to a severe reckoning the smallest offenses. It does
not openly exhibit Christ and his grace, but points him out at a
distance, and only when hidden by the covering of ceremonies. All such
qualities of the law, Paul tells us, are abolished; so that the office
of Moses is now at an end, so far as it differs in outward aspect from a
covenant of grace.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p33"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p34"></span>**26.** *For ye are all the children of
God*. It would be unjust, and in the highest degree unreasonable, that
the law should hold believers in perpetual slavery. This is proved by
the additional argument, that they are the children of God. It would not
be enough to say that we are no longer children, unless it were added
that we are freemen; for in slaves age makes no alteration. The fact of
their being the children of God proves their freedom. How? *By faith in
Christ Jesus;* for

<span id="iii.v.vi-p35"></span>“as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name.”  
(<span id="iii.v.vi-p35.2"></span>[Joh
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.v.vi-p35.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.vi-p36"></span>Since, then, by faith we have obtained
adoption, by faith likewise we have obtained our freedom.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p37"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p38"></span>**27.** *As many of you as have been
baptized*. The greater and loftier the privilege is of being the
children of God, the farther is it removed from our senses, and the more
difficult to obtain belief. He therefore explains, in a few words, what
is implied in our being united, or rather, made one with the Son of God;
so as to remove all doubt, that what belongs to him is communicated to
us. He employs the metaphor of a garment, when he says that the
Galatians *have put on Christ*; but he means that they are so closely
united to him, that, in the presence of God, they bear the name and
character of Christ, and are viewed in him rather than in themselves.
This metaphor or similitude, taken from garments, occurs frequently, and
has been treated by us in other places.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p39"></span>But the argument, that, because they have
been baptized, they have put on Christ, appears weak; for how far is
baptism from being efficacious in all? Is it reasonable that the grace
of the Holy Spirit should be so closely linked to an external symbol?
Does not the uniform doctrine of Scripture, as well as experience,
appear to confute this statement? I answer, it is customary with Paul to
treat of the sacraments in two points of view. When he is dealing with
hypocrites, in whom the mere symbol awakens pride, he then proclaims
loudly the emptiness and worthlessness of the outward symbol, and
denounces, in strong terms, their foolish confidence. In such cases he
contemplates not the ordinance of God, but the corruption of wicked men.
When, on the other hand, he addresses believers, who make a proper use
of the symbols, he then views them in connection with the truth — which
they represent. In this case, he makes no boast of any false splendor as
belonging to the sacraments, but calls our attention to the actual fact
represented by the outward ceremony. Thus, agreeably to the Divine
appointment, the truth comes to be associated with the symbols.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p40"></span>But perhaps some person will ask, Is it
then possible that, through the fault of men, a sacrament shall cease to
bear a figurative meaning? The reply is easy. Though wicked men may
derive no advantage from the sacraments, they still retain undiminished
their nature and force. The sacraments present, both to good and to bad
men, the grace of God. No falsehood attaches to the promises which they
exhibit of the grace of the Holy Spirit. Believers receive what is
offered; and if wicked men, by rejecting it, render the offer
unprofitable to themselves, their conduct cannot destroy the
faithfulness of God, or the true meaning of the sacrament.  <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63) With strict propriety, then, does Paul,
in addressing believers, say, that when they were baptized, they “put on
Christ;” just as, in the Epistle to the Romans, he says,

<span id="iii.v.vi-p42"></span>“that we have been planted together into
his death,  
so as to be also partakers of his resurrection.”  
(<span id="iii.v.vi-p42.3"></span>[Ro
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.vi-p42.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.v.vi-p43"></span>In this way, the symbol and the Divine
operation are kept distinct, and yet the meaning of the sacraments is
manifest; so that they cannot be regarded as empty and trivial
exhibitions; and we are reminded with what base ingratitude they are
chargeable, who, by abusing the precious ordinances of God, not only
render them unprofitable to themselves, but turn them to their own
destruction!

<span id="iii.v.vi-p44"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p45"></span>**28.** *There is neither Jew nor Greek*.
The meaning is, that there is no distinction of persons here, and
therefore it is of no consequence to what nation or condition any one
may belong: nor is circumcision any more regarded than sex or civil
rank. And why? Because Christ makes them all one. Whatever may have been
their former differences, Christ alone is able to unite them all. *Ye
are one:* the distinction is now removed. The apostle’s object is to
shew that the grace of adoption, and the hope of salvation, do not
depend on the law, but are contained in Christ alone, who therefore is
all. Greek is here put, as usual, for Gentile, and one department for
the whole class.

<span id="iii.v.vi-p46"></span><span id="iii.v.vi-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p47"></span>**29.** *Then are ye Abraham’s seed*.
This is not intended to convey the idea, that to be a child of Abraham
is better than to be a member of Christ, — but to repress the pride of
the Jews, who gloried in their privilege, as if they alone were the
people of God. They reckoned no distinction higher than to belong to the
race of Abraham; and this very distinction he makes to be common to all
who believe in Christ. The conclusion rests on this argument, that
Christ is the blessed seed, in whom, as we have said, all the children
of Abraham are united. He proves this by the universal offer of the
inheritance to them all, from which it follows, that the promise
includes them among the children. It deserves notice, that, wherever
faith is mentioned, it is always his relation to the promise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[54](cc41007.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iii.v.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p15"></span> “<span
id="iii.v.i-p15.1"></span>Βασκαίνειν, ‘to enchant, to fascinate, to
delude by magical charms,’ — -rather an uncommon word, <span
id="iii.v.i-p15.2"></span>ἃπαξ λεγόμενον in the New Testament. It may
amuse to notice the etumon of the word. Some grammarians have strangely
thought it derived from <span id="iii.v.i-p15.3"></span>φάεσι καίνειν,
‘to kill with the eyes.’ Its true etymology obviously is, <span
id="iii.v.i-p15.4"></span>βάω, βάσκω, βασκάω βασκαίνω. βάσκω (equivalent
to <span id="iii.v.i-p15.5"></span>φάσκω,), ‘to say, to speak,’ comes,
in the form <span id="iii.v.i-p15.6"></span>βασκαίνω, to signify <span
id="iii.v.i-p15.7"></span>κακολογεῖν, ‘to calumniate,’ then ‘to
deceive,’ then ‘to deceive by magical arts.’” — Brown.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[55](cc41007.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iii.v.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p18"></span> <span id="iii.v.i-p18.1"></span>Καὶ μὴν
οὐκ ἐν τὣ<span id="iii.v.i-p18.2"></span> Γαλατῶν χώρᾳ ἀλλ ᾿ ἐν <span
id="iii.v.i-p18.3"></span>̔ιεροσολύμοις ἐσταυρώθν. Πῶς οὖν φησιν, ἐν
ὑμῖν; Τὢς πίστεως δεικνὺς τὴν ἰσχυν καὶ τὰ πόρ᾿ῥωθεν δυναμένης ὁρᾷν. Καὶ
οὐκ εἶπεν, ἐσταυρώθη ἀλλὰ προεγράθη ἐσταυρωμένος δηλῶν ὅτι τοῖς τὢς
πίστεως ὀφθαλμοῖς ἀκριβέστερον ἐθεώρησαν τῶν παρόντων ἐνίων καὶ τὰ
γινόμενα θεωμένων “Yet it was not in the country of the Galatians, but
in Jerusalem, that he was crucified. How, then, does he say, ‘Among
you?’ To demonstrate the power of faith, which is able to see even
distant objects, And he does not say, ‘Was crucified,’ but ‘Was painted
crucified,’ shewing that by the eyes of faith they beheld more
distinctly than some who were present and saw the transactions.” —
Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[56](cc41007.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iii.v.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p22"></span> “Display the sufferings of Christ like
one who was an eye-witness of those sufferings, and hold up the blood,
the precious blood of atonement, as issuing warm from the cross.” —
Robert Hall.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[57](cc41007.htm#fr_56) <span
id="iii.v.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.i-p26"></span> “Did ye receive that Spirit which was the
fullest evidence of your being justified, accepted, and received as the
children and people of God, by conformity to the law of Moses, or by
embracing the doctrine of the gospel? If by embracing the doctrine of
the gospel, then you became justified by embracing that doctrine, and
consequently need not conform to the law of Moses, in order to obtain
justification.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[58](cc41007.htm#fr_57) <span
id="iii.v.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.ii-p28"></span> “The scope of the passage shews that
<span id="iii.v.ii-p28.1"></span>γινώσκετε is not the Indicative, but
the Imperative. Paul does not presuppose that the Galatians acknowledge
this principle; he is exerting himself to convince them of it.” — Brown.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[59](cc41007.htm#fr_58) <span
id="iii.v.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="iii.v.iii-p27.1"></span>La
malediction de tous hommes.”

<span id="fn_59"></span>[60](cc41007.htm#fr_59) <span
id="iii.v.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.v.v-p20.1"></span>Qui est
le parfait accomplissement de la promesse.” “Who is the perfect
accomplishment of the promise.”

<span id="fn_60"></span>[61](cc41007.htm#fr_60) <span
id="iii.v.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p23"></span> “Though some learned men have been of
opinion that the mediator here mentioned is the Son of God, yet I think
no reasonable doubt can be entertained as to its denoting Moses.
Strictly speaking, Aaron, or rather the priesthood, was the mediator of
the old covenant. It answers to the Great High-Priest, (<span
id="iii.v.v-p23.1"></span>ἀρχιερεύς,) Mediator, (<span
id="iii.v.v-p23.2"></span>μεσίτης,) and Surety, (<span
id="iii.v.v-p23.3"></span>ἔγγυος,) of the new covenant. But the
reference seems here to the *giving* of the law: that was by Moses. ‘The
law was given by Moses.’ (<span id="iii.v.v-p23.4"></span>[Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)<span id="iii.v.v-p23.4"></span>.)
God speaks to Moses, and Moses speaks to the people; and this
arrangement was entered into by the express request of the people
themselves. Moses himself says, ‘I stood between the Lord and you at
that time. (<span id="iii.v.v-p23.5"></span>[De
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005)<span id="iii.v.v-p23.5"></span>.)
Philo calls Moses <span id="iii.v.v-p23.6"></span>μεσίτης.” — Brown.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[62](cc41007.htm#fr_61) <span
id="iii.v.v-p29.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v.v-p30"></span> “This is confessedly one of the most
obscure passages in the New Testament, and, perhaps, above all others,
‘<span id="iii.v.v-p30.1"></span>vexatus ab interpretibus,’ (tortured by
interpreters,) if it be true, as Winer affirms, that there are no less
than 250 modes of explanation, most of which are stated and reviewed by
Koppe, Berger, Keil, Bonitz, Weigand, and Scheft.” — (Bloomfield.)
Schott remarks, that the bare fact of upwards of 250 interpretations
makes it impossible to deny that some obscurity attaches to the
Apostle’s language in this passage, arising chiefly from mere brevity of
style, but judiciously adds, that, had there not been many commentators
more eager to bring forward anything that has the appearance of novelty,
than to investigate the ordinary meaning of the terms, the scope of the
passage, and the doctrinal statements and reasonings contained in the
writings of the Apostle Paul, the interpretations would never have
swelled to so large an amount. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[63](cc41007.htm#fr_62) <span
id="iii.v.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p24"></span> “As the law was before compared to a
*jailer*, so it is here likened to a <span
id="iii.v.vi-p24.1"></span>παιδαγωγός, by which term is not to be
understood a *schoolmaster*, (for that would have been <span
id="iii.v.vi-p24.2"></span>διδάσκαλος,) but the paedagous or person
(usually a freedman or slave) who conducted children to and from school,
attended them out of school hours, formed their manners, superintended
their moral conduct, and in various respects prepared them for the <span
id="iii.v.vi-p24.3"></span>διδάσκαλος.” — Bloomfield. Our author’s
observations on <span id="iii.v.vi-p24.4"></span>παιδαγωγός, in another
passage, have brought out the full meaning of this word, and the
classical authorities for the use of it, in the translator’s notes. —
Calvin on the Corinthians, vol. 1, p. 169. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_63"></span>[64](cc41007.htm#fr_63) <span
id="iii.v.vi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v.vi-p41"></span> “If any person receives nothing more
than this bodily washing, which is perceived by the eyes of flesh, he
has not put on the Lord Jesus Christ.” — Jerome.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc41008)
