[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41000)  [Next](cc41002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span> 

<span id="ii-p2"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The extraordinary ability and skill displayed by
Calvin, in his Commentaries on the Inspired Writings, have been set
forth by almost all the Translators of this Series. I have always
thought, and am happy to have the support of his latest Editor, Dr.
Tholuck, that he is more successful in expounding the Epistles Of Paul
than in any other portion of Scripture. This might arise in part from
having studied them with uncommon ardor and perseverance. The times in
which he lived held out strong inducements to examine the great
peculiarities of the Christian Faith. And where were these so likely to
be found as in the writings of an Apostle whom the Spirit of God
employed, more than all the others, in unfolding to the Church “the
unsearchable riches of Christ?” (<span id="ii-p3.1"></span>[Eph
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#008)<span id="ii-p3.1"></span>.)

<span id="ii-p4"></span>How far that success might be promoted by the
resemblance of character which an able and eloquent writer  <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) asserts to have existed between the great
Apostle and the Reformer, I leave undetermined. But the chief cause
unquestionably lay in his singularly clear perception of that scheme of
doctrine which Paul was honored to declare. This enabled him to
penetrate the design of the Apostle, and to follow closely the course of
his argument. In discussions of the greatest intricacy he seldom loses
his way.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>Various authors, who cannot be named without
awakening gratitude, and to whom it would be impossible to do justice in
this brief sketch, have supplied the materials of valuable Notes to this
volume. From their pages it would have been easy to select many a warm
tribute to the Genevan Reformer, to whom they were deeply indebted, and
whose writings were consulted by them with acknowledged deference. The
greatest lights of our age have not superseded the labors of Calvin, and
ablest divines vie with each other in doing homage to his great sagacity
as an interpreter of the Holy Scriptures.

<span id="ii-p7"></span>To my younger brethren in the ministry may I
take the liberty of recommending these Commentaries as an excellent
model for expounding the inspired Epistles? The frequent mention of
Popery does not lessen the value of this recommendation. How far it may
be necessary, at all times, to fortify our hearers against the attacks
of the “man of sin,” (<span id="ii-p7.1"></span>[2Th
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)<span id="ii-p7.1"></span>,) I do
not now stay to inquire. But as a skillful, natural, and impressive
application of divine truth to the controversies of the day, the
warnings against Popery deserve careful study. They are appropriately
introduced, and serve to illustrate more fully the mind of the Spirit.

<span id="ii-p8"></span>In describing them as models, it may be proper
to mention that they are strictly what their title bears, Commentaries,
unaccompanied by those illustrations which, in public instruction, are
indispensably necessary. To devout minds they will have many
attractions. They are imbued with the ardent piety and that copious use
of the language of Scripture by which all the writings of Calvin are so
eminently distinguished.

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Achtebarder,  
6th September 1854.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc41001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p5"></span> “The Paul of the Reformation. More than two
hundred and fifty years have elapsed since he went to join the Apostle
whom he so much resembled in the kingdom of God.” — Dr. Mason on
Catholic Communion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Galatians](cc41002)
