[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41009)  [Next](cc41011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="iii.viii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p1"></span><span
id="iii.viii.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
6:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)<span
id="iii.viii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Brethren, if a man be overtaken
in a fault, ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the spirit of
meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Fratres, etiamsi praeoccupatus
fuerit homo in aliquo lapsu, vos, qui spirituales estis, instaurate
ejusmodi hominem spiritu lenitatis; considerans to ipsum, ne tu quoque
tenteris.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Bear ye one another’s burdens,
and so fulfil the law of Christ.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Alii aliorum onera portate, et
sic adimplete legem Christi.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p6"></span>**3.** For if a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Nam si quis putat se esse
aliquid, quum nihil sit, se ipsum decipit.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p8"></span>**4.** But let every man prove his own
worth, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone, and not in
another.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Opus antem suum probet
unusquisque; et tunc in se ipso solo gloriam habebit, non antem in alio.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p10"></span>**5.** For every man shall bear his own
burden.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Quisque enim proprium onus
portabit.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.viii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p14"></span>**1.** *Brethren, if a man be overtaken
in any fault*  <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) Ambition is a
serious and alarming evil. But hardly less injury is frequently done by
unseasonable and excessive severity, which, under the plausible name of
zeal, springs in many instances from pride, and from dislike and
contempt of the brethren. Most men seize on the faults of brethren as an
occasion of insulting them, and of using reproachful and cruel language.
Were the pleasure they take in upbraiding equalled by their desire to
produce amendment, they would act in a different manner. Reproof, and
often sharp and severe reproof, must be administered to offenders. But
while we must not shrink from a faithful testimony against sin, neither
must we omit to mix oil with the vinegar.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p16"></span>We are here taught to correct the
faults of brethren in a mild manner, and to consider no rebukes as
partaking a religious and Christian character which do not breathe the
spirit of meekness. To gain this object, he explains the design of pious
reproofs, which is*, to restore him who is fallen,* to place him in his
former condition. That design will never be accomplished by violence, or
by a disposition to accuse, or by fierceness of manner or language; and
consequently, we must display a gentle and meek spirit, if we intend to
heal our brother. And lest any man should satisfy himself with assuming
the outward form, he demands *the spirit of meekness*; for no man is
prepared for chastising a brother till he has succeeded in acquiring a
gentle spirit.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="iii.viii.i-p18"></span>Another argument for gentleness in
correcting brethren is contained in the expression, “if a man be
*overtaken*.” If he has been carried away through want of consideration,
or through the cunning arts of a deceiver, it would be cruel to treat
such a man with harshness. Now, we know that the devil is always lying
in wait, and has a thousand ways of leading us astray. When we perceive
a brother to have transgressed, let us consider that he has fallen into
the snares of Satan; let us be moved with compassion, and prepare our
minds to exercise forgiveness. But offenses and falls of this
description must undoubtedly be distinguished from deep seated crimes,
accompanied by deliberate and obstinate disregard of the authority of
God. Such a display of wicked and perverse disobedience to God must be
visited with greater severity, for what advantage would be gained by
gentle treatment? The particle *if also*, (ἐὰν καὶ,) implies that not
only the weak who have been tempted, but those who have yielded to
temptation, shall receive forbearance.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p19"></span>*Ye who are spiritual*. This is not
spoken in irony; for, however spiritual they might be, still they were
not wholly filled with the Spirit. It belongs to such persons to raise
up the fallen. To what better purpose can their superior attainments be
applied than to promote the salvation of the brethren? The more
eminently any man is endowed with Divine grace, the more strongly is he
bound to consult the edification of those who have been less favored.
But such is our folly, that in our best duties we are apt to fail, and
therefore need the exhortation which the apostle gives to guard against
the influence of carnal views.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p20"></span>*Considering thyself*. It is not
without reason that the apostle passes from the plural to the singular
number. He gives weight to his admonition, when he addresses each person
individually, and bids him look carefully into himself. “Whoever thou
art that takest upon thee the office of reproving others, look to
thyself.” Nothing is more difficult than to bring us to acknowledge or
examine our own weakness. Whatever may be our acuteness in detecting the
faults of others, we do not see, as the saying is, “the wallet that
hangs behind our own back;”  <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95) and
therefore, to arouse us to greater activity, he employs the singular
number.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p22"></span>These words may admit of two senses. As
we acknowledge that we are liable to sin, we more willingly grant that
forgiveness to others which, in our turn, we expect will be extended to
us. Some interpret them in this manner: “Thou who art a sinner, and
needest the compassion of thy brethren, oughtest not to show thyself
fierce and implacable to others.”  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)
But I would rather choose to expound them as a warning given by Paul,
that, in correcting others, we should not ourselves commit sin. There is
a danger here which deserves our most careful attention, and against
which it is difficult to guard; for nothing is more easy than to exceed
the proper limits. The word *tempt*, however, may very properly be taken
in this passage as extended to the whole life. Whenever we have occasion
to pronounce censure, let us begin with ourselves, and, remembering our
own weakness, let us be indulgent to others.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p24"></span><span id="iii.viii.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p25"></span>**2.** *Bear ye one another’s burdens*.
The weaknesses or sins, under which we groan, are called *burdens*. This
phrase is singularly appropriate in an exhortation to kind behavior, for
nature dictates to us that those who bend under a burden ought to be
relieved. He enjoins us to *bear* the burdens. We must not indulge or
overlook the sins by which our brethren are pressed down, but relieve
them, — which can only be done by mild and friendly correction. There
are many adulterers and thieves, many wicked and abandoned characters of
every description, who would willingly make Christ an accomplice in
their crimes. All would choose to lay upon believers the task of bearing
their burdens. But as the apostle had immediately before exhorted us to
*restore* a brother, the manner in which Christians are required to
*bear one another’s burdens* cannot be mistaken.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p26"></span>*And so fulfill the law of Christ*. The
word *law*, when applied here to Christ, serves the place of an
argument. There is an implied contrast between the law of Christ and the
law of Moses. “If you are very desirous to keep a law, Christ enjoins on
you a law which you are bound to prefer to all others, and that is, to
cherish kindness towards each other. He who has not this has nothing. On
the other hand, he tells us, that, when every one compassionately
assists his neighbor, the law of Christ is *fulfilled*; by which he
intimates that every thing which does not proceed from love is
superfluous; for the composition of the Greek word ἀναπληρώσατε, conveys
the idea of what is absolutely perfect. But as no man performs in every
respect what Paul requires, we are still at a distance from perfection.
He who comes the nearest to it with regard to others, is yet far distant
with respect to God.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p27"></span><span id="iii.viii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p28"></span>**3.** *For if a man think himself*.
There is an ambiguity in the construction, but Paul’s meaning is clear.
The phrase, *When he is nothing*, appears at first view to mean, “if any
person, who is in reality nothing, claims to be something;” as there are
many men of no real worth who are elated by a foolish admiration of
themselves. But the meaning is more general, and may be thus expressed:
“Since all men are nothing, he who wishes to appear something, and
persuades himself that he is somebody, deceives himself.” First, then,
he declares that we are nothing, by which he means, that we have nothing
of our own of which we have a right to boast, but are destitute of every
thing good: so that all our glorying is mere vanity. Secondly, he infers
that they who claim something as their own deceive themselves. Now,
since nothing excites our indignation more than that others should
impose upon us, it argues the height of folly that we should willingly
impose upon ourselves. This consideration will render us much more
candid to others. Whence proceeds fierce insult or haughty sternness,
but from this, that every one exalts himself in his own estimation, and
proudly despises others? Let arrogance be removed, and we shall all
discover the greatest modesty in our conduct towards each other.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.viii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p30"></span>**4.** *But let every man prove his own
work*. By a powerful blow, Paul has already struck down the pride of
man. But it frequently happens that, by comparing ourselves with others,
the low opinion which we form of them leads us to entertain a high
opinion of ourselves. Paul declares that no such comparison ought to be
allowed. Let no man, he says, measure himself by the standard of
another, or please himself with the thought, that others appear to him
less worthy of approbation. Let him lay aside all regard to other men,
examine his own conscience, and inquire what is *his own work*. It is
not what we gain by detracting from others, but what we have without any
comparison, that can be regarded as true praise.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p31"></span>Some consider Paul to be speaking in
irony. “Thou flatterest thyself by a comparison with the faults of
others; but if thou wilt consider who thou art, thou wilt then enjoy the
praise which is justly due to thee.” In other words, no praise whatever
shall be thine; because there is no man by whom the smallest portion of
praise is really deserved. In conformity with this view, the words that
follow, *every man shall bear his own burden*, are supposed to mean,
that it is usual for every man to bear his own burden. But the plain and
direct sense of the words agrees better with the apostle’s reasoning.
“With respect to thyself alone, and not by comparison with others, thou
wilt have praise.” I am well aware that the next sentence, which
annihilates all the glory of man, has been regarded as justifying the
ironical interpretation. But the glorying of which this passage treats,
is that of a good conscience, in which the Lord allows his people to
indulge, and which Paul elsewhere expresses in very animated language.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p32"></span>“Paul earnestly beholding the council,
said, Men and brethren, I have lived in all good conscience before God
until this day.”  
(<span id="iii.viii.i-p32.2"></span>[Ac
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001)<span
id="iii.viii.i-p32.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.i-p33"></span>This is nothing more than an
acknowledgment of Divine grace, which reflects no praise whatever on
man, but excites him to give God the glory. Such a reason for glorying
do the godly find in themselves; and they ascribe it, not to their own
merits, but to the riches of the grace of God.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p34"></span>“For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of a good conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world.”  
(<span id="iii.viii.i-p34.2"></span>[2Co
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012)<span
id="iii.viii.i-p34.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.i-p35"></span>Our Lord himself instructs us:

<span id="iii.viii.i-p36"></span>“But thou, when thou prayest, enter
into thy closet; and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
who is in secret; and thy Father, who seeth in secret, shall reward thee
openly.”  
(<span id="iii.viii.i-p36.2"></span>[Mt
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.viii.i-p36.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.i-p37"></span>Strictly speaking, he makes no
assertion, but leads us to conclude, that, when a man is valued for his
own worth, and not for the baseness of others, the praise is just and
substantial. The statement is therefore conditional, and imports that
none are entitled to be regarded as good men, who are not found to be
so, apart from the consideration of others.

<span id="iii.viii.i-p38"></span><span id="iii.viii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p39"></span>**5.** *For every man shall bear his
own burdens*. To destroy sloth and pride, he brings before us the
judgment of God, in which every individual for himself, and without a
comparison with others, will give an account of his life. It is thus
that we are deceived; for, if a man who has but one eye is placed among
the blind, he considers his vision to be perfect; and a tawny person
among negroes thinks himself white. The apostle affirms that the false
conclusions to which we are thus conducted will find no place in the
judgment of God; because there every one will bear his own burden, and
none will stand acquitted by others from their own sins. This is the
true meaning of the words.

<span id="iii.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
6:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#006)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p2"></span>**6.** Let him that is taught in the
word communicate unto him that teacheth in all good things.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Coremunicet is, qui instituitur
in sermone, cum doctore, in omnibus bonis.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Be not deceived; God is not
mocked: for whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Ne erretis: Deus non
subsannatur; quod enim seminaverit homo, hoc etiam metet.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p6"></span>**8.** For he that soweth to his flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit
shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p7"></span>**8.** Nam qui seminat carni suae, ex
carne metet corruptionem; qui autem seminat Spiritui, ex Spiritu metet
vitam aeternam.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p8"></span>**9.** And let us not be weary in well
doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Bonum antem faciendo ne
defatigemur; nam si non defecerimus, metemus opportuno tempore.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p10"></span>**10.** As we have therefore
opportunity, let us do good unto all *men*, especially unto them who are
of the household of faith..

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Ergo ubi tempus habemus,
benefaciamus erga omnes, praesertim vero erga domesticos fidel.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p13"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p14"></span>**6.** *Let him that is taught in the
word*. It is probable that the teachers and ministers of the word were
at that time neglected. This shewed the basest ingratitude. How
disgraceful is it to defraud of their temporal support those by whom our
souls are fed! — to refuse an earthly recompense to those from whom we
receive heavenly benefits! But it is, and always has been, the
disposition of the world, freely to bestow on the ministers of Satan
every luxury, and hardly to supply godly pastors with necessary food.
Though it does not become us to indulge too much in complaint, or to be
too tenacious of our rights, yet Paul found himself called upon to
exhort the Galatians to perform this part of their duty. He was the more
ready to do so, because he had no private interest in the matter, but
consulted the universal benefit of the Church, without any regard to his
own advantage. He saw that the ministers of the word were neglected,
because the word itself was despised; for if the word be truly esteemed,
its ministers will always receive kind and honorable treatment. It is
one of the tricks of Satan to defraud godly ministers of support, that
the Church may be deprived of such ministers.  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) An earnest desire to preserve a gospel
ministry, led to Paul’s recommendation that proper attention should be
paid to good and faithful pastors.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p16"></span>*The word* is here put, by way of
eminence, (κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν,) for the doctrine of godliness. Support is
declared to be due to those by whom we *are taught in the word*. Under
this designation the Papal system supports idle bellies of dumb men, and
fierce wild beasts, who have nothing in common with the doctrine of
Christ. *In all good things*. He does not propose that no limit should
be set to their worldly enjoyments, or that they should revel in
superfluous abundance, but merely that none of the necessary supports of
life should be withheld. Ministers ought to be satisfied with moderate
fare, and the danger which attends pomp and luxury ought to be
prevented. To supply their real necessities, let believers cheerfully
devote any part of their property that may be required for the services
of devout and holy teachers. What return will they make for the
invaluable treasure of eternal life, which is communicated to them by
the preaching of those men?

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p17"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p18"></span>**7.** *God is not mocked*. The design
of this observation is to reply to the dishonest excuses which are
frequently pleaded. One alleges that he has a family to support, and
another asserts that he has no superfluity of wealth to spend in
liberality or profusion. The consequence is, that, while such multitudes
withhold their aid, the few persons who do their duty are generally
unable to contribute the necessary support. These apologies Paul utterly
rejects, for a reason which the world little considers, that this
transaction is with God. The supply of a man’s bodily wants is not the
sole question, but involves the degree of our regard for Christ and his
gospel. This passage contains evidence that the custom of treating
faithful ministers with scorn did not originate in the present day; but
their wicked taunts will not pass unpunished.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p19"></span>*For whatsoever a man soweth*. Our
liberality is restrained by the supposition, that whatever passes into
the hands of another is lost to ourselves, and by the alarm we feel
about our own prospects in life. Paul meets these views by a comparison
drawn from seed-time, which, he tells us, is a fit representation of
acts of beneficence. On this subject we had occasion to speak, in
expounding the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, where the same
metaphor was employed. Happy would it be for us, if this truth were
deeply impressed upon our minds. How “very gladly” would we “spend and
be spent” (<span id="iii.viii.ii-p19.1"></span>[2Co
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#015)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p19.1"></span>) for the good of our neighbours,
encouraged by the hope of the coming harvest! No operation is more
cheerfully performed by husbandmen than throwing the seed into the
ground. They are enabled to wait with patience during nine months of the
year, by the expectation of reaping a corruptible harvest, while our
minds are not properly affected by the hope of a blessed immortality.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p21"></span>**8.** *For he that soweth to his
flesh*. Having stated the general sentiment, he now divides it into
parts. To *sow to the flesh*, is to look forward to the wants of the
present life, without any regard to a future life. They who do this will
gather fruit corresponding to the seed which they have sown, — will heap
up that which shall miserably perish. *To sow in the flesh*, (<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p21.1"></span>*seminare in carne*,) is supposed by some
to mean indulgence in the lusts of the flesh, and corruption to mean
destruction; but the former exposition agrees better with the context.
In departing from the old translation and from Erasmus, I have not acted
rashly. The Greek words, ὁ σπείρων εἰς τὴν σάρκα ἑαυτοῦ, literally
signify, *he that soweth into his flesh*. And what else does this mean,
but to be so entirely devoted to the flesh, as to direct all our
thoughts to its interests or convenience?

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p22"></span>*But he that soweth to the spirit*. By
*the spirit* I understand the spiritual life, to which they are said to
sow whose views are directed more to heaven than to earth, and whose
life is regulated by the desire of reaching the kingdom of God. From
their spiritual employments they will reap in heaven incorruptible
fruit. Those employments are denominated spiritual on account of their
end, though in some respects they are external and relate to the body,
as in the very case now under consideration of supporting pastors. If
the Papists shall endeavor, in their usual manner, to build upon these
words the righteousness of works, we have already shewn how easily their
absurdities may be exposed. Though eternal life is a reward, it does not
follow either that we are justified by works, or that works are
meritorious of salvation. The undeserved kindness of God appears in the
very act of honoring the works which his grace has enabled us to
perform, by promising to them a reward to which they are not entitled.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p23"></span>Is a more complete solution of the
question demanded?

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p24"></span>**1.** We have no good works which God
rewards but those which we derive from his grace.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p25"></span>**2.** The good works which we perform
by the guidance and direction of the Holy Spirit, are the fruits of that
adoption which is an act of free grace.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p26"></span>**3.** They are not only unworthy of
the smallest and most inconsiderable reward, but deserve to be wholly
condemned, because they are always stained by many blemishes; and what
have pollutions to do with the presence of God?

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p27"></span>**4.** Though a reward had been a
thousand times promised to works, yet it is not due but by fulfilling
the condition of obeying the law perfectly; and how widely distant are
we all from that perfection!

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p28"></span>Let Papists now go and attempt to
force their way into heaven by the merit of works. We cheerfully concur
with Paul and with the whole Bible in acknowledging, that we are unable
to do anything but by the free grace of God, and yet that the benefits
resulting from our works receive the name of a reward.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p29"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p30"></span>**9.** *Let us not be weary in
well-doing. Well-doing* (καλὸν) does not simply mean doing our duty, but
the performance of acts of kindness, and has a reference to men. We are
instructed *not to be weary* in assisting our neighbours, in performing
good offices, and in exercising generosity. This precept is highly
necessary; for we are naturally reluctant to discharge the duties of
brotherly love, and many unpleasant occurrences arise by which the ardor
of the best disposed persons is apt to be cooled. We meet with many
unworthy and many ungrateful persons. The vast number of necessitous
cases overwhelms us, and the applications which crowd upon us from every
quarter exhaust our patience. Our warmth is abated by the coolness of
other men. In short, the world presents innumerable hinderances, which
tend to lead us aside from the right path. Most properly, therefore,
does Paul admonish us not to relax through weariness.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p31"></span>*If we faint not*. That is, we shall
reap the fruit which God promises, if we “persevere to the end.” (<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p31.1"></span>[Mt
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#022)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p31.1"></span>.) Those who do not persevere resemble
indolent husbandmen, who, after ploughing and sowing, leave the work
unfinished, and neglect to take the necessary precautions for protecting
the seed from being devoured by birds, or scorched by the sun, or
destroyed by cold. It is to no purpose that we begin to do good, if we
do not press forward to the goal.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p32"></span>*In due season*  <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98) Let no man, from a wish to gather the
fruit in this life, or before its *proper time*, deprive himself of the
spiritual harvest. The desires of believers must be both supported and
restrained by the exercise of hope and patience.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p34"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p35"></span>**10.** *While we have opportunity.*
The metaphor is still pursued. Every season is not adapted to tillage
and sowing. Active and prudent husbandmen will observe the proper
season, and will not indolently allow it to pass unimproved. Since,
therefore, God has set apart the whole of the present life for ploughing
and sowing, let us avail ourselves of the season, lest, through our
negligence, it may be taken out of our power. Beginning with liberality
to ministers of the gospel, Paul now makes a wider application of his
doctrine, and exhorts us to *do good to all men*, but recommends to our
particular regard *the household of faith*, or believers, because they
belong to the same family with ourselves. This similitude is intended to
excite us to that kind of communication which ought to be maintained
among the members of one family. There are duties which we owe to all
men arising out of a common nature; but the tie of a more sacred
relationship, established by God himself, binds us to believers.

<span id="iii.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p2"></span>**11.** Ye see how large a letter I
have written unto you with mine own hand.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p3"></span>**11.** Videtis, qualibus literis
vobis scripserim mea manu.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p4"></span>**12.** As many as desire to make a
fair shew in the flesh, they constrain you to be circumcised; only lest
they should suffer persecution for the cross of Christ.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p5"></span>**12.** Quicunque volunt placere juxta
faciem in carne, hi cogunt vos circumcidi; tantum ut ne persequutionem
sustineant cruce Christi.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p6"></span>**13.** For neither they themselves
who are circumcised keep the law; but desire to have you circumcised,
that they may glory in your flesh.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p7"></span>**13.** Neque enim qui circumciduntur,
ipsi Legera servant; sed volunt vos circumcidi, ut in carne vestra
glorientur.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.viii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p10"></span>**11.** *Ye see*. The meaning of the
Greek verb ἴδετε, is so far doubtful that it may be taken either in the
imperative or indicative mood; but the force of the passage is little if
at all affected. To convince the Galatians more fully of his anxiety
about them, and at the same time to ensure their careful perusal, he
mentions that this long Epistle had been written with his own hand. The
greater the toil to which he had submitted on their account, the
stronger were their inducements to read it, not in a superficial manner,
but with the closest attention.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p11"></span><span id="iii.viii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p12"></span>**12.** *As many as desire to make a
fair shew in the flesh*. Such men pay no regard to edification, but are
guided by an ambitious desire to hunt after popular applause. The Greek
verb εὐπροσωπὢσαι,  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) is highly
expressive, and denotes the kind looks and address which were assumed
for the purpose of pleasing. He charges the false apostles with
ambition. As if he had said, “When those men lay circumcision upon you
as a necessary burden, do you wish to know what sort of persons they
are, what are the objects of their regard or pursuit? You are mistaken
if you imagine that they are at all influenced by godly zeal. To gain or
preserve the favor of men is the object they have in view in offering
this bribe.” It was because they were Jews that they adopted this method
of retaining the good-will, or at least allaying the resentment, of
their own nation. It is the usual practice of ambitious men meanly to
fawn on those from whose favor they hope to derive advantage, and to
insinuate themselves into their good graces, that, when better men have
been displaced, they may enjoy the undivided power. This wicked design
he lays open to the Galatians, in order to put them on their guard.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p14"></span>*Only lest they should suffer
persecution*. The pure preaching of the gospel is again designated the
cross of Christ. But there is likewise an allusion to their favourite
scheme of resolving to preach Christ without the cross. The deadly rage
by which the Jews were animated against Paul, arose from their being
unable to endure a neglect of ceremonies. To avoid persecution, those
men flattered the Jews. Yet after all, if they had themselves kept the
law, their conduct might have been suffered. On the contrary, they
disturbed the whole church for the sake of their personal ease, and
scrupled not to lay a tyrannical yoke on the consciences of men, that
they might be entirely freed from bodily uneasiness. A dread of the
cross led them to corrupt the true preaching of the cross.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p15"></span><span id="iii.viii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p16"></span>**13.** *For neither they who hold by
circumcision keep the law*. The old version and Erasmus translate thus:
*who are circumcised*. But Paul appears to me to refer to teachers only;
and for this reason I would prefer to render the words, *those who hold
by circumcision,* which would not include all circumcised persons, and
thus would avoid ambiguity. The meaning is, “It is not from a strong
attachment to the law that they bind you with the yoke of ceremonies;
for, even with their own circumcision, they do not keep the law. It is
no doubt under the pretext of the law that they require you to be
circumcised; but, though they have themselves been circumcised, they do
not perform what they enjoin upon others.” When he says, indeed, that
they do not *keep the law*, it is doubtful whether he refers to the
whole law, or to ceremonies. Some understand him as saying that the law
is an intolerable burden, and therefore they do not satisfy its demands.
But he rather insinuates against them a charge of insincerity, because,
except when it suited their own designs, they found themselves at
liberty to despise the law.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p17"></span>Even now this disease rages
everywhere with virulence. You will find many who are prompted more by
ambition than by conscience to defend the tyranny of the papal system. I
speak of our courtly apostles, who are attracted by the smell of a
kitchen, and who pronounce, with an air of authority, that the decrees
of the holy Church of Rome must be observed with reverence. And what is
their own practice all the while! They pay no more regard to any
decisions of the Roman see than to the braying of an ass, but they take
care to avoid personal risk. In short, Paul had the same kind of
controversy with those impostors as we now have with hypocritical
professors of the gospel, who hold out to us a monstrous union between
Christ and the Pope. Paul therefore declares that they are not acting
the part of honest men, and that they have no other object in enjoining
circumcision than to boast to the Jews of the converts they have made.
Such is the import of the words, *that they may glory in your flesh*.
“They wish to triumph over you, and to gratify their own desire of
applause, by offering up your mutilated flesh to the false zealots of
the law, as a token of peace and harmony.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
6:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p2"></span>**14.** But God forbid that I should
glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p3"></span>**14.** Mihi antem absit gloriari, nisi
in truce Domini nostri Iesu Christi, per quam mundus mihi crucifixus
est, et ego mundo.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p4"></span>**15.** For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new creature.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p5"></span>**15.** Nam in Christo neque
circumcisio quicquam valet, neque praeputium; sed nova creatura.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p6"></span>**16.** And as many as walk according
to this rule, peace *be* on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p7"></span>**16.** Et quicunque hac regula
ambulabunt, pax super eos et misericordia, et super Israelem Dei.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p8"></span>**17.** From henceforth let no man
trouble me: for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p9"></span>**17.** In reliquis nemo facessat mihi
molestiam; ego enim stigmata Domini Iesu in corpore meo porto.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p10"></span>**18.** Brethren, the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ *be* with your spirit. Amen.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p11"></span>**18.** Gratia Domini nostri Iesu
Christi cum spiritu vestro, fratres. Amen.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p12"></span> To the Galatians written from Rome.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p13"></span>Ad Galatas missa fuit e Roma.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p15"></span><span id="iii.viii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p16"></span>**14.** *But God forbid that I should
glory*. The designs of the false apostles are here contrasted with his
own sincerity. As if he had said, “To avoid being compelled to bear a
cross, they deny the cross of Christ, purchase with your flesh the
applause of men, and end by triumphing over you. But my triumph and my
glory are in the cross of the Son of God.” If the Galatians had not been
utterly destitute of common sense, ought they not to have held in
abhorrence the men whom they beheld making sport of their dangerous
condition.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p17"></span>*To glory in the cross of Christ*, is
to glory in Christ crucified. But something more is implied. In that
death, — so full of disgrace and ignominy, which God himself has
pronounced to be accursed, and which men are wont to view with
abhorrence and shame, — in that death he will glory, because he obtains
in it perfect happiness. Where man’s highest good exists, there is his
glory. But why does not Paul seek it elsewhere? Though salvation is held
out to us in the cross of Christ, what does he think of his
resurrection? I answer, in the cross redemption in all its parts is
found, but the resurrection of Christ does not lead us away from the
cross. And let it be carefully observed, that every other kind of
glorying is rejected by him as nothing short of a capital offense. “May
God protect us from such a fearful calamity!” Such is the import of the
phrase which Paul constantly employs, *God forbid*

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p18"></span>BY WHICH *the world is crucified*. As
the Greek word for *cross*, σταυρὸς, is masculine, the relative pronoun
may be either rendered *by whom*, or *by which*, according as we refer
it to Christ or to the cross. In my opinion, however, it is more proper
to apply it to the cross; for by it strictly we die to the world. But
what is the meaning of *the world*? It is unquestionably contrasted with
the *new creature*. Whatever is opposed to the spiritual kingdom of
Christ is the world, because it belongs to the old man; or, in a word,
*the world* is the object and aim of the old man.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p19"></span>*The world is crucified to me*. This
exactly agrees with the language which he employs on another occasion.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p20"></span>“But what things were gain to me,
those I counted loss for Christ; yea doubtless, and I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord;
for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but
dung, that I may win Christ” (<span id="iii.viii.iv-p20.1"></span>[Phil.
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p21"></span>To crucify the world is to treat it
with contempt and disdain.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p22"></span>He adds, *and I unto the world*. By
this he means that he regarded himself as unworthy to be taken into the
account, and indeed as utterly annihilated; because this was a matter
with which a dead man had nothing to do. At all events, he means, that
by the mortification of the old man he had renounced the world. Some
take his meaning to be, “If the world looks upon me as abhorred and
excommunicated, I consider the world to be condemned and accursed.” This
appears to me to be overstrained, but I leave my readers to judge.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p23"></span><span id="iii.viii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p24"></span>**15.** *For in Christ Jesus*. The
reason why he is crucified to the world, and the world to him, is, that
in Christ, to whom he is spiritually united, nothing but a new creature
is of any avail. Everything else must be dismissed, must perish. I refer
to those things which hinder the renewing of the Spirit. “If any man be
in Christ” says he, “let him be a new creature.” (<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p24.1"></span>[2Co
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p24.1"></span>.) That is, if any man wishes to be
considered as belonging to the kingdom of Christ, let him be created
anew by the Spirit of God; let him not live any longer to himself or to
the world, but let him be raised up to “newness of life.” (<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p24.2"></span>[Ro
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p24.2"></span>.) His reasons for concluding that neither
circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any importance, have been already
considered. The truth of the gospel swallows up, and brings to nought,
all the shadows of the law.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p25"></span><span id="iii.viii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p26"></span>**16.** *And as many as walk according
to this rule*. “May they enjoy all prosperity and happiness!” This is
not merely a prayer in their behalf, but a token of approbation. His
meaning therefore is, that those who teach this doctrine are worthy of
all esteem and regard, and those who reject it do not deserve to be
heard. The word *rule* denotes the regular and habitual course which all
godly ministers of the gospel ought to pursue. Architects employ a model
in the erection of buildings, to assist them in preserving the proper
form and just proportions. Such a *model* (κανόνα) does the apostle
prescribe to the ministers of the word, who are to build the church
“according to the pattern shewn to them.” (<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p26.1"></span>[Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p26.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p27"></span>Faithful and upright teachers, and all
who allow themselves to conform to this rule, must derive singular
encouragement from this passage, in which God, by the mouth of Paul,
pronounces on them a blessing. We have no cause to dread the thunders of
the Pope, if God promises to us from heaven *peace* and *mercy*. The
word *walk* may apply both to a minister and to his people, though it
refers chiefly to ministers. The future tense of the verb, (ὅσοι
στοιχήσουσιν,) as many as *shall walk*, is intended to express
perseverance.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p28"></span>*And upon the Israel of God*  <span
id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) This is an indirect ridicule of the
vain boasting of the false apostles, who vaunted of being the
descendants of Abraham according to the flesh. There are two classes who
bear this name, a pretended Israel, which appears to be so in the sight
of men, — and the Israel of God. Circumcision was a disguise before men,
but regeneration is a truth before God. In a word, he gives the
appellation of the *Israel of God* to those whom he formerly denominated
the children of Abraham by faith, (<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.4"></span>[Ga
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#029)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.4"></span>,) and thus includes all believers,
whether Jews or Gentiles, who were united into one church. On the
contrary, the name and lineage are the sole boast of Israel according to
the flesh; and this led the apostle to argue in the Epistle to the
Romans, that “they are not all Israel which are of Israel, neither
because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all children.” (<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.5"></span>[Rom.
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.5"></span>.)

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p30"></span><span id="iii.viii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p31"></span>**17.** *Let no man trouble me*. He
now speaks with the voice of authority for restraining his adversaries,
and employs language which his high rank fully authorized. “Let them
cease to throw hinderances in the course of my preaching.” He was
prepared, for the sake of the church, to encounter difficulties, but
does not choose to be interrupted by contradiction. *Let no man trouble
me*. Let no man make opposition to obstruct the progress of my work.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p32"></span>*As to everything else,* (τοῦ λοιποῦ,)
that is, as to everything besides the *new creature*. “This one thing is
enough for me. Other matters are of no importance, and give me no
concern. Let no man question me about them.” He thus places himself
above all men, and allows to none the power of attacking his ministry.
Literally, the phrase signifies, as to *the rest* or *the remainder*,
which Erasmus, in my opinion, has improperly applied to time.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p33"></span>*For I bear*  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) *in my body the marks of the Lord
Jesus*. This accounts for his bold, authoritative language. And what
were those marks? Imprisonment, chains, scourging, blows, stoning, and
every kind of injurious treatment which he had incurred in bearing
testimony to the gospel. Earthly warfare has its honors, in conferring
which a general holds out to public view the bravery of a soldier. So
Christ our leader has his own marks, of which he makes abundant use, for
conferring on some of his followers a high distinction. These marks,
however, differ from the other in one important respect, that they
partake of the nature of the cross, and in the sight of the world are
disgraceful. This is suggested by the word translated *marks*,
(στίγματα,) for it literally denotes the *marks* with which barbarian
slaves, or fugitives, or malefactors, were usually branded. Paul,
therefore, can hardly be said to use a figure, when he boasts of shining
in those marks with which Christ is accustomed to honor his most
distinguished soldiers,  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102) which
in the eye of the world were attended by shame and disgrace, but which
before God and the angels surpass all the honors of the world.  <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103)

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p37"></span><span id="iii.viii.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p38"></span>**18.** *The grace*  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) *of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit*. His prayer is not only that God may bestow upon them his grace
in large measure, but that they may have a proper feeling of it in their
hearts. Then only is it truly enjoyed by us, when it comes to our
*spirit*. We ought therefore to entreat that God would prepare in our
souls a habitation for his grace. Amen.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p40"></span>END OF THE COMMENTARIES ON THE  
EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc41010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.viii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p15"></span> “In the original it is <span
id="iii.viii.i-p15.1"></span>ἔν τινι παραπτώματι, ‘in any fault.’ The
expression is general, though it seems to refer to those works of the
flesh of which he had made mention in the 19th and following verses of
the foregoing chapter. ‘If in any of these faults any person should
happen to be overtaken;’ the last word seems to denote somewhat of a
surprise, by which a man might be drawn into a sin, without any previous
deliberate purpose or design; a sin committed through some extraordinary
and sudden temptation. The last words of the verse, ‘lest thou also be
tempted,’ seem plainly to intimate that this was the apostle’s meaning.”
— Chandler.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc41010.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.viii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p17"></span> “I observe an agreement in a somewhat
peculiar rule of Christian conduct, as laid down in this epistle, and as
exemplified in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. It is not the
repetition of the same general precept, which would have been a
coincidence of little value; but it is the general precept in one place,
and the application of that precept to an actual occurrence in the
other. (See <span id="iii.viii.i-p17.1"></span>[2Co
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)<span
id="iii.viii.i-p17.1"></span>.) I have little doubt but that it was the
same mind which dictated these two passages.” Paley’s Horae Paulinae.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc41010.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.viii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p21"></span> Catullus.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc41010.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.viii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.i-p23"></span> “Even in those who do not need
forbearance, nothing is more becoming than gentleness; and I reckon him
to be the best and most blameless man who pardons others, as if he were
daily sinning, and yet abstains from sin, as if he pardoned nobody.” —
Plin. Ep.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc41010.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p15"></span> “<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p15.1"></span>De tels serviteurs.” “Of such servants.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc41010.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p33"></span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-p33.1"></span>
᾿Εγενήσαν ἀμφότεροι κατὰ τοὺς ἰδίους καιροὺς τύραννοι Συρακουσῶν. “Both
at their onwn time became tyrants of Syracuse“ — Polybius. Xenophon and
other classical writers employ the phrase <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p33.2"></span>ἐν καιρῷ in the general sense of
“seasonably,” and sometimes very nearly in the same sense as when the
adjective <span id="iii.viii.ii-p33.3"></span>ἴδιος is added. <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p33.4"></span>Κυρ. Παιδ.. 8:5. 5. — *Ed*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc41010.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p13"></span> “The word we render, ‘to make a fair
shew,’ properly signifies to be handsome and lovely. Hence it is used to
signify anything that recommends itself by its specious appearance,
\[Thus <span id="iii.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>ἀπολογία εὐπροσῶπος,
Lucian.\] Now this was the case of these Judaising teachers. Their great
care was to avoid persecution: and, in order to this, they made it their
study <span id="iii.viii.iii-p13.2"></span>εὐπροσωπὢσαι, to keep fair
with the Jews, <span id="iii.viii.iii-p13.3"></span>ἐν σαρκὶ, by means
of the flesh, that is, not only by boasting of their own circumcision,
but by making it a point of merit with them, that they had pressed the
necessity of circumcision upon others.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc41010.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p29"></span> <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.1"></span>Ισραηλιτικὸν γὰρ τὸ ἀληθινὸν πνευματικὸν
καὶ <span id="iii.viii.iv-p29.2"></span>Ἰακὼβ καὶ Ἰσαὰκ καὶ <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p29.3"></span>᾿Αβραὰμ τοῦ ἐν ἀκροβυστίᾳ ἐπὶ τὣ πίστει
μερτυρηθέντος ὑπὸ τοῦ Θεοῦ καὶ εὐλογηθέντος καὶ πατρὸς πολλῶν κληθέντος
ἡμεῖς ἐσμεν, οἱ διὰ τούτου σταυρωθέντος Χριστοῦ τῷ Θεῷ προσαχθώντες.
“We, who have been brought to God by this crucified Christ are the true
spiritual Israel, and the seed of Judah, and of Jacob, and of Isaac, and
of Abraham, whose faith was attested, and who was blessed by God, and
called the father of many nations, while he was in circumcision“ —
Justin Martyr.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc41010.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p34"></span> <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p34.1"></span>Οὐκ εἴπε δὲ ἔχω ἀλλὰ βαστάζω ὣσπερ τι
τρόπαιον ἢ σημεῖον βασιλικὸν καὶ τούτοις ἐναβρύνομαι. “He does not say,
I have, but, I bear, as some trophy or royal symbol; and I deck myself
with them.” — Theophylact

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc41010.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p35"></span> “There is no warlike weapon, <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p35.1"></span>οὖγε οὐκ ἴχνη ἐν ἐμαυτῷ φέρω, of which I
do not bear the marks upon me.” — Arrian.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc41010.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p36"></span> “So far am I from being liable to be
torn away from the truth of the gospel, by any reproaches or
afflictions, that the disgrace inflicted on me for Christ’s sake, and
the imprisonment, and scourging, and bonds, and stonings, and other
distresses which I have endured for the name of Christ, shall be carried
about with me, in my body, wherever I go, as marks and tokens of my Lord
Jesus Christ. I will exhibit them as so many trophies, and will reckon
it to be my glory, that I am counted worthy to imitate, in any manner,
the cross of Christ which I preach.”-Erasmus’s Paraphrase.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc41010.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p39"></span> “It is of little moment whether, by
the ‘grace,’ we understand that free love and favour, which He always
bears in his heart to all that believe in his name, or all that kindness
— all those heavenly and spiritual blessings — in the communication of
which He manifests this love, this free favour.” — Brown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Ephesians](cc41011)
