[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41007)  [Next](cc41009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iii.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p2"></span>**1.** Now I say, *That* the heir, as long
as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, though he be lord of
all;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p3"></span>**1.** Dico antem: quamdiu haeres puer
est, nihil differt a servo, quum tamen sit dominus onmium;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p4"></span>**2.** But is under tutors and governors,
until the time appointed of the father.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p5"></span>**2.** Sed sub tutoribus et curatorbus
est, usque ad tempus a patre definitum.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p6"></span>**3.** Even so we, when we were children,
were in bondage under the elements of the world:

<span id="iii.vi.i-p7"></span>**3.** Sic et nos quum essemus pueri, sub
elementis mundi in servitute eramus.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p8"></span>**4.** But when the fulness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p9"></span>**4.** Quando autem venit plenitudo
temporis, misit Deus Filium suum, facturn ex muliere, redactum sub
Legem;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p10"></span>**5.** To redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p11"></span>**5.** Ut eos, qui sub Lege erant,
redimeter, ut adoptionem reciperemus.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.i-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p14"></span>**1.** *Now I say*. Whoever made the
division into chapters has improperly separated this paragraph from the
preceding, as it is nothing else than the concluding section,
(ἐπεξεργασία,) in which Paul explains and illustrates the difference
that exists between us and the ancient people. He does so by introducing
a third comparison, drawn from the relation which a person under age
bears to his tutor. The young man, though he is free, *though he is lord
of all* his father’s family, still resembles a slave; for he is under
the government of tutors.  <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64) But the
period of guardianship lasts only “until the time appointed by the
father” after which he enjoys his freedom. In this respect the fathers
under the Old Testament, being the sons of God, were free; but they were
not in possession of freedom, while the law held the place of their
tutor, and kept them under its yoke. That slavery of the law lasted as
long as it pleased God, who put an end to it at the coming of Christ.
Lawyers enumerate various methods by which the tutelage or guardianship
is brought to a close; but of all these methods, the only one adapted to
this comparison is that which Paul has selected, “the appointment of the
father.”

<span id="iii.vi.i-p16"></span>Let us now examine the separate clauses.
Some apply the comparison in a different manner to the case of any man
whatever, whereas Paul is speaking of two nations. What they say, I
acknowledge, is true; but it has nothing to do with the present passage.
The elect, though they are the children of God from the womb, yet, until
by faith they come to the possession of freedom, remain like slaves
under the law; but, from the time that they have known Christ, they no
longer require this kind of tutelage. Granting all this, I deny that
Paul here treats of individuals, or draws a distinction between the time
of unbelief and the calling by faith. The matters in dispute were these.
Since the church of God is one, how comes it that our condition is
different from that of the Israelites? Since we are free by faith, how
comes it that they, who had faith in common with us, were not partakers
with us of the same freedom? Since we are all equally the children of
God, how comes it that we at this day are exempt from a yoke which they
were forced to bear? On these points the controversy turned, and not on
the manner in which the law reigns over each of us before we are freed
by faith from its slavery. Let this point be first of all settled, that
Paul here compares the Israelitish church, which existed under the Old
Testament, with the Christian church, that thus we may perceive in what
points we agree and in what we differ. This comparison furnishes most
abundant and most profitable instruction.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p17"></span>First, we learn from it that our hope at
the present day, and that of the fathers under the Old Testament, have
been directed to the same inheritance; for they were partakers of the
same adoption. According to the dreams of some fanatics, and of Servetus
among others, the fathers were divinely elected for the sole purpose of
prefiguring to us a people of God. Paul, on the other hand, contends
that they were elected in order to be together with us the children of
God, and particularly attests that to them, not less than to us,
belonged the spiritual blessing promised to Abraham.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p18"></span>Secondly, we learn that, notwithstanding
their outward slavery, their consciences were still free. The obligation
to keep the law did not hinder Moses and Daniel, all the pious kings,
priests, and prophets, and the whole company of believers, from being
free in spirit. They bore the yoke of the law upon their shoulders, but
with a free spirit they worshipped God. More particularly, having been
instructed concerning the free pardon of sin, their consciences were
delivered from the tyranny of sin and death. Hence we ought to conclude
that they held the same doctrine, were joined with us in the true unity
of faith, placed reliance on the one Mediator, called on God as their
Father, and were led by the same Spirit. All this leads to the
conclusion, that the difference between us and the ancient fathers lies
in accidents, not in substance. In all the leading characters of the
Testament or Covenant we agree: the ceremonies and form of government,
in which we differ, are mere additions. Besides, that period was the
infancy of the church; but now that Christ is come, the church has
arrived at the estate of manhood.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p19"></span>The meaning of Paul’s words is clear, but
has he not some appearance of contradicting himself? In the Epistle to
the Ephesians he exhorts us to make daily progress

<span id="iii.vi.i-p20"></span>“till we come to a perfect man, to the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p20.1"></span>[Eph
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p20.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p21"></span>In the first Epistle to the Corinthians
he says, (<span id="iii.vi.i-p21.1"></span>[1Co
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span id="iii.vi.i-p21.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p22"></span>“I have fed you with milk, and not with
meat: for hitherto ye were not able to bear it, neither yet now are ye
able;”

<span id="iii.vi.i-p23"></span>and shortly after this he compares the
Galatians to children. (<span id="iii.vi.i-p23.1"></span>[Ga
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span id="iii.vi.i-p23.1"></span>)
In those passages, I reply, the apostle speaks of particular men, and of
their faith as individuals; but here he speaks generally of two bodies
without regard to persons. This reply will assist us in resolving a much
greater difficulty. When we look at the matchless faith of Abraham, and
the vast intelligence of the holy prophets, with what effrontery shall
we dare to talk of such men as our inferiors? Were not they rather the
heroes, and we the children? To say nothing of ourselves, who among the
Galatians would have been found equal to any of those men?

<span id="iii.vi.i-p24"></span>But here, as I have already said, the
apostle describes not particular persons, but the universal condition of
both nations. Some men were endowed with extraordinary gifts; but they
were few, and the whole body did not share with them. Besides, though
they had been numerous, we must inquire not what they inwardly were, but
what was that kind or government under which God had placed them; and
that was manifestly a school, παιδαγωγία, a system of instruction for
children. And what are we now? God has broken those chains, governs his
church in a more indulgent manner, and lays not upon us such severe
restraint. At the same time, we may remark in passing, that whatever
amount of knowledge they might attain partook of the nature of the
period; for a dark cloud continually rested on the revelation which they
enjoyed. And hence that saying of our Savior,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p25"></span>“Blessed are the eyes which see the
things that ye see: for I tell you that many prophets and kings have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p25.1"></span>[Luke
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#024)<span id="iii.vi.i-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p26"></span>We now understand in what respect we are
preferred to those who were greatly our superiors; for the statements
are not applied to persons, but relate entirely to the economy of the
Divine administration.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p27"></span>This passage will prove a most powerful
battery for destroying the pageantry of ceremonies, which constitutes
the entire splendor of the Papal system. For what else is it that
dazzles the eyes of simple people, so as to lead them to regard the
dominion of the Pope, if not with admiration, at least with some degree
of reverence, but the magnificent army of ceremonies, rites,
gesticulations, and equipage of every description, contrived for the
express purpose of amazing the ignorant? From this passage it appears
that they are false disguises, by which the true beauty of the church is
impaired. I do not now speak of greater and more frightful corruptions,
such as, that they hold them out for divine worship, imagine them to
possess the power of meriting salvation, and enforce with more rigid
severity the observation of those trifles than the whole law of God. I
only advert to the specious pretext under which our modern contrivers
apologize for such a multitude of abominations. What though they object
that the ignorance of the multitude prevails to a greater extent than it
formerly did among the Israelites, and that many assistances are
therefore required? They will never be able in this way to prove that
the people must be placed under the discipline or a school similar to
what existed among the people of Israel; for I shall always meet them
with the declaration, that the appointment of God is totally different.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p28"></span>If they plead expediency, I ask, are they
better judges of what is expedient than God himself? Let us entertain
the firm conviction that the highest advantage, as well as the highest
propriety, will be found in whatever God has determined. In aiding the
ignorant, we must employ not those methods which the fancy of men may
have been pleased to contrive, but those which had been fixed by God
themself, who unquestionably has left out nothing that was fitted to
assist their weakness. Let this shield suffice for repelling any
objections: “God has judged otherwise, and his purpose supplies to us
the place of all arguments; unless it be supposed that men are capable
of devising better aids than those which God had provided, and which he
afterwards threw aside as useless.” Let it be carefully observed, Paul
does not merely say that the yoke which had been laid upon the Jews is
removed from us, but expressly lays down a distinction in the government
which God has commanded to be observed. I acknowledge that we are now at
liberty as to all outward matters, but only on the condition that the
church shall not be burdened with a multitude of ceremonies, nor
Christianity confounded with Judaism. The reason of this we shall
afterwards consider in the proper place.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p29"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p30"></span>**3.** *Under the elements of the world.
Elements* may either mean, literally, outward and bodily things, or,
metaphorically, rudiments. I prefer the latter interpretation. But why
does he say that those things which had a spiritual signification were
*of the world*? We did not, he says, enjoy the truth in a simple form,
but involved in earthly figures; and consequently, what was outward must
have been “of the world,” though there was concealed under it a heavenly
mystery.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p31"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p32"></span>**4.** *When the fullness of the time was
come*. He proceeds with the comparison which he had adduced, and applies
to his purpose the expression which has already occurred, “the time
appointed by the Father,” — but still shewing that the time which had
been ordained by the providence of God was proper and seasonable. That
season is the most fit, and that mode of acting is the most proper,
which the providence of God directs. At what time it was expedient that
the Son of God should be revealed to the world, it belonged to God alone
to judge and determine. This consideration ought to restrain all
curiosity. Let no man presume to be dissatisfied with the secret purpose
of God, and raise a dispute why Christ did not appear sooner. If the
reader desires more full information on this subject, he may consult
what I have written on the conclusion of the Epistle to the Romans.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p33"></span>*God sent forth his Son*. These few words
contain much instruction. The Son, who was sent, must have existed
before he was sent; and this proves his eternal Godhead. Christ
therefore is the Son of God, sent from heaven. Yet this same person was
*made of a woman*, because he assumed our nature, which shews that he
has two natures. Some copies read *natum* instead of *filium*; but the
latter reading is more generally followed, and, in my opinion, is
preferable. But the language was also expressly intended to distinguish
Christ from other men, as having been formed of the substance of his
mother, and not by ordinary generation. In any other sense, it would
have been trifling, and foreign to the subject. The word *woman* is here
put generally for the female sex.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p34"></span>*Subjected under the law.* The literal
rendering is, *Made under the law*; but in my version I have preferred
another word, which expresses more plainly the fact that he was placed
in subjection to the law. Christ the Son of God, who might have claimed
to be exempt from every kind of subjection, became subject to the law.
Why? He did so in our room, that he might obtain freedom for us. A man
who was free, by constituting himself a surety, redeems a slave: by
putting on himself the chains, he takes them off from the other. So
Christ chose to become liable to keep the law, that exemption from it
might be obtained for us; otherwise it would have been to no purpose
that he should come under the yoke of the law, for it certainly was not
on his own account that he did so.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p35"></span>*To redeem them that were under the law*
 <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65) We must here observe, the
exemption from the law which Christ has procured for us does not imply
that we no longer owe any obedience to the doctrine of the law, and may
do whatever we please; for the law is the everlasting rule of a good and
holy life. But Paul speaks of the law with all its appendages. From
subjection to that law we are redeemed, because it is no longer what it
once was. “The vail being rent,” (<span id="iii.vi.i-p36.1"></span>[Mt
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p36.1"></span>,) freedom is openly proclaimed, and this is
what he immediately adds.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p37"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p38"></span>**5.** *That we might receive the
adoption*. The fathers, under the Old Testament, were certain of their
adoption, but did not so fully as yet enjoy their privilege. *Adoption*,
like the phrase, “the redemption of our body,” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p38.2"></span>[Ro
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p38.2"></span>,) is here put for actual possession. As, at
the last day, we receive the fruit of our redemption, so now we receive
the fruit of adoption, of which the holy fathers did not partake before
the coming of Christ; and therefore those who now burden the church with
an excess of ceremonies, defraud her of the just right of adoption.

<span id="iii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
4:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p2"></span>**6.** And because ye are sons, God hath
sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p3"></span>**6.** Quoniam autem estis filii, misit
Deus Spiritum Filii sui in corda vestra, clamantem, Abba, Pater.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p4"></span>**7.** Wherefore thou art no more a
servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p5"></span>**7.** Itaque non amplius es servus, sed
filius; si antem filius, etiam haeres Dei per Christum.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p6"></span>**8.** Howbeit then, when ye knew not
God, ye did service unto them which by nature are no gods.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p7"></span>**8.** At tunc quum nondum cognoveratis
Deum, serviebatis eis qui natura non sunt dii.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p8"></span>**9.** But now, after that ye have known
God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and
beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in bondage?

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p9"></span>**9.** Nunc autem postquam cognovistis
Deum, vel potius cogniti fuistis a Deo; quomode convertimini rursus ad
infirma et egena elementa, quibus rursus Deuteronomy integro servire
vultis?

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p10"></span>**10.** Ye observe days, and months, and
times, and years.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p11"></span>**10.** Dies observatis, et menses, et
tempera, et annos.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p12"></span>**11.** I am afraid of you, lest I have
bestowed upon you labour in vain.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p13"></span>**11.** Timeo Deuteronomy vobis, ne
forte in vobis frustra laboraverim.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p16"></span>**6.** *And because ye are sons*. The
adoption which he had mentioned, is proved to belong to the Galatians by
the following argument. This adoption must have preceded the testimony
of adoption given by the Holy Spirit; but the effect is the sign of the
cause. In venturing, he says, to call God your Father, you have the
advice and direction of the Spirit of Christ; therefore it is certain
that you are the sons of God. This agrees with what is elsewhere taught
by him, that the Spirit is the earnest and pledge of our adoption, and
gives to us a well-founded belief that God regards us with a father’s
love.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p17"></span>“Who hath also sealed us, and given the
earnest of the Spirit  
in our hearts.” (<span id="iii.vi.ii-p17.2"></span>[2Co
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p18"></span>“Now he that hath wrought us for the
self-same thing is God,  
who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit.”  
(<span id="iii.vi.ii-p18.3"></span>[2Co
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p18.3"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p19"></span>But it will be objected, do not wicked
men, too, carry their rashness so far as to proclaim that God is their
Father? Do they not frequently, with greater confidence than others,
utter their false boasts? I reply, Paul’s language does not relate to
idle boasting, or to the proud opinion of himself which any man may
entertain, but to the testimony of a pious conscience which accompanies
the new birth. This argument can have no weight but in the case of
believers, for ungodly men have no experience of this certainty; as our
Lord himself declares.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p20"></span>“The Spirit of truth,” says he, “whom
the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth
him.”  
(<span id="iii.vi.ii-p20.2"></span>[Joh
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p21"></span>This is implied in Paul’s words, *God
hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts*. It is not what
the persons themselves, in the foolish judgment of the flesh, may
venture to believe, but what God declares in their hearts by his Spirit.
*The Spirit of his Son* is a title more strictly adapted to the present
occasion than any other that could have been employed. We are the sons
of God, because we have received the same Spirit as his only Son.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p22"></span>Let it be observed, that Paul ascribes
this universally to all Christians; for where this pledge of the Divine
love towards us is wanting, there is assuredly no faith. Hence it is
evident what sort of Christianity belongs to Popery, since any man who
says, that he has the Spirit of God, is charged by them with impious
presumption. Neither the Spirit of God, nor certainty, belongs to their
notion of faith. This single tenet held by them is a remarkable proof
that, in all the schools of the Papists, the devil, the father of
unbelief, reigns. I acknowledge, indeed, that the scholastic divines,
when they enjoin upon the consciences of men the agitation of perpetual
doubt, are in perfect agreement with what the natural feelings of
mankind would dictate. It is the more necessary to fix in our minds this
doctrine of Paul, that no man is a Christian who has not learned, by the
teaching of the Holy Spirit, to call God his Father.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p23"></span>*Crying*. This participle, I think, is
used in order to express greater boldness. Hesitation does not allow us
to speak freely, but keeps the mouth nearly shut, while the half-broken
words can hardly escape from a stammering tongue. “Crying,” on the other
hand, expresses firmness and unwavering confidence.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p24"></span>“For we have not received again the
spirit of bondage to fear,  
but of freedom to full confidence.” (<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p24.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p24.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p25"></span>*Abba, Father*. The meaning of these
words, I have no doubt, is, that calling upon God is common to all
languages. It is a fact which bears directly on the present subject,
that the name *Father* is given to God both by the Hebrews and by the
Greeks; as had been predicted by Isaiah,

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p26"></span>“Every tongue shall make confession to
my name.”  
(<span id="iii.vi.ii-p26.2"></span>[Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p26.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p27"></span>The whole of this subject is handled by
the apostle at greater length in his Epistle to the Romans. I judge it
unnecessary to repeat here observations which I have already made in the
exposition of that Epistle, and which the reader may consult. Since,
therefore, Gentiles are reckoned among the sons of God, it is evident
that adoption comes not by the merit of the law, but by the grace of
faith.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p28"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p29"></span>**7.** *Wherefore thou art no more a
servant*. In the Christian Church slavery no longer exists, but the
condition of the children is free. In what respect the fathers under the
law were slaves, we have already inquired; for their freedom was not yet
revealed, but was hidden under the coverings and yoke of the law. Our
attention is again directed to the distinction between the Old and New
Testaments. The ancients were also sons of God, and heirs through
Christ, but we hold the same character in a different manner; for we
have Christ present with us, and in that manner enjoy his blessings.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p30"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p31"></span>**8.** *But when ye as yet knew not
God.* This is not intended as an additional argument; and indeed he had
already proved his point so fully, that no doubt remained, and the
rebuke which was now to be administered could not be evaded. His object
is to make their fall appear more criminal, by comparing it with past
events. It is not wonderful, he says, that formerly *ye did service to
them which by nature are no gods*; for, wherever ignorance of God
exists, there must be dreadful blindness. You were then wandering in
darkness, but how disgraceful is it that in the midst of light you
should fall into such gross errors! The main inference is, that the
Galatians were less excusable for corrupting the gospel than they had
formerly been for idolatry. But here it ought to be observed, that, till
we have been enlightened in the true knowledge of one God, we always
serve idols, whatever pretext we may throw over the false religion. The
lawful worship of God, therefore, must be preceded by just views of his
character*. By nature*, that is, in reality, *they are no gods*. Every
object of worship which men contrive is a creature of their own
imagination. In the opinion of men idols may be gods, but in reality
they are nothing.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p32"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p33"></span>**9.** *But now,*  <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) *after that ye have known God*. No
language can express the base ingratitude of departing from God, when he
has once been known. What is it but to forsake, of our own accord, the
light, the life, the fountain of all benefits, — “to forsake,” as
Jeremiah complains,

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p35"></span>“the fountain of living waters, and hew
out cisterns,  
broken cisterns, that can hold no water!” (<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p35.2"></span>[Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p35.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p36"></span>Still farther to heighten the blame, he
corrects his language, and says, *or rather have been, known by God*;
for the greater the grace of God is towards us, our guilt in despising
it must be the heavier. Paul reminds the Galatians whence they had
derived the knowledge of God. He affirms that they did not obtain it by
their own exertions, by the acuteness or industry of their own minds,
but because, when they were at the farthest possible remove from
thinking of him, God visited them in his mercy. What is said of the
Galatians may be extended to all; for in all are fulfilled the words of
Isaiah,

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p37"></span>“I am sought by them that asked not for
me:  
I am found by them that sought me not.” (<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p37.2"></span>[Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p37.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p38"></span>The origin of our calling is the free
election of God, which predestinates us to life before we are born. On
this depends our calling, our faith, our whole salvation.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p39"></span>*How turn ye again*? They could not turn
*again* to ceremonies which they had never practiced. The expression is
figurative, and merely denotes, that to fall again into wicked
superstition, as if they had never received the truth of God, was the
height of folly. When he calls the ceremonies *beggarly elements*, he
views them as out of Christ, and, what is more, as opposed to Christ. To
the fathers they were not only profitable exercises and aids to piety,
but efficacious means of grace. But then their whole value lay in
Christ, and in the appointment of God. The false apostles, on the other
hand, neglecting the promises, endeavored to oppose the ceremonies to
Christ, as if Christ alone were not sufficient. That they should be
regarded by Paul as worthless trifles, cannot excite surprise; but of
this I have already spoken. The word *bondage* conveys a reproof for
submitting to be slaves.  <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p41"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p42"></span>**10.** *Ye observe days*. He adduces as
an instance one description of “elements,” the observance of days. No
condemnation is here given to the observance of dates in the
arrangements of civil society. The order of nature out of which this
arises, is fixed and constant. How are months and years computed, but by
the revolution of the sun and moon? What distinguishes summer from
winter, or spring from harvest, but the appointment of God, — an
appointment which was promised to continue to the end of the world?
(<span id="iii.vi.ii-p42.1"></span>[Ge
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p42.1"></span>.) The civil observation of days contributes
not only to agriculture and to matters of politics, and ordinary life,
but is even extended to the government of the church. Of what nature,
then, was the observation which Paul reproves? It was that which would
bind the conscience, by religious considerations, as if it were
necessary to the worship of God, and which, as he expresses it in the
Epistle to the Romans, would make a distinction between one day and
another. (<span id="iii.vi.ii-p42.2"></span>[Ro
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p43"></span>When certain days are represented as
holy in themselves, when one day is distinguished from another on
religious grounds, when holy days are reckoned a part of divine worship,
then days are improperly observed. The Jewish Sabbath, new moons, and
other festivals, were earnestly pressed by the false apostles, because
they had been appointed by the law. When we, in the present age, intake
a distinction of days, we do not represent them as necessary, and thus
lay a snare for the conscience; we do not reckon one day to be more holy
than another; we do not make days to be the same thing with religion and
the worship of God; but merely attend to the preservation of order and
harmony. The observance of days among us is a free service, and void of
all superstition.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p44"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p45"></span>**11.** *Lest I have bestowed upon you
labor in vain*. The expression is harsh, and must have filled the
Galatians with alarm; for what hope was left to them, if Paul’s labor
had been in vain? Some have expressed astonishment that Paul should be
so powerfully affected by the observance of days, as almost to designate
it a subversion of the whole gospel. But if we carefully weigh the
whole, we shall see that there was just reason; and that the false
apostles not only attempted to lay the yoke of Jewish bondage on the
neck of the church, but filled their minds with wicked superstitions. To
bring back Christianity to Judaism, was in itself no light evil; but far
more serious mischief was done, when, in opposition to the grace of
Christ, they set up holidays as meritorious performances, and pretended
that this mode of worship would propitiate the divine favor. When such
doctrines were received, the worship of God was corrupted, the grace of
Christ made void, and the freedom of conscience oppressed.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p46"></span>Do we wonder that Paul should be afraid
that he had labored in vain, that the gospel would henceforth be of no
service? And since that very description of impiety is now supported by
Popery, what sort of Christ or what sort of gospel does it retain? So
far as respects the binding of consciences, they enforce the observance
of days with not less severity than was done by Moses. They consider
holidays, not less than the false apostles did, to be a part of the
worship of God, and even connect with them the diabolical notion of
merit. The Papists must therefore be held equally censurable with the
false apostles; and with this addition in aggravation, that, while the
former proposed to keep those days which had been appointed by the law
of God, the latter enjoin days, rashly stamped with their own seal, to
be observed as most holy.

<span id="iii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
4:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p2"></span>**12.** Brethren, I beseech you, be as I
*am*; for I *am* as ye *are*: ye have not injured me at all.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p3"></span>**12.** Estote ut ego; quia ego quoque
sum ut vos. Fratres, rogo vos; nihil mihi fecistis injuriae.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p4"></span>**13.** Ye know how through infirmity of
the flesh I preached the gospel unto you at the first.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p5"></span>**13.** Novistis antem, quod per
infirmitatem carnis evangelizaverim vobis prius;

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p6"></span>**14.** And my temptation which was in
my flesh ye despised not, nor rejected; but received me as an angel of
God, *even* as Christ Jesus.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p7"></span>**14.** Et experimenturn mei, quod fuit
in carne mea, non contempsistis, neque respuistis; sed tanquam angelum
Dei suscepistis me, tanquam Christum Iesum.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p8"></span>**15.** Where is then the blessedness ye
spake of? for I bear you record, that, if *it had been* possible, ye
would have plucked out your own eyes, and have given them to me.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p9"></span>**15.** Ubi igitur beatitude vestra?
testimonium enim reddo vobis, quod, si possibile fuisset, etiam oculos
vestros effossos dedissetis mihi.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p10"></span>**16.** Am I therefore become your
enemy, because I tell you the truth?

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p11"></span>**16.** Ergdne vera loquendo inimicus
sum vobis factus?

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p12"></span>**17.** They zealously affect you,
*but* not well; yea, they would exclude you, that ye might affect them.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p13"></span>**17.** AEmulantur vos, non bene; imo
excludere vos volunt, ut ipsos aemulemini.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p14"></span>**18.** But *it is* good to be
zealously affected always in *a* good *thing*, and not only when I am
present with you.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p15"></span>**18.** Bonum autem est aemulari in
bono semper, et non tanturn quum praesens sum apud vos.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p16"></span>**19.** My little children, of whom I
travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you,

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p17"></span>**19.** Filioli mei, quos iterum
parturio, donec formetur in vobis Christus.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p18"></span>**20.** I desire to be present with you
now, and to change my voice; for I stand in doubt of you.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p19"></span>**20.** Vellem autem nunc coram esse
vobiscum, et routare vocem meam; quia anxius sum in vobis.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p20"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p21"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p22"></span>**12.** *Be as I am*. Having till now
spoken roughly, he begins to adopt a milder strain. The former harshness
had been more than justified by the heinousness of the offense; but as
he wished to do good, he resolves to adopt a style of conciliation. It
is the part of a wise pastor to consider, not what those who have
wandered may justly deserve, but what may be the likeliest method of
bringing them back to the right path. He must “be instant in season, out
of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering and
doctrine.” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>[2Ti
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>.) Following the method which he had
recommended to Timothy, he leaves off chiding, and begins to use
entreaties. *I beseech you*, he says, and calls them *brethren*, to
assure them that no bitterness had mingled with his reproofs.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p23"></span>The words, *be as I am*, refer to the
affection of the mind. As he endeavors to accommodate himself to them,
so he wishes that they would do the like by him in return. *For I am as
ye are*. “As I have no other object in view than to promote your
benefit, so it is proper that you should be prevailed on to adopt
moderate views, and to lend a willing, obedient ear to my instructions.”
And here again pastors are reminded of their duty to come down, as far
as they can, to the people, and to study the various dispositions of
those with whom they have to deal, if they wish to obtain compliance
with their message. The proverb still holds: “to be loved, you must be
lovely.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p24"></span>*Ye have not injured me at all*. This
is intended to remove the suspicion which might have rendered his former
reproofs more disagreeable. If we think that a person is speaking under
a sense of injury, or revenging a private quarrel, we turn away our
minds from him entirely, and are sure to torture whatever he says into
an unfavourable interpretation. Paul therefore meets the rising
prejudice by saying, “So far as respects myself, I have no cause to
complain of you. It is not on my own account, nor from any hostility to
you, that I feel warmly; and therefore, if I use strong language, it
must arise from some other cause than hatred or anger.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p25"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p26"></span>**13.** *Ye know that, through
infirmity of the flesh*. He recalls to their recollection the friendly
and respectful manner in which they had received him, and he does so for
two reasons. First, to let them know that he loved them, and thus to
gain a ready ear to all that he says; and secondly, to encourage them,
that, as they had begun well, they would go on in the same course. This
mention of past occurrences, then, while it is an expression of his kind
regards, is intended likewise as an exhortation to act in the same
manner as they had done at an earlier period.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p27"></span>By *infirmity of the flesh* he means
here, as in other places, what had a tendency to make him appear mean
and despised. *Flesh* denotes his outward appearance, which the word
infirmity describes to have been contemptible. Such was Paul when he
came among them, without show, without pretense, without worldly honors
or rank, without everything that could gain him respect or estimation in
the eyes of men. Yet all this did not prevent the Galatians from giving
him the most honorable reception. The narrative contributes powerfully
to his argument, for what was there in Paul to awaken their esteem or
veneration, but the power of the Holy Spirit alone? Under what pretext,
then, will they now begin to despise that power? Next, they are charged
with inconsistency, since no subsequent occurrence in the life of Paul
could entitle them to esteem him less than before. But this he leaves to
be considered by the Galatians, contenting himself with indirectly
suggesting it as a subject of consideration.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p28"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p29"></span>**14.** *My temptation*. That is,
“Though ye perceived me to be, in a worldly point of view, a
contemptible person, yet ye did not reject me.” He calls it a
*temptation* or trial, because it was a thing not unknown or hidden, and
he did not himself attempt to conceal it, as is usually done by
ambitious men, who are ashamed of anything about them that may lower
them in public estimation. It frequently happens that unworthy persons
receive applause, before their true character has been discovered, and
shortly afterwards are dismissed with shame and disgrace. But widely
different was the case of Paul, who had used no disguise to impose on
the Galatians, but had frankly told them what he was.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p30"></span>*As an angel of God*. In this light
every true minister of Christ ought to be regarded. As God employs the
services of angels for communicating to us his favors, so godly teachers
are divinely raised up to administer to us the most excellent of all
blessings, the doctrine of eternal salvation. Not without good reason
are they, by whose hands God dispenses to us such a treasure, compared
to angels: for they too are the messengers of God, by whose mouth God
speaks to us. And this argument is used by Malachi.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p31"></span>“The priest’s lips should keep
knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth, *for he is the
messenger of the Lord of hosts*.” (<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>[Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p31.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p32"></span>But the apostle rises still higher, and
adds, *even as Christ Jesus*; for the Lord himself commands that his
ministers shall be viewed in the same light as himself.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p33"></span>“He that heareth you heareth me,  
and he that despiseth you despiseth me.” (<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p33.2"></span>[Lu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p33.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p34"></span>Nor is this wonderful; for it is in his
name that they discharge their embassy, and thus they hold the rank of
him in whose room they act. Such is the highly commendatory language
which reveals to us at once the majesty of the gospel, and the honorable
character of its ministry. If it be the command of Christ that his
ministers shall be thus honored, it is certain that contempt of them
proceeds from the instigation of the devil; and indeed they never can be
despised so long as the word of God is esteemed. In vain do the Papists
attempt to hold out this pretext for their own arrogant pretensions. As
they are plainly the enemies of Christ, how absurd is it that they
should assume the garb, and take to themselves the character, of
Christ’s servants! If they wish to obtain the honors of angels, let them
perform the duty of angels: if they wish that we should listen to them
as to Christ, let them convey to us faithfully his pure word.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p35"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p36"></span>**15.** *Where is there your
blessedness?* Paul had made them happy, and he intimates that the pious
affection with which they formerly regarded him was an expression of
their happiness. But now, by allowing themselves to be deprived of the
services of him to whom they ought to have attributed whatever knowledge
they possessed of Christ, they gave evidence that they were unhappy.
This hint was intended to produce keen reflection. “What? Shall all this
be lost? Will you forfeit all the advantage of having once heard Christ
speaking by my lips? Shall the foundation in the faith which you
received from me be to no purpose? Shall your falling away now destroy
the glory of your obedience in the presence of God?” In short, by
despising the pure doctrine which they had embraced, they throw away, of
their own accord, the *blessedness* which they had obtained, and draw
down upon themselves the destruction in which their unhappy career must
terminate.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p37"></span>*For I bear you record*. It is not
enough that pastors be respected, if they are not also loved; for both
are necessary to make the doctrine they preach be fully relished; and
both, the apostle declares, had existed among the Galatians. He had
already spoken of their respect for him, and he now speaks of their
love. To be willing to *pluck out their own eyes*, if it had been
necessary, was an evidence of very extraordinary love, stronger than the
willingness to part with life.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p38"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p39"></span>**16.** *Am I therefore become your
enemy?* He now returns to speak about himself. It was entirely their own
fault, he says, that they had changed their minds. Though it is a common
remark, that truth begets hatred, yet, except through the malice and
wickedness of those who cannot endure to hear it, truth is never
hateful. While he vindicates himself from any blame in the unhappy
difference between them, he indirectly censures their ingratitude. Yet
still his advice is friendly, not to reject, on rash or light grounds,
the apostleship of one whom they had formerly considered to be worthy of
their warmest love. What can be more unbecoming than that the hatred of
truth should change enemies into friends? His aim then is, not so much
to upbraid, as to move them to repentance.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p40"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p41"></span>**17.** *They are jealous of you.* He
comes at length to the false apostles, and does more by silence to make
them odious, than if he had given their names; for we usually abstain
from naming those whose very names produce in us dislike and aversion.
He mentions the immoderate ambition of those men, and warns the
Galatians not to be led astray by their appearance of zeal. The
comparison is borrowed from honorable love, as contrasted with those
professions of regard which arise from unhallowed desires. Jealousy, on
the part of the false apostles, ought not to impose upon them; for it
proceeded not from right zeal, but from an improper desire of obtaining
reputation, — a desire most unlike that holy jealousy of which Paul
speaks to the Corinthians.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p42"></span>“For I am jealous over you with godly
jealousy; for I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you
as a chaste virgin to Christ. But I fear lest by any means, as the
serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.”  
(<span id="iii.vi.iii-p42.2"></span>[2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p42.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p43"></span>To expose still more fully their base
arts, he corrects his language. *Yea, they would exclude you*  <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) They not only endeavor to gain your
affections, but, as they cannot obtain possession of you by any other
means, they endeavor to kindle strife between us. When you have been
thrown as it were destitute, they expect that you will yield yourselves
up to them; for they perceive that, so long as there shall be maintained
between us a religious harmony, they can have no influence. This
stratagem is frequently resorted to by all the ministers of Satan. By
producing in the people a dislike of their pastor, they hope afterwards
to draw them to themselves; and, having disposed of the rival, to obtain
quiet possession. A careful and judicious examination of their conduct
will discover that in this way they always begin.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p46"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p47"></span>**18.** *But it is good to be the
object of jealousy.* It is hard to say whether this refers to himself or
to the Galatians. Good ministers are exhorted to cherish holy jealousy
in watching over the churches,

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p48"></span>“that they may present them as a chaste
virgin to Christ.”  
(<span id="iii.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>[2Co
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p49"></span>If it refers to Paul, the meaning will
be: “I confess that I also am jealous of you, but with a totally
different design: and I do so as much when I am absent as when I am
present, because I do not seek my own advantage.” But I am rather
inclined to view it as referring to the Galatians, though in this case
it will admit of more than one interpretation. It may mean: “They indeed
attempt to withdraw your affections from me, that, when you are thrown
destitute, you may go over to them; but do you, who loved me while I was
present, continue to cherish the same regard for me when I am absent.”
But a more correct explanation is suggested by the opposite senses which
the word ζηλοῦσθαι bears. As, in the former verse, he had used the word
*jealous* in a bad sense, denoting an improper way of accomplishing an
object, so here he uses it in a good sense, denoting a zealous imitation
of the good qualities of another. By condemning improper jealousy, he
now exhorts the Galatians to engage in a different sort of competition,
and that, too, while he was absent.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p50"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p51"></span>**19.** *My little children*. The word
*children* is still softer and more affectionate than brethren; and the
diminutive, *little children*, is an expression, not of contempt, but of
endearment, though, at the same time, it suggests the tender years of
those who ought now to have arrived at full age. (<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p51.1"></span>[Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p51.1"></span>.) The style is abrupt, which is usually
the case with highly pathetic passages. Strong feeling, from the
difficulty of finding adequate expression, breaks off our words when
half uttered, while the powerful emotion chokes the utterance.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p52"></span>*Of whom I travail in birth again*.
This phrase is added, to convey still more fully his vehement affection,
which endured, on their account, the throes and pangs of a mother. It
denotes likewise his anxiety; for

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p53"></span>“a woman, when she is in travail, hath
sorrow, because her hour is come; but as soon as she is delivered of the
child, she remembereth no more the anguish, for joy that a man is born
into the world.” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p53.1"></span>[Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p53.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p54"></span>The Galatians had already been
conceived and brought forth; but, after their revolt, they must now be
begotten a second time.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p55"></span>*Until Christ be formed in you*. By
these words he soothes their anger; for he does not set aside the former
birth, but says that they must be again nourished in the womb, as if
they had not yet been fully formed. That Christ should be formed in us
is the same thing with our being formed in Christ; for we are born so as
to become new creatures in him; and he, on the other hand, is born in
us, so that we live his life. Since the true image of Christ, through
the superstitions introduced by the false apostles, had been defaced,
Paul labors to restore that image in all its perfection and brightness.
This is done by the ministers of the gospel, when they give

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p56"></span>“milk to babes, and strong meat to them
that are of full age,” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p56.1"></span>[Heb.
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p56.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p57"></span>and, in short, ought to be their
employment during the whole course of their preaching. But Paul here
compares himself to a woman in labor, because the Galatians were not yet
completely born.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p58"></span>This is a remarkable passage for
illustrating the efficacy of the Christian ministry. True, we are “born
of God,” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p58.1"></span>[1Jo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p58.1"></span>;) but, because he employs a minister and
preaching as his instruments for that purpose, he is pleased to ascribe
to them that work which Himself performs, through the power of his
Spirit, in co-operation with the labors of man. Let us always attend to
this distinction, that, when a minister is contrasted with God, he is
nothing, and can do nothing, and is utterly useless; but, because the
Holy Spirit works efficaciously by means of him, he comes to be regarded
and praised as an agent. Still, it is not what he can do in himself, or
apart from God, but what God does by him, that is there described. If
ministers wish to do anything, let them labor to form Christ, not to
form themselves, in their hearers. The writer is now so oppressed with
grief, that he almost faints from exhaustion without completing his
sentence.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p59"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p60"></span>**20.** *I would wish to be present
with you now.* This is a most serious expostulation, the complaint of a
father so perplexed by the misconduct of his sons, that he looks around
him for advice, and knows not to what hand to turn.  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) He wishes to have an opportunity of
personally addressing them, because we thus obtain a better idea of what
is adapted to present circumstances; because, according as the hearer is
affected, according as he is submissive or obstinate, we are enabled to
regulate our discourse. But something more than this was meant by the
desire to *change the voice*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) He
was prepared most cheerfully to assume a variety of forms, and even, if
the case required it, to frame a new language. This is a course which
pastors ought most carefully to follow. They must not be entirely guided
by their own inclinations, or by the bent of their own genius, but must
accommodate themselves, as far as the case will allow, to the capacity
of the people, — with this reservation, however, that they are to
proceed no farther than conscience shall dictate,  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) and that no departure from integrity
shall be made, in order to gain the favor of the people.

<span id="iii.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
4:21-26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p2"></span>**21.** Tell me, ye that desire to be
under the law, do ye not hear the law?

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p3"></span>**21.** Dicite mihi, qui sub Lege vultis
esse, Legem non auditis?

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p4"></span>**22.** For it is written, that Abraham
had two sons, the one by a bondmaid, the other by a freewoman.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p5"></span>**22.** Scriptum est enim, quod Abraham
duos filios habuit; unum ex ancilla, alterum ex libera.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p6"></span>**23.** But he *who was* of the bondwoman
was born after the flesh; but he of the freewoman *was* by promise.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p7"></span>**23.** Sed qui erat ex ancilla, secundum
carnem erat genitus: qui vero ex libera, per promissionem.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p8"></span>**24.** Which things are an allegory: for
these are the two covenants; the one from the mount Sinai, which
gendereth to bondage, which is Agar.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p9"></span>**24.** Quae allegorica sunt; nam duae
sunt pactiones, una quidem a monte Sina, quae in servitutem generat; ea
est Agar.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p10"></span>**25.** For this Agar is mount Sinai in
Arabia, and answereth to Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with
her children.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p11"></span>**25.** Nam Agar, Sina mons est in
Arabia; ex adverso autem respondet ei quae nunc est Ierusalem; servit
enim cum liberis suis.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p12"></span>**26.** But Jerusalem which is above is
free, which is the mother of us all.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p13"></span>**26.** Quae autem sursum est Ierusalem,
libera est, quae mater est nostra omnium.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p14"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p15"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p16"></span>**21.** *Tell me*. Having given
exhortations adapted to touch the feelings, he follows up his former
doctrine by an illustration of great beauty. Viewed simply as an
argument, it would not be very powerful; but, as a confirmation added to
a most satisfactory chain of reasoning, it is not unworthy of attention.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p17"></span>*To be under the law*, signifies here,
to come under the yoke of the law, on the condition that God will act
toward you according to the covenant of the law, and that you, in
return, bind yourself to keep the law. In any other sense than this, all
believers are under the law; but the apostle treats, as we have already
said, of the law with its appendages.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p18"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p19"></span>**22.** *For it is written*. No man who
has a choice given him will be so mad as to despise freedom, and prefer
slavery. But here the apostle teaches us, that they who are under the
law are slaves. Unhappy men! who willingly choose this condition, when
God desires to make them free. He gives a representation of this in the
two sons of Abraham, one of whom, the son of a slave, held by his
mother’s condition;  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) while the
other, the son of a free woman, obtained the inheritance. He afterwards
applies the whole history to his purpose, and illustrates it in an
elegant manner.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p21"></span>In the first place, as the other party
armed themselves with the authority of the law, the apostle quotes the
law on the other side. *The law* was the name usually given to the Five
Books of Moses. Again, as the history which he quotes appeared to have
no bearing on the question, he gives to it an allegorical
interpretation. But as the apostle declares that these things are
*allegorized*, (ἀλληγορούμενα,) Origen, and many others along with him,
have seized the occasion of torturing Scripture, in every possible
manner, away from the true sense. They concluded that the literal sense
is too mean and poor, and that, under the outer bark of the letter,
there lurk deeper mysteries, which cannot be extracted but by beating
out allegories. And this they had no difficulty in accomplishing; for
speculations which appear to be ingenious have always been preferred,
and always will be preferred, by the world to solid doctrine.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p22"></span>With such approbation the licentious
system gradually attained such a height, that he who handled Scripture
for his own amusement not only was suffered to pass unpunished, but even
obtained the highest applause. For many centuries no man was considered
to be ingenious, who had not the skill and daring necessary for changing
into a variety of curious shapes the sacred word of God. This was
undoubtedly a contrivance of Satan to undermine the authority of
Scripture, and to take away from the reading of it the true advantage.
God visited this profanation by a just judgment, when he suffered the
pure meaning of the Scripture to be buried under false interpretations.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p23"></span>Scripture, they say, is fertile, and
thus produces a variety of meanings.  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) I acknowledge that Scripture is a most
rich and inexhaustible fountain of all wisdom; but I deny that its
fertility consists in the various meanings which any man, at his
pleasure, may assign. Let us know, then, that the true meaning of
Scripture is the natural and obvious meaning; and let us embrace and
abide by it resolutely. Let us not only neglect as doubtful, but boldly
set aside as deadly corruptions, those pretended expositions, which lead
us away from the natural meaning.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p25"></span>But what reply shall we make to Paul’s
assertion, that these things *are allegorical*? Paul certainly does not
mean that Moses wrote the history for the purpose of being turned into
an allegory, but points out in what way the history may be made to
answer the present subject. This is done by observing a figurative
representation of the Church there delineated. And a mystical
interpretation of this sort (ἀναγωγή) was not inconsistent with the true
and literal meaning, when a comparison was drawn between the Church and
the family of Abraham. As the house of Abraham was then a true Church,
so it is beyond all doubt that the principal and most memorable events
which happened in it are so many types to us. As in circumcision, in
sacrifices, in the whole Levitical priesthood, there was an allegory, as
there is an allegory at the present day in our sacraments, — so was
there likewise in the house of Abraham; but this does not involve a
departure from the literal meaning. In a word, Paul adduces the history,
as containing a figurative representation of the two covenants in the
two wives of Abraham, and of the two nations in his two sons. And
Chrysostom, indeed, acknowledges that the word *allegory* points out the
present application to be (κατάχρησις)  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) different from the natural meaning; which
is perfectly true.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p27"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p28"></span>**23.** *But he who was of the bond
woman*. Both were sons of Abraham according to the flesh; but in Isaac
there was this peculiarity, that he had the promise of grace. In Ishmael
there was nothing besides nature; in Isaac there was the election of
God, signified in part by the manner of his birth, which was not in the
ordinary course, but miraculous. Yet there is an indirect reference to
the calling of the Gentiles, and the rejection of the Jews: for the
latter boast of their ancestry, while the former, without any human
interference, are become the spiritual offspring of Abraham.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p29"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p30"></span>**24.** *These are the two covenants*. I
have thought it better to adopt this translation, in order not to lose
sight of the beauty of the comparison; for Paul compares the two
διαθὢκαι, to two mothers, and to employ *testamentum*, (a testament,)
which is a neuter noun, for denoting a mother, would be harsh. The word
*pactio* (a covenant) appears to be, on that account, more appropriate;
and indeed the desire of obtaining perspicuity, as well as elegance, has
led me to make this choice.  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75)

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p32"></span>The comparison is now formally
introduced. As in the house of Abraham there were two mothers, so are
there also in the Church of God. Doctrine is the mother of whom we are
born, and is twofold, Legal and Evangelical. The legal mother, whom
Hagar resembles, *gendereth to bondage*. Sarah again, represents the
second, which gendereth to freedom; though Paul begins higher, and makes
our first mother Sinai, and our second, Jerusalem. The two covenants,
then, are the mothers, of whom children unlike one another are born; for
the legal covenant makes slaves, and the evangelical covenant makes
freemen.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p33"></span>But all this may, at first sight, appear
absurd; for there are none of God’s children who are not born to
freedom, and therefore the comparison does not apply. I answer, what
Paul says is true in two respects; for the law formerly brought forth
its disciples, (among whom were included the holy prophets, and other
believers,) to slavery, though not to permanent slavery, but because God
placed them for a time under the law as “a schoolmaster.”  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) (<span id="iii.vi.iv-p34.2"></span>[Ga
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#025)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p34.2"></span>.) Under the vail of ceremonies, and of the
whole economy by which they were governed, their freedom was concealed:
to the outward eye nothing but slavery appeared. “Ye have not,” says
Paul to the Romans, “received the spirit of bondage again to fear.”
(<span id="iii.vi.iv-p34.3"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p34.3"></span>.) Those holy fathers, though inwardly they
were free in the sight of God, yet in outward appearance differed
nothing from slaves, and thus resembled their mother’s condition. But
the doctrine of the gospel bestows upon its children perfect freedom as
soon as they are born, and brings them up in a liberal manner.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p35"></span>Paul does not, I acknowledge, speak of
that kind of children, as the context will show. By the children of
Sinai, it will afterwards be explained, are meant hypocrites, who are at
length expelled from the Church of God, and deprived of the inheritance.
What, then, is the gendering to bondage, which forms the subject of the
present dispute? It denotes those who make a wicked abuse of the law, by
finding in it nothing but what tends to slavery. Not so the pious
fathers, who lived under the Old Testament; for their slavish birth by
the law did not hinder them from having Jerusalem for their mother in
spirit. But those who adhere to the bare law, and do not acknowledge it
to be “a schoolmaster to bring them to Christ,” (<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p35.1"></span>[Ga
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p35.1"></span>,) but rather make it a hinderance to
prevent their coming to him, are the Ishmaelites born to slavery.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p36"></span>It will again be objected, why does the
apostle say that such persons are born of God’s covenant, and are
considered to belong to the Church? I answer, strictly speaking, they
are not God’s children, but are degenerate and spurious, and are
disclaimed by God, whom they falsely call their Father. They receive
this name in the Church, not because they are members of it in reality,
but because for a time they presume to occupy that place, and impose on
men by the disguise which they wear. The apostle here views the Church,
as it appears in this world: but on this subject we shall afterwards
speak.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p37"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p38"></span>**25.** *For Agar is mount Sinai*  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) I shall not waste time in refuting the
expositions of other writers; for Jerome’s conjecture, that Mount Sinai
had two names, is trifling; and the disquisitions of Chrysostom about
the agreement of the names are equally unworthy of notice. Sinai is
called Hagar,  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) because it is a type
or figure, as the Passover was Christ. The situation of the mountain is
mentioned by way of contempt. It lies in Arabia, beyond the limits of
the holy land, by which the eternal inheritance was prefigured. The
wonder is, that in so familiar a matter they erred so egregiously.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p42"></span>*And answers, on the other hand.* The
Vulgate translates it, *is joined* (conjunctus est) to Jerusalem; and
Erasmus makes it, *borders on* (confinis) Jerusalem; but I have adopted
the phrase, *on the other hand,* (ex adverso,) in order to avoid
obscurity. For the apostle certainly does not refer to nearness, or
relative position, but to resemblance, as respects the present
comparison. The word, σύστοιχα, which is translated *corresponding to*,
denotes those things which are so arranged as to have a mutual relation
to each other, and a similar word, συατοιχία, when applied to trees and
other objects, conveys the idea of their following in regular order.
Mount Sinai is said (συστοιχεῖν) *to correspond to* that which is now
Jerusalem, in the same sense as Aristotle says that Rhetoric is
(ἀντίστροφος) the *counterpart* to Logic, by a metaphor borrowed from
lyric compositions, which were usually arranged in two parts, so adapted
as to be sung in harmony. In short, the word, συστοιχεῖ, *corresponds*,
means nothing more than that it belongs to the same class.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p43"></span>But why does Paul compare the present
Jerusalem with Mount Sinai? Though I was once of a different opinion,
yet I agree with Chrysostom and Ambrose, who explain it as referring to
the earthly Jerusalem, and who interpret the words, *which now is*, τὣ
νῦν ̔ιερουσαλὴμ, as marking the slavish doctrine and worship into which
it had degenerated. It ought to have been a lively image of the new
Jerusalem, and a representation of its character. But such as it now is,
it is rather related to Mount Sinai. Though the two places may be widely
distant from each other, they are perfectly alike in all their most
important features. This is a heavy reproach against the Jews, whose
real mother was not Sarah but the spurious Jerusalem, twin sister of
Hagar; who were therefore slaves born of a slave, though they haughtily
boasted that they were the sons of Abraham.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p44"></span><span id="iii.vi.iv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p45"></span>**26.** *But Jerusalem, which is above*.
The Jerusalem which he calls *above*, or heavenly, is not contained in
heaven; nor are we to seek for it out of this world; for the Church is
spread over the whole world, and is a “stranger and pilgrim on the
earth.” (<span id="iii.vi.iv-p45.1"></span>[Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p45.1"></span>.) Why then is it said to be from heaven?
Because it originates in heavenly grace; for the sons of God are

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p46"></span>“born, not of blood, nor of the will of
the flesh,  
nor of the will of man,” (<span id="iii.vi.iv-p46.2"></span>[Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p46.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p47"></span>but by the power of the Holy Spirit. The
heavenly Jerusalem, which derives its origin from heaven, and dwells
above by faith, is the mother of believers. To the Church, under God, we
owe it that we are

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p48"></span>“born again, not of corruptible seed,
but of incorruptible,”  
(<span id="iii.vi.iv-p48.2"></span>[1Pe
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p48.2"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p49"></span>and from her we obtain the milk and the
food by which we are afterwards nourished.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p50"></span>Such are the reasons why the Church is
called the mother of believers. And certainly he who refuses to be a son
of the Church in vain desires to have God as his Father; for it is only
through the instrumentality of the Church that we are “born of God,”
(<span id="iii.vi.iv-p50.1"></span>[1Jo
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p50.1"></span>,) and brought up through the various stages
of childhood and youth, till we arrive at manhood. This designation,
“the mother of us all,” reflects the highest credit and the highest
honor on the Church. But the Papists are fools and twice children, who
expect to give us uneasiness by producing these words; for their mother
is an adulteress, who brings forth to death the children of the devil;
and how foolish is the demand, that the children of God should surrender
themselves to her to be cruelly slain! Might not the synagogue of
Jerusalem at that time have assumed such haughty pretensions, with far
higher plausibility than Rome at the present day? and yet we see how
Paul strips her of every honorable distinction, and consigns her to the
lot of Hagar.

<span id="iii.vi.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>[Galatians
4:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p2"></span>**27.** For it is written, Rejoice, *thou*
barren that bearest not; break forth and cry, thou that travailest not:
for the desolate hath many more children than she which hath an husband.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p3"></span>**27.** Scriptum est enim: Exulta,
sterilis, qum non paris; erumpe et elama, quae non parturis; quaE plures
erunt liberi desertae quam habentis maritum. (<span
id="iii.vi.v-p3.1"></span>[Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.v-p3.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p4"></span>**28.** Now we, brethren, as Isaac was,
are the children of promise.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p5"></span>**28.** Nos autem, fratres, secundum
Issac, promissionis sumus filii. (<span id="iii.vi.v-p5.1"></span>[Ro
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span id="iii.vi.v-p5.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p6"></span>**29.** But as then he that was born after
the flesh persecuted him *that was born* after the Spirit, even so *it
is* now.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p7"></span>**29.** Sed quemadmodum tunc, qui secundum
carnem erat genitus, persequebatur eum qui secundum Spiritum genitus
erat; sic et nunc.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p8"></span>**30.** Nevertheless, what saith the
scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the
bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p9"></span>**30.** Sed quid dicit Scriptura? Ejice
ancillam, et filium ejus; non enim haereditatem obtinebit filius
ancillae cum filio liberae. (<span id="iii.vi.v-p9.1"></span>[Ge
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p10"></span>**31.** So then, brethren, we are not
children of the bondwoman, but of the free.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p11"></span>**31.** Ergo, fratres, non sumus ancillae
filii, sed liberae.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p12"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi.v-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p14"></span>**27.** *For it is written*. The apostle
proves, by a quotation from Isaiah, that the lawful sons of the Church
are born according to the promise. The passage is in <span
id="iii.vi.v-p14.1"></span>[Isa
54](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#000)<span id="iii.vi.v-p14.1"></span>
where the prophet speaks of the kingdom of Christ and the calling of the
Gentiles, and promises to the barren wife and the widow a numerous
offspring; for it is on this ground that he exhorts the Church to “sing”
and “rejoice.” The design of the apostle, let it be carefully remarked,
is to deprive the Jews of all claim to that spiritual Jerusalem to which
the prophecy relates. Isaiah proclaims, that her children shall be
gathered out of all the nations of the earth, and not by any preparation
of hers, but by the free grace and blessing of God.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p15"></span>He next concludes that we become the sons
of God by promise, after the example (κατὰ ᾿Ισαὰκ) of Isaac, and that in
no other way do we obtain this honor. To readers little skilled or
practiced in the examination of Scripture, this reasoning may appear
inconclusive; because they do not hold the most undoubted of all
principles, that all the promises, being founded on the Messiah, are of
free grace. It was because the apostle took this for granted, that he so
fearlessly contrasted the promise with the law.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p16"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p17"></span>**29.** *As then, he that was born after
the flesh*. He denounces the cruelty of the false apostles, who wantonly
insulted pious persons that placed all their confidence in Christ. There
was abundant need that the uneasiness of the oppressed should be soothed
by consolation, and that the cruelty of their oppressors should be
severely checked. It is not wonderful, he says, that the children of the
law, at the present day, do what Ishmael their father at first did, who,
trusting to his being the first-born, persecuted Isaac the true heir.
With the same proud disdain do his posterity now, on account of outward
ceremonies, circumcision, and the various services of the law, molest
and vaunt over the lawful sons of God. *The Spirit* is again contrasted
with the flesh, that is, the calling of God with human appearance.
(<span id="iii.vi.v-p17.1"></span>[1Sa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p17.1"></span>.) So the disguise is admitted to be
possessed by the followers of the Law and of works, but the reality is
claimed for those who rely on the calling of God alone, and depend upon
his grace.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p18"></span>*Persecuted.* But persecution is nowhere
mentioned, only Moses says that Ishmael was <span
id="iii.vi.v-p18.1"></span>קהצמ, (*metzahek,*) *mocking*, (<span
id="iii.vi.v-p18.2"></span>[Ge
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p18.2"></span>;) and by this participle he intimates that
Ishmael ridiculed his brother Isaac. The explanation offered by some
Jews, that this was a simple smile, is entirely inadmissible; for what
cruelty would it have argued, that a harmless smile should have been so
fearfully revenged? There cannot then be a doubt that he maliciously
endeavored to provoke the child Isaac by reproachful language.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p19"></span>But how widely distant is this from
persecution?  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) And yet it is not
idly or unguardedly that Paul enlarges on this point. No persecution
ought to distress us so much as to see our calling attempted to be
undermined by the reproaches of wicked men. Neither blows, nor
scourging, nor nails, nor thorns, occasioned to our Lord such intense
suffering as that blasphemy:

<span id="iii.vi.v-p21"></span>“He trusted in God; what availeth it to
him?  
for he is deprived of all assistance.” (<span
id="iii.vi.v-p21.2"></span>[Mt
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p22"></span>There is more venom in this than in all
persecutions; for how much more alarming is it that the grace of Divine
adoption shall be made void, than that this frail life shall be taken
from us? Ishmael did not persecute his brother with the sword; but, what
is worse, he treated him with haughty disdain by trampling under foot
the promise of God. All persecutions arise from this source, that wicked
men despise and hate in the elect the grace of God; a memorable instance
of which we have in the history of Cain and Abel. (<span
id="iii.vi.v-p22.1"></span>[Ge
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008)<span id="iii.vi.v-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p23"></span>This reminds us, that not only ought we
to be filled with horror at outward persecutions, when the enemies of
religion slay us with fire and sword; when they banish, imprison,
torture, or scourge; but when they attempt, by their blasphemies, to
make void our confidence, which rests on the promises of God; when they
ridicule our salvation, when they wantonly laugh to scorn the whole
gospel. Nothing ought to wound our minds so deeply as contempt of God,
and reproaches cast upon His grace: nor is there any kind of persecution
more deadly than when the salvation of the soul is assailed. We who have
escaped from the tyranny of the Pope, are not called to encounter the
swords of wicked men. But how blind must we be, if we are not affected
by that spiritual persecution, in which they strive, by every method, to
extinguish that doctrine, from which we draw the breath of life! — when
they attack our faith by their blasphemies, and shake not a few of the
less informed! For my own part, I am far more grieved by the fury of the
Epicureans than of the Papists. They do not attack us by open violence;
but, in proportion as the name of God is more dear to me than my own
life, the diabolical conspiracy which I see in operation to extinguish
all fear and worship of God, to root out the remembrance of Christ, or
to abandon it to the jeers of the ungodly, cannot but rack my mind with
greater anxiety, than if a whole country were burning in one
conflagration:

<span id="iii.vi.v-p24"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p25"></span>**30.** *But what saith the Scripture*?
There was some consolation in knowing that we do but share the lot of
our father Isaac; but it is a still greater consolation, when he adds,
that hypocrites, with all their boasting, can gain nothing more than to
be *cast out* of the spiritual family of Abraham; and that, to whatever
extent they may harass us for a time, the inheritance will certainly be
ours. Let believers cheer themselves with this consolation, that the
tyranny of the Ishmaelites will not last for ever. They appear to have
reached the highest pre-eminence, and, proud of their birthright, look
down upon us with contempt; but they will one day be declared to be the
descendants of Hagar, the sons of a slave, and unworthy of the
inheritance.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p26"></span>Let us be instructed by this beautiful
passage,

<span id="iii.vi.v-p27"></span>“not to fret ourselves because of
evil-doers,  
neither be envious against the workers of iniquity,”  
(<span id="iii.vi.v-p27.3"></span>[Ps
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p27.3"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.v-p28"></span>when they hold a temporary habitation and
rank in the Church, but patiently to look for the end which awaits them.
There are many pretended Christians, or strangers, who hold a place in
the Church, but who afterwards give evidence of their departure from the
faith, as he who, proud of his birthright, at first reigned, was cast
out like a foreigner with the posterity of Ishmael. Some censorious
persons smile at Paul’s simplicity, in comparing a woman’s passion,
arising out of a trifling quarrel, to a judgment of God. But they
overlook the decree of God, which took effect in such a manner, as to
make it manifest that the whole transaction was directed by a heavenly
providence. That Abraham should have been commanded to humor his wife
(<span id="iii.vi.v-p28.1"></span>[Ge
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p28.1"></span>) entirely in the matter, is no doubt
extraordinary, but proves that God employed the services of Sarah for
confirming his own promise. In a word, the *casting out* of Ishmael was
nothing else than the consequence and the accomplishment of that
promise, “In Isaac shall thy seed be called,” (<span
id="iii.vi.v-p28.2"></span>[Ge
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.v-p28.2"></span>,) — not in Ishmael. Although, therefore, it
was the revenging of a woman’s quarrel, yet God did not the less make
known his sentence by her mouth as a type of the Church.

<span id="iii.vi.v-p29"></span><span id="iii.vi.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p30"></span>**31.** *So then, brethren*. He now
exhorts the Galatians to prefer the condition of the children of Sarah
to that of the children of Hagar; and having reminded them that, by the
grace of Christ, they were born to freedom, he desires them to continue
in the same condition. If we shall call the Papists, Ishmaelites and
Hagarites, and boast that we are the lawful children, they will smile at
us; but if the two subjects in dispute be fairly compared, the most
ignorant person will be at no loss to decide.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[65](cc41008.htm#fr_64) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p15"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.i-p15.1"></span>Επίτροπος signifies both a child’s guardian
to take care of his person and estate, and his instructor and tutor,
<span id="iii.vi.i-p15.2"></span>ἐπίτροπος καὶ τοῦ παιδὸς καὶ τῶν
χρημάτων, ‘the guardian both of the child and of his property.’ (AElian,
v. H. 1. 3. c. 26.) Here it properly signifies the latter, his preceptor
or tutor. The next word, <span id="iii.vi.i-p15.3"></span>οἰκόνομος,
which we render governor, here denotes his guardian, who is to take care
of his person and estate; and to each of these the heirs to large
inheritances are generally subject, even as servants are subject to
their proper masters.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[66](cc41008.htm#fr_65) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p36"></span> “So far was he from subjecting to the
yoke of the law those to whom the law had not been given, that he came
in order to emancipate even the Jews themselves.” — Wetstein.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[67](cc41008.htm#fr_66) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p34"></span> <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.1"></span>Μᾶλλον δὲ “The Greek writers make use of
these two particles for the purpose of correcting what they have already
said, and, as if it had not been enough, of adding something more. Thus,
<span id="iii.vi.ii-p34.2"></span>[Ro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.2"></span>, and in Polybius. <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.3"></span>Χρήσιμον εἴη μᾶλλον δ ᾿ αηναγκαῖον. “It
would be useful, it would even be necessary.” <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.4"></span>Καὶ γὰρ ἄτοπον μᾶλλον δ ᾿ ὡς εἰπεῖν
ἀδύνατον, αδυνατον. “It would be absurd; it would even be impossible.” —
Raphelius.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[68](cc41008.htm#fr_67) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p40"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.ii-p40.1"></span>Par
ce mot de *Servir*, il reprend la necessity, a laquelle ils
s’astraignoyent d’observer les ceremonies.” “By the word ‘bondage,’ he
reproves them for the necessity to which they had reduced themselves to
observe ceremonies.”

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc41008.htm#fr_68) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p44"></span> <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p44.1"></span>́̓Εστι γὰρ καὶ ζὢλος ἀγαθὸς ὅταν τις οὕτω
ζηλοῖ ὥστε μιμήσασθαι τὴν ἀρετήν· ἔστι καὶ ζὢλος προνηρὸς ὤστε ἐκβάλλειν
τὢς ἀρετὢς τὸν κατορθοῦντα· ὅ δὴ καὶ αὐτοὶ νῦν ἐπιχειροῦσι, τὢς μὲν
τελείας γνώσεως ἐκβάλλειν θέλοντες, εἰς δὲ τὴν ἠκρωτηριασμένην ὑμᾶς δὲ
τοὺς νῦν ὑψηλοτέρους αὐτῶν ὄντας, ἐν τάξει καταστήσωσι μαθητῶν· τοῦτο
γὰρ ἐδήλωσεν εἰτὼν ἵνα αὐτοὺς ζηλοῦτε

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p45"></span>“There is a good zeal, when one
emulates in such a manner as to imitate virtue; and there is a bad zeal,
which ‘drives away’ from virtue one who is acting right. And this is
what they are now attempting to do, when they wish to ‘drive away’ from
perfect knowledge, and to lead them to that which is mutilated and
spurious, for no other reason than that they may occupy the ranks of
teachers, and that you, who are higher than themselves, may be placed by
them in the rank of scholars; for this is what he meant by saying, ‘that
ye may emulate them.’” — Chrysostom.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc41008.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p61"></span> <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p61.1"></span>ἀποροῦμαι ἐν ὑμῖν. “By these words the
apostle undoubtedly expresses more than that he was ‘in doubt about’ the
Galatians, and was at a loss what he should say about them; for in the
preceding verse he had given utterance to the vehement emotion of his
mind. With very nearly the same kind of emphasis does this word occur in
the Septuagint, at <span id="iii.vi.iii-p61.2"></span>[Ge
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p61.2"></span>, where it is said, ‘And Jacob was greatly
afraid, and was in deep anxiety.’ The concluding words are translated
<span id="iii.vi.iii-p61.3"></span>καὶ ἠπορεῖτο ” — Keuchenius.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc41008.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p61.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p62"></span> “To speak sometimes gently, and
sometimes harshly, as the case might demand.” — Luther. <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p62.1"></span>Φωνή signifies not only a voice, but the
thing that is spoken, (AElian, V. H., p. 347,) whether it be by word of
mouth, or by letter. And therefore, when the apostle says that he
‘desired to change his voice,’ he means, that he should be glad to be
present and converse with them personally, instead of writing to them at
a distance; because then he could be more fully informed of their true
state, and better able to know how to order his discourse to them.” —
Chandler.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc41008.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p63"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p63.1"></span>Seulement qu’ils regardent de ne faire
chose contre l’honneur de Dieu et leur conscience.” “Only let them
beware of doing anything against the honour of God and their own
conscience.”

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc41008.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.iv-p20.1"></span>La
servile condition de sa mere.” “His mother’s condition as a slave.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc41008.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p24"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.iv-p24.1"></span>Et
pour ceste cause elle engendre plusieurs sens et de diverses sortes.”
“And therefore it produces many meanings, and of various kinds.”

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc41008.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p26"></span> “A cataehresis borrows the name of one
thing to express another; which thing, though it has a name of its own,
yet, under a borrowed name, surprises us with novelty, or infuses into
our discourses a bold and daring energy. The Sacred Scriptures will
furnish us with many instances of this trope. <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.1"></span>[Le
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.1"></span>, — ‘And I will cast your carcases upon the
carcases of your idols;’ that is, upon the ruins of your idols, which
shall be as much destroyed as the body is when it is slain, and become a
dead carcase. So <span id="iii.vi.iv-p26.2"></span>[De
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.2"></span>; <span id="iii.vi.iv-p26.3"></span>[Ps
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.3"></span>; <span id="iii.vi.iv-p26.4"></span>[Ho
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.4"></span>. But the boldest catachresis, perhaps, in
all the Holy Scriptures, is in <span id="iii.vi.iv-p26.5"></span>[1Co
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p26.5"></span>., Because the foolishness of God,’ says the
apostle, ‘is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than
men;’ that is, what men are apt to account foolishness in God surpasses
their wisdom, and what they may be ready to misconstrue as weakness in
God, excels all their power. Gibbons’s Rhetoric.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc41008.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p31"></span> To a Latin scholar the author’s meaning
is obvious enough. But it may be proper to apprize the English reader,
that <span id="iii.vi.iv-p31.1"></span>*pactio* (a covenant) is a
feminine noun, and, on that account, is pronounced to be more natural
and graceful, in a metaphorical description of a mother, than <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p31.2"></span>*testamentum*, (a testament,) which, being a
neuter noun, sounds harshly in this connection. In that point of view,
the preference is little else than a matter of taste; but, on far higher
grounds, “covenant” is a more faithful translation than “testament;” and
a careful investigation of the meaning of <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p31.3"></span>διαθήκη would contribute greatly to
elucidate many passages of Scripture. — Ed.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc41008.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p34"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iv-p34.1"></span>C’est a dire, les conduisoit comme petits
enfans.” “That is, treated them like little children.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc41008.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p39"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.iv-p39.1"></span>Car
Agar est la montagne de Sina en Arabie, et est correspondante a
Ierusalem; ou, Sina est une montagne en Arabie, correspondante a
Ierusalem.” “For Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to
Jerusalem; or, Sinai is a mountain in Arabia, which corresponds to
Jerusalem.”

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc41008.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p40"></span> “Several critics have thought it so
extraordinary, that they have attempted to alter it from mere
conjecture, as may be seen in Bowyer’s ‘Critical Conjectures.’ But no
man, who knew that the Arabic word ‘Hagar’ meant *a rock*, could think
of making an alteration in this passage; for it is obvious that <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p40.1"></span>τὸ <span id="iii.vi.iv-p40.2"></span>̀̔Αγαρ,
in the neuter gender, cannot signify the woman *Hagar*; and Paul has not
been guilty of a grammatical error, since the passage must be
translated, ‘The word Hagar denotes Mount Sinai in Arabia.’“ —
Michaelis.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p41"></span>“That this was an appellation of Sinai
among the people of the surrounding country, we have the testimony of
Chrysostom and the ancient commentators, which is also confirmed by the
accounts of modern travellers. And it might well have it, since <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p41.1"></span>רגה (*hagar*) in Arabia signifies a rock, or
rocky mountain; and as Sinai is remarkably such, it might be <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p41.2"></span>κατ ᾿ ἐξοχὴν, called <span
id="iii.vi.iv-p41.3"></span>τὸ <span id="iii.vi.iv-p41.4"></span>̀̔Αγαρ.”
— Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc41008.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.vi.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.v-p20"></span> “The history tells us, that he laughed
at, derided, and mocked him to scorn, which is real persecution;
probably through pride, and the conceit of being Abraham’s eldest son
and heir.” — Chandler. “<span id="iii.vi.v-p20.1"></span>Διώκω will here
denote injurious treatment of every kind, both in deeds and words. And
although the Mosaic history records only one instance of insulting
treatment, — namely, on Ishmael mocking Sarah, when she weaned Isaac,
(<span id="iii.vi.v-p20.2"></span>[Gen.
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)<span id="iii.vi.v-p20.2"></span>,)
yet when we consider the disappointment which both Hagar and Ishmael
must have felt on the birth of Isaac, it was not unnatural for them to
feel ill-will, and show it on every occasion, to the real heir of the
promise. And many such are recorded, from tradition, in the Rabbinical
writers.” — Bloomfield.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc41009)
