[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41003)  [Next](cc41005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>THE ARGUMENT

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>OF

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span>THE EPISTLE OF PAUL TO THE GALATIANS.

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span>What part of Asia was inhabited by the
Galatians, and what were the boundaries of their country, is well known;
but whence they originally came  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) is
not agreed among historians. It is universally admitted that they were
Gauls, and, on that account, were denominated Gallo-Grecians. But from
what part of Gaul they came it is more difficult to determine.

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>Strabo thought that the Tectosages came from
Gallia Narbonensis, and that the remainder were Celtae;  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) and this opinion has been generally adopted.
But, as Pliny enumerates the Ambiani  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5)
among the Tectosagi, and as it is universally agreed that they were
allied to the Tolistobogi, who dwelt on the banks of the Rhine, I think
it more probable that, they were Belgians, whose territory extended from
a very distant part of the course of the Rhine to the English Channel.
The Tolistobogi inhabited that part which receives from its present
inhabitants the names of Cleves and Brabant.

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span>The mistake originated, I think, in this
way. A band of Tectosagi, who had made all irruption into Gallia
Narbonensis, retained their own name, and gave it to the country which
they had conquered. This is intimated by Ausonius,  <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6) who says, “As far as the Teutosagi, whose
original name was Belgians;  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) for he
calls them Belgians, and says that they were first called Teutosagi, and
afterwards Tectosagi. Caesar,  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) indeed,
places the Tectosagi in the Hercynian  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) forest; but I consider this to have been in
consequence of their emigration, which indeed appears from that very
passage.

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span>But more than enough has now been said as
to the origin of the nation, so far as relates to the present passage.
Pliny informs us that the Galatians, who inhabited that part of Asia to
which they gave their name, were divided into three chief nations,
Tectosagi, Tolistobogi, and Trocmi, and accordingly occupied three chief
cities. So great was the power which they at one time swayed over their
unwarlike neighbors, that they received tribute from a great part of
Lesser Asia. Losing at length their ancient valor, and giving themselves
up to pleasure and luxury, they were vanquished in war and subdued, with
little difficulty, by Cneius Manlius, a Roman consul.

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>At the time of the Apostle Paul they were
under the dominion of the Romans. He had purely and faithfully
instructed them in the Gospel; but false apostles had entered, during
his absence, and had corrupted the true seed by false and erroneous
doctrines. They taught that the observation of ceremonies was still
necessary. This might appear to be a trivial matter; but Paul very
properly contends as for a fundamental article of the Christian faith.
It is no small evil to quench the light of the Gospel, to lay a snare
for consciences, and to remove the distinction between the Old and New
Testaments. He perceived that these errors were also connected with a
wicked and dangerous opinion as to the manner in which justification is
obtained. This is the reason why he fights with so much earnestness and
vehemence; and, having learned from him the important and serious nature
of the controversy, it is our duty to read with greater attention.

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span>One who forms his views of the subject from
the Commentaries of Origen and Jerome, will be astonished that Paul
should take so deep an interest in external rites; but whoever goes to
the fountain will acknowledge that there was abundant reason for all
this sharpness of reproof. The Galatians had allowed themselves to be
drawn aside from the right course by excessive credulity, or rather by
lightness and folly. He therefore censures them more severely; for I do
not agree with those who attribute the harshness of his language to
their slowness of apprehension. The Ephesians and Colossians had been
subjected to the same temptations. If they had lent as ready an ear to
the tale of the impostors, do we imagine that Paul would have treated
them with greater gentleness? This boldness of rebuke was not suggested
by the disposition of the people, but extorted by the baseness of their
conduct.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span>Having ascertained what was the design of
writing the Epistle, let us attend to the order in which it is treated.
In the *first* and *second* Chapters (<span
id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Galatians
1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span> and
<span id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>[Galatians
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p17.2"></span>) he
maintains the authority of his Apostleship, except that, towards the
close of the second chapter, he touches incidentally on his main point,
the question of Man’s Justification, which, however, is avowedly and
directly argued in the *third* Chapter, <span
id="iii.ii-p17.3"></span>[Galatians
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p17.3"></span>.
Although he appears in those two Chapters to have many objects in view,
yet his sole object is to prove that He is equal to the highest
apostles, and that there is no reason why he should not be considered to
hold an equally honorable rank with any of them.

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>But it is of importance to know why he
labors so hard in establishing his own claim to respect. Provided that
Christ reigns, and that the purity of doctrine remains uncontaminated,
what matters it whether he is higher or lower than Peter, or whether
they are all on a footing of equality? If all must “decrease,” that
Christ alone may “increase,” (<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>[Joh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>,)
it is idle to dispute about human ranks. Besides, it may be asked, why
does he draw a comparison between himself and other apostles? What
dispute had he with Peter, and James, and John? What good purpose did it
serve to bring into collision those who were united in sentiment, and in
the closest friendship?

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span>I reply, the false apostles, who had
deceived the Galatians, endeavored to obtain favor by pretending that
they had received a commission from the Apostles. Their chief influence
arose from insinuating the belief that they represented the Apostles,
and delivered their message. To Paul, on the other hand, they refused
the name and authority of an Apostle. They objected that he had not been
chosen by our Lord as one of the Twelve; that he had never been
acknowledged as such by the college of the Apostles; that he did not
receive his doctrine from Christ, or even from the Apostles themselves.
All this tended not only to lower Paul’s authority, but to rank him with
the ordinary members of the Church, and therefore to place him far below
those persons who made these insinuations.

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span>If this had been merely a personal matter,
it would have given no uneasiness to Paul to be reckoned an ordinary
disciple. But when he saw that his doctrine was beginning to lose its
weight and authority, he was not entitled to be silent. It became his
duty to make a bold resistance. When Satan does not venture openly to
attack doctrine, his next stratagem is to diminish its influence by
indirect attacks. Let us remember, then, that in the person of Paul the
truth of the Gospel was assailed; for, if he had allowed himself to be
stripped of the honor of apostleship, it followed that he had hitherto
claimed what he had no title to enjoy; and this false boasting would
have made him liable to suspicion in other matters. The estimation in
which his doctrine was held depended on the question, whether it came,
as some had begun to think, from an ordinary disciple, or from an
apostle of Christ.

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span>He was overwhelmed, on the other hand, by
the lustre of great names. Those who referred, in a boastful manner, to
Peter, and James, and John, pretended to apostolical authority. If Paul
had not manfully resisted this boasting, he would have given way to
falsehood, and would have allowed the truth of God  <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) to suffer again in his own person. He
therefore contends earnestly for both points: that he was appointed by
the Lord to be an apostle, and that he was in no respect inferior to the
rest, but enjoyed the same title, and was equal to them in authority and
rank. He might, indeed, have denied that those men were either sent, or
hold any commission from Peter and his associates. But he takes far
higher ground, that he does not yield to the Apostles themselves; and if
he had declined doing so, he would have been supposed to have distrusted
his cause.

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span>Jerusalem was, at that time, the Mother of
all the Churches; for the Gospel had spread from it over the whole
world, and it might be said to be the principal seat of the kingdom of
Christ. Any one who came from it into other churches was received with
due respect. But many were foolishly elated with the thought that they
had enjoyed the friendship of the Apostles, or at least had been taught
in their school; and therefore nothing pleased them but what they had
seen at Jerusalem. Every custom that had not been practiced there was
not only disliked, but unsparingly condemned by them. This peevish
manner becomes highly pernicious, when the custom of a single church is
attempted to be enforced as a universal law. We are sometimes so devoted
to an instructor or a place, that, without exercising any judgment of
our own, we make the opinion of one man the standard for all men, and
the customs of one place the standard for every other place. Such
attachment is ridiculous, if there be not always in it a mixture of
ambition; or rather we should say, excessive peevishness is always
ambitious.

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>To return to those false apostles, if they
had only attempted, through wicked contention, to establish everywhere
the use of those ceremonies, which they had seen observed at Jerusalem,
that would have been no slight offense; for, when a custom is forthwith
converted into a law, injustice is perpetrated. But a more serious evil
was involved in the wicked and dangerous doctrine, which held
consciences to be bound to them by religious considerations, which made
justification to depend on the observation of them. Such were the
reasons why Paul defended his Apostleship with so much earnestness, and
why he contrasted himself with the rest of the Apostles.

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span>He pursues this subject to the end of the
*second* Chapter, <span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>[Galatians
2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>, when
he proceeds to argue the doctrine, that we are justified in the sight of
God by Free Grace, and not by the Works of the Law. His argument is
this: If Ceremonies have not the power of bestowing Justification, the
observation of them is therefore unnecessary. We must remark, however,
that he does not confine himself entirely to Ceremonies, but argues
generally about Works, otherwise the whole discussion would be trifling.

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span>If any person thinks that we are thus
straining the matter too far, let him attend to the two following
reasons. First, the question could not be settled without assuming the
general principle, that we are justified by the free grace of God; and
this principle sets aside not only ceremonies, but every other kind of
works. Secondly, Paul did not attach so much importance to Ceremonies as
to the wicked doctrine of obtaining Salvation by Works. Let it be
observed, therefore, that Paul had good reasons for recurring to first
principles. It was necessary to go to the fountain, and to warn his
readers that the controversy related, not to some insignificant trifle,
but to the most important of all matters — the method of obtaining
salvation.

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span>It is a mistake, therefore, to suppose that
the Apostle confined himself wholly to the special question about
Ceremonies, a subject which did not admit of being settled by itself. A
similar instance occurs in history. (<span id="iii.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ac
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)<span id="iii.ii-p27.1"></span>.)
Strife and contention had arisen out of the question, whether or not
Ceremonies were necessary to be observed. In the course of the
discussion, the Apostles dwell largely on the intolerable yoke of the
Law, and on the Forgiveness of Sins through Free Grace. What was the
object of this? It appears to be a foolish departure from the point in
hand; but the contrary is the fact, for a particular error cannot be
satisfactorily refuted without assuming a universal principle. As, for
instance, if I am called to dispute about, forbidding the use of flesh,
I shall not speak merely about the different kinds of food, but shall
arm myself with the general doctrine: What authority have the Traditions
of men for binding the conscience? I shall quote the declaration, that

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span>“There is one Lawgiver, who has power to
save and to destroy.” (<span id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Jas
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.ii-p29"></span>In short, Paul here argues negatively from
general to particular propositions, which is the ordinary and most
natural method of reasoning. By what evidences and arguments he proves
this principle, that we are justified by the grace of God alone, we
shall see when we come to the passage. He pursues this topic till the
end of the *third* Chapter, <span id="iii.ii-p29.1"></span>[Galatians
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="iii.ii-p30"></span>In the commencement of the *fourth*
Chapter, <span id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Galatians
4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p30.1"></span>, he
inquires into the proper use of Ceremonies, and the reason why they were
appointed; shewing, at the same time, that they are now abolished. It
became necessary to meet this silly objection, which might occur to some
minds. What, then, was the purpose of Ceremonies? Were they useless?
Were the Fathers idly employed in observing them? He illustrates briefly
two statements, that in their own time they were not superfluous, and
that they have now been abolished by the coming of Christ, because He is
the truth and end of them; and therefore he shews that we must abide by
Him. Glancing briefly at the difference between our condition and that
of the Fathers, he infers that the doctrine of the false apostles is
wicked and dangerous, because it darkens the clearness of the gospel by
ancient shadows. The Apostle’s doctrine is now intermingled with some
affecting exhortations. Towards the close of the Chapter his argument is
enlivened by a beautiful allegory.

<span id="iii.ii-p31"></span>In the *fifth* Chapter, <span
id="iii.ii-p31.1"></span>[Galatians
5](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#000)<span id="iii.ii-p31.1"></span>, he
exhorts them to hold fast the Liberty which has been obtained by the
blood of Christ, that they may not surrender their consciences to be
ensnared by the opinions of men. But he reminds them, at the same time,
in what manner Liberty may be lawfully used.  <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) He then takes occasion to point out the
proper employments of Christians, that they may not uselessly spend
their time in Ceremonies, and neglect matters of real importance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc41004.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>Mais quant a
leur origine, et le lieu dont ils sont premieremerit partis, les anciens
autheurs ne se trouvent d’accord.” “But as to their lineage, and the
place from which they originally came, ancient authors are not agreed.”

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc41004.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>Strabo
geographe pense que ceux d’entre eux qui avoyent le nom de Tectosagois
estoyent venus du pays de Provence, et les antres de la Gaule Celtique.”
“Strabo, the geographer, thinks that those of them who bore the name of
Tectosages had come from Provence, and the remainder from Celtic Gaul.”

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc41004.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>Ceux
d’Amiens.” “Those of Amiens.”

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc41004.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p10.1"></span>Ausone
poete Bordelois, qui a escrit en Latin.” “Ausonius, the poet, a native
of Bourdeaux, who wrote in Latin.”

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc41004.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>Usque in
Teutosagos primaevo nomine Belgas.”

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc41004.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.ii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span> Bell. Gall. 50 6 100 24.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc41004.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> A forest in Germany, which Caesar
describes to be nine days’ journey in breadth, and, at least, sixty
days’ journey in length. How much more he was unable to say, as he had
never found any person who had traveled farther, or could tell where the
forest terminated. He regrets the necessity of employing these vague
terms, having placed little reliance on the skill or accuracy of his
informers. It is mentioned, he adds, by Eratosthenes and other Greek
writers, under the name of *Orcynia*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc41004.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p22.1"></span>La verite
de Dieu.”

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc41004.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p32"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p32.1"></span>En quoy
consiste ceste liberte, et quel en est le vray et droit usage“ “In what
that liberty consists, and what is the true and lawful use of it.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc41005)
