[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc41013)  [Next](cc41015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 41: Galatians and Ephesians*, tr. by John
King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** And you *hath he quickened*, who
were dead in trespasses and sins;

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Et vos, quum essetis mortui
delictis et peccatis vestris;

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Wherein in time past ye walked
according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of
disobedience:

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** In quibus aliquando ambulastis
secundum saeculum mundi hujus, secundum principem potestatis aeris,
spiritus scilicet, qui nunc operatur in filiis inobedientiae;

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Among whom also we all had our
conversation in times past in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind; and were by nature the children of
wrath, even as others.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Inter quos nos quoque omnes
aliquando conversati sumus in concupiscentiis carnis nostrae, facientes
quae carni libebant, et menti; et eramus natura filii irae, sicut et
caeteri.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span>**1.** *And you who were dead.* This is
an ἐπεξεργασία of the former statements, that is, an exposition
accompanied by an illustration.  <span id="fr_117"></span>[118](#fn_117)
To bring home more effectually to the Ephesians the general doctrine of
Divine grace, he reminds them of their former condition. This
application consists of two parts. “Ye were formerly lost; but now God,
by his grace, has rescued you from destruction.” And here we must
observe, that, in laboring to give an impressive view of both of these
parts, the apostle makes a break in the style by (ὑπερβατὸν) a
transposition. There is some perplexity in the language; but, if we
attend carefully to what the apostle says about those two parts, the
meaning is clear. As to the first, he says that they *were dead;* and
states, at the same time, the cause of the death — *trespasses and
sins.*  <span id="fr_118"></span>[119](#fn_118) He does not mean simply
that they were in danger of death; but he declares that it was a real
and present death under which they labored. As spiritual death is
nothing else than the alienation of the soul from God, we are all born
as dead men, and we live as dead men, until we are made partakers of the
life of Christ, — agreeably to the words of our Lord,

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span>“The hour is coming, and now is, when the
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live.” (<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>[Joh
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span>The Papists, who are eager to seize every
opportunity of undervaluing the grace of God, say, that while we are out
of Christ, we are half dead. But we are not at liberty to set aside the
declarations of our Lord and of the Apostle Paul, that, while we remain
in Adam, we are entirely devoid of life; and that regeneration is a new
life of the soul, by which it rises from the dead. Some kind of life, I
acknowledge, does remain in us, while we are still at a distance from
Christ; for unbelief does not altogether destroy the outward senses, or
the will, or the other faculties of the soul. But what has this to do
with the kingdom of God? What has it to do with a happy life, so long as
every sentiment of the mind, and every act of the will, is death? Let
this, then, be held as a fixed principle, that the union of our soul
with God is the true and only life; and that out of Christ we are
altogether dead, because sin, the cause of death, reigns in us.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span>**2.** *In which for some time ye
walked.* From the effects or fruits, he draws a proof that sin formerly
reigned in them; for, until sin displays itself in outward acts, men are
not sufficiently aware of its power. When he adds, *according to the
course of this world,*  <span id="fr_119"></span>[120](#fn_119) he
intimates that the death which he had mentioned rages in the nature of
man, and is a universal disease. He does not mean that course of the
world which God has ordained, nor the elements, such as the heaven, and
earth, and air, — but the depravity with which we are all infected; so
that sin is not peculiar to a few, but pervades the whole world.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span>*According to the prince of the power of
the air.* He now proceeds farther, and explains the cause of our
corruption to be the dominion which the devil exercises over us. A more
severe condemnation of mankind could not have been pronounced. What does
he leave to us, when he declares us to be the slaves of Satan, and
subject to his will, so long as we live out of the kingdom of Christ?
Our condition, therefore, though many treat it with ridicule, or, at
least, with little disapprobation, may well excite our horror. Where is
now the free-will, the guidance of reason, the moral virtue, about which
Papists babble to much? What will they find that is pure or holy under
the tyranny of the devil? On this subject, indeed, they are extremely
cautious, and denounce this doctrine of Paul as a grievous heresy. I
maintain, on the contrary, that there is no obscurity in the apostle’s
language; and that all men who live *according to the world,* that is,
according to the inclinations of their flesh, are here declared to fight
under the reign of Satan.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span>In accordance with the practice of the
inspired writers, the Devil is mentioned in the singular number. As the
children of God have one head, so have the wicked; for each of the
classes forms a distinct body. By assigning to him the dominion over all
wicked beings, ungodliness is represented as an unbroken mass. As to his
attributing to the devil power over the air, that will be considered
when we come to the sixth chapter. At present, we shall merely advert to
the strange absurdity of the Manicheans, in endeavoring to prove from
this passage the existence of two principles, as if Satan could do
anything without the Divine permission. Paul does not allow him the
highest authority, which belongs to the will of God alone, but merely a
tyranny which God permits him to exercise. What is Satan but God’s
executioner to punish man’s ingratitude? This is implied in Paul’s
language, when he represents the success of Satan as confined to
unbelievers; for the children of God are thus exempted from his power.
If this be true, it follows that Satan does nothing but under the
control of a superior: and that he is not (αὐτοκράτωρ) an unlimited
monarch.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span>We may now draw from it also this
inference, that ungodly men have no excuse in being driven by Satan to
commit all sorts of crimes. Whence comes it that they are subject to his
tyranny, but because they are rebels against God? If none are the slaves
of Satan, but those who have renounced the service, and refuse to yield
to the authority, of God, let them blame themselves, for having so cruel
a master.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span>By *the children of disobedience,*
according to a Hebrew idiom, are meant obstinate persons. Unbelief is
always accompanied by disobedience; so that it is the source — the
*mother* of all stubbornness.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span>**3.** *Among whom also we all had our
conversation.* Lest it should be supposed that what he had now said was
a slanderous reproach against the former character of the Ephesians, or
that Jewish pride had led him to treat the Gentiles as an inferior race,
he associates himself and his countrymen along with them in the general
accusation. This is not done in hypocrisy, but in a sincere ascription
of glory to God. It may excite wonder, indeed, that he should speak of
himself as having walked “in the lusts of the flesh,” while, on other
occasions, he boasts that his life had been throughout irreproachable.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span>“Touching the righteousness which is in
the law, blameless.” (<span id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>[Php
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span>And again,

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span>“Ye are witnesses, and God also, how
holily, and justly, and unblamably, we behaved ourselves among you that
believe.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.i-p26.2"></span>[1Th
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.i-p26.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p27"></span>I reply, the statement applies to all who
have not been regenerated by the Spirit of Christ. However praiseworthy,
in appearance, the life of some may be, because their lusts do not break
out in the sight of men, there is nothing pure or holy which does not
proceed from the fountain of all purity.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p28"></span>*Fulfilling the desires of the flesh and
of the mind.* To fulfill these desires, is to live according to the
guidance of our natural disposition and of our mind. *The flesh* means
here the disposition, or, what is called, the inclination of the nature;
and the next expression (τῶν διανοιῶν) means what proceeds from the
mind. Now, *the mind* includes reason, such as it exists in men by
nature; so that *lusts* do not refer exclusively to the lower appetites,
or what is called the sensual part of man, but extend to the whole.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p29"></span>*And were by nature*  <span
id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) *children of wrath.* All men without
exception, whether Jews or Gentiles, (<span
id="iv.iii.i-p30.4"></span>[Gal. 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)<span id="iv.iii.i-p30.4"></span>,)
are here pronounced to be guilty, until they are redeemed by Christ; so
that out of Christ there is no righteousness, no salvation, and, in
short, no excellence. *Children of wrath* are those who are lost, and
who deserve eternal death. *Wrath* means the judgment of God; so that
*the children of wrath* are those who are condemned before God. Such,
the apostle tells us, had been the Jews, — such had been all the
excellent men that were now in the Church; and they were so *by nature,*
that is, from their very commencement, and from their mother’s womb.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p31"></span>This is a remarkable passage, in
opposition to the views of the Pelagians, and of all who deny original
sin. What dwells naturally in all is certainly original; but Paul
declares that we are all naturally liable to condemnation; therefore sin
dwells naturally in us, for God does not condemn the innocent. Pelagians
were wont to object, that sin spread from Adam to the whole human race,
not by descent, but by imitation. But Paul affirms that we are born with
sin, as serpents bring their venom from the womb. Others who think that
it is not in reality sin, are not less at variance with Paul’s language;
for where condemnation is, there must unquestionably be sin. It is not
with blameless men, but with sin, that God is offended. Nor is it
wonderful that the depravity which we inherit from our parents is
reckoned as sin before God; for the seeds of sin, before they have been
openly displayed, are perceived and condemned.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p32"></span>But one question here arises. Why does
Paul represent the Jews, equally with others, as subject to wrath and
curse, while they were the blessed seed? I answer, they have a common
nature. Jews differ from Gentiles in nothing but this, that, through the
grace of the promise, God delivers them from destruction; but that is a
remedy which came after the disease. Another question is, since God is
the Author of nature, how comes it that no blame attaches to God, if we
are lost by nature? I answer, there is a twofold nature: the one was
produced by God, and the other is the corruption of it. This
condemnation therefore which Paul mentions does not proceed from God,
but from a depraved nature: for we are not born such as Adam was at
first created, we are not

<span id="iv.iii.i-p33"></span>“wholly a right seed, but are turned into
the degenerate”  
(<span id="iv.iii.i-p33.2"></span>[Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)<span id="iv.iii.i-p33.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p34"></span>offspring of a degenerate and sinful man.

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>**4.** But God, who is rich in mercy, for
his great love wherewith he loved us,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**4.** Deus autem, qui dives est in
misericordia, propter multam suam dilectionem, qua nos dilexit,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**5.** Even when we were dead in sins,
hath quickened us together with Christ; (by grace ye are saved;)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**5.** Etiam quum essemus mortui
peccatis, convivificavit cum Christo; (Gratia estis salvati;)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>**6.** And hath raised *us* up together,
and made *us* sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus;

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**6.** Et simul excitavit, et sedere
fecit in coelestibus in Christo Iesu,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**7.** That in the ages to come he might
shew the exceeding riches of his grace, in *his* kindness toward us
through Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** Ut demonstraret in saeculis
supervenientibus exsuperantes divitias gratiae suae, in benignitate erga
nos in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**4.** *But God, who is rich in mercy.*
 <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) Now follows the second member
of the sentence, the substance of which is, that God had delivered the
Ephesians from the destruction to which they were formerly liable; but
the words which he employs are different. *God, who is rich in mercy,
hath quickened you together with Christ.* The meaning is, that, there is
no other life than that which is breathed into us by Christ: so that we
begin to live only when we are ingrafted into him, and enjoy the same
life with himself. This enables us to see what the apostle formerly
meant by death, for that death and this resurrection are brought into
contrast. To be made partakers of the life of the Son of God, — to be
quickened by one Spirit, is an inestimable privilege.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span>On this ground he praises the *mercy* of
God, meaning by its *riches,* that it had been poured out in a
singularly large and abundant manner. The whole of our salvation is here
ascribed to the mercy of God. But he presently adds, *for his great love
wherewith he loved us.*  <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) This is
a still more express declaration, that all was owing to undeserved
goodness; for he declares that God was moved by this single
consideration. “Herein,” says John, “is love, not that we loved God, but
that he loved us. — We love him because he first loved us.” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>[1 John
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>**5.** *Even when we were dead in sin.*
These words have the same emphasis as similar expressions in another
Epistle.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>“For *when we were yet without
strength,* in due time Christ died, for the ungodly. — But God
commendeth his love toward us, in that, *while we were yet sinners,*
Christ died for us.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>[Rom.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p19"></span>Whether the words, *by grace ye are
saved,* have been inserted by another hand, I know not; but, as they are
perfectly agreeable to the context, I am quite willing to receive them
as written by Paul. They show us that he always feels as if he had not
sufficiently proclaimed the riches of Divine grace, and accordingly
expresses, by a variety of terms, the same truth, that everything
connected with our salvation ought to be ascribed to God as its author.
And certainly he who duly weighs the ingratitude of men will not
complain that this parenthesis is superfluous.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21"></span>**6.** *And hath raised us up together.*
The resurrection and sitting in heaven, which are here mentioned, are
not yet seen by mortal eyes. Yet, as if those blessings were presently
in our possession, he states that we have received them; and illustrates
the change which has taken place in our condition, when we were led from
Adam to Christ. It is as if we had been brought from the deepest hell to
heaven itself. And certainly, although, as respects ourselves, our
salvation is still the object of hope, yet in Christ we already possess
a blessed immortality and glory; and therefore, he adds, *in Christ
Jesus*. Hitherto it does not appear in the members, but only in the
head; yet, in consequence of the secret union, it belongs truly to the
members. Some render it, *through Christ;* but, for the reason which has
been mentioned, it is better to retain the usual rendering, *in Christ.*
We are thus furnished with the richest consolation. Of everything which
we now want, we have a sure pledge and foretaste in the person of
Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23"></span>**7.** *That in the ages to come.* The
final and true cause — the glory of God — is again mentioned, that the
Ephesians, by making it the subject of earnest study, might be more
fully assured of their salvation. He likewise adds, that it was the
design of God to hallow, in all ages, the remembrance of so great
goodness. This exhibits still more strongly the hateful character of
those by whom the free calling of the Gentiles was attacked; for they
were endeavoring instantly to crush that scheme which was destined to be
remembered through all ages. But we, too, are instructed by it, that the
mercy of God, who was pleased to admit our fathers into the number of
his own people, deserves to be held in everlasting remembrance. The
calling of the Gentiles is an astonishing work of divine goodness, which
ought to be handed down by parents to children, and to their children’s
children, that it may never be forgotten or unacknowledged by the sons
of men.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24"></span>*The riches of his grace in his
kindness.* The love of God to us in Christ is here proved, or again
declared, to have had its origin in mercy*. That he might shew,* says
he, *the exceeding riches of his grace.* How? *In his kindness towards
us,* as the tree is known by its fruit. Not only, therefore, does he
declare, that the love of God was free, but likewise that God displayed
in it the riches, — the extraordinary pre-eminent riches of his grace.
It deserves notice, also, that the name of *Christ* is repeated; for no
grace, no love, must be expected by us from God, except through his
mediation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>**8.** For by grace are ye saved through
faith; and that not of yourselves: *it is* the gift of God:

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>**8.** Gratia enim estis salvati per
fidem; idque non ex vobis: Dei donum est.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>**9.** Not of works, lest any man should
boast.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>**9.** Non ex operibus; ne quis
glorietur.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>**10.** For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained
that we should walk in them.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>**10.** Ipsius enim opus sumus, creati
in Christo Iesu ad opera bona, quae praeparavit Deus, ut in illis
ambulemus.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>**8.** *For by grace are ye saved.*
This is an inference from the former statements. Having treated of
election and of effectual calling, he arrives at this general
conclusion, that they had obtained salvation by faith alone. First, he
asserts, that the salvation of the Ephesians was entirely the work, the
gracious work of God. But then they had obtained this grace by faith. On
one side, we must look at God; and, on the other, at man. God declares,
that he owes us nothing; so that salvation is not a reward or
recompense, but unmixed grace. The next question is, in what way do men
receive that salvation which is offered to them by the hand of God? The
answer is, *by faith;* and hence he concludes that nothing connected
with it is our own. If, on the part of God, it is grace alone, and if we
bring nothing but faith, which strips us of all commendation, it follows
that salvation does not come from us.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>Ought we not then to be silent about
free-will, and good intentions, and fancied preparations, and merits,
and satisfactions? There is none of these which does not claim a share
of praise in the salvation of men; so that the praise of grace would
not, as Paul shews, remain undiminished. When, on the part of man, the
act of receiving salvation is made to consist in faith alone, all other
means, on which men are accustomed to rely, are discarded. Faith, then,
brings a man empty to God, that he may be filled with the blessings of
Christ. And so he adds, *not of yourselves;* that claiming nothing for
themselves, they may acknowledge God alone as the author of their
salvation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>**9.** *Not of works.* Instead of what
he had said, that their salvation is of grace, he now affirms, that “it
is the gift of God.”  <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) Instead of
what he had said, *“*Not of yourselves,*”* he now says, *“*Not of
works.*”* Hence we see, that the apostle leaves nothing to men in
procuring salvation. In these three phrases, — *not of yourselves,* —
*it is the gift of God,* — *not of works,* — he embraces the substance
of his long argument in the Epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians,
that righteousness comes to us from the mercy of God alone, — is offered
to us in Christ by the gospel, — and is received by faith alone, without
the merit of works.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span>This passage affords an easy refutation
of the idle cavil by which Papists attempt to evade the argument, that
we are justified without works. Paul, they tell us, is speaking about
ceremonies. But the present question is not confined to one class of
works. Nothing can be more clear than this. The whole righteousness of
man, which consists in works, — nay, the whole man, and everything that
he can call his own, is set aside. We must attend to the contrast
between God and man, — between grace and works. Why should God be
contrasted with man, if the controversy related to nothing more than
ceremonies?

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>Papists themselves are compelled to own
that Paul ascribes to the grace of God the whole glory of our salvation,
but endeavor to do away with this admission by another contrivance. This
mode of expression, they tell us, is employed, because God bestows the
first grace. It is really foolish to imagine that they can succeed in
this way, since Paul excludes man and his utmost ability, — not only
from the commencement, but throughout, — from the whole work of
obtaining salvation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span>But it is still more absurd to overlook
the apostle’s inference, *lest any man should boast.* Some room must
always remain for man’s boasting, so long as, independently of grace,
merits are of any avail. Paul’s doctrine is overthrown, unless the whole
praise is rendered to God alone and to his mercy. And here we must
advert to a very common error in the interpretation of this passage.
Many persons restrict the word *gift* to faith alone. But Paul is only
repeating in other words the former sentiment. His meaning is, not that
faith is the gift of God, but that salvation is given to us by God, or,
that we obtain it by the gift of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>**10.** *For we are his work.* By
setting aside the contrary supposition, he proves his statement, that
*by grace we are saved,* — that we have no remaining works by which we
can merit salvation; for all the good works which we possess are the
fruit of regeneration. Hence it follows, that works themselves are a
part of grace.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>When he says, that “we are the work of
God,” this does not refer to ordinary creation, by which we are made
men. We are declared to be new creatures, because, not by our own power,
but by the Spirit of Christ, we have been formed to righteousness. This
applies to none but believers. As the descendants of Adam, they were
wicked and depraved; but by the grace of Christ, they are spiritually
renewed, and become new men. Everything in us, therefore, that is good,
is the supernatural gift of God. The context explains his meaning. *We
are his work,* because we have been *created,* — not in Adam, but *in
Christ Jesus,* — not to every kind of life, but to *good works.*

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span>What remains now for free-will, if all
the good works which proceed from us are acknowledged to have been the
gifts of the Spirit of God? Let godly readers weigh carefully the
apostle’s words. He does not say that we are assisted by God. He does
not say that the will is prepared, and is then left to run by its own
strength. He does not say that the power of choosing aright is bestowed
upon us, and that we are afterwards left to make our own choice. Such is
the idle talk in which those persons who do their utmost to undervalue
the grace of God are accustomed to indulge. But the apostle affirms that
we are God’s work, and that everything good in us is his creation; by
which he means that the whole man is formed by his hand to be good. It
is not the mere power of choosing aright, or some indescribable kind of
preparation, or even assistance, but the right will itself, which is his
workmanship; otherwise Paul’s argument would have no force. He means to
prove that man does not in any way procure salvation for himself, but
obtains it as a free gift from God. The proof is, that man is nothing
but by divine grace. Whoever, then, makes the very smallest claim for
man, apart from the grace of God, allows him, to that extent, ability to
procure salvation.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>*Created to good works.* They err
widely from Paul’s intention, who torture this passage for the purpose
of injuring the righteousness of faith. Ashamed to affirm in plain
terms, and aware that they could gain nothing by affirming, that we are
not justified by faith, they shelter themselves under this kind of
subterfuge. “We are justified by faith, because faith, by which we
receive the grace of God, is the commencement of righteousness; but we
are made righteous by regeneration, because, being renewed by the Spirit
of God, we walk in good works.” In this manner they make faith the door
by which we enter into righteousness, but imagine that we obtain it by
our works, or, at least, they define righteousness to be that
uprightness by which a man is formed anew to a holy life. I care not how
old this error may be; but they err egregiously who endeavor to support
it by this passage.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>We must look to Paul’s design. He
intends to shew that we have brought nothing to God, by which he might
be laid under obligations to us; and he shews that even the good works
which we perform have come from God. Hence it follows, that we are
nothing, except through the pure exercise of his kindness. Those men, on
the other hand, infer that the half of our justification arises from
works. But what has this to do with Paul’s intention, or with the
subject which he handles? It is one thing to inquire in what
righteousness consists, and another thing to follow up the doctrine,
that it is not from ourselves, by this argument, that we have no right
to claim good works as our own, but have been formed by the Spirit of
God, through the grace of Christ, to all that is good. When Paul lays
down the cause of justification, he dwells chiefly on this point, that
our consciences will never enjoy peace till they rely on the
propitiation for sins. Nothing of this sort is even alluded to in the
present instance. His whole object is to prove, that,

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>“by the grace of God, we are all that
we are.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24.2"></span>[1Co
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p24.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>*Which God hath prepared* Beware of
applying this, as the Pelagians do, to the instruction of the law; as if
Paul’s meaning were, that God commands what is just, and lays down a
proper rule of life. Instead of this, he follows up the doctrine which
he had begun to illustrate, that salvation does not proceed from
ourselves. He says, that, before we were born, the good works were
prepared by God; meaning, that in our own strength we are not able to
lead a holy life, but only so far as we are formed and adapted by the
hand of God. Now, if the grace of God came before our performances, all
ground of boasting has been taken away. Let us carefully observe the
word *prepared.* On the simple ground of the order of events, Paul rests
the proof that, with respect to good works, God owes us nothing. How so?
Because they were drawn out of his treasures, in which they had long
before been laid up; for whom he called, them he justifies and
regenerates.

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>**11.** Wherefore remember, that ye
*being* in time past Gentiles in the flesh, who are called
Uncircumcision by that which is called the Circumcision in the flesh
made by hands;

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**11.** Quamobrem memores estote, quod
aliquando vos Gentes in carne, qui dicebamini Praeputium ab ea, quae
vocatur Circumcisio, in carne manu facta;

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>**12.** That at that time ye were without
Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from
the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world:

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>**12.** Illo tempore eratis absque
Christo, alienati a republica Israelis, hospites tabularum promissionis,
spem non habentes, et sine Deo in mundo.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>**13.** But now, in Christ Jesus, ye who
sometimes were far off are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>**13.** Nunc autem in Christo Iesu vos,
qui quondam eratis procul, facti estis propinqui per Christi sanguinem.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>**11.** *Wherefore remember.* The
apostle never once loses sight of his subject, marks it out clearly, and
pursues it with increasing earnestness. He again exhorts the Ephesians
to remember what their character had been before they were called. This
consideration was fitted to convince them that they had no reason to be
proud. He afterwards points out the method of reconciliation, that they
might rest with perfect satisfaction on Christ alone, and not imagine
that other aids were necessary. The first clause may be thus summed up:
“Remember that, when ye were uncircumcised, ye were aliens from Christ,
from the hope of salvation, and from the Church and kingdom of God; so
that ye had no friendly intercourse with God.” The second may run thus:
“But now ingrafted into Christ, ye are at the same time reconciled to
God.” What is implied in both parts of the description, and what effect
the remembrance of it was fitted to produce on their minds, has been
already considered.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>*Gentiles in the flesh*. He first
mentions that they had wanted the marks of God’s people. *Circumcision*
was a token by which the people of God were marked out and distinguished
from other men: *Uncircumcision* was the mark of a profane person.
Since, therefore, God usually connects his grace with the sacraments,
their want of the sacraments is taken as an evidence that neither were
they partakers of his grace. The argument, indeed, does not hold
universally, though it does hold as to God’s ordinary dispensations.
Hence we find the following language:

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span>“And the Lord God said, Behold, the man
is become as one of us, to know good and evil: and now, lest he put
forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live for
ever: therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to
till the ground from whence he was taken. So he drove out the man.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>[Gen.
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#023)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>Though he had devoured the whole tree,
he would not, by merely eating it, have recovered the possession of
life; but, by taking away the sign, the Lord took from him also life
itself. Uncircumcision is thus held out to the Ephesians as a mark of
pollution. By taking from the Ephesians the token of sanctification, he
deprives them also of the thing signified.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14"></span>Some are of opinion, that all these
observations are intended to throw contempt on outward circumcision; but
this is a mistake. At the same time, I acknowledge, that the qualifying
clause*, the Circumcision in the flesh made by hands,* points out a
twofold circumcision. The Jews were thus taught that they should no
longer indulge in foolish boasting about the literal circumcision. The
Ephesians, on the other hand, were instructed to abstain from all
scruples on their own account, since the most important privilege—nay,
the whole truth expressed by the outward sign—was in their possession.
He calls it, *Uncircumcision in the flesh,* because they bore the mark
of their pollution; but, at the same time, he suggests that their
uncircumcision was no hinderance to their being spiritually circumcised
by Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15"></span>The words may likewise be read in one
clause, *Circumcision in the flesh made by hands,* or in two clauses:
*Circumcision in the flesh,* meaning that it was carnal; *made by
hands,* meaning that it was done by the hand of man. This kind of
circumcision is contrasted with that of the Spirit, or *of the heart,*
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>[Ro
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>,) which is also called *the circumcision of
Christ.* (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15.2"></span>[Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p16"></span>*By that which is called.*
*Circumcision* may be viewed here either as a collective noun for the
Jews themselves, or literally for the thing itself; and then the meaning
would be, that the Gentiles were called *Uncircumcision,* because they
wanted the sacred symbol, that is, by way of distinction. This latter
sense is countenanced by the qualifying phrase; but the substance of the
argument is little affected.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p17"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18"></span>**12.** *That at that time ye were
without Christ.* He now declares that the Ephesians had been excluded,
not only from the outward badge, but from everything necessary to the
salvation and happiness of men. As Christ is the foundation of hope and
of all the promises, he mentions, first of all, that they *were without
Christ.* But for him that is without Christ, there remains nothing but
destruction. On Him *the commonwealth of Israel* was founded; and in
whom, but in Himself, could the people of God be collected into one holy
society?

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p19"></span>A similar observation might be made as
to *the tables of the promise* On one great promise made to Abraham all
the others hang, and without it they lose all their value:

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20"></span>“In thy seed shall all the nations of
the earth be blessed.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p21"></span>Hence our apostle says elsewhere,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22"></span>“All the promises of God in him are yea,
and in him Amen.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>[2Co
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p23"></span>Take away the covenant of salvation, and
there remains no hope. I have translated τῶν διαθηκῶν by *the tables,*
or, in ordinary legal phrase, the *instruments.* By solemn ritual did
God sanction His covenant with Abraham and his posterity, that he would
be their God for ever and ever. (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ge
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>.) *Tables* of this covenant were ratified
by the hand of Moses, and intrusted, as a peculiar treasure, to the
people of Israel, to whom, and not to the Gentiles, “pertain the
covenants.” (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p23.2"></span>[Ro
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p24"></span>*And without God in the world.* But at
no period were the Ephesians, or any other Gentiles, destitute of all
religion. Why, then, are they styled (ἄθεοι) *Atheists?* for (ἄθεος) an
*Atheist,* strictly speaking, is one who does not believe, and who
absolutely ridicules, the being of a God. That appellation, certainly,
is not usually given to superstitious persons, but to those who have no
feeling of religion, and who desire to see it utterly destroyed. I
answer, Paul was right in giving them this name, for he treated all the
notions entertained respecting false gods as nothing; and with the
utmost propriety do godly persons regard all idols as “nothing in the
world.” (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>[1Co
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>.) Those who do not worship the true God,
whatever may be the variety of their worship, or the multitude of
laborious ceremonies which they perform, are without God: they adore
what they know not. (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p24.2"></span>[Ac
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p24.2"></span>.) Let it be carefully observed, that the
Ephesians are not charged with (ἀθεϊσμὸς) *Atheism,* in the same degree
as Diagoras, and others of the same stamp, who were subjected to that
reproach. Persons who imagined themselves to be very religious are
charged with that crime; for an idol is a forgery, an imposition, not a
Divinity.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p25"></span>From what has been said, the conclusion
will be easily drawn, that out of Christ there are none but idols. Those
who were formerly declared to be *without Christ,* are now declared to
be *without God;*  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) as John says,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p27"></span>“Whosoever hath not the Son, hath not
the Father,”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p27.2"></span>[1Jo
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#023)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p27.2"></span>;)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p28"></span>and again,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p29"></span>“Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth
not in the doctrine of Christ, hath not God.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>[2Jo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p30"></span>Let us know, therefore, that all who do
not keep this way wander from the true God. We shall next be asked, Did
God never reveal himself to any of the Gentiles? I answer, no
manifestation of God without Christ was ever made among the Gentiles,
any more than among the Jews. It is not to one age only, or to one
nation, that the saying of our Lord applies,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p31"></span>“I am the way;” for he adds, “no man
cometh  
unto the Father but by me.” (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p31.2"></span>[Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p31.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p32"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p33"></span>**13.** *But now in Christ Jesus.* We
must either supply the verb, *now that ye have been received in Christ
Jesus,* or connect the word *now* with the conclusion of the verse, *now
through the blood of Christ,* — which will be a still clearer
exposition. In either case, the meaning is, that the Ephesians, *who
were far off* from God and from salvation, had been reconciled to God
through Christ, and *made nigh by his blood;* for the blood of Christ
has taken away *the* *enmity* which existed between them and God, and
from being enemies hath made them sons.

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**14.** For he is our peace, who hath made
both one, and hath broken down the middle wall of partition *between
us*;

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**14.** Ipse enim est pax nostra, qui
fecit utraque unum, et interstitium maceriae solvens, inimicitias in
carne sua;

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**15.** Having abolished in his flesh the
enmity, *even* the law of commandments *contained* in ordinances; for to
make in himself of twain one new man, *so* making peace;

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**15.** Legem mandatorum in decretis
positam abolens, ut duos conderet in se ipso, in unum novum hominem,
faciens pacem;

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>**16.** And that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity thereby.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>**16.** Ut reconciliaret ambos in uno
corpore Deo per crucem, inimicitias in ipsa interimens.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>**14.** *For he is our peace.* He now
includes Jews in the privilege of reconciliation, and shows that,
through one Messiah, all are united to God. This consideration was
fitted to repress the false confidence of the Jews, who, despising the
grace of Christ, boasted that they were the holy people, and chosen
inheritance, of God. If Christ *is our peace,* all who are out of him
must be at variance with God. What a beautiful title is this which
Christ possesses, — the peace between God and men! Let no one who dwells
in Christ entertain a doubt that he is reconciled to God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span>*Who hath made both one.* This
distinction was necessary.  <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) All
intercourse with the Gentiles was held to be inconsistent with their own
superior claims.  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) To subdue this
pride, he tells them that they and the Gentiles have been united into
one body. Put all these things together, and you will frame the
following syllogism: If the Jews wish to enjoy peace with God, they must
have Christ as their Mediator. But Christ will not be their peace in any
other way than by making them one body with the Gentiles. Therefore,
unless the Jews admit the Gentiles to fellowship with them, they have no
friendship with God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span>*And breaking down the middle wall of
partition.* To understand this passage, two things must be observed. The
Jews were separated, for a certain time, from the Gentiles, by the
appointment of God; and ceremonial observances were the open and avowed
symbols of that separation. Passing by the Gentiles, God had chosen the
Jews to be a peculiar people to himself. A wide distinction was thus
made, when the one class were “fellow-citizens and of the household”
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p14.1"></span>[Eph
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)<span id="iv.iii.v-p14.1"></span>)
of the Church, and the other were foreigners. This is stated in the Song
of Moses:

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span>“When the Most High divided to the
nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set
the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
Israel: for the Lord’s portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.” (<span id="iv.iii.v-p15.1"></span>[Deut.
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)<span id="iv.iii.v-p15.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>Bounds were thus fixed by God to separate
one people from the rest; and hence arose *the enmity* which is here
mentioned. A separation is thus made. The Gentiles are set aside. God is
pleased to choose and sanctify the Jewish people, by freeing them from
the ordinary pollution of mankind. Ceremonial observances were
afterwards added, which, like walls, enclosed the inheritance of God,
prevented it from being open to all or mixed with other possessions, and
thus excluded the Gentiles from the kingdom of God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span>But now, the apostle, says, the *enmity*
is removed, and the wall is broken down. By extending the privilege of
adoption beyond the limits of Judea, Christ has now made us all to be
brethren. And so is fulfilled the prophecy,

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span>“God shall enlarge Japheth,  
and he shall dwell in the tents of Shem.” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p18.2"></span>[Ge
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027)<span id="iv.iii.v-p18.2"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span>**15.** *Having abolished in his flesh
the enmity.* The meaning of Paul’s words is now clear. *The middle wall
of partition* hindered Christ from forming Jews and Gentiles into one
body, and therefore the wall has been *broken down.* The reason why it
is broken down is now added — *to abolish the enmity,* by the flesh of
Christ. The Son of God, by assuming a nature common to all, has formed
in his own body a perfect unity.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span>*Even the law of commandments contained
in ordinances.* What had been metaphorically understood by the word
*wall* is now more plainly expressed. The ceremonies, by which the
distinction was declared, have been abolished through Christ. What were
circumcision, sacrifices, washings, and abstaining from certain kinds of
food, but symbols of sanctification, reminding the Jews that their lot
was different from that of other nations; just as the white and the red
cross distinguish the French of the present day from the inhabitants of
Burgundy. Paul declares not only that the Gentiles are equally with the
Jews admitted to the fellowship of grace, so that they no longer differ
from each other, but that the mark of difference has been taken away;
for ceremonies have been abolished. If two contending nations were
brought under the dominion of one prince, he would not only desire that
they should live in harmony, but would remove the badges and marks of
their former enmity. When an obligation is discharged, the *handwriting*
is destroyed, — a metaphor which Paul employs on this very subject in
another Epistle.  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.9"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.9"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span>Some interpreters,  <span
id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) — though, in my opinion, erroneously,
— connect the words, *in ordinances,* with *abolished,* making the
*ordinances* to be the act of abolishing the ceremonies. This is Paul’s
ordinary phrase for describing the ceremonial law, in which the Lord not
only enjoined upon the Jews a simple rule of life, but also bound them
by various statutes. It is evident, too, that Paul is here treating
exclusively of the ceremonial law; for the moral law is not a wall of
partition separating us from the Jews, but lays down instructions in
which the Jews were not less deeply concerned than ourselves. This
passage affords the means of refuting an erroneous view held by some,
that circumcision and all the ancient rites, though they are not binding
on the Gentiles, are in force at the present day upon the Jews. On this
principle there would still be a middle wall of partition between us,
which is proved to be false.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span>*That he might make in himself*. When the
apostle says, *in himself,* he turns away the Ephesians from viewing the
diversity of men, and bids them look for unity nowhere but in Christ. To
whatever extent the two might differ in their former condition, in
Christ they are become one man. But he emphatically adds, *one new man,*
intimating (what he explains at greater length on another occasion) that

<span id="iv.iii.v-p26"></span>“neither circumcision, nor
uncircumcision, availeth anything,” (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>[Ga
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p27"></span>but that “a new creature” holds the first
and the last place. The principle which cements them is spiritual
regeneration. If then we are all renewed by Christ, let the Jews no
longer congratulate themselves on their ancient condition, but let them
be ready to admit that, both in themselves and in others, Christ is all.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p28"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p29"></span>**16.** *And that he might reconcile
both.* The reconciliation between ourselves which has now been described
is not the only advantage which we derive from Christ. We have been
brought back into favor with God. The Jews are thus led to consider that
they have not less need of a Mediator than the Gentiles. Without this,
neither the Law, nor ceremonies, nor their descent from Abraham, nor all
their dazzling prerogatives, would be of any avail. We are all sinners;
and forgiveness of sins cannot be obtained but through the grace of
Christ. He adds, *in one body,* to inform the Jews, that to cultivate
union with the Gentiles will be well-pleasing in the sight of God.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p30"></span>*By the cross.* The word *cross* is
added, to point out the propitiatory sacrifice. Sin is the cause of
enmity between God and us; and, until it is removed, we shall not be
restored to the Divine favor. It has been blotted out by the death of
Christ, in which he offered himself to the Father as an expiatory
victim. There is another reason, indeed, why the cross is mentioned
here, as it is through the cross that all ceremonies have been
abolished. Accordingly, he adds, *slaying the enmity thereby.* These
words, which unquestionably relate to the cross, may admit of two
senses, — either that Christ, by his death, has turned away from us the
Father’s anger, or that, having redeemed both Jews and Gentiles, he has
brought them back into one flock. The latter appears to be the more
probable interpretation, as it agrees with a former clause, *abolishing
in his flesh the enmity.* (<span id="iv.iii.v-p30.1"></span>[Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p30.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Ephesians
2:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>**17.** And came and preached peace to
you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>**17.** Et veniens evangelizavit pacem
vobis, qui eratis procul, et pacem iis qui propinqui erant;

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span>**18.** For through him we both have
access by one Spirit unto the Father.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span>**18.** Quoniam per ipsum habemus
accessum ambo in uno spiritu ad Patrem.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6"></span>**19.** Now therefore ye are no more
strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of
the household of God;

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p7"></span>**19.** Ergo non amplius estis hospites
et inquilini; sed cives sanctorum et domestici Dei,

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p8"></span>**20.** And are built upon the foundation
of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner*-stone*;

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9"></span>**20.** Superaedificati fundamento
Apostolorum et Prophetarum, cujus lapis summus angularis est ipse
Christus;

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p10"></span>**21.** In whom all the building, fitly
framed together, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord:

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p11"></span>**21.** In quo totum aedificium
coagmentatum crescit in templum sanctum in Domino;

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p12"></span>**22.** In whom ye also are builded
together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p13"></span>**22.** In quo et vos coaedificamini in
habitaculum Dei in Spiritu.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p14"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p15"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p16"></span>**17.** *And came and preached peace.*
All that Christ had done towards effecting a reconciliation would have
been of no service, if it had not been proclaimed by the gospel; and
therefore he adds, that the fruit of this peace has now been offered
both to Jews and to Gentiles. Hence it follows, that to save Gentiles as
well as Jews was the design of our Savior’s coming, as the preaching of
the gospel, which is addressed indiscriminately to both, makes
abundantly manifest. The same order is followed in the second Epistle to
the Corinthians.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p17"></span>“He hath committed to us the word of
reconciliation. Now, then, we are ambassadors for Christ. For he hath
made him to be sin for us who knew no sin.” (<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>[2Co
5:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p17.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p18"></span>Salvation through the death of Christ is
first announced, and a description is afterwards given of the manner in
which Christ communicates to us himself and the benefit of his death.
But here Paul dwells chiefly on this circumstance, that Gentiles are
united with Jews in the Kingdom of God. Having already represented
Christ as a Savior common to both, he now speaks of them as companions
in the gospel. The Jews, though they possessed the law, needed the
gospel also; and God had bestowed upon the Gentiles equal grace. Those
therefore whom

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p19"></span>“God hath joined together, let no man
put asunder.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>[Mt
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p19.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p20"></span>No reference to distance of place is
conveyed by the words *afar off* and *nigh.* The Jews, in respect of the
covenant, were *nigh* to God. The Gentiles, so long as they had no
promise of salvation, were *afar off*— were banished from the kingdom of
God.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p21"></span>*And preached peace;* not indeed by his
own lips, but by the apostles. It was necessary that Christ should rise
from the dead, before the Gentiles were called to the fellowship of
grace. Hence that saying of our Lord,

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22"></span>“I am not sent but to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel.”  
(<span id="iv.iii.vi-p22.2"></span>[Mt
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p22.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p23"></span>The apostles were forbidden, while he
was still in the world, to carry their first embassy to the Gentiles.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p24"></span>“Go not into the way of the Gentiles,
and into any city of the Samaritans, enter ye not. But go rather to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel.” (<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>[Matt.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p24.1"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p25"></span>His apostles were afterwards employed as
trumpets for proclaiming the gospel to the Gentiles. What they did, not
only in his name, and by his command, but as it were in his own person,
is justly ascribed to none other than himself. We too speak as if Christ
himself exhorted you by us. (<span id="iv.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>[2Co
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p25.1"></span>) The faith of the gospel would be weak
indeed, were we to look no higher than to men. Its whole authority is
derived from viewing men as God’s instruments, and hearing Christ speak
to us by their mouth. Observe here, the gospel is the message of
*peace,* by which God declares himself to be reconciled to us, and makes
known his paternal love. Take away the gospel, and war and enmity
continue to subsist between God and men; and, on the other hand, the
native tendency of the gospel is, to give peace and calmness to the
conscience, which would otherwise be tormented by distressing alarm.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p26"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p27"></span>**18.** *For through him we both have
access.* This is an argument from the fact, that we are permitted to
draw near to God. But it may be viewed also as an announcement of peace;
for wicked men, lulled into a profound sleep, sometimes deceive
themselves by false notions of peace, but are never at rest, except when
they have learned to forget the Divine judgment, and to keep themselves
at the greatest possible distance from God. It was necessary, therefore,
to explain the true nature of evangelical peace, which is widely
different from a stupefied conscience, from false confidence, from proud
boasting, from ignorance of our own wretchedness. It is a settled
composure, which leads us not to dread, but to desire and seek, the face
of God. Now, it is Christ who opens the door to us, yea, who is himself
*the door*. (<span id="iv.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>[Joh
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#009)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p27.1"></span>.) As this is a double door thrown open for
the admission both of Jews and Gentiles, we are led to view God as
exhibiting to both his fatherly kindness. He adds, *by one Spirit;* who
leads and guides us to Christ, and “by whom we cry, Abba, Father,”
(<span id="iv.iii.vi-p27.2"></span>[Ro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p27.2"></span>,) for hence arises the boldness of
approach. Jews had various means of drawing near to God; now all have
but one way, to be led by the Spirit of God.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p28"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p29"></span>**19.** *Now therefore ye are no more
strangers.* The Ephesians are now exclusively addressed. They were
formerly *strangers from the covenants of promise,* but their condition
was now changed. They were *foreigners,* but God had made them
*citizens* of his church. The high value of that honor which God had
been pleased to bestow upon them, is expressed in a variety of language.
They are first called *fellow-citizens with the saints,* — next, *of the
household of God,* — and lastly, stones properly fitted into the
building of the temple of the Lord. The first appellation is taken from
the comparison of the church to a state, which occurs very frequently in
Scripture. Those who were formerly profane, and utterly unworthy to
associate with godly persons, have been raised to distinguished honor in
being admitted to be members of the same community with Abraham, — with
all the holy patriarchs, and prophets, and kings, — nay, with the angels
themselves. To be *of the household of God,* which is the second
comparison, suggests equally exalted views of their present condition.
God has admitted them into his own family; for the church is God’s
house.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p30"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p31"></span>**20.** *And are built*. The third
comparison illustrates the manner in which the Ephesians, and all other
Christians are admitted to the honor of being *fellow-citizens with the
saints and of the household of God.* They are *built on the foundation,*
— they are founded on the doctrine, *of the apostles and prophets.* We
are thus enabled to distinguish between a true and a false church. This
is of the greatest importance; for the tendency to error is always
strong, and the consequences of mistake are dangerous in the extreme. No
churches boast more loudly of the name than those which bear a false and
empty title; as may be seen in our own times. To guard us against
mistake, the mark of a true church is pointed out.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32"></span>*Foundation,* in this passage,
unquestionably means doctrine; for no mention is made of patriarchs or
pious kings, but only of those who held the office of teachers, and whom
God had appointed to superintend the edification of his church. It is
laid down by Paul, that the faith of the church ought to be founded on
this doctrine. What opinion, then, must we form of those who rest
entirely on the contrivances of men, and yet accuse us of revolt,
because we embrace the pure doctrine of God? But the manner in which it
is founded deserves inquiry; for, in the strict sense of the term,
Christ is the only foundation. He alone supports the whole church. He
alone is the rule and standard of faith. But Christ is actually the
foundation on which the church is built by the preaching of doctrine;
and, on this account, the prophets and apostles are called builders.
(<span id="iv.iii.vi-p32.1"></span>[1Co
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p32.1"></span>.) Nothing else, Paul tells us, was ever
intended by the prophets and apostles, than to found a church on Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p33"></span>We shall find this to be true, if we
begin with Moses; for “Christ is the end of the law,” (<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>[Ro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p33.1"></span>,) and the sum of the gospel. Let us
remember, therefore, that if we wish to be reckoned among believers, we
must place our reliance on no other: if we wish to make sure progress in
the knowledge of the Scriptures, to him our whole attention must be
directed. The same lesson is taught, when we consult the word of God as
contained in the writings of the prophets and apostles. To shew us how
we ought to combine them, their harmony is pointed out; for they have a
common foundation, and labor jointly in building the temple of God.
Though the apostles have become our teachers, the instruction of the
prophets has not been rendered superfluous; but one and the same object
is promoted by both.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p34"></span>I have been led to make this remark by
the conduct of the Marcionites in ancient times, who expunged the word
*prophets* from this passage; and by that of certain fanatics in the
present day, who, following their footsteps, exclaim loudly that we have
nothing to do with the law and the prophets, because the gospel has put
an end to their authority. The Holy Spirit everywhere declares, that he
has spoken to us by the mouth of the prophets, and demands that we shall
listen to him in their writings. This is of no small consequence for
maintaining the authority of our faith. All the servants of God, from
first to last, are so perfectly agreed, that their harmony is in itself
a clear demonstration that it is one God who speaks in them all. The
commencement of our religion must be traced to the creation of the
world. In vain do Papists, Mahometans, and other sects, boast of their
antiquity, while they are mere counterfeits of the true, the pure
religion.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p35"></span>*Jesus Christ, himself is the chief
corner-stone*  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) Those who
transfer this honor to Peter, and maintain that on him the church is
founded, are so void of shame, as to attempt to justify their error by
quoting this passage. They hold out that Christ is called *the chief
corner-stone,* by comparison with others; and that there are many stones
on which the church is founded. But this difficulty is easily solved.
Various metaphors are employed by the apostles according to the
diversity of circumstances, but still with the same meaning. In writing
to the Corinthians, Paul lays down an incontestable proposition, that
“no other foundation can be laid.” (<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p36.2"></span>[1Co
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p36.2"></span>.) He does not therefore mean, that Christ
is merely a corner, or a part of the foundation; for then he would
contradict himself. What then? He means that Jews and Gentiles were two
separate walls, but are formed into one spiritual building. Christ is
placed in the middle of the corner for the purpose of uniting both, and
this is the force of the metaphor. What is immediately added shews
sufficiently that he is very far from limiting Christ to any one part of
the building.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p37"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p38"></span>**21.** *In whom all the building
groweth.* If this be true, what will become of Peter? When Paul, in
writing to the Corinthians, speaks of Christ as a “Foundation,” he does
not mean that the church is begun by him and completed by others, but
draws a distinction arising out of a comparison of his own labors with
those of other men. It had been his duty to found the church at Corinth,
and to leave to his successors the completion of the building.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p39"></span>“According to the grace of God which is
given to me, as a wise master-builder, I have laid the foundation, and
another buildeth on it.” (<span id="iv.iii.vi-p39.1"></span>[1Co
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p39.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p40"></span>With respect to the present passage, he
conveys the instruction, that all who are *fitly framed together in
Christ* are the temple of the Lord. There is first required a fitting
together, that believers may embrace and accommodate themselves to each
other by mutual intercourse; otherwise there would not be a building,
but a confused mass. The chief part of the symmetry consists in unity of
faith. Next follows progress, or increase. Those who are not united in
faith and love, so as to *grow in the Lord,* belong to a profane
building, which has nothing in common with the temple of the Lord.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p41"></span>*Groweth unto an holy temple.*
Individual believers are at other times called “temples of the Holy
Ghost,” (<span id="iv.iii.vi-p41.1"></span>[1Co
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p41.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.vi-p41.2"></span>[2Co
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p41.2"></span>,) but here all are said to constitute one
temple. In both cases the metaphor is just and appropriate. When God
dwells in each of us, it is his will that we should embrace all in holy
unity, and that thus he should form one temple out of many. Each person,
when viewed separately, is a temple, but, when joined to others, becomes
a stone of a temple; and this view is given for the sake of recommending
the unity of the church.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p42"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p43"></span>**22.** *In whom ye also are builded
together,* or *in whom also* Be Ye Builded *together.* The termination
of the Greek verb, συνοικοδομεῖσθε, like that of the Latin, <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p43.1"></span>*cooedificamini,* does not enable us to
determine whether it is in the imperative or indicative mood. The
context will admit either, but I prefer the latter sense. It is, I
think, an exhortation to the Ephesians to grow more and more in the
faith of Christ, after having been once founded in it, and thus to form
a part of that new temple of God, the building of which through the
gospel was then in progress in every part of the world.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p44"></span>*Through the Spirit.* This is again
repeated for two reasons: first, to remind them that all human exertions
are of no avail without the operation of the Spirit; and secondly, to
point out the superiority of the spiritual building to all Jewish and
outward services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118](cc41014.htm#fr_117) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p11.1"></span>Il
expose et esclarcit ce qu’il avoit dit ci-dessus.” “He explains and
illustrates what he had formerly said.”

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119](cc41014.htm#fr_118) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span> Classical writers employ the same
metaphor, to denote not spiritual death, with which they were
unacquainted, but the absence of moral principle, or utter ignorance of
right and wrong. Thus Epictetus says, <span
id="iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>νεκρὸς μὲν ὁ παιδευτὴς νεκροὶ δ ᾿ ὑμεῖς ὅτε
χορτασθὢτε σήμερον, καθὢσθε κλαίοντες περὶ τὢς αὔριον πόθεν φάγητε. “The
instructor is dead, and you are dead. When you are satiated to-day, you
sit down and weep about to-morrow, what you shall have to eat.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_119"></span>[120](cc41014.htm#fr_119) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span> “The Greek word <span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.1"></span>αἰών, and likewise the Latin word <span
id="iv.iii.i-p17.2"></span>AEvum, both signify the ‘lip of man’ and from
thence, by an easy figure, ‘the manner and custom’ of a person’s living;
and therefore it denotes here the corrupt principles and morals, and
particularly the idolatrous practices of the Heathen world, with which
the Ephesians were as truly chargeable as the rest of mankind, before
their conversion to the faith of Christ.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[121](cc41014.htm#fr_120) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p30"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p30.1"></span>Φύσις,
‘nature,’ in such an idiom, signifies what is essential as opposed to
what is accidental, what is innate in contrast with what is acquired.
This is its general sense, whatever its specific application. Thus,
<span id="iv.iii.i-p30.2"></span>Φαρμάκου φύσις is the nature of a drug,
its color, growth, and potency. <span id="iv.iii.i-p30.3"></span>Φύσις
τοῦ Αἰγύπτου is the nature of the land of Egypt — a phrase referring to
no artificial peculiarity, but to results which follow from its physical
conformation.” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[122](cc41014.htm#fr_121) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span> “That is, exceedingly bountiful and
liberal in the exercise of mercy. And in this metaphorical sense, the
words ‘rich’ and ‘riches’ are used by the best writers. Lucian speaks of
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13.1"></span>πλοῦτος φιλοσοφίας, ‘the riches of
philosophy.’ The Roman orator frequently speaks of the ‘riches of the
mind,’ by which he means those excellencies of understanding and virtue
which are the peculiar ornaments and riches of it. De Orat. I. So the
apostle means here the infinite benignity of the Divine Nature, and his
unchangeable disposition to be merciful.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[123](cc41014.htm#fr_122) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span> “‘Loving with love,’ increaseth the
emphasis and force of the expression. Cicero hath an expression exactly
parallel: ‘<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>Cura ut me ames amore illo
tuo singulari.’ — Ep. Fam. ‘Be sure you love me with your singular and
peculiar love.’ An allowed beauty in a profane author should not be
censured as a tautology in a sacred one.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc41014.htm#fr_123) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>Καὶ τοῦτο οὐκ ἐξ ὑμῶν. It has been not a
little debated, among both ancient and modern commentators, to what noun
<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14.2"></span>τοῦτο should be referred. Some say,
to <span id="iv.iii.iii-p14.3"></span>πίστωες; others, to <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p14.4"></span>χάριτι; though on the sense of <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p14.5"></span>πίστις they differ in their views. The
reference seems, however, to be neither to the one nor to the other, but
to the subject of the foregoing *clause,* salvation by grace, through
faith in Christ and his gospel; a view, I find, adopted by Dr. Chandler,
Dean Tucker, Dr. Macknight, and Dr. A. Clarke. And to show that this
interpretation is not a mere novelty, I need only refer the reader to
Theophylact, who thus explains: <span id="iv.iii.iii-p14.6"></span>Οὐ
τὴν πίστιν λέγει δῶρον Θεοῦ ἀλλὰ τὸ διὰ πίστεως σωθὴναι τοῦτο δῶρόν ἐστι
Θεοῦ. ‘He does not say that faith is the gift of God; but to be saved by
faith, this is the gift of God.’ Such also is the view adopted by
Chrysostom and Theodoret.” — Bloomfield.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc41014.htm#fr_124) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p26"></span> “They either knew him not, or did not
worship him as God; they had not avouched, or solemnly owned, or taken
him for their God; and, in consequence, were not avouched, were not
owned, and blessed, and accepted by him as his peculiar people. This was
their condition as Gentiles born.” — Chandler.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc41014.htm#fr_125) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p12.1"></span>Il
estoit necessaire que l’Apostre distinguast ainsi les hommes en deux
bandes.” “It was necessary that the apostle should separate men into two
classes.”

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc41014.htm#fr_126) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.v-p13.1"></span>Les
Juifs estans enflez du privilege que Dieu leur avoit fait, tenoyent les
Gentils pour indignes de communiquer avec eux en sorte quelconque.” “The
Jews, puffed up with the privilege which God had conferred upon them,
reckoned the Gentiles to be unworthy of being admitted to any
intercourse whatever.”

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc41014.htm#fr_127) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span> <span id="iv.iii.v-p22.1"></span>᾿Εν
δόγμασι — “<span id="iv.iii.v-p22.2"></span>Δόγμα is equivalent to the
participial form — <span id="iv.iii.v-p22.3"></span>τὸ δεδογμένον, and
has its apparent origin in the common phrases which prefaced a
proclamation or statute— <span id="iv.iii.v-p22.4"></span>ἔδοξε τῷ λαῷ
καὶ τὣ βουλὣ. In the New Testament it signifies decree, and is applied
(<span id="iv.iii.v-p22.5"></span>[Lu
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.v-p22.5"></span>)
to the edict of Caesar, and in <span id="iv.iii.v-p22.6"></span>[Ac
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.v-p22.6"></span>,
it occurs with a similar reference. But not only does it signify
imperial statutes; it is also the name given to the decrees of the
ecclesiastical council in Jerusalem. (<span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.7"></span>[Ac
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.7"></span>.) It is found, too, in the parallel passage
in <span id="iv.iii.v-p22.8"></span>[Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.v-p22.8"></span>.
In the Septuagint its meaning is the same; and in the sense first
quoted, that of royal mandate, it is frequently used in the book of
Daniel.” — Eadie.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc41014.htm#fr_128) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span> Theodoret, Theophylact, and others.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc41014.htm#fr_129) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p36"></span> According to that ancient prophecy,
(<span id="iv.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>[Ps
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p36.1"></span>,) ‘the stone, which the builders refused,
is become the head-stone of the corner.’ The strength of buildings lies
in their angles; and the corner-stone is that which unites and compacts
the different sides of them; the chief cornerstone is that which is laid
at the foundation, upon which the whole angle of the building rests, and
which therefore is the principal support and tie of the whole edifice.”
— Chandler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc41015)
