[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](aat01)  [Next](aat03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 1. CREATION MYTH (ACHOMAWI).

In the beginning all was water. In all directions the sky was clear and
unobstructed. A cloud formed in the sky, grew lumpy, and turned into
Coyote. Then a fog arose, grew lumpy, and became Silver-Fox. They became
persons. Then they thought. They thought a canoe, and they said, "Let us
stay here, let us make it our home." Then they floated about, for many
years they floated; and the canoe became old and mossy, and they grew
weary of it.

"Do you go and lie down," said Silver-Fox to Coyote, and he did so.
While he slept, Silver-Fox combed his hair, and the combings he saved.
When there was much of them, he rolled them in his hands, stretched them
out, and flattened them between his hands. When he had done this, he
laid them upon the water and spread them out, till they covered all the
surface of the water. Then he thought, "There should be a tree," and it
was there. And he did the same way with shrubs and with rocks, and
weighted the film down with stones, so that the film did not wave and
rise in ripples as it floated in the wind. And thus he made it, that it
was just right, this that was to be the world. And then the canoe
floated gently up to the edge, and it was the world. Then he cried to
Coyote, "Wake up! We are going to sink!" And Coyote woke, and looked up;
and over his head, as he lay, hung cherries and plums; and from the
surface of the world he heard crickets chirping. And at once Coyote
began to cat the cherries and the plums, and the crickets also.

After a time Coyote said, "Where are we? What place is this that we have
come to?" And Silver-Fox replied, "I do not know. We are just here. We
floated up to the shore." Still all the time he knew; but he denied that
he had made the world. He did not want Coyote to know that the world was
his creation. Then Silver-Fox said, "What shall we

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

do? Here is solid ground. I am going ashore, and am going to live here."
So they landed, and built a sweat-house and lived in it. They thought
about making people; and after a time, they made little sticks of
service-berry, and they thrust them all about into the roof of the house
on the inside. And by and by all became people of different sorts, birds
and animals and fish, all but the deer, and he was as the deer are
to-day. And Pine-Marten was the chief of the people; and Eagle was the
woman chief, for she was Pine-Marten's sister. And this happened at
Ilā'texcagēwa.

And people went out to hunt from the sweat-house. And they killed deer,
and brought them home, and had plenty to eat. Arrows with pine-bark
points were what they used then, it is said, for there was no obsidian.
And Ground-Squirrel, of all the people, he only knew where obsidian
could be found. So he went to steal it. To Medicine Lake he went, for
there Obsidian-Old-Man lived, in a big sweat-house. And Ground-Squirrel
went in, taking with him roots in a basket of tules. And he gave the old
man some to eat; and he liked them so much, that he sent Ground-Squirrel
out to get more. But while he was digging them Grizzly-Bear came, and
said, "Sit down! Let me sit in your lap. Feed me those roots by
handfuls." So Ground-Squirrel sat down, and fed Grizzly-Bear as he had
asked, for he was afraid. Then Grizzly-Bear said, "Obsidian-Old-Man's
mother cleaned roots for some one," and went away. Ground-Squirrel went
back to the sweat-house, but had few roots, for Grizzly-Bear had eaten
so many. Then he gave them to the old man, and told him what the bear
had said about him, and how he had robbed him of the roots. Then
Obsidian-Old-Man was angry. "To-morrow we will go," he said, Then they
slept. In the morning they ate breakfast early and went off, and the old
man said that Ground-Squirrel should go and dig more roots, and that he
would wait, and watch for Grizzly-Bear. So Ground-Squirrel went and dug;
and when the basket was filled, Grizzly-Bear came, and said, "You have
dug all these for me. Sit down!" So Ground-Squirrel sat down, and fed
Grizzly-Bear roots by the handful. But Obsidian-Old-Man had come near.
And Grizzly-Bear got up to fight, and he struck at the old man; but he
turned his side to the blow, and Grizzly-Bear merely cut off a great
slice of his own flesh. And he kept on fighting, till he was all cut to
pieces, and fell dead. Then Ground-Squirrel and Obsidian-Old-Man went
home to the sweat-house, and built a fire, and ate the roots, and were
happy. Then the old man went to sleep.

In the morning Obsidian-Old-Man woke up, and heard Ground-Squirrel
groaning. He said, "I am sick. I am bruised because that great fellow
sat upon me. Really, I am sick." Then Obsidian-Old-Man was sorry, but
Ground-Squirrel was fooling the old man. After a while the old man said,
"I will go and get wood. I'll watch him, for perhaps he

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

is fooling me. These people are very clever." Then he went for wood; and
he thought as he went, "I had better go back and look." So he went back
softly, and peeped in; but Ground-Squirrel lay there quiet, and groaned,
and now and then he vomited up green substances. Then Obsidian-Old -Man
thought, "He is really sick," and he went off to get more wood; but
Ground-Squirrel was really fooling, for he wanted to steal obsidian.
When the old man had gotten far away, Ground-Squirrel got up, poured out
the finished obsidian points, and pulled out a knife from the wall, did
them up in a bundle, and ran off with them. When the old man came back,
he carried a heavy load of wood; and as soon as he entered the
sweat-house, he missed Ground-Squirrel. So he dropped the wood and ran
after him. He almost caught him, when Ground-Squirrel ran into a hole,
and, as he went, kicked the earth into the eyes of the old man, who dug
fast, trying to catch him. Soon Ground-Squirrel ran out of the other end
of the hole; and then the old man gave chase again, but again
Ground-Squirrel darted into a hole; and after missing him again,
Obsidian-Old-Man gave up, and went home.

Ground-Squirrel crossed the river and left his load of arrow-points, and
came back to the house and sat down in his seat. He and Cocoon slept
together. Then his friend said, "Where have you been?" And
Ground-Squirrel replied, "I went to get a knife and to get good
arrow-points. We had none." Then the people began to come back with
deer. And when they cooked their meat, they put it on the fire in lumps;
but Ground-Squirrel and Cocoon cut theirs in thin slices, and so cooked
it nicely. And Weasel saw this, and they told him about how the knife
had been secured. In the morning Ground-Squirrel went and brought back
the bundle of points he had hidden, and handed it down through the
smoke-hole to Wolf. Then he poured out the points on the ground, and
distributed them to every one, and all day long people worked, tying
them onto arrows. So they threw away all the old arrows with bark
points; and when they went hunting, they killed many deer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. The Making of Daylight (Achomawi)](aat03.md)
