[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](aat05)  [Next](aat07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. LOON-WOMAN (ACHOMAWI).

Loon-Woman wanted a husband. She wished to marry Wildcat. He was a
treasure, something that was kept in a sack hung up in the house, and no
one ever touched it or saw him. So she asked the people

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

to take down the sack, but they were afraid. Then Pine-Marten, who was
the chief, said, "Take it down;" and they did so, and gave Wildcat to
her. So Wildcat and Loon-Woman went away together toward the sunset; and
when night came, they stopped and camped. Early in the morning Wildcat,
being weary, rose from his bed while Loon-Woman still slept, and went
back to where his people lived. Then they took him and put him back in
the sack, and tied it up, and put it under the roof where it had been
before.

By and by Loon-Woman awoke, and missed her husband, and was angry. She
rolled about on the ground, crying, "Oh, oh!" and as she did so, fire
burst out from beneath her; and as it blazed, it cried, "Tup, tup, tup!"
Then the ground burst open, and there was a great canyon there.
Loon-Woman walked about, saying all the time, "Oho, oho, oho!" and
always the fire blazed up, and all the earth was burned. The rocks
cracked and split, and the ground turned red.

The people in the house where Wildcat was began to be afraid as
Loon-Woman came nearer; and they sat about, hanging their heads. Then
Cocoon-Man spoke, and said, "Why do you sit hanging your heads? Why
don't you kill her? A little while ago you killed Hawk-Man when he tried
to drown you. You are strong only in talk." Then the people and the
chief thought what they could do. The Mice brothers took rye-grass and
spliced it together, and shot it with an arrow into the sky, so that the
rye-grass cord hung down to the earth, and came in through the
smoke-hole. Then all the people began to climb up away from the earth.
Coyote was snuffling "Hs, hs, hs!" for he was sorry to leave his
daughter Loon-Woman behind. And as he climbed he looked down, and the
rope broke just as he was almost up to the sky; and all the people fell
back to the earth, falling into the midst of the blazing house which
they had escaped from. Loon-Woman saw them fall, and hurried to make a
net, that she might catch their hearts as they burst. One by one the
hearts flew out; and Loon-Woman caught them, and threaded them on a
cord, and put them about her neck for a necklace. Some of the hearts she
did not keep, however, but gave them to Silver-Fox. Then she ran away,
and travelled all over the world. Her sister, Eagle-Woman, searched
everywhere for her, for she wanted to get the hearts, that she might
restore the people to life. As she sought, she kicked up the earth, and
so the mountains were made. Finally she secured the hearts, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) and brought them back to where the house had
been. She rebuilt the house, and then put the hearts in water, in the

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

river; and at daybreak they came to life, and the people came trooping
back into the house. Then Silver-Fox named them, and told them to go
away and spread all over the world, and said where each was to live. And
to every one he gave his cry, and he painted them with their colors, and
they went away, some in one direction, some in another.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[166:1](aat06.htm#fr_0.md) How this came about is
not stated. The latter portion, as well as much of the tale, is very
incomplete, and obviously abbreviated. It is said that up to the end of
this story, all the events of creation move in an orderly manner in one
connected series. After the animals, however, had been dispersed in this
way, there is no longer any definite series, and the many stories told
of their subsequent doings are without sequence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Lost Brother (Achomawi)](aat07.md)
