[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](aat16)  [Next](aat18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. THE BUZZARD BROTHERS AND WOOD-WORM

Two Buzzard brothers lived together Near Pit River lived Wood-Worm, the
last of his race. All the other Wood-Worm people had been killed by
Western men. Wood-Worm lived alone one winter; and when the winter was
past, he began to think of going west to see what kind of a place it was
where his people had been lost. He thought four or five days before
starting, and got his weapons ready. Then he sent Cottontail-Rabbit to
the Buzzard brothers to tell them of all he intended to do, and to say
from him, "I'll come and visit you in two or three days." The brothers
said, "All right. We are glad that you are coming." Both brothers were
married, each having a wife and a mother-in-law.

The Buzzard brothers got ready to go on the journey. They made flint
knives out of their own feathers. These flint knives stuck out through
their buckskin dresses: and when they were good-humored the knives were
smooth like feathers; when angry, they stuck out like knives, and killed
every man they touched.

On the third day the Buzzard brothers were looking for Wood-Worm. They
did not have to wait long, for he came early. All were glad, smoked,
took breakfast, and then set out, reaching Sun's house about sundown.
The people there were astonished, and said, "We thought all these men
were killed."--"No," said Sun, "there are more yet; they keep back the
best. These that have just come are the smartest. They are hard to
kill." Sun sent his daughter to marry Wood-Worm, a very fine-looking
man. He went to where the girls had fixed a place for him to sit.

The Buzzard brothers did not like to enter Sun's house; but as Wood-Worm
went in, they followed. Sun was very kind to the two brothers, and said,
"I am glad to see you, my boys, and I am glad to have my daughters
marry." Then he said, turning to Wood-Worm, "My son-in-law, take good
care of me. I like my daughters to have a husband." The Buzzard brothers
were very angry. They wanted to fight immediately,

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

for they knew that old man Sun was trying to fool them. Wood-Worm
listened to the old man in silence, filled his pipe, and smoked.

Sun's wife was cooking acorn-mush, salmon and other fish, for supper.
She brought plenty of food to her daughters, and the young men all ate
heartily. They went to bed. In the morning a great many people came to
the house, wanting to sweat. They brought wood, made a great fire, and
sweated. When they had half finished, the Buzzard brothers stuck out
their flint knives, which cut and killed half the people.

That day after breakfast they had to play with a big disk. The brothers
were told to call for the game, and did so. They went out. "Bet your
brother against ten men," said a spirit-guardian to the elder Buzzard.
The young man began the game. Wood-Worm all this time was in Sun's
house, with his wife. Buzzard bet his brother against ten men. The
spirit-guardian said, "You roll first." Buzzard rolled, after putting up
the disk with the help of his brother. Buzzard rolled the disk rather
slowly; and the other side stopped it, then sent it back very fast. But
Buzzard had something like a brake, with which he stopped and caught the
disk.

The second time Buzzard rolled the disk very hard. It went so fast that
they could not stop it, and -lost their ten men. They lost three times.
Thus they lost thirty men in all. Buzzard killed the thirty men, cutting
them up with his flint feathers, which acted like knives.

Next morning they played with the disk again. Buzzard won twice and
killed twenty men. Then. they ran a foot-race. The racers went to the
starting-post. On the way back, Buzzard let others go ahead for awhile.
Behind him Thunder was running, who tried to kill him; but Buzzard
dodged, sometimes up, sometimes down, and at last he killed Thunder, and
then killed a good many others. All were angry, and a great fight
followed. While the race and fight were going on, Wood-Worm had gathered
all the bones of his friends into a bag, and said to the Buzzard
brothers, "You go on killing. I will go home."

The Buzzard brothers fought the western people, they followed them
eastward for a good while, but at last they had to go back. Wood-Worm
reached home, put all the bones in water in the sweat-house, and all
came to life again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The House of Silver-Fox](aat18)
