[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](aat14)  [Next](aat16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I. PINE-MARTEN MARRIES THE BEAD SISTERS

THE two Bead girls were sent by their mother to marry Cocoon-Man's son.
He was wrapped up and put away. He had never been outside, and had never
eaten anything.

The Bead sisters came from a place far off in the ocean. They came on
the water, brought by the wind, and they always sang the song of the
wind. It took just one day for them to reach Cocoon-Man's house. His
daughters liked the two girls and gave them food. All the men were out
hunting, and the daughters sent the two girls into the sweathouse and
told them to sit by Pine-Marten's bed.

They could not get Cocoon-Man's son, the one their mother had sent them
for. Cocoon-Man would not listen to it, so they took Pine-Marten, and
stayed three days with him. At the end of that time they wanted to go
home. Pine-Marten asked all his people for blankets and shells to give
his wives to carry home. They started. Cocoon-Man made a trail to the
west to walk on. He sent his words out west, put his hand out west and
east to make a trail, and immediately it was open. Cocoon-Man sat on the
ground in the centre, and made a rainbow reaching from the place where
he sat to the home of the girls.

The company started. Weasel went with Pine-Marten up to the top of the
rainbow, and the women went under it. While they were travelling, Weasel
made a flute out of a reed, and made sweet music that sounded through
the world and was heard by every living being.

The two sisters walked on the lower rainbow, the reflection, and reached
home safely. Next year Pine-Marten had children. He made a boy of
bead-shells, and from a round shell which he threw into his wife a girl
was born. In the spring of the second year, he came back on the same
trail that Cocoon-Man had made. His children grew very fast. Then he
left his boy at home, and sent his girl to her grandmother in the ocean.
The boy stayed with Cocoon-Man. The third year he had two sons and two
daughters.

Now Pine-Marten's wife took one son and one daughter to her mother

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

in the ocean; and Pine-Marten kept one son and one daughter, and they
lived with him at Fall River.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Kangaroo-Rat Races with Coyote and Others](aat16)
