[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [California](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](aat12)  [Next](aat14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. FLINT-MAN, THE SEARCH FOR FIRE, AND LOON WOMAN (ATSUGEWI).

At one time people had no flint for their arrows. They used bark for
arrow-points, and it did not work well. One day Ground-Squirrel
determined to get flint from Flint-Man, who owned it. So he stole away
while every one else was out hunting. He got to the house where
Flint-Man lived, and went in. He said he was hungry, and Flint-Man gave
him pounded flint to eat. He ate much of it, and then lay down to sleep.
The pounded flint he had eaten made Squirrel sick, and he defecated
blood. Flint-Man saw this, and thought, "Well, he will die." He came
over and looked at Squirrel, and thought he was dead: so he left him,
and went out. As soon as he was gone, Squirrel jumped up, for he had
been shamming. He took a lot of flints, made them up in a bundle, and
ran away. Flint-Man soon saw him, and gave chase. He nearly caught up
with him, when Squirrel threw the flints into a hole in the ground, and
jumped in after them. Flint-Man came up and jumped in after him; but
Squirrel was out at the other end, and away before he could reach him.
Flint-Man gave chase again; but, as before, Squirrel jumped into a hole
and got away. Then Squirrel travelled far under ground; but when he came
up, Flint-Man saw him, and continued to chase. Five times Squirrel thus
eluded his pursuer; and then the latter gave up, and went back.
Squirrel, however, kept on under ground.

When he got back to the house, he hid the flints in the bushes, all but
one, a knife, which he tied to a string, and hung round his neck, so
that it was on his back behind, where no one could see it. He went in
and sat down, but the others had not got back from the hunt. By and by
they returned, and brought meat. They gave some to Squirrel, who
secretly cut it up with his knife. They saw this, and asked what he was
doing, but he wouldn't tell them. Next day he went out and took all the
flints he had brought. He took them to the house, and gave them to the
people, giving one to each. "With these," he said, "you can kill deer
better, and can cut up the meat." Then all day the people sat there and
chipped their flints, making arrow-points. And next day they all went
out to hunt, and with the new points they killed great quantities of
deer,--so many that there were five deer apiece when they divided up the
lot,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

After this one day Dog went to get fire, for people until then had eaten
their food raw. He travelled far to the west, to where Fire-Woman lived,
for she owned all the fire. He climbed up on the roof of her house, and
lay quietly near the smoke-hole. The sparks came out in crowds; and Dog
held his ear over the opening, and caught a spark in it, and so in the
other ear as well. He had put a little dry tinder in his ears before
starting. Then he ran home. The fire in Fire-Woman's house began to die
down; and she said then, "Let the fire Dog carries go out." Then Bluejay
said, "Qas!" and it began to rain. Dog held his head on one side to keep
the rain out of his ear, and ran as fast as he could. When he reached
the top of the hill just west of Burney Valley, it stopped raining. He
got back to the house about sunset, as the people were eating supper.
They gave him some, but he did not tell them what he had done. Next
morning Dog got up, went to the centre of the sweat-house, and held his
ear down to the ground, and took out the plug he had put in, and the
coals fell out. People could cook their food now. So they roasted some
meat, and said, "That tastes good." Then they went out hunting.

Next night Wildcat had a bad dream, and went out to the little house
near by, where the two sisters of all the people in the big house slept.
These two women were Eagle and Loon. Wildcat crawled in and slept there,
but did not touch the women. In the morning Loon went out, got some
pitch and smeared it on herself, so that she might know who it was who
had come in the night. Next night Wildcat went again to his sisters'
hut, and this time had connection with Loon; and in the morning when he
left, some of his fur was left sticking to the pitch. He came back to
the house, and lay down so that no one could see where the hair had been
pulled off. He pretended to be asleep. Loon found who had come to her in
the night, and was angry. She went outdoors, and said, "Bring me a
bundle of bark to carry fire in," and at once the fire blazed up all
around the sweat-house. Every time she said this, a great flame shot up
in front of the door. The people inside grew afraid at this, and Coyote
said, "Who has done this to our sister?" Then he turned to Wildcat and
said, "You had better go off with her, or she will burn us all up."
Wildcat did not want to move; but they rolled him over and saw where his
fur had been pulled out. Then everybody said, "You did it!" Then
Butterfly got up, removed Wildcat's membrum and put a small one in its
place, and sent Wildcat out, telling him to return as soon as possible.
Loon was very anxious to make Wildcat her husband at once, and so made
night come on quickly. They camped then; but, in spite of his endeavors,
Wildcat could not satisfy Loon. Early in the morning, while Loon was
asleep, Wildcat got up, took a log of wood, laid it beside her, and ran
away.

As soon as Wildcat had left, Spider began to make a net, and had
finished it by the time Wildcat returned. Coyote got in first, and then

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

all the others, after which Spider drew them all up into the sky, except
Eagle, who flew away. Loon by and by waked up, and, discovering the
cheat, ran back to the sweat-house, sending fire ahead of her to burn
every one up. She saw all the people, her brothers, going up in the net,
and called out, "Why do you leave me? You had better take me back!" Now,
Coyote, to whom she spoke, was her father; and he felt sorry for her,
and wanted to see her: so he made a tiny hole in the bottom of the net
to peek through, and immediately it burst, and all fell down into the
blazing house. Loon was watching, and at once made a seed-beater out of
some twigs; and when pretty soon Coyote's heart popped in the fire and
shot up into the air, she let it go, but caught the next one; and so on,
catching all, as she thought. She strung them on a string. One heart
popped out, that she missed; that was Wood-Worm's, and it fell far over
toward Shasta; another popped, and was missed, and this was Butterfly,
and it fell far to the east. Blue-Stone was also missed. Meanwhile Eagle
was not burned, for she was flying about, weeping. Up to this time the
world had been flat; but as Eagle went about, she made the mountains.

Loon took all the hearts she had strung, and put them about her neck as
a necklace, and then went to one lake after another, till finally she
came to one at the head of Butte Creek, and there she stayed. Meanwhile
Eagle went all over the world making mountains, and looking for the
hearts that had escaped. For a small hill she would throw up the earth
once; but for a large mountain, three times. By and by she reached the
country toward the north. Here two women had gone out to get wood. They
came to a deer-lick, which was formed from the tears of one of the
hearts, that belonging to Wood-Worm. The two girls were Beads, and they
heard the sound of weeping, and at last found the heart. After much
difficulty, they dug out the heart, which then became just like a
person, and learned from him all about the way he had come to be there.
Then Wood-Worm married the two Bead girls. Eagle came along this way,
wearing pitch in mourning for her brothers; and when she found her
brother Wood-Worm here, she returned to near the head of Butte Creek.
Here lived two boys (some sort of small brown water-birds), and she
asked them if they had seen Loon. They said that sometimes they had seen
her on the lake, and had heard her cry. They said she had a necklace
about her neck, and that she looked at herself all the time in the
water. Eagle asked them if they could kill Loon, and they said they
thought they could if they had arrow-points of deer-bone. One wanted
bone from deer killed at a time when their hair was turning red, the
other when they dropped their antlers. So Eagle went off to get the
bones. She brought them; and the two men then took their arrows, and
went out in a tule boat before dawn. They hid in the tule swamp near the
edge of the lake. The younger said, "I'll shoot first." The elder

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

then said, " No, I'll shoot first, for you might miss." They finally
agreed that both should shoot at once.

At dawn Loon appeared, and the two shot, and she dove immediately. They
watched, and by and by Loon came up, dead. So they took her back to
Eagle, who took off the string of hearts around Loon's neck; then she
skinned the loon and stuffed it, and said that loons must cry and laugh
in spring-time. Eagle then hunted about all over the world, till she
found the other two hearts, those of Butterfly and of Blue-Stone, and
then came back with them all to the sweat-house, which she rebuilt. This
was near Pitville. She then took pine-boughs and fixed up the inside of
the house nicely, and laid the hearts in the water in the river near by.
Then she went into the house, and, lying face downwards, slept. In the
early dawn all the hearts came to fife again, and all came trooping into
the house. She lay quietly, without looking, until she had counted them
all. Then she got up, and they all went on living as before.

HARVARD UNIVERSITY, CAMBRIDGE, MASS.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note](aat14)
