[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sha13)  [Next](sha15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

### II.--"URVASHI"

The second of the two inferior dramas may be conveniently called
Urvashi, though the full title is *The Tale of Urvashi won by Valour*.
When and where the play was first produced we do not know, for the
prologue is silent as to these matters. It has been thought that it was
the last work of Kalidasa, even that it was never produced in his
lifetime. Some support is lent to this theory by the fact that the play
is filled with reminiscences of Shakuntala, in small matters as well as
in great; as if the poet's imagination had grown weary, and he were
willing to repeat himself. Yet *Urvashi* is a much more ambitious effort
than *Malavika*, and invites a fuller criticism, after an outline of the
plot has been given.

 

In addition to the stage-director and his assistant, who appear in the
prologue, the characters of the play are these:

PURURAVAS, *king in Pratishthana on the Ganges*,  
AYUS, *his son*.  
MANAVAKA, *a clown, his friend*.  
URVASHI, *a heavenly nymph*.  
CRITRALEKHA, *another nymph, her friend*.  
AUSHINARI, *queen of Pururava*s.  
NIPUNIKA, *her maid*.

*A charioteer, a chamberlain, a hermit-woman, various nymphs and other
divine beings, and attendants*.

 

The scene shifts as indicated in the following analysis. The time of the
first four acts is a few days. Between acts four and five several years
elapse.

 

ACT I.--The prologue only tells us that we may expect a new play of
Kalidasa. A company of heavenly nymphs then appear upon Mount Gold-peak
wailing and calling for help. Their cries are answered by King
Pururavas, who rides in a chariot that flies through the air. In
response to his inquiries, the nymphs inform him that two of their
number, Urvashi and Chitralekha, have been carried into captivity by a

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

demon. The king darts in pursuit, and presently returns, victorious,
with the two nymphs. As soon as Urvashi recovers consciousness, and has
rejoined her joyful friends, it is made plain that she and the king have
been deeply impressed with each other's attractions. The king is
compelled to decline an invitation to visit Paradise, but he and Urvashi
exchange loving glances before they part.

ACT II.--The act opens with a comic scene in the king's palace. The
clown appears, bursting with the secret of the king's love for Urvashi,
which has been confided to him. He is joined by the maid Nipunika,
commissioned by the queen to discover what it is that occupies the
king's mind. She discovers the secret ingeniously, but without much
difficulty, and gleefully departs.

The king and the clown then appear in the garden, and the king expresses
at some length the depth and seeming hopelessness of his passion. The
latter part of his lament is overheard by Urvashi herself, who, impelled
by love for the king, has come down to earth with her friend
Chitralekha, and now stands near, listening but invisible. When she has
heard enough to satisfy her of the king's passion, she writes a
love-stanza on a birch-leaf, and lets it fall before him. His reception
of this token is such that Urvashi throws aside the magic veil that
renders her invisible, but as soon as she has greeted the king, she and
her friend are called away to take their parts in a play that is being
presented in Paradise.

The king and the clown hunt for Urvashi's love-letter, which has been
neglected during the past few minutes. But the leaf has blown away, only
to be picked up and read by Nipunika, who at that moment enters with the
queen. The queen can hardly be deceived by the lame excuses which the
king makes, and after offering her ironical congratulations, jealously
leaves him.

 

ACT III.--The act opens with a conversation between two minor personages
in Paradise. It appears that Urvashi had taken the heroine's part in the
drama just presented there, and when asked, "On whom is your heart set?"
had absent-mindedly replied, "On Pururavas." Heaven's stage-director

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

had thereupon cursed her to fall from Paradise, but this curse had been
thus modified: that she was to live on earth with Pururavas until he
should see a child born of her, and was then to return.

The scene shifts to Pururavas' palace. In the early evening, the
chamberlain brings the king a message, inviting him to meet the queen on
a balcony bathed in the light of the rising moon. The king betakes
himself thither with his friend, the clown. In the midst of a dialogue
concerning moonlight and love, Urvashi and Chitralekha enter from
Paradise, wearing as before veils of invisibility. Presently the queen
appears and with humble dignity asks pardon of the king for her
rudeness, adding that she will welcome any new queen whom he genuinely
loves and who genuinely returns his love. When the queen departs,
Urvashi creeps up behind the king and puts her hands over his eyes.
Chitralekha departs after begging the king to make her friend forget
Paradise.

 

ACT IV.--From a short dialogue in Paradise between Chitralekha and
another nymph, we learn that a misfortune has befallen Pururavas and
Urvashi. During their honey-moon in a delightful Himalayan forest,
Urvashi, in a fit of jealousy, had left her husband, and had
inadvertently entered a grove forbidden by an austere god to women. She
was straightway transformed into a vine, while Pururavas is wandering
through the forest in desolate anguish.

The scene of what follows is laid in the Himalayan forest. Pururavas
enters, and in a long poetical soliloquy bewails his loss and seeks for
traces of Urvashi. He vainly asks help of the creatures whom he meets: a
peacock, a cuckoo, a swan, a ruddy goose, a bee, an elephant, a
mountain-echo, a river, and an antelope. At last he finds a brilliant
ruby in a cleft of the rocks, and when about to throw it away, is told
by a hermit to preserve it: for this is the gem of reunion, and one who
possesses it will soon be reunited with his love. With the gem in his
hand, Pururavas comes to a vine which mysteriously reminds him of
Urvashi, and when he embraces it, he finds his beloved in his arms.
After she has explained to him the reason of her transformation, they
determine to return to the king's capital.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

ACT V.--The scene of the concluding act is the king's palace. Several
years have passed in happy love, and Pururavas has only one sorrow--that
he is childless.

One day a vulture snatches from a maid's hand the treasured gem of
reunion, which he takes to be a bit of bloody meat, and flies off with
it, escaping before he can be killed. While the king and his companions
lament the gem's loss, the chamberlain enters, bringing the gem and an
arrow with which the bird had been shot. On the arrow is written a verse
declaring it to be the property of Ayus, son of Pururavas and Urvashi. A
hermit-woman is then ushered in, who brings a lad with her. She explains
that the lad had been entrusted to her as soon as born by Urvashi, and
that it was he who had just shot the bird and recovered the gem. When
Urvashi is summoned to explain why she had concealed her child, she
reminds the king of heaven's decree that she should return as soon as
Pururavas should see the child to be born to them. She had therefore
sacrificed maternal love to conjugal affection. Upon this, the king's
new-found joy gives way to gloom. He determines to give up his kingdom
and spend the remainder of his life as a hermit in the forest. But the
situation is saved by a messenger from Paradise, bearing heaven's decree
that Urvashi shall live with the king until his death. A troop of nymphs
then enter and assist in the solemn consecration of Ayus as crown
prince.

The tale of Pururavas and Urvashi, which Kalidasa has treated
dramatically, is first made known to us in the Rigveda. It is thus one
of the few tales that so caught the Hindu imagination as to survive the
profound change which came over Indian thinking in the passage from
Vedic to classical times. As might be expected from its history, it is
told in many widely differing forms, of which the oldest and best may be
summarised thus.

Pururavas, a mortal, sees and loves the nymph Urvashi. She consents to
live with him on earth so long as he shall not break certain trivial
conditions. Some time after the birth of a son, these conditions are
broken, through no fault of the man, and she leaves him. He wanders
disconsolate, finds her, and pleads with her, by her duty as a wife, by
her love for her child, even by a threat of suicide. She rejects his

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

entreaties, declaring that there can be no lasting love between mortal
and immortal, even adding: "There are no friendships with women. Their
hearts are the hearts of hyenas." Though at last she comforts him with
vague hopes of a future happiness, the story remains, as indeed it must
remain, a tragedy--the tragedy of love between human and divine.

This splendid tragic story Kalidasa has ruined. He has made of it an
ordinary tale of domestic intrigue, has changed the nymph of heaven into
a member of an earthly harem. The more important changes made by
Kalidasa in the traditional story, all have the tendency to remove the
massive, godlike, austere features of the tale, and to substitute
something graceful or even pretty. These principal changes are: the
introduction of the queen, the clown, and the whole human paraphernalia
of a court; the curse pronounced on Urvashi for her carelessness in the
heavenly drama, and its modification; the invention of the gem of
reunion; and the final removal of the curse, even as modified. It is
true that the Indian theatre permits no tragedy, and we may well believe
that no successor of Kalidasa could hope to present a tragedy on the
stage. But might not Kalidasa, far overtopping his predecessors, have
put on the stage a drama the story of which was already familiar to his
audience as a tragic story? Perhaps not. If not, one can but wish that
he had chosen another subject.

This violent twisting of an essentially tragic story has had a further
ill consequence in weakening the individual characters. Pururavas is a
mere conventional hero, in no way different from fifty others, in spite
of his divine lineage and his successful wooing of a goddess. Urvashi is
too much of a nymph to be a woman, and too much of a woman to be a
nymph. The other characters are mere types.

Yet, in spite of these obvious objections, Hindu critical opinion has
always rated the *Urvashi* very high, and I have long hesitated to make
adverse comments upon it, for it is surely true that every nation is the
best judge of its own literature. And indeed, if one could but forget
plot and characters, he would find in *Urvashi* much to attract and
charm. There is no lack of humour in the clever maid who worms the
clown's secret out of him. There is no lack of a certain shrewdness in
the clown, as when he observes:

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

\[paragraph continues\] "Who wants heaven? It is nothing to eat or
drink. It is just a place where they never shut their eyes--like
fishes!"

Again, the play offers an opportunity for charming scenic display. The
terrified nymphs gathered on the mountain, the palace balcony bathed in
moonlight, the forest through which the king wanders in search of his
lost darling, the concluding solemn consecration of the crown prince by
heavenly beings--these scenes show that Kalidasa was no closet
dramatist. And finally, there is here and there such poetry as only
Kalidasa could write. The fourth act particularly, undramatic as it is,
is full of a delicate beauty that defies transcription. It was a new and
daring thought--to present on the stage a long lyrical monologue
addressed to the creatures of the forest and inspired by despairing
passion. Nor must it be forgotten that this play, like all Indian plays,
is an opera. The music and the dancing are lost. We judge it perforce
unfairly, for we judge it by the text alone. If, in spite of all, the
Urvashi is a failure, it is a failure possible only to a serene and
mighty poet.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dynasty of Raghu](sha15.md)
