[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat00)  [Next](sat02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### INTRODUCTION <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md)

 

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Trasumanar significa per verba<br />
non si poria; però, l’esemplo basti<br />
a cui esperienza grazia serba</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

 

<span class="smallcaps">There</span> are few figures in history more
strange and beautiful than that of Jacob Boehme. With a few exceptions
the outward events of his life were unremarkable. He was born in 1575 at
the village Alt Seidenberg, two miles from Goerlitz in Germany and close
to the Bohemian border. His parents were poor, and in childhood he was
put to mind their cattle. It was in the solitude of the fields that he
first beheld a vision, and assuredly his contemplative spirit must have
been well nourished by the continual companionship of nature.

Physically he was not robust (though he never had a sickness), and for
this reason his parents, when he was fourteen, apprenticed him to a
shoemaker. Of his apprenticeship nothing is recorded, I think, except a
story about a mysterious man who came once to the shop when the master
was away, and taking Jacob by both hands foretold to him the great work
that he should accomplish.

In 1599, when he was four-and-twenty, he became a master shoemaker, and
in the same year he married the daughter of a butcher. The girl
developed into a capable considerate woman, and they lived together
happily until Boehme died. They had four sons and probably two
daughters, but his children do not figure prominently in the story of
his life. Already he had been visited by a sudden illumination of mind,
and in 1600 he experienced the second of those marvellous ecstasies that
gave splendour to the whole of his after-life. This, also, was followed
by a third and still more brilliant illumination that made clear and
complete much that in his previous visions had been obscure and
unrelated.

The more dramatic portion of his life begins, however, with the
publication of his first book (about 1612). At first he called it
*Morning-Glow*, but at the suggestion of a friend he

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

altered the title to that under which it has become
world-famous—*Aurora*.

Now although Lutheranism had severely shaken the old orthodoxy, it had
itself become, in Boehme's time, an orthodoxy just as rigid. Quite
naturally the book was read by the pastor of Goerlitz, one Gregorius
Richter. He was a man intolerant, conceited, violent of temper, and
obtuse of intellect. He despised and feared the shoemaker. The book
ruffled him into a self-righteous passion, and hurrying to the City
Council he demanded that Boehme should be banished. The Council was
afraid to refuse, and Boehme (like nearly all the truth-bringers) was
exiled from his native town.

On the morrow, however, the Council convened again. Its members were
stirred by a fine shame when it was put to them that they had banished a
citizen of stainless reputation, and one, indeed, who regularly attended
church. They recalled him at once, but on condition that he should write
no books.

In the following year he changed his occupation. Literary work had
caused his business to decline, and having sold the shop he journeyed to
the larger cities of the neighbourhood (such, for example, as Prague and
Dresden) selling woollen gloves; but after a while it was no longer
possible for him to disobey the inner command that he should give to men
his revelations, and in these last ten years he composed the unique and
shining books of which we have a selection in this volume.

Gregorius Richter, as we should expect, by no means left him at peace.
He was denounced from the pulpit and in his own hearing. Scurrilous
treatises were flung at him, treatises full of personal abuse and
ignoble sneers at his profession. " His writing," observed those who
represented the Son of the carpenter, "smells overmuch of cobbler's
pitch;" and again we read, "Will ye have the words of Jesus Christ or
the words of a shoemaker?" The shoemaker answered them gently and with
dignity, as when he declared, "Not I, the I that I am, knows these
things, but God knows them in me."

In 1624 his friend Abraham von Frankenburg republished a selection of
his writings under the title of *The Way to Christ*. Its radiant beauty
impelled the respect of many who belonged to the orthodox church, and
this very fact inflamed the Tertullians of his native town. Again they
banished him on the charge of impiety, and even refused that he should
say farewell to his wife and sons. He went to Dresden. There already he
had found a friend in Dr. Hinkelmann. It is pleasant to,

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

record that while he was at Dresden the emperor convened a meeting of
eminent divines, that Boehme was invited, and that the depth and
spirituality of his thought, together with the charm and modesty with
which he expressed it, were received with admiration by many and with
enthusiasm by the learned doctors Gerhard and Meissner.

But at the end of the year (November 20, 1624) he died, happily and in
the presence of a loving and beloved son. He had foretold the very hour
of his death. So relentless were his opponents in Goerlitz that, until
the intervention of the powerful Count Hannibal von Drohna, they refused
a burial service, and the very priest who had attended him in death,
being forced by the Council to make an oration, began by declaring that
he would rather walk twenty miles than praise the gentle Boehme. The
elaborate cross, too, which was put upon his tomb was torn down in
anger.

We are told by Frankenburg, his friend, that he was short in stature,
"worn and very plain," with "grey eyes, that lightened into a celestial
blue, a low forehead, a thin beard, and an aquiline nose."

Now in the study of mysticism we soon find the essential experience of
all mystics to have been identical, and that among them is no figure
more representative than Jacob Boehme: so that when we read this book we
are like men who from the vantage-point of one of its highest hills can
see below and around them the whole expanse of a beautiful and unearthly
island. If it allures us we shall then delight in exploring its verdant
valleys or spirit-peopled woods or quiet starlit gardens, and all the
mysterious birds and blossoms that fly or flutter within them; but if it
does not seem attractive we can push off and sail for another country.
By no true philalethe can mysticism be honourably ignored. It is either
the noblest folly or the grandest achievement of man's mind. Alexander
and Napoleon were ambitious, but their ambition dwindles to
insignificance when it is compared with that of the mystic. The purpose
of the mystic is the mightiest and most solemn that can ever be, for the
central aim of all mysticism is to soar out of separate personality up
to the very Consciousness of God.

So well, indeed, had Roman Catholicism taught those who were religious
the insignificance of the human soul that few among the European mystics
of the Middle Ages or the Renaissance were so brilliantly conscious that
they could cry

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

out boldly with Meister Eckhardt, "I truly have need of God, but God has
need of me." Often they shrank from the ultimate experience, wholly
worshipping God indeed, but retaining ever a sense of separateness.
Their very humility was the final veil of egotism which they dared not
rend.

Jacob Boehme, the last of the great European mystics, having imagined
the Spirit which pervades the universe, knew well how little was the
stature of his human personality; but he had realised that God was
verily within him, and he spoke with the uprightness of a divine being.
Unflaggingly he counsels men (as in *The Supersensual Life*) to turn
away from the worthless and separated self which hungers for honour or
for bodily comfort, in order that they should rediscover within
themselves "what was before nature and creature." And he means by this
phrase "that light which lighteth every man who cometh into the world."
It is here, he says, now and always: we have but to extricate our
consciousness from all that is the effect of our time and place. We have
but to quiet cur own thoughts and desires, and we shall hear at once the
harmonies of heaven.

The danger of such a doctrine is apparent. The true mystic may safely
follow his Inward Light, but the enchanted apples are guarded by dragons
and are only to be captured by the strong. Many a self-styled mystic has
wasted his life in "waiting for the spark that never came:" wasted, we
say, though surely not worse wasted than the thousands of lives that,
for all their activity, bring nothing to the soul. It is something at
least to have striven for the noblest of all ends. We must choose either
safety or romance, and mysticism is the romance of religion; the mystic
an explorer in the spiritual world. He does not use the instruments of
intellect. He experiments. Perhaps, like the Persian Sufi poets, he
thinks of God as the Great Beloved, and then, directing all his power of
love to the most glorious idea that he is able to conceive, he finds
that his emotion like a river has carried him into a state of soul in
which he is vividly conscious of the Divine Presence. In that state he
beholds the visible world as it were from within. He perceives the
spiritual cause of all these material effects. He understands the
essential nature of trees and flowers and mountains and the live
creatures of the world. No longer does he see men by those dim lights
that penetrate the dense and cloudy world of matter. He sees them as
angelic toilers bowed by the burden of their own

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

mundane selves. And he knows the insignificance of much that we deem
important, the deep value of much that we count accessory, for having
cleansed his vision of all personal impediment he apprehends the true
proportion of all the elements that compose the universe. The vast
realisations that shine within him then are by their nature not easy to
express in common terms. Who that has loved could explain his experience
to one that had never loved? Only those who are near can understand, and
that is why so often the words of mystics are obscure.

Sometimes the seer will attempt to explain his illumined state, like St.
John or Jalàlu-d-din Rūmi, by the use of brilliant symbols adapted from
the material world; sometimes, like Plotinus or Boehme, by the use of
the most abstract words in order that the mind may be led away from
worldly associations: but all alike have looked upon one splendour. By
many ways they have travelled homeward to that ideal state in which
alone the unshackled soul has perfect freedom, and in this book,
assuredly, we are communing with one who, if any among men has ever done
so, broke free from the bonds of personality and could look upon the
universe with the eyes of God.

CLIFFORD BAX.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v:1](sat01.htm#fr_0.md) The biographic substance of
this introduction is principally drawn from Dr. Hartmann's rare volume,
and from Professor Deussen's *Preface* to the magnificent edition of
Boehme's works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](sat02.md)
