[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat08)  [Next](sat10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

### CHAPTER V

<span class="small">OF THE SULPHUREAN DEATH, AND HOW THE DEAD BODY IS
REVIVED, AND REPLACED INTO ITS FIRST GLORY</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">All</span> life and motion, with
understanding, reason, and senses, both in animals and vegetables,
consist originally in Sulphur, viz. in nature's desire, and in the
lubet's desire of the liberty,

2\. In nature's desire arises the death and enclosing, and in the desire
of the liberty arises the opening and the life; for the liberty's desire
tinctures the desire of the dark nature, so that the wrathful mother
foregoes her own right, and freely resigns to the liberty's desire, and
so the life grows in death, for there is no life without light; but if
the light goes out in the essence of the Sulphur, then it is an eternal
death, which no man can revive, unless God moves himself in the
lubet-desire in the same death; for death can receive no life into it,
unless the first desire, viz. the free lubet's desire, manifests itself
in the desire to nature, wherein the enclosing and death are generated.

3\. Therefore when man died in the Sulphur, none could have made him
alive again, unless the free lubet, viz. the desire to the eternal life
did again enter into his Phur, viz. into the birth of the nature of the
human property, and moved the enclosed death, viz. the centre of nature,
and gave itself again into the centre, viz. into the soul-like property,
and into the soul's essentiality and corporality; and this was so
brought to pass.

4\. We know that the right Sulphur is a generation of all spirituality
and corporality; so far as concerns its first original, where it is
heavenly, it is the generation of the essence of all essences: For all,
whatever eternity and time is in itself, has, and is able to effect,
lies in this birth: But now as to the kingdom of this world it is
earthly, viz. a figure of the eternal; for in it the time and creature
consist, and all whatever is visible and invisible.

5\. Now man, and every life also, as to the kingdom of this world, was
created and generated out of the outward Sulphur; man out of the inward
and outward \[Sulphur\], and the outward creature only out of the
outward; for man is an image and likeness of God, and the other
creatures are as a similitude

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

according to the figuration in the internal generation in God's wisdom,
viz. in the expressed or procreated heavenly essence, according to both
eternal principles.

6\. But now man was created good and perfect, according to and out of
all the three worlds, as an image of the Deity, in whom God dwelled; and
he was even that essence what God is, according to eternity and time in
all the three worlds; but he was a creature with a beginning, as to the
creature, and died through the lubet <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62)
as to the heavenly and divine essence: For the inward lubet, which was
generated in the centre, viz. in the fire, wherein stood the life in the
divine essentiality, that is, that which enkindled the essence of the
divine meekness, wherein the joyfulness or the angelical form consists;
that (I say) turned itself from the inward lubet of the liberty and
eternity into the time, viz. into the external birth, into the planetary
property, \[it departed\] out of the pure divine element into the four
elements: Thus the inward divine essentiality, or inward corporality did
no longer retain any leader or life: And this was the death; for the
soul's fire proceeding from the Father's property turned itself away
from the Son's property, in which alone the divine life consists.

7\. Thus the property of the soul remained naked only with its will in
the outward Sulphur, and the inward disappeared, and continued steadfast
in the eternal unchangeableness, <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63) as
in an eternal nothing, wherein there was no more any effecting \[or
working efficacy to bring to pass\].

8\. Thus man with his outward body lived barely and merely to the time;
the precious gold of the heavenly corporality, which tinctured the
outward body, was disappeared, and so the outward body stood barely and
alone in the life of nature's desire, viz. in the soul's fiery property;
understand in the form and property of Mars, viz. in the wrath of God,
which is the wrath in Sulphur, viz. the property of God's anger and the
dark world: But seeing the outward body was created out of the time,
therefore the time, viz. the constellation with the four elements,
presently obtained the dominion in him; and the divine property, viz.
the desire of the Deity (which ruled and tinctured time, so that there
was a holy life in the creature out of the time), was vanished; its own
peculiar love in the divine desire was turned to water, and it became
blind and dead in the will and desire of God; and the soul must help
itself with the sun's light.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

9\. But seeing that time has beginning and end, and the will with the
desire has given up itself to the temporal leader, therefore the
dominion of time destroys its own contrived spirit, and so the body also
dies and passes away; and this is that which God said to Adam, that "he
should not eat of the tree, or plant, of the knowledge of good and
evil," of both properties, lest he died; <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) as it also came to pass, he died in the
Sulphur; the Sul in the kingdom of God, viz. the lubet of the divine
liberty, out of which the light of God shines, and in which the divine
love, viz. the love-fire burns \[disappeared and withdrew from him\].

10\. Now there was no remedy for him, unless God's desire entered again
into his dead Sulphur, that is, into his Sul, which was dead, viz. into
the dead \[or mortified\] essentiality, and again enkindled it with the
love-fire; which came to pass in Christ: And there the heavenly body,
wherein God's light shines, did again arise. But if this must be
effected, then the love-desire must again enter into the desire of the
enkindled anger, and quench and overcome the anger with the love; the
divine water must enter again into the soul's burning fire, and quench
the wrathful death in the astringent fiat, viz. in the desire to nature,
that the love-desire, which desires God, might be again enkindled in the
soul.

11\. For man's happiness <span id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) consists in
this, that he has in him a true desire <span
id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66) after God, for out of the desire springs
forth the love; that is, when the desire receives the meekness of God
into itself, then the desire immerses itself in the meekness, and
becomes essential; and this is the heavenly or divine essentiality, or
corporality; and therein the soul's spirit (which lay shut up in the
anger, viz. in death) does again arise in the love of God; for the love
tinctures the death and darkness, that it is again capable of the divine
sunshine.

12\. And as this is done in man, so likewise it is in the transmutation
of metals: The Sulphur is shut up in Saturn, viz. in the death, and yet
there is no death, but a vegetative life; and the outward Mercury is the
life thereof. <span id="fr_67"></span>[4](#fn_67) Now if the metalline
body shall come to the highest perfection, then it must die unto the
external dominator, <span id="fr_68"></span>[5](#fn_68) viz. to the
elements, and come again into such a Sulphur as it was, when as yet it
had not the four elements on it, but lay only in the element in
unity. <span id="fr_69"></span>[6](#fn_69)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

13\. But now none can reduce it into such a body, but he only who has
generated; he that has given it the four elements, he alone can take
them away; and he that at first made it corporeal, he must bring it to
himself, and transchange it in himself into another body; and this is
the Sulphur, which has Mercurius as its chief faber in itself. He must
again take it out of dark Saturn's bowels in the fiat, and introduce it
into his own, and with his own fire separate the four elements from it,
and reduce it into one; as God at the last day will in the enkindling of
his own fire separate the essence of the four elements from the pure
element, that the eternal corporality in the pure element may
arise <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70) and spring forth: And as in
the death of man the four elements separate from the true man (who is
the element of God) and the heavenly body remains only in itself; so it
goes in the transmutation of metals.

#### PROCESS

14\. The body lies shut up in a disesteemed form in Saturn, not wholly
in Saturn's property, in a dark colour, marked with Mercurius its
father, and Sol its mother, clothed with Saturn, and manifest with the
life of Mars; but its mother is not outwardly manifest and known on it,
unless its faber be enraged with its own iniquity; which yet cannot be,
unless an alienate be applied, whereby its propriate is enraged; and
then (if his anger be set on a fire or fury) he becomes so very hungry
and thirsty, and yet can find no refreshment in itself; then it seizes
on its faber who has made it, and fights against its creator, as the
earthly wicked man does against God, so long till he devours and
consumes himself, as a fiery \[pestilent\] poison consumes the body,
unless you remedy, stay, and allay its hunger; yet there is none that
can still this horrible hunger, but God himself who has made him; and if
he assists not in due time, then the hunger in the wrath consumes the
body, and puts it into the eternal darkness.

15\. This hunger desires nothing but the mercy of God, that he might be
freed from the anguish of hell; but this he cannot obtain of himself,
for he is shut up in the anger of God; and his dear mother, which nursed
him in the beginning, is also shut up in death: But if God shews his
grace, and gives him again of his love, then the anger is dismayed at
the love; <span id="fr_71"></span>[2](#fn_71) and this is a flagrat of
great joy: For he again tastes the sweetness

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of his dear mother, and then he knows full well that he has been so vile
and wicked, and repents of his iniquity, and will turn and mortify the
old Adam, and cast it away from him.

16\. So the artist takes him presently away with the old Adam from the
strange anger, and lays him in a soft bed; for the old Adam is sick, and
will die; and then his own faber in the old Adam is in the love of
God, <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) which destroyed the anger, and
will make a young child, and rejoices in the child; and the old Adam
grows sick, and weak, wholly dark, and swarthish, and dies; and the four
elements go out <span id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73) from him with their
colours: So the faber gives him even leave to go, and continually
labours on the new body, which shall arise from death; and none sees his
labour, for he works in the dark.

17\. But the artist takes no care about the work, <span
id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74) but gives the faber his own food, till he
sees that a vegetative life appears in the dark death with a new colour
out of the black; and then, when the new man is ready, the artist comes,
and brings the soul, and gives it the faber; at which the faber is
dismayed that another life comes into him; and he puts the soul into the
new body, and it goes inwardly in the anger: Thus the new man arises in
great power and glory from death, and bruises the head of the old
serpent in the anger of God, and passes through the anger, and the anger
can do him no harm at all.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Whoe’er thou art, that to this work art born,  
A chosen work thou hast, howe’er the world may scorn.</span>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[44:1](sat09.htm#fr_62) Lust.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[44:2](sat09.htm#fr_63) Or immobility.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[45:1](sat09.htm#fr_64) Or he should die.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[45:2](sat09.htm#fr_65) Salvation.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[45:3](sat09.htm#fr_66) An upright, full, and
unfeigned desire.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[45:4](sat09.htm#fr_67) Or therein.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[45:5](sat09.htm#fr_68) Leader.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[45:6](sat09.htm#fr_69) In one.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[46:1](sat09.htm#fr_70) Begin.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[46:2](sat09.htm#fr_71) Or in the divine love.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[47:1](sat09.htm#fr_72) Or upon the love of God.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[47:2](sat09.htm#fr_73) Depart.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[47:3](sat09.htm#fr_74) Labour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](sat10)
