[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat03)  [Next](sat05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### PREFACE TO THE READER

<span class="smallcaps">THIS</span> book is a true mystical mirror of
the highest wisdom. The best treasure that a man can attain unto in this
world is true knowledge; even *the knowledge of himself*: For *man* is
the great mystery of God, the *microcosm*, or the complete abridgment of
the whole universe: He is the *mirandum Dei opus*, God's masterpiece, a
living emblem and hieroglyphic of eternity and time; and therefore to
know whence he is, and what his temporal and eternal being and
well-being are, must needs be that ONE necessary thing, to which all our
chief study should aim, and in comparison of which all the wealth of
this world is but dross, and a loss to us.

Hence Solomon, the wisest of the kings of Israel, says: "Happy is the
man that findeth wisdom, and the man that getteth understanding; for the
merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of silver, and the gain
thereof than fine gold; she is more precious than rubies, and all things
that can be desired are not to be compared unto her."

This is that wisdom which dwells in nothing, and yet possesses all
things, and the humble resigned soul is its playfellow; this is the
divine alloquy, the inspiration of the Almighty, the breath of God, the
holy unction, which sanctifies the soul to be the temple of the Holy
Ghost, which instructs it aright in all things, and searches τὰ βάθη το̃υ
Θεο̃υ, <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) the depths of God.

This is the precious pearl, whose beauty is more glorious, and whose
virtue more sovereign than the sun: It is a never-failing comfort in all
afflictions, a balsam for all sores, a panacea for all diseases, a sure
antidote against all poison, and death itself; it is that joyful and
assured companion and guide, which never forsakes a man, but convoys him
through this valley of misery and death into the blessed paradise of
perfect bliss.

If you ask, What is the way to attain to this wisdom? Behold! Christ,
who is the way, the truth, and the life, tells you plainly in these
words; "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross daily and follow me;" <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) or as
he

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

says elsewhere, "Unless you be born again, you cannot see the kingdom of
heaven:" or as St. Paul says, "If any man seemeth to be wise in this
world, let him become a fool that he may be wise." <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md)

Herein lies that simple childlike way to the highest wisdom, which no
sharp reason or worldly learning can reach unto; nay, it is foolishness
to reason, and therefore so few go the way to find it: The proud
sophisters and wiselings of this world have always trampled it under
foot with scorn and contempt, and have called it enthusiasm, madness,
melancholy, whimsy, fancy, etc., but wisdom is justified of her
children.

Indeed, every one is not fit for or capable of the knowledge of the
eternal and temporal nature in its mysterious operation, neither is the
proud covetous world worthy to receive a clear manifestation of it; and
therefore the only wise God (who giveth wisdom to every one that asketh
it aright of him) has locked up the jewel in his blessed treasury, which
none can open but those that have the key; which is this, viz., "Ask,
and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened unto you: "The Father will give the Spirit to them that ask
him for it.

This is the true theosophic school wherein this author learned the first
rudiments and principles of wisdom, and to which we must go if we would
understand his deep writings: For we must know that the sons of Hermes,
who have commenced in the high school of true magic and theosophy, have
always spoken their hidden wisdom in a mystery; and have so couched it
under shadows and figures, parables and similies, that none can
understand their obscure, yet clear writings, but those who have had
admittance into the same school, and have tasted of the Feast of
Pentecost.

And this does not seem at all strange to the children of divine Mercury;
for the mysteries of philosophy, divinity, and theosophy must not be
profaned, and laid open to the view of the outward astral reason, which
turns all to its selfish pride, covetousness, envy, wrath, and cunning
hypocrisy; and therefore a parabolical or magical phrase or dialect is
the best and plainest habit and dress that mysteries can have to travel
in up and down this wicked world: And thus parable have a double and
different respect and use; for as they conceal and hide secrets from the
rude and vulgar sort, who are not able or

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

patient to bear anything but what suits with their common conceits and
opinions, so likewise they sweetly lead the mind of the true searcher
into the depths of wisdom's council. They are as the cloudy pillar of
Moses; they have a dark part, and they have a light part; they are dark
to the Egyptians, the pharisaical sons of sophistry, but light to the
true Israel, the children of the mystery.

And therefore whoever will be nurtured and trained up by Sophia, and
learn to understand and speak the language of wisdom, must be born again
of and in the Word of Wisdom, Christ Jesus, the Immortal Seed: The
divine essence which God breathed into his paradisical soul must be
revived, and he must become one again with that which he was in God
before he was a creature, and then his Eternal Spirit may enter into
that which is within the veil, and see not only the literal, but the
moral, allegorical, and anagogical meaning of the wise and their dark
sayings: He then will be fit to enter, not only into Solomon's porch,
the outer court of natural philosophy, sense and reason, but likewise
into the inward court of holy and spiritual exercises, in divine
understanding and knowledge; and so he may step into the most inward and
holiest place of theosophical mysteries, into which none are admitted to
come, but those who have received the high and holy unction.

I will now endeavour briefly to hint to the reader what this book
contains, though in it the spirit of wisdom cannot be delineated with
pen and ink, no more than a sound can be painted, or the wind grasped in
the hollow of the hand: But know, that in it he deciphers and represents
in a lively manner the Signature of all Things, and gives you the
contents of eternity and time, and glances at all mysteries.

Herein the author sets forth fundamentally the birth, sympathy, and
antipathy of all beings; how all beings originally arise out of one
eternal mystery, and how that same mystery begets itself in itself from
eternity to eternity; and likewise how all things, which take their
original out of this eternal mystery, may be changed into evil, and
again out of evil into good; with a clear and manifest demonstration how
man has turned himself out of the good into the evil, and how his
transmutation is again out of the evil into the good: Moreover, herein
is declared the outward cure of the body; how the outward life may be
freed from sickness by its likeness or assimulate, and be again
introduced into its first essence; where also, by way

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

of parable and similitude, the Philosopher's Stone is with great life
described for the temporal cure; and along with it the holy Corner
Stone, Christ alone, for the everlasting cure, regeneration, and perfect
restitution of all the true, faithful, eternal souls. In a word, his
intent is to let you know the inward power and property by the outward
sign; for nature has given marks and notes to everything, whereby it may
be known; and this is the Language of Nature, which signifies for what
everything is good and profitable: And herein lies the mystery, or
central science of the high philosophical work in the true spagiric art,
which consummates the cure, not only for the body, but for the soul.

But let the reader know that the sharp speculation of his own reason
will never pry into the depth of this book, but rather bring him into a
maze of doubtful notions, wherein he will bewilder himself, and think
the author's phrase tedious and strange; and therefore the understanding
lies only in the manifestation of that Spirit, which in the Day of
Pentecost gave forth the true sense and meaning of all languages in one:
Now if that Spirit rules and dwells in you, then you may understand this
author in the deepest ground, according to your creaturely
constellation, both in the eternal and temporal nature; but if not,
these things will be but as a relation of trifles and chimeras to you.
And therefore if you be of a saturnine property, dull and dark, shut up
in the house of Luna, soar not too high with your censure and scorn, or
with a critical speculation of your outward reason, lest you fall indeed
into the deep abyss of darkness; but wait patiently, till the divine Sol
shall shine again in your dark and selfish Saturn, and give you some
beams and glimpses of his eternal light, and then your angry Mars will
be changed into pure love-zeal, and your prating, pharisaical and
hypocritical Mercury into a meek, mild, and Christian speaking of God's
works and wonders in the dispensation of his wisdom; and your doubtful,
unsettled Jupiter will be turned into a plerophory, or most full
assurance of true joy and saving comfort in your religion; your earthly
Venus into heavenly love, and your eclipsed mutable Luna into the pure,
perfect, and crystalline streams of light, life, and glory.

But the proud scorner that will take no warning is of Lucifer's
regiment, who saw the mystery of God's kingdom to stand in meekness,
simplicity, and deep humility, and therefore out of his pride would
aspire to be above the divine love, and harmony

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

of obedience to God's will, and so fell into the abyss of the dark
world, into the outmost darkness of the first principle, which we call
Hell, where he and his legions are captives; from which the Almighty God
of Love deliver us.

I will end with the words of the author at the conclusion of the book,
where he says thus; "I have faithfully, with all true admonition,
represented to the reader what the Lord of all beings has given me; he
may behold himself in this looking-glass <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) within and without, and so he shall find
what and who he is: Every reader, be he good or bad, will find his
profit and benefit therein: It is a very clear gate of the great mystery
of all beings: By glosses, commentaries, curiosity and self-wit, none
shall be able to reach or apprehend it in his own ground; but it may
very well meet and embrace the true *seeker*, and create him much profit
and joy; yea be helpful to him in all natural things, provided he
applies himself to it aright, and seeks in the fear of God, seeing it is
now a time of seeking; for a lily blossoms upon the mountains and
valleys in all the ends of the earth: 'He that seeketh findeth.'" And so
I commend the reader to the grace and love of Jesus Christ, in whom are
hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[3:1](sat04.htm#fr_1.md) Cor. ii. 10.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:2](sat04.htm#fr_2.md) Luke ix. 23.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:1](sat04.htm#fr_3.md) 1 Cor. iii. 13.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:1](sat04.htm#fr_4.md) Mirror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](sat05.md)
