[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sat15)  [Next](sat17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Kindle Download of this
Book](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001BDI55M/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy Printed Copy of this Book at
lulu.com](https://www.lulu.com/content/2742583)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Signature of All Things*, by Jacob Boehem, \[1912\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### CHAPTER XII

<span class="small">OF THE SEVENTH FORM IN THE KINGDOM OF THE MOTHER;
HOW THE SEVENTH KINGDOM, VIZ. THE KINGDOM OF THE SUN, IS AGAIN OPENED
AND MADE ALIVE; SET FORTH IN PARABLE, OR BY WAY OF SIMILITUDE OF
CHRIST'S RESURRECTION</span>

1\. <span class="smallcaps">We</span> are not to think that when Christ
died the natural death in the human property, that he died as to his
creaturely soul, <span id="fr_223"></span>[1](#fn_223) much less as to
the Deity; also he did not disappear or die in the heavenly essentiality
and in the heavenly tincture: This cannot be; only the will and dominion
of self, viz. of the outward world, which domineered in man unto the own
will and own powers of the selfish creature (wherein man was disobedient
to God), he gave that wholly into the Father's hands, viz. into the end
of nature, into the Father's great mystery; not that it should be dead,
but that God's Spirit might alone be the life thereof, that the divine
dominion might be in Christ's person, that the Eternal Father might rule
and reign with his Eternal Spirit in his image; and therefore God has
determined to keep the last judgment by this Jesus.

2\. Now the creature of Christ does it not alone, but God in his image
through the creature in the dominion of his Eternal Spirit of all the
three principles, which is the life and dominion of every being, in each
thing according to its property.

3\. And understand us right, when Christ died on the cross, the name
Jesus did not also die, which destroyed death, and tinctured the
expressed word, viz. the form of the Deity (or the formed word), viz.
the soul with love: No, it cannot be, the eternity does not die, only
the spoken word, which stands again in the desire of the speaking, viz.
in the fiat, which changes itself in its own speaking, viz. in the
self-desire, and brings its own sound into another form and source than
the speaking word had spoken it, and set it forth with the verbum fiat
into a form, signature, and will; as Lucifer with his royal throne, and
Adam also did, when they both departed out of resignation into selfhood;
the instrument would be master.

4\. The outward working sensitive life wherein the anger of

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God was set on
fire did wholly die away, not that it should be a nothing, but it fell
into the nothing, viz. into God's will, into God's working and feeling,
quite from the will of the outward world, which is evil and good, so
that it might no longer live to the world, viz. to the astrum in the
walm, the boiling or seething power of the four elements; but to the
Eternal Father's nature in the walm of the pure divine element the life
of the outward world died.

5\. Thus the true human life fell immediately again into that place from
whence Adam had brought it, viz. into paradise, upon which Christ said
to the thief, "To-day thou shalt be with me in paradise;" it fell into
Adam's death, whereby he died to paradise, and sprang up in Adam's death
as a new creature out of the old, like as the branch springs from the
corn: And this it did from the might and power of the speaking word,
which of grace was entered with living essentiality into the disappeared
heavenly essentiality of man, and had freely given itself into the
centre of the soul-like nature, and also into the wrath of the anger and
death in the flesh, and changed the anger into love, and tinctured the
corrupt blood in the anger with the love.

6\. The divine tincture tinctured the human; the divine sun entered into
the human; the divine sun entered into Adam's night, viz. into Adam's
sleep; God's sun with the name Jesus entered with Adam's soul and
humanity in Christ's person into death, understand into Adam's sleep.

7\. When Christ died, then Adam died also to his self-hood in Christ's
death; the name Jesus was in Christ the serpent-destroyer in Adam's
humanity; Christ entered into the image of the first Adam, so that the
first Adam in the humanity of Christ became the same Christ, and
serpent-destroyer, indeed not in the same creature, but in the same
soul's and body's property.

8\. The first Adam fell into sleep, viz. into the impotence of the
divine world, and died in the death of death; the second Adam entered
into the death of death; and took the death of death captive in himself,
viz. in the humanity of Adam: He was a death to death, and brought forth
the life out of death into the eternal liberty: He arose in the divine
omnipotence in the essence of the first Adam: God's Spirit in the
speaking eternal word brought forth Adam out of death in Christ's
humanity. Adam arose in Christ's humanity, and all the children of Adam,
which are partakers of Christ's kingdom, arise in Christ; all in
Christ's flesh and blood, soul and spirit, but

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

every one in his creature which he has had here, and mortified in
Christ's death.

9\. Every one is a particular twig; but there is only one tree, which is
Christ in Adam, and Adam in Christ, only one, not two; only one Christ
in all Christians; so that I may say, "If I be dead in Christ to the
world, I am the same Christ, viz. a branch on the same tree."

10\. But seeing that I in the outward man do yet live in my self-hood,
therefore I must also die with the outward man in Christ's death, and
arise and live in him. Now therefore I live with the will of faith in
the mind in Christ, and am a Christian in the will of the mind in the
desire of faith, and receive Christ with his humanity into my will, and
cast my will into his death; and thus my inward man is also dead in
Christ's death, and lives no longer to self-hood; but I am resigned in
him, and lie buried in his death: But seeing he is risen in God's will,
I also live in his resurrection in him; but my earthliness in its
selfish property lives to the earthly world, until it also dies quite to
self-hood, and enters into the resignation and putrefaction, and then
Christ will awaken it through my inward man, which now lives in him.

11\. Like as he is risen from the dead, even so shall I, who shall die
to the earthliness in him, viz. in my first father Adam, in the name
Jesus as a Christian in Christ; my twig, withered in sin on the tree,
shall obtain strength and sap in the name Jesus to life. I shall and
must spring forth afresh with my humanity in him as in my stem who is
become a heart and power in my father Adam, and bring forth fruit to the
praise of God.

12\. My will-spirit, which now is in Christ's humanity, and lives in
Christ's Spirit, that shall in Christ's power give sap to the dry tree,
that it shall again arise at the last day in the sound of the trumpet of
the divine breath in Christ's voice, which also is my voice in his
breath, and spring afresh in the tree Christ, viz. in paradise: The
paradise shall be in me; all whatever God has and is shall appear in me
as a form and image of the divine world's being; all colours, powers,
and virtues of his eternal wisdom shall be manifest in me, and on me, as
on his likeness: I shall be the manifestation of the spiritual divine
world, and an instrument of God's Spirit, wherein he makes melody with
himself, with this voice, which I myself am, as with his signature: I
shall be his instrument, and organ of his expressed word and voice; and
not only I, but all my fellow-members in the glorious tuned instrument
of God: We are all strings in his joyful

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

consort; the spirit of his mouth strikes the tune and note on our
strings.

13\. And therefore God became man, that he might again repair his
glorious instrument which he had made for his praise, which perished as
to him, and would not sound according to the desire of his joy and love,
and introduce again the true love-sound into the strings: He has
introduced the voice which sounds in his presence again into us, viz.
into his instrument, he is become that which I am, and has made me that
which he is, so that I may say, that I am in my resignation in him his
trumpet, and the sound of his instrument and divine voice, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[1](#fn_224) at which now I rejoice in all my
fellow-strings and voices, which with me are tuned and set as an eternal
work, to the praise and glory of God.

14\. Thus know ye now my fellow-voices in the praise of God, that I
sound with my string played upon in the spirit upon and in your note,
and thus sing I to you; that whatever Jesus has done through the Christ,
viz. through his and my humanity, the same he does yet to-day in me and
in all my fellow-members. He died to my self-hood in his death, and I
also die to my self-hood in his death: He is given up to his resignation
in God his Father, and God his Father has raised him up with the spirit
of his mouth in him, and set him forth for the royal image according to
the Holy Trinity, through and with whom God will judge all things in the
place of this world.

15\. Thus God also has awakened in him my spirit and soul through his
spirit in the great name Jesus in Christ, so that I in my resignation in
him need not to die, for he died in me and for me; his death, in that he
is risen from death, is become my eternal life, so that now I live in
his death, as one dying; and yet there is no more any death in him, but
thus I die to myself and sin in him, seeing that my desire and will
presses forth from my self-hood into it, so that I die daily to myself,
till once I shall obtain the limit of my self-hood, and my self-hood
with the earthly will and desire does wholly die to its selfishness;
then shall my self-hood, and all whatever is in me which seeks and loves
itself, fall into the death of Christ, viz. into the first mother, from
whence God created me, and my self-hood shall become a nothing; and even
then my self-hood lies in Christ's death in the resignation as an
instrument of God, who then will make it his instrument as he pleases.

16\. But seeing now my soul and spirit lives in his resurrection,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

and his voice \[air or breath\] is in me, according to the resignation
in him, as St. Paul says, "Our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
wait for the Saviour Jesus Christ;" therefore also his voice, which is
in me in that I am \[or live\] no longer to my self-hood, but he alone
\[is and lives in me\], shall raise up my dead body, which I resign to
him, and bring it into his first image, to which he created it.

17\. Thus now I live in God, and my self-hood does not know it, for it
lives not in God, but in itself (God is indeed in it, but it does not
apprehend him), and hides the pearl which I am in Christ; not I, but he
in his humanity in my creature in himself: And thus I speak and write of
the great mystery of all beings, not that I have apprehended it in my
self-hood, but he strikes my signature in my desire, which presses into
him, as he pleases.

18\. I am known to myself, but not in my self-hood, but in his mirror
which of grace he has put into me, thereby to allure my self-hood to
him, viz. into the resignation; and so likewise, dear brethren, it shall
again be represented to you out of his glass, <span
id="fr_225"></span>[1](#fn_225) which he has set forth through my
capacity in him, as his instrument.

19\. Thus it goes also in the philosophic work; Sulphur, Mercury, and
Sal are entered by the curse of God into their self-hood, viz. into a
self-working and living; all does now work in the curse and anger of God
according to the property of the first principle; if God had not placed
the sun as a nature-god of the outward visible world therein, which
tinctures every working life, even everything which grows and moves, all
would be in the dark death's impression, viz. in the abyss of hell.

20\. Now if anything shall be freed from this self-hood, viz. from the
wrathful death, and be again brought into the universal, viz. into the
highest perfection, then it must die wholly to its self-hood, and enter
into the stillness, viz. into the death of the resignation at nature's
end: Mars must wholly lose the might of the fire and wrath, and Mercury
also his poison-life; Saturn must be a death to himself, insomuch that
the artist sees nothing but the great darkness, and even then the light
appears in the resignation; for St. John says, "The light shineth in the
darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not;" that is, in its
self-hood, viz. in its own will and working it cannot apprehend it; but
in the resignation the nothing, viz. the liberty of God shines in it.

21\. For the nothing manifests itself in its lubet out of the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

liberty in the darkness of death; for the nothing will not be a nothing,
and also cannot be a nothing, and likewise it cannot otherwise manifest
itself, but according to the property of the free lubet, which is now
fixed \[or steadfast\], and in it also as a nothing, for there is no
turba therein; the self-will and hunger is dead, and in the nothing, and
the lubet of the eternal liberty is its life: Now seeing that the
highest being has once moved itself, and come into a visible
comprehensible essence, it does again figure \[or form\] that same
essence, which departs from its self-hood, and enters into the nothing,
into such a being \[or essence\] as it was before the times of the
world: But seeing the verbum fiat stands yet to this day creating of the
corporal essence, it does again make a fixed perfect essence; as the
like is brought to pass in the philosophic work, where a new life arises
out of death, as God does raise us up in himself in Christ, if we die to
self-hood, and wholly resign up ourselves to him.

22\. And thus when the expressed Mercury in the Sulphur of Saturn
resigns its self-hood into Venus, then the verbum fiat changes it again
into such an essence according to the lubet of the liberty; the death
arises in a new body out of the darkness of death, in a white fair
colour, but as an hidden lustre, wherein the colour is not rightly and
distinctly known, till it dissolves itself, and the materia becomes
desiring; then the sun arises in the centre, and Saturn in the property
of Jupiter and Venus in all the seven forms (that is in the verbum fiat)
as a new creation, and the desire of all the seven forms tend to Sol's
lustre, viz. to the white and red colour from the fire and light, which
is the majestical \[colour, lustre, or glory\].

23\. <span class="smallcaps">Christ</span> after his resurrection
walked <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226) forty days in the mystery
of all the three principles at once, in the property of the first Adam
after his creation before his sleep, and before his Eve was formed, and
appeared to his disciples in his property which he had here from the
outward world, and did eat with them, and shewed them his assumed
humanity, and that he had in no wise wholly put it off.

24\. Even so let the artist understand us, that in the philosophic work
the first matter does not wholly pass away or vanish, but it enters into
the death of the life of its wrathful property, and dies in the curse of
God, but rises again in its former being, which it had before the curse
of God: The curse only is destroyed therein, and the first life does
again rise up therein, and therefore it is fixed, and subsists in the
fire, for it

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

is dead to the dominion of the four elements, and lives in the fifth
essence; not that it has that same life, but it stands still therein;
yet the spirit of the new-born essence is a vegetative life with its
growing therein; its lustre stands therein, it shews the first Adam in
innocence, who stood likewise in such perfection.

25\. And as Christ tinctured our corrupt humanity, in which Mercury was
turned to poison, with the heavenly blood of the eternal divine
virginity and essentiality, whereby the human self-hood died in the
poison, and the resigned life did again arise; so the poisonful
mercurial, martial, and saturnine will and desire die in the blood of
Venus in the philosophic work, and both enter together into death, and
arise both together in one love, in one will.

26\. Therefore let the artist observe the tincture; it is more noble and
precious for man's use in this valley of misery than the body which
arises in the tincture; for the spirit is the life; the body is only a
figure of the life, and the blood is a mansion of the spirit.

27\. The artist must well observe this; in the blood of the young man,
when his pearl <span id="fr_227"></span>[1](#fn_227) gives itself to the
three murtherers, that it also sheds its blood in and with the young
man's, then the champion stands in hell, and disclaims the human
self-hood: Then the white lion appears upon his crimson-coloured beast;
even there lies the cure of sickness, and the death of death.

28\. The body is dissolved in the blood of love in the death out of the
earthly into an heavenly \[property\]. The tincture gives itself into
the new body; and afterwards, when the body rises in Sol's splendour, it
also forsakes its will; it resigns itself wholly into the body's
essence, and becomes its beauty, splendour, and colour, which the artist
can never separate; for they are together in the fifth essence, viz. in
the mystery of the verbum fiat, and belong to God's motion of the final
day of separation; in this time to his own manifestation unto his
honour, and deeds of wonder; but after this time to the crystalline
world in the glassy sea before the ancient in the Apocalypse.

#### <span class="smallcaps">A Brief Summary of the Philosophic Work</span>

29\. Our meaning might seem very difficult to the reader, in that we go
so far about and shew Christ all along therein; at which let no man
wonder, we do not seek gold, or any temporal

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

goods thereby, and drive man into vain curiosities; we speak only with
the children whom God has chosen thereunto; for the time is born, where
that which is lost shall be again found; yea not only the universal for
the body of this world, but also for the soul.

30\. The process is very short in both, and it is only of one property
which is thus: The tree, understand the life, is divided into seven
forms; now the curse of God is come into the seven forms, so that they
are in strife and enmity, and one form annoys the other, and can never
agree unless they all seven enter into death, and die to the self-will.
Now this cannot be, unless a death comes into them, which breaks all
their will, and be a death to them; as the deity in Christ was a death
to the human self-hood, and the seven forms in the human life; thus it
is here also: The human will was changed in Christ into the eternal sun,
viz. into the resignation in God; so must all the forms in the
philosophic work be changed into one, viz. into Sol: Seven must become
one, and yet remain in seven, but in one desire, where each form desires
the other in love, and then there is no more any strife and contest.

31\. Therefore let the artist but consider how he may give death to the
death with the pure life, and how he may awaken the dead and disappeared
life, which is heavenly, and lies hidden and captivated in the curse, so
that it may again receive the fire-soul; and if he does but bring it so
far, it works of itself. <span id="fr_228"></span>[1](#fn_228)

32\. When the virgin again receives her bridegroom, who has been
faithless, then he is prepared and fitted to the work; otherwise he is
no way at all fitted; but all is in vain and to no purpose \[which he
attempts\]. There is not any possibility for the heavenly image
according to God's likeness in man to be otherwise helped and restored
after that the fire-soul had entered into its self-hood, unless the
Spirit of God introduced itself into the disappeared image, viz. into
the heavenly essentiality, and gave itself in with the image awakened in
it into the soul's fire, viz. into the wrath of death, and be a death to
death, viz. to the wrathful anger of God, that it might be drowned in
the love, in the blood of the heavenly essentiality; and though there
could be no parting nor dying, yet there was a dying of the wrath, so
that the wrath was changed into a joy and love.

33\. Thus the artist's work is exactly and throughout no otherwise: For
man was created out of all beings, out of the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

heaven and earth; but when he became wholly earthly, and the curse
seized on him, the curse also came over the earthly being, from whence
man was made: Thus the heaven was shut up from man, and the heaven also
was shut up in the earth, as metals, trees, and herbs, in the food of
man, and whatever belonged to his ornament and delight.

34\. The soul of the earth, viz. the property of the fire of the first
principle is entered into its self-hood, viz. into God's anger; now the
heaven is hidden in it; therefore the artist must in his work reduce the
soul in the curse and the heaven again into one: He must introduce the
soul again into heaven, or else there is no possibility: Now he cannot
bring the soul in its iniquity into heaven, for it will not, and
therefore he must bring the heaven into the soul, and wholly give in the
heaven to the soul, that the soul may eat of heaven, whether she will or
no; the heaven must be as death <span id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229) in
the soul, so that the soul cannot get rid of it, how angry soever she
be, and vehemently rages against it, till she be overcome in her wrath,
and enters with the desire into heaven, viz. into the disappeared
essence, and wills to murther it, as the Jews did Christ; and if she so
enters into the heavenly essence, then the image of the heavenly essence
falls into the jaws of the murtherer.

35\. Thus when the heavenly essence gives its desire to the murtherer,
the murtherer is dismayed at the dear love-life, and arises in the
flagrat in the heavenly essentiality; thus the disappeared essence does
again receive the fire flagrat into itself, and wholly unites itself
with the fire-life; and so the fire must burn in love and meekness, and
forego <span id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230) its right in the centre, as
the light which shines from the fire; thus and no otherwise the heavenly
essence obtains its life; and as a fire does thoroughly heat an iron
that it appears as if it were mere fire, and it is so, but the iron does
still retain its substance; so the disappeared essence, viz. the heaven
is manifest in the poisonful mercurial and martial fire-soul, and makes
of seven wills only one, and yet seven remain, but the enmity ceases.

36\. This is an universal, which also changes the enmity <span
id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_231) or malignity of all diseases in the
human body into one will \[into unity\]; so that the raging and raving,
viz. the seven forms of life in their enmity become unanimous; and then
the hunger of the disease ceases, and the process to the universal is as
has been already mentioned. It is not my intention to mention a clear
declaration thereof; it is clear enough; he that will not seek

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

thereby a new man born in God, and apply himself diligently thereto, let
him not meddle with my writings.

37\. I have not written anything for such a seeker, and also he shall
not be able to apprehend our meaning fundamentally, though he strives
never so much about it, unless he enters into the resignation in Christ;
there he may apprehend the spirit of the universal, otherwise all is to
no purpose; and we faithfully warn the curious critic not to amuse
himself, for he will not effect anything in this way, unless he himself
enters thereinto, and then it will be shewn him without much seeking;
for the way is child-like \[plain and easy\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_223"></span>[152:1](sat16.htm#fr_223) Soulish creature.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[155:1](sat16.htm#fr_224) Breath, air, tune.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[156:1](sat16.htm#fr_225) Mirror.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[157:1](sat16.htm#fr_226) Or conversed.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[158:1](sat16.htm#fr_227) Or virgin.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[159:1](sat16.htm#fr_228) It makes itself, or
it has its own faber in itself.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[160:1](sat16.htm#fr_229) Or as dead.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[160:2](sat16.htm#fr_230) Or leave.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[160:3](sat16.htm#fr_231) Contrariety.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](sat17)
