[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4110) 
[Next](sbe4112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4">5:2:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:1">5:2:4:1</span></span>1. He
offers the Vai*s*vadeva <span id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109) (All-gods’
offering); for by means of the Vai*s*vadeva, Pra*g*âpati created
abundance (of food) and creatures, thinking, 'May I be consecrated,
after creating abundance and creatures!' And in like manner does this
(Sacrificer) now, by the Vai*s*vadeva, create abundance and creatures,
thinking, 'May I be consecrated, after creating abundance and
creatures!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:2">5:2:4:2</span></span>2. He
then offers the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h* <span
id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110); for by means of the Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h*
Pra*g*âpati delivered the creatures from Varu*n*a's noose, and those
creatures of his were produced healthy and faultless: 'May I be
consecrated for healthy, faultless creatures!'

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

he thought. And in like manner does this (Sacrificer) now, by the
Varu*n*apraghâsâ*h*, deliver the creatures from Varu*n*a's noose, and
those creatures of his are produced healthy and faultless: 'May I be
consecrated for healthy, faultless creatures!' so he thinks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:3">5:2:4:3</span></span>3. He
then performs the Sâkamedhâ*h* <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111);
for by the Sâkamedhâ*h* the gods slew V*ri*tra, and gained that
universal conquest which now is theirs. And in, like manner does this
(Sacrificer) thereby now slay his wicked, hateful enemy; and in like
manner does he gain the victory, thinking, 'May I be consecrated, when
safety and security are gained!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:4">5:2:4:4</span></span>4. He
then performs the *S*unâsîrya <span id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112),
thinking, 'May I be consecrated, having encompassed both essences!
Thereupon the Pa*ñk*avâtîya <span id="fr_113"></span>[3](#fn_113)
(oblation to the five winds). Having poked the Âhavanîya fire asunder
into five parts, he offers, cutting out butter with the dipping-spoon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:5">5:2:4:5</span></span>5. He
offers in the forepart (of the fire), with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 35), 'To the
Agni-eyed gods, the east-seated, hail!' He then offers in the southern
part

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

with, 'To the Yama-eyed <span id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114) gods, the
south-seated, hail!' He then offers in the hind part with, 'To the
Vi*s*vadeva-eyed gods, the west-seated, hail!' He then offers in the
northern part with either, 'To the Mitrâvaru*n*a-eyed gods,--or, To the
Marut-eyed gods,--the north-seated, hail!' He then offers in the centre
with, 'To the Soma-eyed gods, the above-seated; the venerable, hail!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:6">5:2:4:6</span></span>6. Having
then poked (the fire) together, he offers with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 36), 'The
gods that are Agni-eyed, east-seated, to them hail!--The gods that are
Yama-eyed, south-seated, to them hail!--The gods that are
Vi*s*vadeva-eyed, west-seated, to them hail!--The gods that are
Mitrâvaru*n*a-eyed--or, Marut-eyed--north-seated, to them hail!--The
gods that are Soma-eyed, above-seated, venerable, to them hail!' Now as
to why he thus offers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:7">5:2:4:7</span></span>7. Now
when, by means of the Sâkamedhâ*h*, the gods were gaining that universal
conquest, which now is theirs, they said, 'Verily the fiends, the
Rakshas, suck out these (creatures) in the (four) quarters: come, let us
throw the thunderbolt at them!' Now the ghee is a thunderbolt: with that
thunderbolt, the ghee, they smote the fiends, the Rakshas, in the (four)
quarters, and gained that universal conquest which now is theirs. And in
like manner does this (Sacrificer) smite the fiends, the Rakshas, in the
quarters, by that thunderbolt, the ghee; and thus he gains the victory,
thinking, 'May

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I be consecrated,
when safety and security have been gained!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:8">5:2:4:8</span></span>8. And as
to why he offers those five latter oblations. Now when they poke the
Âhavanîya asunder into five parts, thereby they wound and tear some of
the fire; and hereby now he heals it: therefore he offers those five
latter oblations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:9">5:2:4:9</span></span>9. For
this (offering) a carriage and pair, with a side horse, is the priest's
fee. Three horses, the warrior, and the charioteer,--these are five
breaths, and the breath is the same as the wind: and because that is the
fee for this sacrifice, therefore it is called Pa*ñk*avâtîya (belonging
to the five winds).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:10">5:2:4:10</span></span>10. He
may also heal (some disease <span id="fr_115"></span>[1](#fn_115)) with
this (offering): For yonder blower (or purifier, the wind) is this
breath; and the breath is the same as the vital energy. Now he (the
wind) blows as one only, but on entering into man, he is divided
tenfold; and ten are those oblations he offers: thus he (the priest)
endows him with the ten vital airs, with the whole, entire vital energy;
and were he now even as one whose vital spirit has departed, verily by
this (offering) he (the priest) brings him round again.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:11">5:2:4:11</span></span>11.
Thereupon the Indraturîya <span id="fr_116"></span>[2](#fn_116).--There
is a cake on eight potsherds for Agni, a barley pap for Varu*n*a, a pap
of gavedhukâ seed (coix barbata) for Rudra; and a mess of sour curds
from a yoke-trained

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

cow for Indra: this Indraturîya he offers. Now Indra and Agni on that
occasion consulted with each other: 'Verily the fiends, the Rakshas,
suck out these (creatures) in the (four) quarters: come, let us throw
the thunderbolt at them!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:12">5:2:4:12</span></span>12.
Agni then spake, 'Let there be three shares for me, one for thee!'--'So
be it!'--By that offering those two smote the fiends, the Rakshas, in
the (four) quarters, and gained that universal conquest which now is
theirs. And in like manner does this (Sacrificer) by that offering smite
the fiends, the Rakshas, in the quarters; and gain the victory,
thinking, 'May I be consecrated, when safety and security have been
gained!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:13">5:2:4:13</span></span>13. Now
what cake on eight potsherds there is for Agni, that is one of Agni's
shares; and what barley pap there is for Varu*n*a--Varu*n*a being the
same as Agni--that is Agni's second share; and what pap of gavedhukâ
seed there is for Rudra--Rudra being the same as Agni--that is Agni's
third share. And as to why it is prepared of gavedhukâ seed: that god
surely is (the recipient) of refuse (remains of offering) <span
id="fr_117"></span>[1](#fn_117), and gavedhukâ grass is refuse,--hence
it is prepared of gavedhukâ seed. And what mess of sour curds there is
from a yoke-trained cow for Indra, that is the fourth share (being that)
of Indra--turîya being the same as *k*aturtha (fourth)--hence the name
Indraturîya. That same yoke-trained cow is the fee for this (offering);
for by her shoulder she is of Agni's nature, since her shoulder is, as
it were, fire-burnt; and in that, being a female, she improperly draws
(the cart), that is her Varu*n*ic

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

nature; and in that she is a cow, she is of Rudra's nature <span
id="fr_118"></span>[1](#fn_118); and in that Indra's sour curds (come)
from her, thereby she is of Indra's nature. Indeed that (cow) commands
all that: therefore that same yoke-trained cow is the fee.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:14">5:2:4:14</span></span>14.
Thereupon he performs the Apâmârgahoma; for by means of apâmârga plants
(achyranthes aspera) the gods wiped away (apa-mar*g*) the fiends, the
Rakshas, in the quarters, and gained that universal conquest which now
is theirs. And in like manner does this (Sacrificer) now by means of
apâmârga plants wipe away the fiends, the Rakshas, in the quarters; and
in like manner does he gain the victory, thinking, 'May I be
consecrated, when safety and security have been gained!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:15">5:2:4:15</span></span>15. He
takes apâmârga grains in a dipping-spoon of either palâ*s*a (butea
frondosa) or vikaṅkata (flacourtia sapida) wood. They take a firebrand
from the Anvâhâryapa*k*ana (southern) fire; and proceed therewith
eastward or northward; and there having made up a fire he offers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:16">5:2:4:16</span></span>16. He
takes the firebrand with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 37; *Ri*k S. III, 24, 1),
'Encounter the arrays, Agni!'--arrays means battles: 'encounter the
battles!' he thereby says;--'Repel the evil-wisher!'--the evil-wisher is
the enemy: 'beat off the enemy!' he thereby says;--'Unconquerable,
conquering the evil-doers!'--unconquerable he is indeed, by the Rakshas,
the fiends; and conquering the evil-doers, for he conquers every evil:

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

therefore he says, 'conquering the evil-doers;'--'Bestow glory upon the
offerer of sacrifice!'--'bestowing blessing on the Sacrificer,' is what
he thereby says.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:17">5:2:4:17</span></span>17.
Thereupon making up the fire he offers with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 38), 'At the
impulse of the God Savit*ri* I offer with the arms of the A*s*vins, with
the hands of Pûshan, with the strength of the Upâ*ms*u!' for the
Upâ*ms*u <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119) (cup of Soma) is the
mouth (or opening) of the sacrifice: thus he slays the fiends, the
Rakshas, by the mouth of the sacrifice;--'Slain is the Rakshas, hail!'
thus he slays the fiends, the Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:18">5:2:4:18</span></span>18. If
the dipping-spoon is of palâ*s*a wood,--the palâ*s*a being the
Brahman--it is with the Brahman that he slays the fiends, the Rakshas;
and if it is of vikaṅkata wood,--the vikaṅkata being the thunderbolt--it
is with the thunderbolt that the slays the fiends, the Rakshas: 'For the
slaughter of the Rakshas (I take) thee!' therewith he slays the fiends,
the Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:19">5:2:4:19</span></span>19. If
he offers after going eastward, he throws the spoon towards the east;
and if he offers after going northward, he throws the spoon towards the
north, with, 'We have slain the Rakshas!' thus he slays the fiends, the
Rakshas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:2:4:20">5:2:4:20</span></span>20.
Thereupon they return (to the sacrificial ground) without looking back.
Now by this (ceremony) also he may make for himself a
counter-charm <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120). In whatever
direction from there (his evil-wisher) is,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

looking back thither he offers; for the Apâmârga is of a backward
effect: whosoever does anything to him there, him indeed he thereby
pitches backward. Let him indicate the name of that one, saying, 'We
have slain so and so! So and so is slain!' thus he slays the fiends, the
Rakshas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_109"></span>[47:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_109) This, the first of
the Seasonal offerings, is to be performed on the full-moon of Phalgunî,
the other three then following after intervals of four months each.
During these intervals the ordinary Fortnightly sacrifices are to be
performed from day to day in this way that either the Full-moon and
New-moon sacrifice are performed on alternate days, or the former on
each day of the bright fortnights, and the latter on each day of the
dark fortnights. Thus, according to Â*s*v. Sr. IX, 3, 6; while Kâty. XV,
1, 18 allows only the latter mode. The final Seasonal offering, or
*S*unâsîrya, which ordinarily is performed a twelvemonth after the
Vai*s*vadeva, or on the full-moon of Phâlguna, is on the present
occasion to be performed just a year after the opening sacrifice, or
Pavitra ([p. 42](sbe4110.htm#page_42), note [1](sbe4110.htm#fn_98)),
i.e. on the first day of the bright fortnight of Phâlguna, being
immediately followed by the Pa*ñk*avâtîya.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[47:2](sbe4111.htm#fr_110) See part i, p. 391
seq.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[48:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_111) See part i, p. 408
seq.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[48:2](sbe4111.htm#fr_112) See part i, p. 444
seq., where the word is fancifully explained as composed of *s*una
(prosperity) and sîra (= sâra, sap),--the two essences here referred to.
Sâya*n*a, following Yâska (and *S*at. Br. II, 6, 3, 6-8?), identifies
the two component elements with Vâyu, the wind, and Âditya, the sun; see
part i, p. 445, note 3.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[48:3](sbe4111.htm#fr_113) The authorities of
the Black Ya*g*us (Taitt. Br. I, 7, 1, 5) call this oblation
Pa*ñk*âvattîya, i.e. 'consisting of fivefold cut (or ladled)' ghee,
which is offered without disturbing the fire. Prior to this oblation,
Âpastamba (Taitt. S., vol. ii, p. 93), however, prescribes a so-called
Pa*ñk*edhmîya, i.e. an oblation 'on five firebrands,' the fire being, as
here, poked about so as to form separate heaps in the four quarters and
in the centre.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[49:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_114) Yama is the ruler of
the departed ancestors, residing in the southern quarter.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[50:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_115) Tenâpy etena
vish*t*âvrâ*g*e (v. l. vish*t*âbrâge) bhisha*g*yet.
[Kâ*n*va](errata.htm#8) rec.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[50:2](sbe4111.htm#fr_116) That is, the
ceremony in which the fourth oblation belongs to Indra. While the
Mâdhyandinas perform this ceremony on the same day (the pratipad of the
bright fortnight of Phalgunî), the Kâ*n*vas do so on the following day;
the Apâmârgahoma being then likewise shifted on another day.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[51:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_117) On Rudra's epithet
vâstavya, see I, 7, 3, 1, 8.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[52:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_118) Rudra rules over the
beasts (III, 6; 2, 20), whence he is also called the lord of beasts
(pa*s*ûnâm pati, I, 7, 3, 8; Pa*s*upati [V, 3, 3,
7](sbe4115.htm#5:3:3:7)). Pûshan, the genius of thrift and prosperity,
is also (like the Greek Pan) regarded as the protector of cattle: see
[V, 2, 5, 8](sbe4112.htm#5:2:5:8).

<span id="fn_119"></span>[53:1](sbe4111.htm#fr_119) See part ii, p. 248.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[53:2](sbe4111.htm#fr_120) Viz. an amulet
consisting of a band running back into itself. The Kâ*n*va text
has,--Tena hâpy etena vish*t*âvrâ*g*e pratisara*m* kurvîta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 2, 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4112)
