[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4105) 
[Next](sbe4107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4">5:1:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:1">5:1:4:1</span></span>1. At the
midday Soma-feast he consecrates (the Sacrificer) by sprinkling; and at
the midday Soma-feast they run a race; for, verily, Pra*g*âpati is that
sacrifice <span id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58) which is here performed,
and from which these creatures have been produced,--and indeed, they are
even now produced after this one: thus he thereby wins Pra*g*âpati in
the very centre (of the sacrifice).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:2">5:1:4:2</span></span>2. The
Mâhendra cup being not yet drawn,--for

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

that, the Mâhendra, is Indra's special (nishkevalya) cup, and so also
are his that Nishkevalya-stotra and Nishkevalya-*s*astra; and the
Sacrificer is Indra: thus he consecrates him at his own dwelling-place.
Hence, the Mâhendra cup being not yet drawn,--

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:3">5:1:4:3</span></span>3. He
takes down the chariot <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59), with (Vâ*g*.
S. IX, 5), 'Thou art Indra's thunderbolt;' for the chariot is indeed a
thunderbolt, and the sacrificer is Indra: therefore he says, 'Thou art
Indra's thunderbolt;'--'a winner of wealth,' for the chariot is indeed a
winner of wealth;--'May this one win wealth by thee!'--wealth means
food: 'may this one gain food by thee,' is what he thereby says.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:4">5:1:4:4</span></span>4. That
chariot, seized by the pole, he turns (from left to right) so as to make
it stand inside the vedi <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60), with, 'In
the winning of wealth, the great Mother'--wealth means food: 'in the
winning of food, the great Mother'--is what he thereby says;--'Aditi by
name, we praise with speech;' now Aditi is this earth: therefore he
says, 'Aditi by name, we praise with speech,'--'whereon all this being
hath settled;' for indeed thereon all being here is settled;--'thereon
may the divine Savit*ri* prosper our stay!' whereby he means to say,
'thereon may the divine Savit*ri* prosper our Sacrificer!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:5">5:1:4:5</span></span>5. He
then sprinkles the horses with water, either when being led down to be
watered, or when brought

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

up after being watered. Now in the beginning the horse was produced from
the water; while being produced from the water, it was produced
incomplete, for it was indeed produced incomplete: hence it does not
stand on all its feet, but it stands lifting one foot on each side. Thus
what then was left behind of it in the water, therewith he now completes
it, and makes it whole: therefore he sprinkles the horses with water,
either when being led down to be watered, or when brought up after being
watered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:6">5:1:4:6</span></span>6. He
sprinkles them, with (Vâ*g*. S. .IX, 6), 'Within the waters is ambrosia,
in the waters is medicine: at the praises of the waters may ye wax
strong, ye horses!' And with this also, 'O divine waters, what rushing,
high-peaked, wealth-winning wave ye have, therewith may this one win
wealth!' wealth is food: he thus says, 'May he thereby gain food!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:7">5:1:4:7</span></span>7. He
then yokes (the team of) the chariot. The right horse he yokes (puts to)
first; for in human (practice) they indeed put to the left horse first,
but with the gods in this way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:8">5:1:4:8</span></span>8. He
yokes it, with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 7), Either the wind, or thought--'for
there is nothing swifter than the wind, and nothing swifter than
thought:' therefore he says, 'Either the wind, or thought;--'(or) the
seven and twenty Gandharvas <span id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61),

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

they yoked the horse at first;' for the Gandharvas indeed yoked the
horse at first: 'May they who yoked the horse at first yoke thee!' this
he thereby says they;--'laid speed into him,'--he thereby says, 'May
they who laid speed into it, lay speed into thee!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:9">5:1:4:9</span></span>9. He
then yokes the left horse, with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 8), 'Become thou swift as
the wind, O courser, being yoked!'--thereby he says, 'Become quick as
the wind, O courser, being yoked;'--'be thou as Indra's right (steed) in
beauty!'--he thereby says, 'Even as Indra's right (steed) for beauty, so
be thou that of the sacrificer for beauty!'--'May the all-knowing Maruts
yoke thee!' he thereby says, 'may gods yoke thee!'--'May Tvash*tri* lay
speed into thy feet!' in this there is nothing obscure. He then yokes
the right side-horse; for in human (practice) they indeed yoke the left
side-horse first, but with the gods in this way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:10">5:1:4:10</span></span>10. He
yokes it, with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 9), 'What speed hath been secretly laid
into thee, O courser, and what (speed), bestowed on the eagle, went
along in the wind;'--he thereby says, 'what speed of thine, O courser,
is hidden away even elsewhere, therewith win this our sacrifice,
Pra*g*âpati!'--'with that strength be thou strong and wealth-winning for
us, O courser, and victorious at the gathering!'--wealth means food: he
thus means to say, 'And be thou a food-winner for us at this our

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

sacrifice, at the gathering of the gods win thou this sacrifice,
Pra*g*âpati!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:11">5:1:4:11</span></span>11. Now
only those three (horses) are yoked, for what is threefold belongs to
the gods, and this (sacrifice is) with the gods. Alongside the yoke
(laid) on the side-horse <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62) goes a
fourth (horse), for that one is human. When he is about to give that
(chariot to the Adhvaryu), he gives it after yoking the fourth (horse)
thereto. Hence also at any other sacrifice only those three (horses) are
yoked; for what is threefold belongs to the gods, and this (sacrifice
is) with the gods. Alongside the yoke of the side-horse goes a fourth
(horse), for that one is human. When he is about to give that (chariot)
away, he gives it after yoking the fourth (horse) thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:12">5:1:4:12</span></span>12. He
now takes out material for a wild-rice pap of seventeen plates for
B*ri*haspati; for he who offers the Vâ*g*apeya wins food,--vâ*g*a-peya
being doubtless the same as anna-peya (food and drink): thus whatever
food he has thereby won, that he now prepares for him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:13">5:1:4:13</span></span>13. And
as to why it belongs to B*ri*haspati:--B*ri*haspati won it in the
beginning, therefore it belongs to B*ri*haspati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:14">5:1:4:14</span></span>14. And
why it is prepared of wild rice:--B*ri*haspati is the Brahman
(priesthood), and those wild-rice grains are cooked with the Brahman
(prayer),--therefore it is of wild rice. It is one of seventeen plates,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

because Pra*g*âpati is seventeenfold: he thus wins Pra*g*âpati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:4:15">5:1:4:15</span></span>15. He
makes the horses smell it, with 'Ye coursers--;' for horses are coursers
(vâ*g*in): therefore he says, 'Ye coursers,'--'wealth-winners,'--wealth
is food: 'food-winners' he thereby says;--'starting upon the course;'
for they are about to run a race;--'smell ye B*ri*haspati's portion!'
for this indeed is B*ri*haspati's portion: therefore he says, 'smell ye
B*ri*haspati's portion!' And why he makes the horses smell it: he
thinks, 'may I win Him <span id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63)!' therefore
he makes the horses smell it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[17:1](sbe4106.htm#fr_58) In the original,
'pra*g*âpati*h*' is the predicate, not the subject, of the sentence; but
considerations of construction seem to render the change desirable in
English.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[18:1](sbe4106.htm#fr_59) The Adhvaryu takes it
down from the vâhana, or car-stand.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[18:2](sbe4106.htm#fr_60) It is to be placed in
the north-eastern part of the vedi, so as to be ready to start on the
race northwards along the space between the *k*âtvâla (or pit) and the
utkara (heap of rubbish); the horses thus being close to where the
Brahman will have to mount a cartwheel put up on the utkara ([V, 1, 5,
2](sbe4107.htm#5:1:5:2)).

<span id="fn_61"></span>[19:1](sbe4106.htm#fr_61) Professor Weber (in
his essay on the Nakshatras, II, 278; Abhandl. of Berlin Academy, 1861)
takes this passage (--Taitt. S. 1, 7, 7, 2; Kâ*th*aka 13, 14; Maitr. S.
I, 11, 1) to contain the first allusion to the system of Nakshatras, or
lunar mansions marking the daily stations occupied by the moon (masc.)
during his circuit round the heavens.--In the ritual of the Black
Ya*g*us (Taitt. S. 1, 7, 7, 2) <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> this
formula runs thus: 'Either Vâyu, or Manu, or the Gandharvas, the
twenty-seven, harnessed the horse at first, laid speed into him,'--which
Sâya*n*a, however, interprets as meaning, 'Vâyu, and Manu, and the
(twenty-five) Gandharvas,--these seven and twenty. &c.'

<span id="fn_62"></span>[21:1](sbe4106.htm#fr_62) Or, of the leader, as
would appear from Sâya*n*a to Taitt. S. I, 7, 8 (p. 1024),--'Between the
right-hand and the left-hand horse he allows the shafts to project, and
between them he puts the horse called "sapti" (in the text)' No fourth
horse is, however, apparently mentioned in the ritual of the Black
Ya*g*us.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[22:1](sbe4106.htm#fr_63) That is, B*ri*haspati;
unless 'lokam' has to be supplied to 'imam' ('this world'), as might
appear probable from the next paragraph. See also [V. 1, 5,
27](sbe4107.htm#5:1:5:27)-[28](sbe4107.htm#5:1:5:28).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 1, 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4107)
