[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4104) 
[Next](sbe4106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3">5:1:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:1">5:1:3:1</span></span>1. At the
Agnish*t*oma (Sâman <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45)) he seizes a
(victim) for Agni, for the Agnish*t*oma (i.e. 'Agni's

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

praise <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)) is Agni: he thereby wins
Agni. For the Ukthas <span id="fr_47"></span>[2](#fn_47) he seizes one
for Indra and Agni; for the hymns (uktha) relate to Indra and Agni <span
id="fr_48"></span>[3](#fn_48): the hymns he thereby wins. For the
Sho*d*a*s*i n he seizes one for Indra; for the Sho*d*a*s*in is Indra:
the Sho*d*a*s*in (Indra) he thereby wins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:2">5:1:3:2</span></span>2. For
the seventeenth (or seventeenfold) stotra <span
id="fr_49"></span>[4](#fn_49) he seizes one for Sarasvatî: thereby,
while there is no over-night performance <span
id="fr_50"></span>[5](#fn_50), it is yet made like the night
(performance); for he who offers the Vâ*g*apeya

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

wins Pra*g*âpati, and Pra*g*âpati is the year: by that (victim) for
Sarasvatî he now wins the night: hence, while there is no night
performance, it is made like the night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:3">5:1:3:3</span></span>3.
Thereupon he seizes a spotted sterile cow for the Victorious Maruts; for
the spotted sterile cow is this (earth): whatever food, rooted and
rootless, is here established on her, thereby she is a spotted cow. Now,
he who offers the Vâ*g*apeya wins food, for vâ*g*a-peya <span
id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) doubtless means the same as anna-peya
(food and drink); and the Maruts are the peasants, and the peasants are
food (for the noble). 'To the Victorious (Maruts)!' he says, even for
the sake of victory. It is difficult to obtain an invitatory and
offering prayer containing the word 'victorious:' if he should be unable
to obtain such as contain the word 'victorious,' any other two verses to
the Maruts will do. Difficult to obtain also is a spotted sterile cow:
if he cannot obtain a spotted sterile cow, any other sterile cow will
do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:4">5:1:3:4</span></span>4. The
course of procedure thereof (is as follows). When the Hot*ri* recites
after the Mâhendra libation, then let them proceed with (the offering
of) her omentum, for that, the Mâhendra <span
id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52), is Indra's special (nishkevalya)
libation; and his also are the Nishkevalya-stotra and
Nishkevalya-*s*astra. Now the sacrificer is Indra: thus he thereby puts
strength into the sacrificer in the very middle (of the sacrifice):

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

that is why they should proceed with her omentum at that particular
time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:5">5:1:3:5</span></span>5. They
cook the portions <span id="fr_53"></span>[1](#fn_53) in two lots. Of
the one lot thereof, after making an 'under-layer' of ghee (clarified
butter) in the *g*uhû spoon, he makes two cuttings from each (portion),
bastes them once, and replenishes with ghee (the empty places of) the
cuttings. Thereupon he makes one cutting from each into the upabh*ri*t
spoon, bastes them twice, but does not replenish (the places of) the
cuttings. Now, when of the one lot (of portions) he makes two cuttings
from each, thereby that (sterile cow) becomes whole; and when he
proceeds with those (portions), thereby he wins the divine race. He then
presents the (other) half to the human kind: and thereby he wins the
human kind (people, vi*s*).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:6">5:1:3:6</span></span>6. But
let him not do it in this wise; for verily he who departs from the path
of the sacrifice, stumbles; and he who does it in this wise certainly
departs from the path of the sacrifice. Hence when they proceed with the
omenta of the other victims, only then let them proceed with the omentum
of that (cow). They cook the portions in one lot, and do not present any
to the human kind.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:7">5:1:3:7</span></span>7. He
then seizes seventeen victims for Pra*g*âpati. They are all hornless,
all dark-grey <span id="fr_54"></span>[2](#fn_54), all (uncastrated)
males; for he who offers the Vâ*g*apeya, wins Pra*g*âpati; but
Pra*g*âpati is food, and the victim (cattle) is food: he thus wins
Pra*g*âpati. And Pra*g*âpati is Soma, and the victim is the visible

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soma: he thus wins
the visible Pra*g*âpati. There are seventeen (victims), because
Pra*g*âpati is seventeenfold: he thus wins Pra*g*âpati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:8">5:1:3:8</span></span>8. Now,
they are all hornless;--for man is nearest to Pra*g*âpati, and he is
hornless, unhorned; and Pra*g*âpati also is hornless, unhorned; and
these (victims) belong to Pra*g*âpati: therefore they are all hornless.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:9">5:1:3:9</span></span>9. They
are all dark-grey. Now, the dark-grey has two forms, the light hair and
the black; and a couple means a productive pair, and Pra*g*âpati (the
lord of generation) represents productiveness, and those (victims)
belong to Pra*g*âpati: therefore they are all dark-grey.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:10">5:1:3:10</span></span>10.
They are all males;--for the male means productiveness, and Pra*g*âpati
represents productiveness: hence they are all males. Difficult to obtain
are victims with these perfections: if he cannot obtain them (all) with
these perfections, even some with these perfections will do; for verily
Pra*g*âpati is everything here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:11">5:1:3:11</span></span>11.
Now, some seize the last (victim) for Vâ*k* (Speech), thinking, 'If
there be anything beyond Pra*g*âpati, that is Speech: we thus win
Speech.' But let him not do it in this wise; for Pra*g*âpati is
everything here,--these worlds and everything there is;--whatever speech
speaks in these worlds, that speech he wins: therefore he need not heed
this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:12">5:1:3:12</span></span>12. The
course of procedure regarding these (victims is as follows). When the
Maitrâvaru*n*a recites after the Vâmadevya <span
id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55), let them then proceed

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

with their omenta; for the Vâmadevya means productiveness, and
Pra*g*âpati means productiveness, and these (victims) belong to
Pra*g*âpati: therefore let them proceed with their omenta at that time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:13">5:1:3:13</span></span>13. And
(when) the after-offerings have been performed, and the spoons have not
yet been shifted (separated) <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56), then
they proceed with the (chief) oblations of those (victims). That (point
in the performance) is the end, and Pra*g*âpati is the end: thus he wins
Pra*g*âpati at the very end. But were he to proceed therewith sooner, it
would be just as if a man had already gone the way he still intends to
go,--and where would he be after that <span
id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)?--therefore

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

they proceed with their (chief) oblations at that time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:1:3:14">5:1:3:14</span></span>14. But
let him not do it in this wise for he who departs from the path of the
sacrifice stumbles; and he who does it in this wise certainly departs
from the path of the sacrifice. Hence whenever they proceed with the
omenta of the other victims, let them at the same time proceed with the
omenta of these; and whenever they proceed with the (chief) oblations of
the other victims, let them at the same time proceed with the oblations
of these. There is but one invitatory prayer, and one offering prayer;
for (these offerings) belong to one deity. He says (to the
Maitrâvaru*n*a), 'To Pra*g*âpati'--saying this (name) in a low
voice--'recite the invitatory prayer for the offering of the
bucks!'--'To Pra*g*âpati' saying this in a low voice--'urge the
ready-standing offering of the bucks!' and as the Vasha*t* is uttered,
he makes the offering.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_45"></span>[11:3](sbe4105.htm#fr_45) Of the seven
fundamental forms (sa*m*sthâ) of Soma-sacrifice, each higher, or more
complex, form is obtained by some additional ceremony, or ceremonies,
being added on to one of the simpler forms of sacrifice. In the present
paragraph, the author briefly reviews the lower forms of Soma-sacrifice,
contained in the Vâ*g*apeya, <span id="page_12">p. 12</span> with the
view of enumerating the victims to be slaughtered at its performance;
viz. the Agnish*t*oma with twelve chants and one victim; the Ukthya with
fifteen stotras and two victims; and the Sho*d*a*s*in with sixteen
chants and three victims. For further particulars, see part ii, p. 397,
note 2.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[12:1](sbe4105.htm#fr_46) The
Agnish*t*oma-sâman, the last (twelfth) and distinctive stotra of the
Agnish*t*oma sacrifice, is in praise of Agni (see part ii, p. 368, note
2). At the Vâ*g*apeya the ordinary (ya*gñ*âya*gñ*ŷâ) hymn is not
chanted, but S.V. II, 973-4, sung to the Vâravantîya tune (Calc. ed.,
vol. v, p. 144), takes its place. Pa*ñk*. Br. 18, 6, 16.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[12:2](sbe4105.htm#fr_47) The three Uktha
stotras (chants) and *s*astras (recitations) constitute the distinctive
element of the Ukthya sacrifice; as the Sho*d*a*s*i-stotra and *s*astra
(part ii, p. 401, note 3; p. 402, note i) constitute that of the
Sho*d*a*s*in sacrifice.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[12:3](sbe4105.htm#fr_48) On the important place
assigned to these two deities in the traditional arrangement of the
Rigveda-sa*m*hitâ, see the introduction to part i, p. xvi.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[12:4](sbe4105.htm#fr_49) That is the
Vâ*g*apeya-sâman, see note [1](sbe4104.htm#fn_43), [p.
11](sbe4104.htm#page_11).

<span id="fn_50"></span>[12:5](sbe4105.htm#fr_50) The author here
alludes to another form of Soma-sacrifice, not contained in the
Vâ*g*apeya, viz. the Atirâtra, which is obtained by following up the
Sho*d*a*s*in (with its sixteen chants) with the so-called
râtri-paryâya*h*, or night-rounds, consisting of three rounds of four
chants each, or together twelve chants. These are succeeded, at
day-break, by the Sandhi-stotra (or twilight chants), consisting of
three chants. Although this night performance does not take place on the
present occasion--the Vâ*g*apeya-sâman taking its place--the author
claims for this form of sacrifice also the moral benefits which would
accrue to the sacrificer from the Atirâtra, for the reason that the same
victim (a be-goat for Sarasvatî) is offered on both occasions.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[13:1](sbe4105.htm#fr_51) In Taitt. Br. I, 3, 2,
3, on the other hand, vâ*g*apeya (which doubtless means 'drink of
strength') is explained first by vâ*g*âpya, 'that through which the gods
wished to obtain (aipsan) strength (vâ*g*am),' and then by 'drink of
strength,' i.e. Soma 'by drinking (pîtvâ) which one becomes strong
(vâ*g*in).'

<span id="fn_52"></span>[13:2](sbe4105.htm#fr_52) For this libation, and
the accompanying Nishkevalya-*s*astra, at the midday Soma-feast, see
part ii, pp. 338, 339, note 2.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[14:1](sbe4105.htm#fr_53) For particulars
regarding the meat portions, see part ii, p. 204 seq.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[14:2](sbe4105.htm#fr_54) Or, black and white
(*s*ukla-k*ri*sh*n*a-var*n*a), as '*s*yâma' is explained by Sâya*n*a.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[15:1](sbe4105.htm#fr_55) The Vâmadevya-sâman
(Sâmav. II, 32-34) is the second P*ri*sh*th*a-stotra, after the chanting
of which, at the midday feast, <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> the first
assistant of the Hot*ri*, the Maitrâvaru*n*a, has to recite his (the
second) Nishkevalya-*s*astra; see part ii, p. 325, note 2; p. 339, note
2.--As regards the Hot*ri*'s P*ri*sh*th*a-stotra, the Rathantara-sâman
(S. V. II, 30, 31) is used for it; while the Abhîvarta tune (S. V. ed.
Bibl. Ind. III, p. 93) is employed in the chanting of the Brahma-sâman
(S. V. II, 35, 36; see part ii, p. 434, note I) instead of the ordinary
Naudhasa tune. Pa*ñk*. Br. 18, 6, 11-14.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[16:1](sbe4105.htm#fr_56) On this ceremony with
which the concluding rites of the ish*t*i commence, see I, 8, 3, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[16:2](sbe4105.htm#fr_57) Or possibly, what
would then become of him? The author's reasoning seems to be that, if
the sacrificer were to offer any of the chief oblations at an earlier
point in the performance, he would thereby anticipate the results he
wants to obtain from the whole performance,--or, so to speak, he would
then already reach the goal for the attainment of which the subsequent
oblations are likewise intended. For the same reason the offering of the
omentum of the sterile cow, previously to and independently of the
omenta of the other victims, was discountenanced in paragraph
[6](sbe4105.htm#5:1:3:6). Our present passage is interpreted rather
differently by Professor Delbrück in his Altindische Syntax, p.
550:--Wenn er vorher damit vorginge, so wäre das so, als ob er, nach
Betretung des Pfades, den er zu betreten beabsichtigt, wo? ware (d. h.
in’s Unglück geriethe): 'Were he to proceed therewith sooner, it would
be just as if, after entering on the path he intends to enter upon, he
would be where? (i.e. would get into trouble).'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 1, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4106)
