[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4159) 
[Next](sbe4161) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4">7:2:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:1">7:2:4:1</span></span>1. He
then pours out jarfuls of water,--for the gods then said, 'Meditate ye
(*k*etay)!' whereby they doubtless meant to say, 'Seek ye a layer
(*k*itim)!' Whilst meditating they saw the rain to be a (suitable)
layer, and put it on that (altar-site); and in like manner does this
(Sacrificer) now put it thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:2">7:2:4:2</span></span>2.
Jarfuls of water are (poured out); for rain is water: it is rain he
thereby bestows on it. With an udumbara jar (he pours them on): the
significance of this has been told;--with a four-cornered one;--four
quarters there are: from all quarters he thus bestows rain thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:3">7:2:4:3</span></span>3. Three
jarfuls he pours out each time <span
id="fr_640"></span>[1](#fn_638),--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni
is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus bestows rain
thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:4">7:2:4:4</span></span>4. Twelve
jarfuls of water he pours on the ploughed ground,--twelve months are a
year, and the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, by so much he thus bestows rain thereon.

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:5">7:2:4:5</span></span>5. On the
ploughed ground he pours (water), whence it rains for (the benefit of)
the ploughed land. Now were he only to pour it on the ploughed ground,
and not on the unploughed, it would only rain for the ploughed land, not
for the unploughed. And were he only to pour it on the unploughed
ground, and not on the ploughed, it would only rain for the unploughed
land, and not for the ploughed. He pours it both on the ploughed, and
the unploughed, ground; whence it rains both for the ploughed, and the
unploughed, ground.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:6">7:2:4:6</span></span>6. Three
(jarfuls) <span id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_639) he pours both on the
ploughed, and on the unploughed, ground;--threefold is Agni: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus bestows rain
thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:7">7:2:4:7</span></span>7. And,
again, why he pours out jarfuls of water;--at that time the gods, being
about to put him (Agni-Pra*g*âpati) together, in the first place put
water into him; and in like manner does this one now, being about to put
him together, in the first place put water into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:8">7:2:4:8</span></span>8. Three
jarfuls he pours out each time,--threefold is Agni: as large as Agni is,
as large as is his measure, by so much he thus puts water into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:9">7:2:4:9</span></span>9. Twelve
jarfuls he pours on the ploughed ground,--twelve months are a year, and
the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, by so
much he thus puts water into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:10">7:2:4:10</span></span>10. On
the ploughed ground he pours it: he thereby puts water into the vital
airs. But were he to pour (water) only on the ploughed ground, and

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

not on the unploughed, there would be water only in (the channels of)
the vital airs, and not in the other (parts of the) body. And were he to
pour (water) only on the unploughed ground, and not on the ploughed,
there would be water only in (the other parts of) the body, and not in
the vital airs. He pours it both on the ploughed, and the unploughed,
ground, whence there is water here both in (the channels of) the vital
airs and in the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:11">7:2:4:11</span></span>11.
Three (jarfuls) he pours both on the ploughed, and on the unploughed,
ground;--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, with so much he thus puts water into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:12">7:2:4:12</span></span>12.
Fifteen jarfuls of water he pours out,--fifteenfold is the thunderbolt:
by that fifteenfold thunderbolt of his he thus drives away all evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:13">7:2:4:13</span></span>13. He
then sows all (kinds of) herb (-seed);--for the gods then said,
'Meditate ye!' whereby doubtless they meant to say, 'Seek ye a layer!'
whilst meditating, they saw food to be a (suitable) layer, and put that
on (or, into) him (Agni); and in like manner does this one now put it
into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:14">7:2:4:14</span></span>14. It
is (seed) of all herbs,--all herbs means all food; he thus puts all
(kinds of) food into him. Let him omit one of those kinds of food, and
not eat thereof as long as he lives. By means of the udumbara jar (he
sows the seed): the significance of this has been explained;--with a
four-cornered one,--there are four quarters: from all quarters he thus
puts food into him (Agni). He sows it with anush*t*ubh (verses),--the
Anush*t*ubh (metre) is speech, and by means of speech (the mouth <span
id="fr_642"></span>[1](#fn_640)) food is eaten.

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:15">7:2:4:15</span></span>15.
With three verses he sows each time <span
id="fr_643"></span>[1](#fn_641),--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni
is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus puts food into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:16">7:2:4:16</span></span>16.
With twelve verses he sows on the ploughed ground,--twelve months are a
year, and the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, with so much he thus puts food into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:17">7:2:4:17</span></span>17. On
the ploughed ground he sows, whence food ripens on ploughed ground. Were
he to sow only on the ploughed ground, and not on the unploughed, food
would only ripen on ploughed ground, not on unploughed; and were he to
sow only on unploughed ground, and not on ploughed ground, food would
only ripen on unploughed ground, and not on ploughed ground. He sows on
both the ploughed, and the unploughed, ground: hence food ripens both on
ploughed, and on unploughed, ground.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:18">7:2:4:18</span></span>18.
With three (verses) he sows both on the ploughed, and on the unploughed,
ground,--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, by so much he thus puts food into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:19">7:2:4:19</span></span>19.
And, again, why he sows all (kinds of) herb (-seed),--the gods at that
time, being about to put him (Agni-Pra*g*âpati) together, in the first
place healed him by healing medicine; and in like manner does this one
now, being about to put him together, first heal him with healing
medicine.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:20">7:2:4:20</span></span>20. It
is (seed) of all herbs;--all herbs is the

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

same as all (kinds of) medicine: by all (kinds of) healing medicine he
thus heals him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:21">7:2:4:21</span></span>21.
With three verses he sows each time,--threefold is Agni: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so much he thus heals him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:22">7:2:4:22</span></span>22.
With twelve verses he sows on the ploughed ground,--twelve months are a
year, and the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, with so much he thus heals him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:23">7:2:4:23</span></span>23. On
the ploughed ground he sows: he thereby heals the vital airs. And were
he to sow only on the ploughed ground, and not on the unploughed, he
would only heal the vital airs, and not the other (parts of the) body;
and were he to sow only on the unploughed, and not on the ploughed,
ground, he would only heal the body, and not the vital airs: he sows
both on the ploughed, and on the unploughed, ground; and thus he heals
both the vital airs and the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:24">7:2:4:24</span></span>24.
With three (verses) he sows both on the ploughed, and on the unploughed,
ground,--threefold is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his
measure, with so much he thus heals him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:25">7:2:4:25</span></span>25.
Fifteen jarfuls of water he pours out, and with fifteen verses he
sows,--that makes thirty,--the Virâ*g* (metre) consists of thirty
syllables, and the Virâ*g* (the far-shining, or far-ruling) is the whole
food: the whole food he thus puts into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:26">7:2:4:26</span></span>26.
\[He sows, with Vâ*g*. S. XII, 75 seq.; *Ri*k S. X, 97\] 'The herbs
first grown three ages before the gods <span
id="fr_644"></span>[1](#fn_642),'--the gods doubtless are the seasons,

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

and from them those (herbs) used to grow thrice, in spring, in the rainy
season, and in the autumn;--'of the brown ones will I ponder,'--the
brown one, doubtless, is Soma, and the herbs are related to Soma, and
the Purusha (Pra*g*âpati) is related to herbs <span
id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_643);--'the hundred powers,'--inasmuch as he
here lives a hundred (years), and has a hundred merits, and a hundred
energies, there are in him those hundred powers;--'and seven,'--he
thereby speaks of those seven vital airs in the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:27">7:2:4:27</span></span>27.
'Yours, O Mother, are a hundred powers, and yours a thousand
growths,'--inasmuch as (the plants) here are shooting out a hundredfold,
and a thousandfold;--'Ye of a hundred virtues, render ye free from
sickness this one of mine!' that is, him whom I am now healing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:28">7:2:4:28</span></span>28.
These (verses) <span id="fr_646"></span>[2](#fn_644) have one and the
same explanation

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

with regard to this (Agni-Pra*g*âpati),how he may heal him, and preserve
him. They are anush*t*ubh verses,--the Anush*t*ubh is speech, and speech
is all healing medicine: by means of all healing medicine he thus heals
him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:29">7:2:4:29</span></span>29.
Now, then, regarding the defined and the undefined (ceremonies);--with
prayer he yokes two oxen, silently the others; with prayer he ploughs
four furrows, silently the others; silently he puts on the grass-bush,
with prayer he makes a libation thereon; silently he pours out the
jarfuls of water, with prayer he sows.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:2:4:30">7:2:4:30</span></span>30.
This Agni is Pra*g*âpati, and Pra*g*âpati is both the defined and the
undefined, the limited and the

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

unlimited. Now whatever he does with prayer thereby he restores that
form of his which is defined, limited; and whatever he does silently,
thereby he restores that form of his which is undefined,
unlimited,--verily, whosoever, knowing this, performs thus, restores
this whole and complete Pra*g*âpati. The outer forms are defined, and
the inner ones are undefined; and Agni is the same as an animal: hence
the outer forms of the animal are defined, and the inner ones undefined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_638"></span>[335:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_640) On every four of
the sixteen furrows, in the order in which they have been ploughed, he
is to empty three jarfuls of water, making altogether twelve jars of
water.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[336:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_641) These are
additional three jarfuls poured over the whole Agnikshetra, or site of
the altar.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[337:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_642) See [p.
200](sbe4134.htm#page_200), note [3](sbe4134.htm#fn_413).

<span id="fn_641"></span>[338:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_643) The sowing of the
seed is done after the manner of the watering of the site, viz. so as to
finish the sowing of every four furrows with the completion of the
muttering of three verses (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 75-86); whereupon the
remaining seed is scattered over the whole site with additional three
verses (87-89).

<span id="fn_642"></span>[339:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_644) Thus the St.
Petersburg dictionary; while Professor Ludwig construes 'triyugam purâ'
together,--'the herbs first come from <span id="page_340">p. 340</span>
the gods before the three ages;'--but is there any other example of
'purâ' with the accusative? The author of the Brâhma*n*a, on the other
hand, takes 'triyugam purâ' as adverbs independent of each
other,--'formerly at three periods.'

<span id="fn_643"></span>[340:1](sbe4160.htm#fr_645) Or, consists of
herbs.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[340:2](sbe4160.htm#fr_646) That is, the two
verses just explained, as well as the remaining thirteen verses (Vâ*g*.
S. XII, 77 seq.; *Ri*k S. X, 97, 3 seq.), viz.:--

3\. Rejoice ye at the plants, the full-budded, abounding in shoots: like
victorious mares, the herbs are eager to win (or, to save).

4\. As plants, O divine mothers, I call upon you: horse, and cow, and
raiment would I win, and thine own self, O Purusha!

5\. On the A*s*vattha tree is your abode, on the Par*n*a dwelling is
made for you: possessed of cattle shall ye be, when ye save the Purusha.

6\. Wherein the herbs have met together, even as the nobles in the
assembly, that priest is called physician, demon-killer, pain-remover.

7\. The (herb) rich in horses, the one rich in Soma, the <span
id="page_341">p. 341</span> strengthening, most powerful,--all herbs
have I found for healthfulness to him (the Purusha).

8\. Forth rush the energies of the plants, like kine from the stable,
eager to win wealth, eager to win wealth, O Purusha!

9\. Strength-giving (ishk*ri*ti) is the name of your mother, hence ye
are healing powers (nishk*ri*ti): winged furrows ye are; what ye make
sick, ye heal.

10\. All obstacles have they overcome, even as the thief the cow-pen;
the herbs have expelled whatever defect of the body there was.

11\. When, to give strength, I take these herbs in my hand, the self of
Yakshman (consumption) perishes, as from the clutches of the living (?
i.e. from death, Ludw.).

12\. Whose every limb, whose every joint ye, O herbs, flow through, from
him ye chase away (the demon) Yakshman,--mighty (he is) and, as it were,
abiding in the core.

13\. Fly forth, O Yakshman; together with the garrulous jay; vanish with
the gliding of the wind, with the whirlwind (?)!

14\. May one of you help the other, may ye lend help to one another! Of
one mind, help ye forward this word of mine!

15\. Those bearing fruit, and those without fruit, the flowerless and
the flowering, urged forward by B*ri*haspati, may they preserve us from
trouble!

The Vâ*g*. S. also gives the remaining verses of the hymn, which are
not, however, required on the present occasion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 3, 1. Third Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4161)
