[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4160) 
[Next](sbe4162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1">7:3:1</span></span>

### THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:1">7:3:1:1</span></span>1. Built
is the Gârhapatya, unbuilt the Âhavanîya; he then buys the king (Soma):
the Gârhapatya being this (terrestrial) world, the Âhavanîya the sky,
and Soma he that blows yonder, he thus places him (Vâyu, the wind)
between these two worlds; and hence he blows between these two worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:2">7:3:1:2</span></span>2. And as
to why he buys the king when the Gârhapatya is built, and the Âhavanîya
unbuilt,--Agni is the body, and Soma the vital air: he thus places the
vital air in the middle of the body, and hence that vital air is in the
middle of the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:3">7:3:1:3</span></span>3. And,
again, why he buys the king when the Gârhapatya is built, and the
Âhavanîya unbuilt,--Agni is the body, and Soma is the life-sap: he thus
supplies the body with life-sap, and hence this body (of ours) is
supplied with life-sap from end to end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:4">7:3:1:4</span></span>4. Having
bought the king, and driven him about, he then takes out the material
for the guest-meal. With the Havishk*ri*t of that (ceremony) he releases
speech. And in this way <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_645) he
interlinks the performance

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

of the (Soma) sacrifice and the performance of the fire (altar) for the
purpose of unity of performance, thinking, 'Uniform shall be this
performance!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:5">7:3:1:5</span></span>5. And,
again, why he interlinks them,--Agni (the fire-altar) is the body, and
the (Soma) sacrifice is the vital air: he thus places the vital air in
the midst of the body, and hence that vital air is in the middle of the
body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:6">7:3:1:6</span></span>6. And,
again, why he interlinks them,--Agni is the body, and the (Soma)
sacrifice is the vital sap: he thus supplies the body with vital sap,
and hence this body is supplied with vital sap from end to end. He then
returns to the site of the Âhavanîya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:7">7:3:1:7</span></span>7. Now
some sweep with the palâ*s*a branch on both occasions <span
id="fr_648"></span>[1](#fn_646), saying, 'Surely, on both occasions he
builds (an altar).' Let him, however, not do so; for by (building) the
Gârhapatya he settles, and by the Âhavanîya he rises upwards: therefore
let him not do so.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:8">7:3:1:8</span></span>8. And
only on the Gârhapatya (site) he throws saline soil, not on the
Âhavanîya; for the Gârhapatya is this (terrestrial) world, and saline
soil means cattle: he thus bestows cattle on this world, whence there
are cattle in this world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:9">7:3:1:9</span></span>9. And
only on the Âhavanîya (site) he places a lotus leaf, not on the
Gârhapatya; for the lotus leaf means water, and the Âhavanîya the sky:
he thus places the waters (vapours) in the sky. On both he

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

scatters sand; for sand means seed, and in both (fire-altars) fashioning
(of Agni) takes place: 'May he be fashioned from out of that seed!' thus
he thinks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:10">7:3:1:10</span></span>10. He
scatters it with two different formulas; for the Gârhapatya is the world
of men, and the Âhavanîya is the world of the gods, and different indeed
are the divine and the human. With the longer formula he scatters it on
the Âhavanîya, and with the shorter one on the Gârhapatya, for longer is
the life of the gods, and shorter the life of men. On the Gârhapatya he
scatters the sand before (the setting up of) the enclosing-stones; for
sand is seed: 'May these be fashioned from out of that seed!' thus he
thinks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:11">7:3:1:11</span></span>11. As
to this they say, 'If the enclosing-stones are the womb, and the sand is
seed, and the sand is strown on the Gârhapatya before (the setting up
of) the enclosing-stones, how, then, is that seed of his not shed aside,
(but) is received (by the womb)?' Well, the saline soil is the amnion,
and inasmuch as he strews first the saline soil, that seed of his is not
shed aside, but is received by that amnion. He now addresses the
enclosing-stones on the Âhavanîya: the meaning of this has been
explained <span id="fr_649"></span>[1](#fn_647). He then scatters sand:
sand being seed, that seed of his is not shed aside, but is received
also by that womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:12">7:3:1:12</span></span>12. And
only on the Âhavanîya he strokes it (even) with two (verses) containing
(the verb) 'to grow <span id="fr_650"></span>[2](#fn_648),' not on the
Gârhapatya; for the Gârhapatya is this (terrestrial) world, and the
Âhavanîya is the heavenly world; and this Sacrificer, being indeed

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

born in this world, is really intended to be born in the heavenly world:
when he strokes (the sand) even on the Âhavanîya with two (verses)
containing (the verb) 'to grow,' and not on the Gârhapatya, he causes
him to be born in the heavenly world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:13">7:3:1:13</span></span>13. He
now puts clod-bricks thereon <span
id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_649),--that fire-altar is these worlds, and
the clod-bricks are the regions: he thus places the regions into these
worlds; whence there are those regions in these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:14">7:3:1:14</span></span>14. He
takes them from outside the (site of the) fire-altar; for those regions
which are in these worlds are already possessed by him (Agni); and he
now bestows on him those regions which are beyond these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:15">7:3:1:15</span></span>15.
From outside the Vedi (he takes them);--the Vedi being this (earth), and
those regions which are on this (earth) being already possessed by him,
he now bestows on him those regions which are beyond this (earth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:16">7:3:1:16</span></span>16.
And, again, why he puts clod-bricks thereon,--when Pra*g*âpati was
disjointed, his vital sap flowed over all the regions (or, in all
directions); and when the gods restored him <span
id="fr_652"></span>[2](#fn_650) they, by means of these clod-bricks, put
into him that vital sap; and in like manner does this one now put that
vital sap into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:17">7:3:1:17</span></span>17. He
takes them from outside (the site of) the fire-altar; for the vital sap
which is in these worlds is already possessed by him (Agni), and he now
puts

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

into him that vital sap which flowed away beyond these worlds <span
id="fr_653"></span>[1](#fn_651).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:18">7:3:1:18</span></span>18.
From outside the Vedi (he takes them),--the Vedi being this (earth), and
that vital sap which is in this (terrestrial) world being already
possessed by him, he now puts into him the vital sap which flowed beyond
this (earth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:19">7:3:1:19</span></span>19. He
takes them with the sacrificial (wooden) sword,--the sword is a
thunderbolt, and the thunderbolt means force, and this (earth) means
wealth: by force he thus obtains wealth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:20">7:3:1:20</span></span>20.
From the front side he brings one, with (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 102), 'May he
not injure me who is the begetter of the Earth!'--the begetter of the
Earth doubtless is Pra*g*âpati (the lord of creatures and generation):
thus, 'May Pra*g*âpati not injure me!'--'Or he of true ordinances who
hath pervaded the sky,' that is, 'Or he of true ordinances who has
created the sky;'--'Or he who first begat the shining waters,'--the
shining waters doubtless are the men: thus, 'he who first created
men;'--'To the god Ka (who?) let us do homage by offering!' Ka doubtless
is Pra*g*âpati, thus, 'To him let us do homage by offering!' Having
brought it he puts it on the body (of the altar-site) inside the
enclosing-stones: he thereby puts into him (Agni) what vital sap had
flowed away from him in the eastern direction, and also the eastern
region itself he bestows upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:21">7:3:1:21</span></span>21.
Then (he fetches a clod) from the south, with (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 103),
'Turn hither, O Earth, with

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

sacrifice, with milk!' as the text, so the meaning;--'Agni, sent forth,
hath mounted thy skin;' whatsoever is on this (earth) that is her skin;
and that (skin) Agni mounts, when sent forth, when blazing forth. Having
brought it he puts it on the body (of the altar) inside the junction of
the (right) wing (and the body): he thereby puts into him (Agni) what
vital sap had flowed from him in the southern direction, and also the
southern region itself he bestows upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:22">7:3:1:22</span></span>22.
Then from behind (he fetches one, with Vâ*g*. S. XII, 104), 'O Agni,
what in thee is pure, what brilliant, what clean, what meet for
sacrifice,'--Agni doubtless is this (earth): of her he says this;--'that
do we bring to the gods,' that is, 'that we bring for this divine work.'
Having brought it he puts it on the body (of the altar) inside the
junction of the tail (and the body): he thereby puts into him what vital
sap had flowed away from him in the western direction, and also the
western region itself he bestows upon him. Let him not take it exactly
from the back (west) lest he should take the vital sap from the path of
the sacrifice: he takes it from about there <span
id="fr_654"></span>[1](#fn_652).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:23">7:3:1:23</span></span>23.
Then from the north, with (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 105), 'Sap and strength have I
taken from here <span id="fr_655"></span>[2](#fn_653),'--that is, 'Sap
and strength I take from here;'--'the womb of sacred law,' the sacred
law doubtless is the truth: thus, 'the womb of the truth;'--'the stream
of the mighty,' the mighty (buffalo, or

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

mahisha) doubtless is Agni, for he, being born here great (mahat),
animated everything;--'May it accrue to me in the cows, in the
bodies,'--the body is the self: thus, 'May it accrue to me both in the
cows and in (my own) self;'--'I leave behind decline, weakness,
sickness!' therewith he spreads the sand (by stroking): he thereby
consigns to that (northern) region whatever decline, weakness, and
sickness there is; whence hungry people (live) in that region. Having
brought that (clod), he puts it on the body (of the altar) on the middle
of the junction of the (left) wing (and the body): he thereby puts into
him (Agni) what vital sap flowed away in the northerly direction; and
also the northern region itself he bestows upon him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:24">7:3:1:24</span></span>24.
These same (clods) are the regions; he places them on all sides: he thus
places the regions on all sides; whence the regions are on every side.
\[He places the clods so\] as to face each other from every side: he
thereby places the regions to face each other from every side, and hence
the regions face each other from every side. He places them separately,
'settles <span id="fr_656"></span>[1](#fn_654)' them separately, and
separately pronounces the Sûdadohas upon them; for separate from each
other are the regions. Standing he places them, for the regions, as it
were, stand; and stronger, indeed, one is whilst standing.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:25">7:3:1:25</span></span>25.
These same (clods) are bricks having special prayers (ya*g*ushmatî <span
id="fr_657"></span>[2](#fn_655)): on the body (of the altar) he places
them, not on the wings and tail; for bricks having special prayers are
placed on the body, not on the wings or tail.

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:26">7:3:1:26</span></span>26. As
to this they say, 'How do these (clod-bricks) come to be put on as
baked, as heated (burnt) ones?' Well, these (clods) are vital sap, and
the vital sap (blood) is naturally-heated; and, moreover, whatever comes
in contact with Agni Vai*s*vânara, even thereby comes to be put on as
baked, as heated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:27">7:3:1:27</span></span>27. He
then throws up the Uttara-vedi <span id="fr_658"></span>[1](#fn_656)
(high-altar),--the Vedi is this (earth), the Uttara-vedi the sky, and
the clod-bricks are the regions: thus when he puts on the clod-bricks
between (the preparation of) the Vedi and (that of) the Uttara-vedi, he
thereby places the regions between these two worlds; whence the regions
are between these two worlds. He makes it either a yoke long on each
side, or forty feet,--whichever way he pleases. He then throws sand
thereon: the meaning of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:28">7:3:1:28</span></span>28. He
throws it on the Uttara-vedi;--the Uttaravedi is the womb: he thus
infuses seed into the womb; and the seed which is infused into the womb
becomes generative. He covers the whole body (of the altar) with that
(sand): he thus puts seed into the whole body <span
id="fr_659"></span>[2](#fn_657); whence the seed is produced from the
whole body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:29">7:3:1:29</span></span>29.
\[He throws it on the high-altar, with Vâ*g*. S. XII, 106-I11; *Ri*k S.
X, 140\] 'Thine, O Agni, is glory and vigour,'--his glory (*s*ravas) and
vigour doubtless is the smoke, for that announces (*s*râvaya) him in
yonder world,--'mighty shine forth the

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

flames, O rich-beamed one!' that is, 'the flames of (thee), the mighty
one, shine forth, O thou, abounding in wealth!'--'With might, O
wide-rayed one (thou bestowest) strength, worthy of song,' might is
power: thus, 'By (thy) power, O wide-rayed one, (thou givest) food
worthy of song;'--'bestowest thou upon the worship, O sage!' worship
doubtless is the Sacrificer: thus, 'Upon the worship thou bestowest, O
sage!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:30">7:3:1:30</span></span>30.
'Pure-flamed, bright-flamed,' for pure-flamed and bright-flamed he
(Agni) is; 'full-flamed, didst thou burst forth with light,' that is,
'full-flamed shonest thou forth with light;'--'running about as their
son thou helpest the two mothers,' for as their son he does help the two
mothers;--'thou fillest both spheres,' the two spheres doubtless are
these two, heaven and earth, and these two he indeed fills,--with smoke
yonder (sky), with rain this (earth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:31">7:3:1:31</span></span>31.
'Child of strength, knower of beings, in benedictions,' that is, 'child
of strength, knower of beings, in praises,'--'delight thou, kindly in
thoughts,' that is, 'shine thou, kindly in thoughts;'--'in thee have
they brought together multiform nourishments,' that is, 'in thee have
they brought together many-formed nourishments;'--'of wondrous help are
the fair-born,' as the text, so the meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:32">7:3:1:32</span></span>32.
'Ruling, O Agni, spread thou by beings'--the beings are men: thus,
'Shining, O Agni, spread thyself by men!'--'riches amongst us, O
immortal!' that is, 'bestowing wealth upon us, O immortal!'--'Of
beautiful form, shinest thou'--for he indeed shines, of beautiful
form;--'thou

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

fillest (us with) profitable <span id="fr_660"></span>[1](#fn_658)
wisdom;' that is, thou fillest (us with) perennial wisdom.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:33">7:3:1:33</span></span>33.
'Him, the wise arranger of the cult,'--the cult is the sacrifice: thus,
'him, the wise preparer of the sacrifice;'--'ruling over great wealth,'
that is, 'ruling in great wealth;'--'the bestowal of good
things,--prosperous, mighty (mah) nourishment,'--that is, 'the bestowal
of good things; prosperous, ample (mahat) nourishment,'--'givest thou,
and profitable substance,' that is, 'givest thou, and perennial
substance.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:34">7:3:1:34</span></span>34.
'\[Thee,\] the righteous,' that is, the truthful;'--'the mighty,' the
mighty (or buffalo) doubtless is Agni;--'the all-remarkable,' for he
(Agni) is indeed remarkable to all;--'(thee), Agni, men have placed
foremost for happiness,' happiness doubtless is the sacrifice, and for
the sacrifice they indeed place him foremost;--'thee, the hearer, the
far-ruling, divine one, with song the human tribes;' that is, 'thee who
hearest, thee, the far-ruling god, we men invoke.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:35">7:3:1:35</span></span>35. Now
this hymn of six verses is that same Agni Vai*s*vânara; and it is in
order to make a beginning (in the building of the altar) that that sand
is scattered,--he thereby pours into it Agni Vai*s*vânara as seed;--(he
does so) with a six-versed hymn: six seasons are a year and the year is
Vai*s*vânara (belonging to all men).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:36">7:3:1:36</span></span>36. As
to this they say, 'If the seed is said to be seed what is its seed
characteristic?'--Let him say, 'white;' for seed is white;--or
'speckled,' for seed is, as it were, speckled.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:37">7:3:1:37</span></span>37. As
to this they say, 'As seed is moist, and he scatters dry sand, how does
it become moist for him, after the manner of seed?' Well, the metres are
vital sap, and vital sap is moist; and inasmuch as he scatters that
(sand) with metres, it is thus that it becomes moist for him, after the
manner of seed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:38">7:3:1:38</span></span>38. As
to this they say, 'How does it come to be put on for him by means of the
day and the night?' Well, day and night are two, and there are two
(kinds of) seed, the white and the black: as black and white it is thus
put on for him by means of the day and the night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:39">7:3:1:39</span></span>39. As
to this they say, 'How does that (sand), put on by the days and nights,
become complete (or perfect) for him, neither deficient, nor
superabundant?' Well, endless are the days and nights, and endless is
the sand: it is thus that, put on by the days and nights, it becomes
complete for him, neither deficient, nor superabundant. 'And wherefrom
(is obtained) the oceanic (Samudriya <span
id="fr_661"></span>[1](#fn_659)) metre?' The ocean is endless, and the
sand is endless: that is the oceanic metre.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:40">7:3:1:40</span></span>40. As
to this they say, 'How is that (sand) of his put on separately with
different prayers?' Well, prayer is thought; this thought, prayer, comes
to be equal to the whole sand <span id="fr_662"></span>[2](#fn_660): and
thus that (sand) of his comes to be put on separately with different
prayers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:41">7:3:1:41</span></span>41. As
to this they say, 'How does that (sand) of his come to be put on by all
the metres?'--Inasmuch as he scatters it with that hymn of six verses;
for as many syllables as there are in the

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

seven metres, so many syllables there are in that hymn of six
verses <span id="fr_663"></span>[1](#fn_661): thus that (sand) of his
comes to be put on by all the metres.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:42">7:3:1:42</span></span>42. And
as to why he scatters sand,--that Agni (fire-altar) is Pra*g*âpati, and
Pra*g*âpati is the whole Brahman. Now that sand is (put) in (the place
of) the lost part of the Brahman; and that part of it which has not been
lost is this fire-altar which is now being built: thus when he scatters
sand he restores to him that lost part of the Brahman. That (sand which)
he scatters is unnumbered, unlimited; for who knows how great is that
lost part of the Brahman? And verily he who, knowing this, scatters
sand, restores the whole, complete Pra*g*âpati.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:43">7:3:1:43</span></span>43. As
to this they say, 'What is the number of these unnumbered sand grains?'
Let him say, 'Two;' for there are two kinds of sand, the white and the
black; or let him say, 'Seven hundred and twenty,' for so many days and
nights there are in the year; or 'Two hundred and fifty-two,' for so
many syllables there are in that hymn of six verses; or 'Twenty-five,'
for seed is twenty-fivefold <span id="fr_664"></span>[2](#fn_662).

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:44">7:3:1:44</span></span>44.
This same (sand represents) bricks with special prayers: he places it on
the body (of the altar), not

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

on the wings and tail; for bricks with special prayers are placed on the
body, not on the wings and tail. He does not 'settle' it, lest he should
stop the seed, and generation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:45">7:3:1:45</span></span>45. He
then strokes it (the sand) even by means of two verses containing the
verb 'to grow:' he thereby causes that infused seed to grow, whence the
seed infused into the womb grows;--with two (verses) relating to Soma
(he strokes the sand); for Soma is breath: he thus puts breath into the
seed; whence the infused seed becomes possessed of breath. But, indeed,
were it to come forth without breath it would become putrid; and this
indeed is the Sûdadohas <span id="fr_665"></span>[1](#fn_663) in this
case; for Soma is breath, and the Sûdadohas is breath.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:46">7:3:1:46</span></span>46.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XII, 112, 113; *Ri*k S. I, 91, 16, 18\] 'Grow thou! let
manly power gather in thee from all sides, O Soma!' manly power
doubtless is seed: thus, 'Grow thou! let seed gather in thee from every
side, O Soma!'--'Be thou in the gathering of strength!' in food
doubtless is strength: thus, 'be thou in the gathering of food!'--'Let
the drinks, let the forces gather in thee!'--drink doubtless means vital
sap, and in food are forces: thus, let vital sap, let food gather itself
in thee!'--'and manly powers in thee, the overcomer of enemies;' that
is, 'and seed in thee, the overcomer of evil;'--'growing, O Soma, for
the sake of immortality,' he thereby lays immortality into the
generative power, whence generative power is immortal;--'gain thou the
highest glory in the heavens!' his highest glory

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

in the heavens doubtless is the moon, for that one causes him to be
celebrated in yonder world <span id="fr_666"></span>[1](#fn_664). With
two (verses) he makes him grow, a gâyatrî and a trish*t*ubh one,--the
significance of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="7:3:1:47">7:3:1:47</span></span>47. Now
then the (mystic) correspondence,--four clod-bricks he puts on; with a
six-versed (hymn) he scatters (the sand); with two (verses) he makes
(the seed) grow; that makes twelve,--twelve months are a year, and the
year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great
does this become.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_645"></span>[342:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_647) That is, in
performing the various rites of the Soma-sacrifice, <span
id="page_343">p. 343</span> and at the same time doing all that is
necessary for the building of the fire-altar, on which the Soma-offering
itself is ultimately to be performed.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[343:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_648) Viz. in
consecrating the site of the Âhavanîya, as well as that of the
Gârhapatya altar (see [VII, 1, 1, 1](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:1)).

<span id="fn_647"></span>[344:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_649) [VII, 1, 1,
14](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:14).

<span id="fn_648"></span>[344:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_650) See paragraphs
[45](sbe4161.htm#7:3:1:45), [46](sbe4161.htm#7:3:1:46).

<span id="fn_649"></span>[345:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_651) He places a clod of
earth on each end of the two 'spines,' that is to say, in the middle of
each of the four sides of the square constituting the 'body' of the
altar-site.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[345:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_652) Or, when they put
him together (by building the fire-altar).

<span id="fn_651"></span>[346:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_653) Viz. when these
worlds were plunged into the water, see [VI, 1, 1,
12](sbe4128.htm#6:1:1:12).

<span id="fn_652"></span>[347:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_654) Viz. from some
place towards north-west from the middle of the western side of the body
of the altar.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[347:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_655) Mahîdhara takes
'âdam' here as the regular imperfect of 'ad,' I ate.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[348:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_656) See [p.
301](sbe4155.htm#page_301), note [3](sbe4155.htm#fn_563).

<span id="fn_655"></span>[348:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_657) See [p.
153](sbe4129.htm#page_153), note [1](sbe4129.htm#fn_306).

<span id="fn_656"></span>[349:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_658) See [p.
325](sbe4157.htm#page_325), note [6](sbe4158.htm#fn_619).

<span id="fn_657"></span>[349:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_659) That is to say, he
first throws down sand on the Uttara-vedi, and then covers with it the
whole of the body of the altar, so as to make it even with the
Uttara-vedi.

<span id="fn_658"></span>[351:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_660) The author connects
'sânasi' with 'sanâtana' (old, perpetual).

<span id="fn_659"></span>[352:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_661) The exact purport
of this term is not clear.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[352:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_662) Sikatâ*h*, sand, is
plural, consisting as it does of a multiplicity of sand-grains.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[353:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_663) This is a somewhat
loose calculation. As a matter of fact, the seven principal metres, viz.
Gâyatrî (24), Ush*n*ih (28), Anush*t*ubh (32), B*ri*hatî (36), Paṅkti
(40), Trish*t*ubh (44), *G*agatî (48), contain together 252 syllables.
The hymn recited in scattering the sand, on the other hand, consists of
one Vish*t*ârapaṅkti (40), three Satob*ri*hatîs (3 × 40), the
Uparish*t*â*gg*yotis (? 40), and one Trish*t*ubh (44), or together of
244 syllables. On similar cases of looseness in computing the syllables
of metres, see [p. 318](sbe4156.htm#page_318), note
[1](sbe4156.htm#fn_606).

<span id="fn_662"></span>[353:2](sbe4161.htm#fr_664) Viz. inasmuch as it
emanates from the body (paragraph [28](sbe4161.htm#7:3:1:28)), and the
body consists of twenty-five parts--the trunk, the four limbs, and
twenty fingers and toes. Cf. [VI, 2, 1, 23](sbe4131.htm#6:2:1:23),
where, however, the trunk is not taken into account.

<span id="fn_663"></span>[354:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_665) See [p.
301](sbe4155.htm#page_301), note [3](sbe4155.htm#fn_563).

<span id="fn_664"></span>[355:1](sbe4161.htm#fr_666) Sâya*n*a
remarks,--The high glory, in the heaven, of Soma growing in the form of
a creeper is said to be the moon: in yonder heavenly world that moon
indeed, when being drunk (by the gods) in the form (?) of ambrosia,
causes him, Soma, to be celebrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII, 3, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4162)
