[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4144) 
[Next](sbe4146) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1">6:6:1</span></span>

#### THE DÎKSHÂ, OR INITIATION.

### SIXTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:1">6:6:1:1</span></span>1.
Many <span id="fr_483"></span>[1](#fn_481) are the oblations, in the
building of the fire-altar, as well as at any other (special ceremony)
than the building of the fire-altar. For there are supernumerary
rites,--supernumerary are those which are (performed) over and above
another rite: of these <span id="fr_484"></span>[2](#fn_482) are the
building of the altar (Agni*k*ityâ), the Râ*g*asûya, the Vâ*g*apeya, and
the A*s*vamedha; and because they are over and above the other (normal)
rites, therefore they are supernumerary.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:2">6:6:1:2</span></span>2. A
cake <span id="fr_485"></span>[1](#fn_483) on eleven potsherds to Agni
and Vish*n*u,--that is the initiation (offering) of the (Soma)
sacrifice;--one on twelve potsherds to Vai*s*vânara, and a pap to the
Âdityas,--these two belong to Agni.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:3">6:6:1:3</span></span>3. Now
were he to prepare only the one for Agni and Vish*n*u, and not the other
two oblations, then only the initiation (offering) of the (Soma)
sacrifice would be performed, and not those of Agni (the fire-altar);
and were he to prepare only the other two oblations, and not the one to
Agni and Vish*n*u, only the initiation (offering) of Agni would be
performed, and not that of the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:4">6:6:1:4</span></span>4. He
prepares both that of the sacrifice, and those of Agni, for this rite is
both a rite of sacrifice, and a rite of fire: first (comes) that of the
sacrifice, and then that of the fire, for the rite of the fire is an
accessory rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:5">6:6:1:5</span></span>5. Now as
regards that (cake) for Agni and Vish*n*u, its mystic import is the same
as what is (implied) in a preparatory ceremony. And the (cake) on twelve
potsherds for Vai*s*vânara is for

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

the obtainment of all the fires, Vai*s*vânara being all the fires;--it
is one of twelve potsherds, for twelve months are a year, and
Vai*s*vânara is the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:6">6:6:1:6</span></span>6. And,
again, as to why he prepares one for Vai*s*vânara,--it is because he is
about to produce Agni as Vai*s*vânara (belonging, or dear to, all men):
in the initiation offering he first pours him forth as seed, and
whatlike the seed is that is poured into the womb, suchlike is (the
child) born therefrom; and inasmuch as he now pours forth that (Agni)
Vai*s*vânara as seed, therefore he is born hereafter as Vai*s*vânara.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:7">6:6:1:7</span></span>7. And
why he prepares those two (other) oblations,--Vai*s*vânara is the ruling
power, and that Âditya pap is the people: he thus makes both the ruling
power and the people. The Vai*s*vânara (cake) he prepares first, and
having thereby made the ruling power, he makes the people.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:8">6:6:1:8</span></span>8. That
(Vai*s*vânara cake) is one single (oblation), having one single deity:
he thus makes the ruling power to be concentrated in one (person), and
excellence to be concentrated in one. The other, the pap, has many
deities, for the pap is a multiplicity of rite-grains, and those Âdityas
are a multiplicity of gods: he thus bestows multiplicity on the people.
Thus much as to the deities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:9">6:6:1:9</span></span>9. Now as
regards the self (or body of Agni). The Vai*s*vânara (cake) is the head,
and that Âditya pap is the body: he thus makes both the head and the
body. The Vai*s*vânara (cake) he prepares first; and having thereby made
the head, he then makes the body.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:10">6:6:1:10</span></span>10.
That (Vai*s*vânara cake) is one single (oblation), for the head is, as
it were, one only; and the

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

other, the pap, has many deities, for that pap is a multiplicity of
rice-grains, and this body is a multiplicity of limbs: he thus bestows
on the body a multiplicity of limbs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:11">6:6:1:11</span></span>11.
That (pap) is (prepared) on ghee, for the Âdityas are consumers of ghee:
he thus gratifies them, each by his own share, by his own liquor. These
offerings are (made) silently, for here in the sacrifice there is seed,
and silently seed is infused.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:12">6:6:1:12</span></span>12. He
then offers the Audgrabha*n*a (libations) <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_484), for by the Audgrabha*n*as (elevatory
libations) the gods raised themselves from this world to the heavenly
world: and inasmuch as (thereby) they raised themselves (ud-grabh), they
are called 'audgrabha*n*a;'--and in like manner does the Sacrificer, by
means of the Audgrabha*n*as, now raise himself from this world to the
heavenly world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:13">6:6:1:13</span></span>13.
There are many of these, in the building of the fire-altar as well as at
any other (special ceremony): the significance of this has been told.
They are of both kinds: (the significance) of this has been told;--first
those of the sacrifice, and then those of the fire: (the significance)
of this also has been told.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:14">6:6:1:14</span></span>14. He
offers five of the sacrifice <span id="fr_487"></span>[2](#fn_485),--the
sacrifice is fivefold: as great as the sacrifice is, as great as is its
measure, by so much he thus pours it forth as seed. Seven (libations) of
the fire,--the fire(-altar) consists of seven layers <span
id="fr_488"></span>[3](#fn_486); seven seasons are a year, and

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Agni is the year:
as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, by so much he thus
pours him forth as seed. Those two kinds (of libations) amount to
twelve,--twelve months are a year, and Agni is the year: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:15">6:6:1:15</span></span>15. He
offers <span id="fr_489"></span>[1](#fn_487), with (Vâ*g*. S. XI,
66-67), 'The Purpose, Agni, the Impulse, hail!'--from purpose, indeed,
this sacred rite originated at first, and he now impels (yokes, uses) it
for this rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:16">6:6:1:16</span></span>16.
'Mind, Wisdom, Agni, the Impulse, hail!'--from the mind indeed this
sacred rite originated at first, and he now impels it for this rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:17">6:6:1:17</span></span>17.
'Thought, knowledge, Agni, the Impulse, hail!'--from thought, indeed,
this sacred rite originated at first, and he now impels it for this
rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:18">6:6:1:18</span></span>18.
'The distinction of Speech, Agni, the Impulse, hail!'--from speech,
indeed, this sacred rite originated at first, and he now impels it for
this rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:19">6:6:1:19</span></span>19. 'To
Pra*g*âpati, to Manu, hail!'--Mann, forsooth, is Pra*g*âpati, for he
thought out (man) all this (universe); and Pra*g*âpati, indeed, of old
performed this rite, and he now makes use of him for this rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:20">6:6:1:20</span></span>20. 'To
Agni Vai*s*vânara, hail!'--Agni Vai*s*vânara, doubtless, is the year;
and the year, indeed,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

of old performed this rite; and he now makes use thereof for this rite.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:21">6:6:1:21</span></span>21. He
then offers the one to Savit*ri*, for Savit*ri*, indeed, of old
performed this rite, and he now makes use of him for this rite,--(Vâ*g*.
S. XI, 67; *Ri*k S. V, 50, 1), 'Every mortal would choose the friendship
of the divine Guide; every one craves riches, and would have glory for
him to prosper, hail!' He who chooses the friendship of the god
Savit*ri*, chooses both glory and prosperity; and he who performs this
rite, indeed chooses his friendship.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:22">6:6:1:22</span></span>22. Now
some offer these Audgrabha*n*a libations into the fire-pan itself,
saying, 'These, surely, are offered for (special) objects of desire, and
that fire-pan is the Sacrificer's self: we thus secure for the
Sacrificer's self all his objects of desire.' Let him not do so; for the
fire which is kindled (in the fire-pan) is the essence of the completed
sacrifice and of those libations, and when he puts the fire-pan on the
fire, after the sacrifice has been completed and the Audgrabha*n*as
offered, then the sacrifice mounts it (the pan), and it bears the
sacrifice: let him, therefore, put the fire-pan on the fire only after
the sacrifice is complete, and the Audgrabha*n*as have been offered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:23">6:6:1:23</span></span>23. It
is covered with a layer of Mu*ñg*a grass, just for the purpose that it
may blaze up. And as to why it is with a layer of Mu*ñg*a grass, (it is
done) to avoid injury, for that Mu*ñg*a grass is a womb, and the womb
does not injure the child; for he who is born, is born from a womb: 'May
he (Agni), when he is born, be born from the womb,' thus he thinks.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:1:24">6:6:1:24</span></span>24.
Inside <span id="fr_490"></span>[1](#fn_488) there is a layer of hemp,
just for the purpose that it may blaze up. And as to its being a layer
of hemp,--the inner membrane (amnion) of the womb from which Pra*g*âpati
was born consists of flax, and the outer membrane (chorion) of hemp:
hence the latter is foul-smelling, for it is the outer membrane of the
embryo. \[It is so used\] to avoid injury, for the outer membrane does
not injure the embryo; and it is from the outer membrane of the embryo
that he who is born is born: 'May he (Agni), when he is born, be born
from the outer membrane of the embryo!' thus he thinks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_481"></span>[246:1](sbe4145.htm#fr_483) Or rather, too
many, more (than are required at one of the normal
Soma-sacrifices),--âdhvarikebhyo bahutarâni, Sây.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[246:2](sbe4145.htm#fr_484) That is, as would
seem from Sâya*n*a, of such ceremonies as have supernumerary, or
additional, oblations to the normal ones connected with them. This
discussion seems to be introduced here on account of the additional
oblation (that to Vai*s*vânara) offered at the initiation ceremony. As
an 'additional' or special, oblation at the Vâ*g*apeya, Sâya*n*a refers
to the pap of wild rice ([V, 1, 4, 12](sbe4106.htm#5:1:4:12)); whilst at
the Râ*g*asûya the one to Anumati ([V, 2, 3, 4](sbe4110.htm#5:2:3:4)) is
said to belong to the same category.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[247:1](sbe4145.htm#fr_485) These and the
subsequent offerings form part of the Dîkshâ, or initiation ceremony,
for the Soma-sacrifice to be performed after the completion of the
fire-altar. This initiation ceremony commences on the day of new moon, a
week after the preparation of the ukhâ, or fire-pan. An integral part of
(the first day of) this ceremony is the kindling of a fire in the
ukhâ--the 'Ukhya Agni'--which ultimately serves to supply the fires for
the brick altars built on the completion of the period of initiation.
The Dîkshâ is, as a rule, to be performed daily for a year, during which
time the fire has to be kept up in the ukhâ, and carried about by the
Sacrificer for a time each day. while the cake to Agni-Vish*n*u here
mentioned is the ordinary cake-offering prescribed for the Dîkshâ of the
normal Soma-sacrifice (see III, 1, 3, 1), the Vai*s*vânara cake is
peculiar to the Agni*k*ayana.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[249:1](sbe4145.htm#fr_486) See III, 1, 4, 1.

<span id="fn_485"></span>[249:2](sbe4145.htm#fr_487) Viz. the five
Audgrabha*n*a libations of the ordinary Soma-sacrifice offered in the
manner there described. See part ii, p. 20, note.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[249:3](sbe4145.htm#fr_488) Though Agni, or the
fire-altar, is commonly called the five-layered one (pa*ñk*a*k*itika),
consisting as it does of five complete <span id="page_250">p. 250</span>
layers of bricks, on the top of these there is a small additional pile
of two layers, the lower one (puna*sk*iti) in the form of the Gârhapatya
hearth ([VII, 1, 1, 1](sbe4155.htm#7:1:1:1) seq.), and the upper one,
consisting of two bricks, on which the fire is ultimately laid down. See
[p. 188](sbe4133.htm#page_188), note [4](sbe4133.htm#fn_389). Hence Agni
is also called 'sapta*k*itika.'

<span id="fn_487"></span>[250:1](sbe4145.htm#fr_489) Viz. the seven
special Audgrabha*n*a libations of the Agni*k*ayana.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[252:1](sbe4145.htm#fr_490) That is, underneath
the layer of mu*ñg*a. Both the reed-grass and the hemp are to be crushed
and reduced to the condition of powder previously to their being strewed
into the fire-pan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 6, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4146)
