[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4148) 
[Next](sbe4150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1">6:7:1</span></span>

### SEVENTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:1">6:7:1:1</span></span>1. He
hangs a gold plate (round his neck), and wears it; for that gold plate
is the truth, and the truth is able to sustain that (fire <span
id="fr_505"></span>[1](#fn_503)): by means of the truth the gods carried
it, and by means of the truth does he now carry it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:2">6:7:1:2</span></span>2. Now
that truth is the same as yonder sun. It is a gold (plate), for gold is
light, and he (the sun) is the light; gold is immortality, and he is
immortality. It (the plate) is round, for he (the sun) is round. It has
twenty-one knobs, for he is the twenty-first <span
id="fr_506"></span>[2](#fn_504). He wears it with the knobs outside, for
the knobs are his (the sun's) rays, and his rays arc outside.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:3">6:7:1:3</span></span>3. And as
to why he puts on and wears the gold plate;--that plate is yonder sun,
and man, in his human form, is unable to sustain that fire: it is only
in this (solar or divine) form that he bears that (divine) form.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:4">6:7:1:4</span></span>4. And,
again, why he puts on and wears the gold plate;--this fire is seed
poured out here; and the gold plate means vital energy (or brilliance)
and vigour: he thus lays vital energy and vigour into that seed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:5">6:7:1:5</span></span>5. And,
again, why he puts on and wears the gold plate;--the gods now were
afraid lest the Rakshas, the fiends, should destroy here that (Agni) of
theirs. They made that (plate), yonder sun, to be his (Agni's) protector
(standing) by his side, for the gold plate is yonder sun: and in like
manner does this (Sacrificer) now make that (plate) to be his (Agni's)
protector by his side.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:6">6:7:1:6</span></span>6. It is
sown up in a black antelope's skin; for the black antelope skin is the
sacrifice, and the sacrifice is able to sustain that (Agni): by means of
the sacrifice the gods carried him, and by means of the sacrifice he now
carries him;--with the hair (inside), for the hair are the metres, and
the metres are indeed able to sustain him: by the metres the gods
carried him, and by the metres he now carries him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:7">6:7:1:7</span></span>7. It is
sown into the white and black hair, for these two are forms of the *rik*
(hymn-verse) and the sâman (hymn-tune), and the *rik* and sâman are
indeed able to sustain him (Agni): by the *rik* and sâman the gods
carried him, and by the *rik* and sâman he now carries him. The hempen
sling of the gold plate is a triple (cord): the significance of this has
been explained.

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:8">6:7:1:8</span></span>8. He
wears it over the navel; for that gold plate is yonder sun, and he
(stands) over the navel (of the earth or sky).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:9">6:7:1:9</span></span>9. And,
again, why over the navel,--below the navel is the seed, the power of
procreation, and the gold plate represents vital energy and vigour: (he
does so, thinking,) 'Lest the gold plate burn up my seed, my power of
procreation, my vital energy and vigour.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:10">6:7:1:10</span></span>10.
And, again, why over the navel;--sacrificially purer is that part of the
animal (victim) which is above the navel, and more in contact with
ordure is that which is below the navel: he thus carries it (the plate)
by means of that part of the animal which is sacrificially purer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:11">6:7:1:11</span></span>11.
And, again, why over the navel,--that part of the vital air which is
immortal is above the navel, and streams out by upward breathings; but
that which is mortal passes by and away from the navel: he thus makes
him (the Sacrificer) obtain the part of the vital air which is immortal,
and by that he then carries it (the fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:12">6:7:1:12</span></span>12.
Now, he carries that (fire in the pan) on a seat;--the seat (âsandî)
doubtless is this earth, for on her everything here is settled (âsanna);
and she indeed is able to sustain him (Agni): it was thereby that the
gods carried him, and thereby he now carries him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:13">6:7:1:13</span></span>13. It
is made of udumbara wood (ficus glomerata), for the Udumbara tree is
sustenance (sustaining strength), life-sap: by means of sustenance,
life-sap, he thus carries him. Moreover, that Udumbara represents all
the trees here (on earth), and all the trees (together) are capable of
sustaining that (fire):

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

by means of all the trees the gods bore (or, maintained) it, and by
means of all the trees does he now bear it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:14">6:7:1:14</span></span>14. It
(the seat) is a span high; for Vish*n*u, as an embryo, was a span high:
he thus makes the womb equal in size to the embryo. It is a cubit
across; for the cubit is (the length of) the (fore-)arm, and strength is
exerted by the arm. It thus is made equal to strength, and strength is
indeed capable of sustaining him (Agni): by means of strength the gods
did bear him, and by means of strength does he now bear him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:15">6:7:1:15</span></span>15. The
feet and boards <span id="fr_507"></span>[1](#fn_505) are four-cornered;
for there are four regions, and the regions are able to sustain him: by
means of the regions the gods bore him, and by the regions does he now
bear him. It is interwoven with cords of reed-grass, triple ones,--the
significance of this has been explained;--and smeared over with
clay,--(the significance) of this also has been explained; but it also
serves to keep them from taking fire <span
id="fr_508"></span>[2](#fn_506).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:16">6:7:1:16</span></span>16. Now
he carries him (Agni, the fire) by means of a netting <span
id="fr_509"></span>[3](#fn_507)--he, Agni, is these worlds, and the
netting is the regions, for by means of the regions these worlds are
able to stand; and inasmuch as they are so able (*s*ak), it is called a
netting (*s*ikya): he thus carries him by means of the regions. It is
furnished with six strings,--for there are six

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

regions;--made of reed-grass, triply wound--the significance of this has
been explained;--and smeared with clay--(the significance) of this also
has been explained; but it also serves to keep them from taking fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:17">6:7:1:17</span></span>17. The
waters are his (Agni's) foundation, for on the waters these worlds are
founded. The sun is the connecting link <span
id="fr_510"></span>[1](#fn_508), for to the sun these worlds are linked
by means of the quarters: whosoever thus knows this, carries suchlike a
one by suchlike a one <span id="fr_511"></span>[2](#fn_509).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:18">6:7:1:18</span></span>18.
And, again, why he carries him by means of a netting,--he, Agni, is the
year, and the netting is the seasons; for by means of the seasons the
year is able to exist, and inasmuch as it is so able (*s*ak), therefore
(the netting is called) '*s*ikya:' he thus carries him by the seasons.
It is furnished with six strings, for there are six seasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:19">6:7:1:19</span></span>19. Day
and night are his foundation, for on day and night this year is founded.
The moon is the connecting link, for to the moon this year is linked by
means of the seasons: whosoever thus knows this, carries suchlike a one
by suchlike a one. And verily by him who so knows this, he (Agni) is
carried for a year; and by him who does not so know it, he is attended
to for a year <span id="fr_512"></span>[3](#fn_510). Thus as to the
deities,--

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:20">6:7:1:20</span></span>20. Now
as to the self (or body of Agni). Agni doubtless is the self, and the
netting is the vital airs, for by means of the vital airs that self is
able to exist; and inasmuch as it is so able (*s*ak) therefore (the
netting is called) '*s*ikya:' he thus carries (sustains) him by means of
the vital airs; and it is furnished with six strings, because there are
six vital airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:21">6:7:1:21</span></span>21. The
mind is his foundation, for on the mind this body is founded,--and food
is the connecting link, for to food this body is linked by means of the
vital airs: whosoever thus knows this, carries suchlike (Agni) by
suchlike means.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:22">6:7:1:22</span></span>22. Now
he carries him by means of the fire-pan; for the pan is these worlds,
and these worlds are indeed able to hold him: by means of these worlds
the gods carried him, and by means of them he (the Sacrificer) now
carries him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:23">6:7:1:23</span></span>23. And
as to why it is called 'Ukhâ;'--by means of this sacred performance and
this process the gods at that time dug out these worlds; and inasmuch as
they so dug out (ut-khan), it (the pan representing the worlds) is
called 'utkhâ,'--'utkhâ' being what they mysteriously (esoterically)
call 'ukhâ,' for the gods love the mysterious.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:24">6:7:1:24</span></span>24. Now
'ukhâ' (consists of) two syllables,--the Sacrificer is two-footed, and
the Sacrificer is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure,
by so much he thus carries him. And that same (pan) is a pot (kumbhî),
it is a cauldron (sthâlî) <span id="fr_513"></span>[1](#fn_511); this

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

makes six (syllables),--six seasons are a year, and the year is Agni: as
great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:25">6:7:1:25</span></span>25. He
now takes hold of him (Agni <span id="fr_514"></span>[1](#fn_512)) by
means of two (straw) pads <span id="fr_515"></span>[2](#fn_513); for he,
Agni, is yonder sun, and the two pads are day and night he thus takes
hold of yonder sun by means of the day and the night, and hence that
(sun) <span id="fr_516"></span>[3](#fn_514) is encompassed by day and
night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:26">6:7:1:26</span></span>26.
And, again, why he takes hold of him by means of two pads,--he, Agni, is
yonder sun, and the two pads are these two worlds: he thus encompasses
yonder sun by these two worlds, and hence he is encompassed by these two
worlds. They are round, for these two worlds are round; of reed-grass,
triply wound,--the significance of this has been told;--and smeared with
clay,--(the significance) of this also has been told, but it also serves
to keep them from taking fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:27">6:7:1:27</span></span>27. Now
then the (mystic) correspondence (of the number of objects to the nature
of Agni),--the seat, the fire-pan, the sling of the gold plate, the
fire, and the gold plate,--these amount to six;--six seasons are a year,
and the year is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure,
so great does this become. Two pads, that makes eight,--the Gâyatrî has
eight syllables, and Agni is Gâyatra as great as Agni is, as great as is
his measure, so great does this become.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:7:1:28">6:7:1:28</span></span>28. Now
the total correspondence,--four feet and four boards (of the seat), the
netting, and the sling of the gold plate, or any other corded netting;
after that the pan and fire, and the gold plate,--that makes
thirteen;--thirteen months are a year, and the year is Agni: as great as
Agni is, as great as is his measure, so great does this become.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_503"></span>[265:1](sbe4149.htm#fr_505) That is, the Ukhya
Agni, or fire in the pan, which the Sacrificer will have to carry about
during his time of initiation; and which, moreover, is here taken to, be
the Sacrificer's divine body ([VI, 6, 4. 5](sbe4148.htm#6:6:4:5)).

<span id="fn_504"></span>[265:2](sbe4149.htm#fr_506) See I, 3, 5,
12,--twelve months of the year, five seasons, and three worlds: this
makes twenty; and he that burns yonder is the twenty-first. See also
Ait. Br. IV, is, where the sun is identified with the Ekavi*ms*a or
Vishuvat day, the central day of the year, by which the gods raised the
sun up to the heavens.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[268:1](sbe4149.htm#fr_507) That is, the boards
forming the seat itself; and being a cubit long.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[268:2](sbe4149.htm#fr_508) Lit. 'from (the
fire in the pan) burning over (or through the clay);' or 'from (their)
being burnt over.'

<span id="fn_507"></span>[268:3](sbe4149.htm#fr_509) Apparently a round
netted mat, on which the fire-pan is to be placed, and which is fastened
to a cord by means of six strings, thus somewhat resembling the scale of
a balance.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[269:1](sbe4149.htm#fr_510) Or, the central
point, the hinge or hook, to which the worlds are attached.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[269:2](sbe4149.htm#fr_511) Lit. carries that
form by that form,--that is to say, he sustains, by means of the sun,
the whole world in the form of Agni.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[269:3](sbe4149.htm#fr_512) That is to say, he
who desires to derive the full benefit from the initiation ceremony, and
the Agni*k*ayana generally, must not only keep up the Ukhya Agni (or
pan-fire) during the year of the initiation, but must also carry him at
least for a time every day during that period.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[270:1](sbe4149.htm#fr_513) These words,
according to Sâya*n*a, are merely intended as synonymous (paryâya) for
'ukhâ,' or fire-pan, not as different vessels (such as the pot used
temporarily when the pan is broken) as one might suppose.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[271:1](sbe4149.htm#fr_514) That is, of the pan
containing the fire.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[271:2](sbe4149.htm#fr_515) Sâya*n*a (on [VII,
2, 1, 15](sbe4157.htm#7:2:1:15)) explains them as two balls of straw.
The comparison in [26](sbe4149.htm#6:7:1:26) rather points to their
being round mats.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[271:3](sbe4149.htm#fr_516) Thus Sâya*n*a. If,
on the other hand, Agni be intended here, this might be taken as an
illusion to the regular worship of the fire at the morning and evening
twilights (cf. [VI, 7, 2, 3](sbe4150.htm#6:7:2:3)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 7, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4150)
