[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4146) 
[Next](sbe4148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3">6:6:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:1">6:6:3:1</span></span>1. He
then puts on a vikaṅkata (flacourtia sapida) one. When Pra*g*âpati
performed the first offering, a vikaṅkata tree sprang forth from that
place where, after offering, he cleansed (his hands). That vikaṅkata,
then, is that first offering; it is that he now offers on this (fire),
and he therewith gratifies him (Agni). \[Vâ*g*. S. XI, 71; *Ri*k S.
VIII, 75, 15\] 'From the far region come thou over to the near one: do
thou protect that wherein I am!' as the text, so its meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:2">6:6:3:2</span></span>2. He
then puts on an udumbara (ficus glomerata) one. The gods and the Asuras,
both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati, strove together. Now all the trees
sided with the Asuras, but the udumbara tree alone did not forsake the
gods. The gods, having conquered the Asuras, took possession of their
trees.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:3">6:6:3:3</span></span>3. They
said, 'Come, let us lay into the udumbara tree whatever pith, whatever
vital sap there is in these trees: were they then to desert us, they
would

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

desert us worn out, like a milked-out cow, or like an ox that has been
(tired out by) drawing (the cart).' Accordingly they laid into the
udumbara tree what pith and essence there was in those trees; and on
account of that pith it matures (fruit) equal to all the (other)
trees <span id="fr_496"></span>[1](#fn_494): hence that (tree) is always
moist, always full of milky sap,--that udumbara tree, indeed, (being)
all the trees, is all food: he thus gratifies him (Agni) by every kind
of food, and kindles him by all trees (kinds of wood).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:4">6:6:3:4</span></span>4.
\[Vâ*g*. S. XI, 72\] 'From the farthest distance,'--that is, '(from)
what farthest distance there is;'--'O red-steeded, come hither!' for
red, indeed, is Agni's horse;--'Purîshya, much-loved,'--that is,
'favourable to cattle, dear to many;'--'O Agni, overcome thou the
scorners!' that is, 'O Agni, overcome all evil-doers!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:5">6:6:3:5</span></span>5. He
then puts on one not cut by an axe,--that (Agni) is born when he is
built up: it is for all (kinds of) food that he is born. Now that (wood)
not cut by an axe is one kind of food (for the fire): it is thereby that
he now gratifies him. \[Vâ*g*. S. XI, 73; *Ri*k S. VIII, 102, 20\]
'Whatsoever wood we lay upon thee, O Agni, let all that be ghee unto
thee, do thou relish that, O youngest!' as the text, so its meaning:
whatever (wood there is) not cut by the axe, that he makes palatable to
him; and having made it food for him, he sets it before him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:6">6:6:3:6</span></span>6. He
then puts on one that has lain on the ground,--he (Agni) is born when he
is built up: it is for all (kinds of) food that he is born. Now that

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (wood) which has
lain on the ground is one kind of food (for the fire): it is thereby he
now gratifies him. \[Vâ*g*. S. XI, 74; *Ri*k S. VIII, 102, 21\] 'What
the red ant eats, what the white ant crawls over,'--for either the red
ant eats it, or the white ant crawls over it;--'let all that be ghee for
thee, do thou relish that, O youngest!' as the text, so its meaning:
whatever (wood) has lain on the ground, that he makes palatable for him;
and having made it food for him, he sets it before him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:7">6:6:3:7</span></span>7. The
remaining (kindling-sticks) are of palâ*s*a wood (butea frondosa);--the
Palâ*s*a tree is the Brahman, it is by the Brahman he thus kindles him
(Agni). And, again, why they are palâ*s*a ones--;the Palâ*s*a tree is
Soma, and he, Soma, doubtless is the supreme offering: it is that he now
offers on this (fire), and by that he gratifies him (Agni).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:8">6:6:3:8</span></span>8. \[He
puts them on, with Vâ*g*. S. XI, 75-82\] 'Day by day bearing
unremittingly,'--that is, 'Day by day bringing not unmindful;'--'food to
him like unto a standing horse,'--that is, 'food as to a standing
(resting) horse;'--'we, rejoicing in wealth-thrift and sap,'--that is,
'rejoicing in wealth, and thrift, and sap;'--'O Agni, let not us, thy
associates, suffer injury!' this he says with a view that his (Agni's)
associate (the Sacrificer) may not suffer injury.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:9">6:6:3:9</span></span>9. 'While
Agni is kindling on the earth's navel,'--that (place) where he is now
being kindled is indeed the navel of the earth;--'we call for great
wealth-thrift,'--that is, 'we call for wealth and great thrift;'--'Unto
him, the draught-delighted,'--for he is indeed delighted (or,
inebriated)

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

by the draught,--'of high praise,'--for he is indeed highly
praised;--'the adorable'--that is, 'worthy of adoration;'--'Agni, the
conqueror, overpowering in battles;'--for Agni is indeed a conqueror,
and overpowering in battles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:10">6:6:3:10</span></span>10.
'Whatever aggressive armies there are, onrushing with drawn-up lines;
whatever thieves and robbers, those I cast into thy mouth, O
Agni.'--'Devour thou in a lump the waylayers with thy two tusks, the
thieves with thy teeth, and the robbers with thy jaws, O holy
one!'--'What waylayers there are among men, what thieves and robbers in
the wood, what miscreants in the lurking-places, I throw them into thy
jaws.'--'Whatever man may plot against us, and whosoever may hate us, or
abuse and seek to hurt us, every one of them burn thou to ashes!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:11">6:6:3:11</span></span>11. For
the gods then made food of whosoever hated them, and of whomsoever they
hated, and gave them up to him (Agni), and thereby gratified him; and
this, then, became his food, and he burnt up the evil of the gods: and
in like manner does the Sacrificer now make food of whosoever hates him,
and of whomsoever he hates, and give them up to him (Agni), and thereby
gratify him; and this, then, becomes his food, and he burns up the
Sacrificer's evil.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:12">6:6:3:12</span></span>12.
These eleven (kindling-sticks) he puts on for one who is not either a
noble, or a domestic chaplain (purohita); for incomplete are those
eleven, and incomplete is he who is not either a noble, or a domestic
priest.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:13">6:6:3:13</span></span>13.
Twelve (he puts on) for a noble or a domestic

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

chaplain; for those twelve are a complete whole (or everything), and he
who is either a noble or a domestic chaplain is everything.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:14">6:6:3:14</span></span>14. In
the case of a Purohita, he puts it on, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 80,
'Perfected is my sanctity (brahman), perfected the vigour, the strength,
perfected the victorious power (kshatra) whose Purohita I am!'--he thus
perfects both his sanctity and power <span
id="fr_497"></span>[1](#fn_495).

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:15">6:6:3:15</span></span>15. And
in the case of a nobleman, with (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 82),'I have raised their
arms, their lustre and strength: by the spiritual power I destroy the
enemies, and elevate mine own (relatives)!' this he says with the view
that he may destroy his enemies, and elevate his own relatives. Let him
put on both these (kindling-sticks); for both the Brahman and the
Kshatra are this Agni; and it is this Agni he thus kindles by those two,
by the Brahman and the Kshatra.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:16">6:6:3:16</span></span>16.
These (kindling-sticks) amount to thirteen;--thirteen months are a year,
and Agni is the year: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure,
by so much food he thus gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="6:6:3:17">6:6:3:17</span></span>17.
They are a span long, for Vish*n*u, as an embryo, was a span long; and
this is (Agni's or Vish*n*u's) food: he thus gratifies him with food
proportionate to his own body. But the food which is proportionate to
one's body satisfies, and does no injury; but what is too much that does
injury, and what is too little that does not satisfy. Standing he puts
them on--the significance of this (will be explained)

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

further on;--and with the Svâhâ ('hail!'); for seed is infused here (in
the sacrifice,--to wit,) this Agni; and were he to put on the logs
unconsecrated by Svâhâ, he would injure him (Agni). Now inasmuch as they
are kindling-sticks, they are not oblations; but inasmuch as (they are
put on) with the Svâhâ, they are food, for the Svâhâ is food; and thus
he does not injure him (Agni).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_494"></span>[257:1](sbe4147.htm#fr_496) According to Ait.
Br. V, 24, its fruits ripen three times a year.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[260:1](sbe4147.htm#fr_497) Or, his spiritual
and political power, his priesthood and nobility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI, 6, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4148)
