[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4112) 
[Next](sbe4114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8120801423/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part III (SBE41)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1894\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1">5:3:1</span></span>

### THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:1">5:3:1:1</span></span>1. Having
taken up both (the Gârhapatya and Âhavanîya) fires on the two
kindling-sticks <span id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126), he goes to the
house of the Commander of the army, and prepares a cake on eight
potsherds for Agni Anîkavat; for Agni is the head (anîka) of the gods,
and the commander is the head of the army: hence for Agni Anîkavat. And
he, the commander, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels <span
id="fr_127"></span>[2](#fn_127): it is for

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

him that he is thereby consecrated (or quickened), and him he makes his
own faithful (follower). The sacrificial fee for this (jewel-offering)
consists in gold; for Agni's is that sacrifice, and gold is Agni's seed:
therefore the sacrificial fee consists in gold.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:2">5:3:1:2</span></span>2. And on
the following day, he goes to the house of the Purohita (the king's
court chaplain), and prepares a pap for B*ri*haspati; for B*ri*haspati
is the Purohita of the gods, and that (court chaplain) is the Purohita
('praepositus') of that (king): hence it is for B*ri*haspati. And he,
the Purohita, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for him
that he is thereby consecrated, and him he makes his own faithful
follower. The sacrificial fee for this is a white-backed bullock; for to
B*ri*haspati belongs that upper region, and there above lies that path
of Aryaman (the sun) <span id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128): therefore
the fee for the Bârhaspatya (oblation) is a white-backed (bullock).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:3">5:3:1:3</span></span>3. And on
the following day he prepares a cake on eleven potsherds for Indra at
the dwelling of him who is being consecrated (the king); for Indra is
the Kshatra (ruling power), and he who is consecrated is

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

the Kshatra: hence it is for Indra. The sacrificial fee for this is a
bull, for the bull is Indra's own (animal).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:4">5:3:1:4</span></span>4. And on
the following day, he goes to the dwelling of the Queen, and prepares a
pap for Aditi; for Aditi is this Earth, and she is the wife of the gods;
and that (queen) is the wife of that (king): hence it is for Aditi. And
she, the Queen, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for
her that he is thereby consecrated, and he makes her his own faithful
(wife). The sacrificial fee, on her part, is a milch cow; for this
(earth) is, as it were, a milch cow: she yields to men all their
desires; and the milch cow is a mother, and this (earth) is, as it were,
a mother: she bears (or sustains) men. Hence the fee is a milch cow.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:5">5:3:1:5</span></span>5. And on
the following day, he goes to the house of the Sûta (court-minstrel and
chronicler), and prepares a barley pap for Varu*n*a; for the Sûta is a
spiriter (sava), and Varu*n*a is the spiriter of the gods: therefore it
is for Varu*n*a. And he, the Sûta, assuredly is one of his (the king's)
jewels: it is for him that he is thereby consecrated; and him he makes
his own faithful (follower). The sacrificial fee for this one is a
horse, for the horse is Varu*n*a's own.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:6">5:3:1:6</span></span>6. And on
the following day, he goes to the house of the Headman (Grâma*n*î <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129)), and prepares a cake

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

on seven potsherds for the Maruts; for the Maruts are the peasants, and
the headman is a peasant: therefore it is for the Maruts. And he, the
headman, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for him that
he is thereby consecrated, and him he makes his own faithful follower.
The sacrificial fee for this (jewel) is a spotted bullock, for in such a
spotted bullock there is abundance of colours; and the Maruts are the
clans (or peasants), and the clan means abundance; therefore the
sacrificial fee is a spotted bullock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:7">5:3:1:7</span></span>7. And on
the following day he goes to the house of the Chamberlain (kshatt*ri*),
and prepares a cake on either twelve, or eight, potsherds for Savit*ri*;
for Savit*ri* is the impeller (prasavit*ri*) of the gods, and the
chamberlain is an impeller: hence it is for Savit*ri*. And he, the
chamberlain, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for him
that he thereby is consecrated, and him he makes his own faithful
(follower). The sacrificial fee for this (jewel) is a reddish-white
draught-bullock; for Savit*ri* is he that burns yonder, and he (the sun)
indeed moves along; and the draught-bullock also moves along, when
yoked. And as to why it is a reddish-white one;--reddish-white indeed is
he (the sun) both in rising and in setting: therefore the sacrificial
fee is a reddish-white draught-bullock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:8">5:3:1:8</span></span>8. And on
the following day he goes to the house

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of the Charioteer (sa*m*grahît*ri*), and prepares a cake on two
potsherds for the A*s*vins; for the two A*s*vins are of the same womb;
and so are the chariot fighter <span id="fr_130"></span>[1](#fn_130) and
the driver (sârathi) of the same womb (standing-place), since they stand
on one and the same chariot: hence it is for the A*s*vins. And he, the
charioteer, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for him
that he is thereby consecrated, and him he makes his own faithful
follower. The sacrificial fee for this (jewel) is a pair of twin
bullocks, for such twin bullocks are of the same womb. If he cannot
obtain twins, two bullocks produced by successive births (of the same
cow) may also form the sacrificial fee, for such also are of the same
womb.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:9">5:3:1:9</span></span>9. And on
the following day he goes to the house

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of the Carver (bhâgadugha <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131)), and
prepares a pap for Pûshan, for Pûshan is carver to the gods; and that
(officer) is carver to that (king): therefore it is for Pûshan. And he,
the carver, assuredly is one of his (the king's) jewels: it is for him
that he is thereby consecrated, and him he makes his own faithful
follower. The sacrificial fee for this (jewel) is a dark-grey bullock:
the significance of such a one being the same as at the
Trisha*m*yukta <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_132).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:10">5:3:1:10</span></span>10. And
on the following day, having brought together gavedhukâ (seeds) from the
houses of the Keeper of the dice (akshâvâpa <span
id="fr_133"></span>[3](#fn_133)) and the Huntsman (govikartana <span
id="fr_134"></span>[4](#fn_134)), he prepares a gavedhukâ pap for Rudra
at the house of him who is consecrated. These two, while being two
jewels (of the king), he makes one for the purpose of completeness. And
as to why he performs this offering,--Rudra is hankering after that
(cow) which is killed here in this hall;

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

now Rudra is Agni (fire), and the gaming-board being fire, and the dice
being its coals, it is him (Rudra) he thereby pleases. And verily
whosoever, that knows this thus, performs the Râ*g*asûya, in his house
that approved (cow) is killed. And he, the keeper of dice, and the
huntsman, are (each of them) assuredly one of his (the king's) jewels:
it is for these two that he is thereby consecrated, and these two he
makes his own faithful followers. The sacrificial fee for this (jewel)
is a bicoloured bullock--either one with white fore-feet, or a
white-tailed one,--a claw-shaped knife, and a dice-board <span
id="fr_135"></span>[1](#fn_135) with a horsehair band <span
id="fr_136"></span>[2](#fn_136); for that is what belongs to those
two <span id="fr_137"></span>[3](#fn_137).

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:11">5:3:1:11</span></span>11. And
on the following day he goes to the house of the Courier, and having
taken ghee in four ladlings, he offers the ghee to the way, with, 'May
the way graciously accept of the ghee, hail!' For the courier is to be
dispatched, and when dispatched goes on his way: therefore he offers the
ghee to the way. And he, the courier, assuredly is one of his (the
king's) jewels: it is for him that he is thereby consecrated, and him he
makes his own faithful follower. The sacrificial fee for this (jewel)
consists in a skin-covered bow, leathern quivers, and a red turban, for
that is what belongs to him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:12">5:3:1:12</span></span>12.
These are the eleven jewels (ratna) he completes; for of eleven
syllables consists the Trish*t*ubh, and the Trish*t*ubh is vigour: it is
for the sake

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

of vigour that he completes the (eleven) jewels. Then as to why he
performs the oblations of the Ratnins: it is their king he becomes; it
is for them that he thereby is consecrated, and it is them he makes his
own faithful followers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="5:3:1:13">5:3:1:13</span></span>13. And
on the following day he goes to the house of a discarded (wife), and
prepares a pap for Nir*ri*ti;--a discarded wife is one who has no son.
He cooks the pap for Nir*ri*ti of black rice, after splitting the grains
with his nails. He offers it with (Vâ*g*. S. IX, 3), 'This, O Nir*ri*ti,
is thy share: accept it graciously, hail!' For a wife that is without a
son, is possessed with Nir*ri*ti (destruction, calamity); and whatever
of Nir*ri*ti's nature there is in her, that he thereby propitiates, and
thus Nir*ri*ti does not take possession of him while he is consecrated.
The fee for this (oblation) consists of a black, decrepit, diseased cow;
for such a one also is possessed with Nir*ri*ti. He says to her (the
wife), 'Let her not dwell this day in my dominion <span
id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138)! thus he removes evil from himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[58:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_126) Each of the two
'ara*n*is' is held for a moment to one of the two fires, which are
thereby supposed to become inherent in them till they are 'churned out'
again for the new offering fire required. For this 'mounting' of the
fire see part i, p. 396.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[58:2](sbe4113.htm#fr_127) Ratna, jewel,
precious thing; whence the eleven offerings described in this section
are called ratna-havis, or ratninâ*m* havî*m*shi; the recipients of
these sacrificial honours, on the part of the newly-consecrated king,
being called ratnina*h*, 'possessed of the Jewel (offering).'--In the
ritual of the Black Ya*g*us (Taitt. S. I, 8, 9; Taitt. Br. I, 1, 3) the
order of the Ratnina*h*, at whose houses these oblations are performed
on successive days, is as follows--1. Brahman priest (a pap to
B*ri*haspati); 2. Râ*g*anya (a cake of eleven kapâlas to Indra); 3.
Consecrated Queen (pap to <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> Aditi); 4. The
king's favourite wife (pap to Bhaga); 5. A discarded wife (pap to
Nir*ri*ti); 6. Commander of the army (cake of eight kap. to Agni); 7.
Sûta (charioteer, Sây.--cake of ten kap. to Varu*n*a); 8. Grâma*n*î
(cake of seven kap. to Maruts); 9. Kshatt*ri* (chamberlain, or
superintendent of seraglio, Sây.--cake of twelve kap. to Savit*ri*); 10.
Sa*m*grahît*ri* (treasurer, Sây.--cake of two kap. to A*s*vins); 11.
Bhâgadugha (collector of taxes, Sây.--pap to Pûshan); 12. Akshavâpa
(dyûtakara, superintendent of gambling, Sây.--gavîdhuka pap to
Rudra).--Finally the king offers in his own house two cake-oblations (of
eleven kapâlas) to Indra Sutra-man (the good protector) and Indra
A*m*homu*k* (the deliverer from trouble).

<span id="fn_128"></span>[59:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_128) Whence the back of
that upper region is white, or bright.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[60:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_129) The exact function
of this officer is not clearly defined. Though the term is also used of
an ordinary village headman (Patel, Adhikârin, Adigar), this could
hardly apply here. Sâya*n*a, on one passage, indeed explains the term by
'Grâma*m* nayati,' but elsewhere he explains it by 'Grâmâ*n*â*m* netâ;'
and some such meaning it may perhaps have here,--the head of communal
administration, either for a district (like one of Manu's lords of a
hundred, or a <span id="page_61">p. 61</span> thousand villages), or for
the whole country. If, however, the headman of a single village be
intended (as the coupling of the office with the Maruts might lead one
to suppose), he would probably be a hereditary territorial proprietor
residing near the place where the inauguration ceremony takes place. Cf.
[V, 4, 4, 18](sbe4121.htm#5:4:4:18); and Zimmer. Altindisches Leben, p.
171.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[62:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_130) Savyash*th*ri
(otherwise savyesh*thri*, savyesh*th*a;--savyastha, Kâ*n*va rec.) is
explained by the commentaries as a synonym of sârathi, charioteer (with
which it is compounded in savyesh*th*asârathî, Taitt. Br. I, 7, 9, 1,
where Sâya*n*a makes them the two charioteers standing on the left and
right side of the warrior), but it seems more probable that the former
terms refer to the warrior (παραβάτης) himself (as savyash*th*â,
Atharva-veda VIII, 8, 23, undoubtedly does), who stands on the left side
of the driver (sârathi, ἡνίοχος); the Change of meaning being perhaps
due to caste scruples about so close an association between the
Kshatriya warrior and his *S*ûdra servant, as is implied in this and
other passages. (Cf. V, 3, 2, 2 with note.)--On Taitt. S. I, 8, 9,
Sâya*n*a explains sa*m*grahît*ri* as the treasurer (dhanasa*m*grahakartâ
ko*s*âdhyaksha*h*), but on I, 8, 16 optionally as treasurer or
charioteer; while the Sûta is I, 8, 9 identified by him with the
charioteer (sârathi). It is more probable, however, that at the time of
the Brâhma*n*a the Sûta occupied much the same position as that assigned
to him in the epics, viz. that of court-bard and chronicler. The
connection of the sa*m*grahît*ri* with the A*s*vins can also scarcely be
said to favour the interpretation of the term proposed by Sâya*n*a (who,
moreover, is himself compelled, on Taitt. S. I, 8, 15; Taitt. Br. I, 7,
10, 6, to take it in the sense of charioteer).

<span id="fn_131"></span>[63:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_131) The meaning
'tax-gatherer, collector of tithes (or rather, of the sixth part of
produce)' assigned to the term by Sâya*n*a, both here, and on Taitt. S.
I, 8, 9, might seem the more natural one, considering the etymology of
the term. See, however, the explanation given of it in our Brâhma*n*a I,
1, 2, 17:--'Pûshan is bhâgadugha (distributor of portions) to the gods,
who places with his hands the food before them.' This clearly is Homer's
δαιτρός, Od. I, 141-2:

δαιτρὸς δὲ κρειῶ πίνακας παρέθηκεν ἀείρας  
παντοίων, παρὰ δέ σφι τίθει χρύσεια κύπελλα

<span id="fn_132"></span>[63:2](sbe4113.htm#fr_132) See [V, 2, 5,
8](sbe4112.htm#5:2:5:8).

<span id="fn_133"></span>[63:3](sbe4113.htm#fr_133) 'The thrower, or
keeper, of the dice,' according to Sâya*n*a. At V, 4, 4, 6 the verb
â-vap is used of the throwing the dice into the hand of the player; and
it is perhaps that function of the keeper of the dice which is meant to
be expressed by the term ('der Zuwerfer der Würfel').

<span id="fn_134"></span>[63:4](sbe4113.htm#fr_134) Literally, the
cutter up of cows, the (beef-) butcher. But according to Sâya*n*a, this
official was the constant companion of his master in the chase.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[64:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_135) Or, a dice-box, as
'akshâvapanam' is explained by some commentaries.--akshâ
upyante<sup>ऽ</sup>sminn ity akshâvapanam
aksha(?akshadyûta-)sthânâvapanapâtram, Sây.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[64:2](sbe4113.htm#fr_136) Or, fastened with a
hair-chain (romasra*g*â prabaddham, Sây.).

<span id="fn_137"></span>[64:3](sbe4113.htm#fr_137) That is to say, the
knife and the dice-board are the objects those two officials have
chiefly to do with.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[65:1](sbe4113.htm#fr_138) According to the
commentary on Kâty. *S*r. XV, 3, 35 she has to betake herself to a
Brahman's house, where the king has no power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V, 3, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4114)
