[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp05)  [Next](dtp07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II

### CAIPHUL

The Atlantean people lived under a government having the character of a
limited monarchy. Its official system recognized an emperor (whose
position was an elective one, and not in any sense hereditary) and his
ministers, known by a name signifying "The Council of Ninety," and also
known as "Princes of the Realm." All of these officers had a life-tenure
in office, except in cases of malfeasance, which term was strictly
defined and its provisions severely enforced; and from the operation of
the law relating thereto, no exaltation of position was sufficient to
secure exemption for offenders. No governmental positions were made
elective, with the exception

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

of one ecclesiastical office, and lesser positions in the public service
were made appointive in all cases, the appointees being held to strict
account by the appointing power, emperor or prince, who, for the use of
this power was responsible to the people for the conduct of his
placeholders. However, it is not the scheme of this chapter to discuss
Poseid politics, but to describe the ministerial and monarchical palaces
with which the nation furnished its elected officers, one for each
prince, but for the emperor, three. In the main, the description of one
of these buildings, both within and without, typifies that of any or all
of the others, just as in the United States of America and other modern
lands a governmental edifice is easily known to be such, by its general
architectural features. A description therefore of one palace will serve
a double purpose, that of presenting an idea of the most notable
residence in the great Atlantean empire, since I will describe the main
palace of the emperor; and, secondly, that of illustrating the
prevailing style of governmental architecture in the period during which
I resided in Poseid. Imagine, if it please thee, an elevation
approximating fifteen feet in height,, ten times that figure in width,
and that fifty times its height represents its length. External to the
plane dimensions, on each of the four sides of the platform, which was
of hewn blocks of porphyry, an easy flight of steps led from the lawns
up to the top of the elevation. On the sides, these steps were divided
into fifteen sections, while on the ends the divisions were only three,
each being divided into lengths of fifty feet. Between the two sections
nearest the corners each division consisted of a deep quadrangular
recess, into and around which the stairs ran in uninterrupted
continuity. The next, or third section, was separated from those on
either side by a sculptured serpent of huge size, fashioned from
sandstone and as faithful to life as art could make it. The heads of
these immobile reptiles rested on the green sward in front of the
stairs, while the bodies lay in full relief upon the staircases and
reaching the top of the platform, wound about the massive columns which
supported the pediments of the verandas

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of the superstructural palace erected upon the platform described,
columns which formed a most imposing peristyle between the broad
verandas and the steps. The succeeding division was a quadrangle in the
steps, and the next, another serpent, and so around the building. It is
hoped that this description is sufficiently perspicuous to give an idea
of the tremendous parallelogram, encompassed with steps, guarded by
monstrous ornamental, as well as useful, serpent forms, religious
emblems, signifying not alone wisdom but also the appearance of a fiery
serpent in the skies of the ancient earth, initiating the event of the
separation of Man from God. Alternating with these forms were the
recesses, relieving what would otherwise have been severely straight and
wearisome lines. Surmounting this was the first story of the palace
proper, its reptile-entwined peristyle holding aloft great veranda
roofs, whereon were enormous vases holding earth to nourish all kinds of
tropical plants, shrubs and many small varieties of trees, a luxuriant
garden which perfumed the air, already cooled by numerous fountains
playing in the midst. Above the first story, with its flower-filled
porticos, arose another tier of apartments, surrounded by open
galleries, the floors of which were formed by the roofs of those
beneath. The third and highest tier of apartments had no verandas,
although on all sides it had promenades, formed by the roof of the
portico beneath. The same wild luxuriance of flowers and foliage
rendered the stories of equal attractiveness. In all, song birds and
birds of plumage were welcome guests, uncaged, but tame because they
never received harm. Attendants, with blowguns to project noiseless
darts, quietly destroyed all predatory species, as also they did-those
which, having neither song powers, vivid coloring of plumage, nor the
useful habits of insectivora to commend them, were therefore
undesirable. Springing from the main roof of the palace arose graceful
spires and towers, while the many jutting apartments, angles and groined
arches, flying buttresses, cornices and multifarious architectural
effects prevented any apparent heaviness in the design. Around the
largest of the towers there extended from

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

bottom to top a winding staircase, conducting to the rail-enclosed space
on its summit, one hundred feet above the aluminum sheathing or
roofing-plates of the palace. Agacoe palace was unique in the possession
of this tower, differing thus from all other ministerial edifices. It
may be explained that the tower had been erected as a memorial of the
departure of a fair princess from the loving care of her imperial
husband into Navazzamin, the shadowy land of departed souls, some
centuries before my day. Such was the Agacoe palace. Its uppermost floor
was in use as a great governmental museum; the middle was devoted to
offices of the chief government officials, while the first flat was
[magnificently](errata.htm#2) arranged and furnished for occupancy as
the emperor's private residence. As not uninteresting, it may be noted
that the yawning mouths of the stone serpents recently described served
as doorways (of the usual size) to certain apartments in the basement, a
fact which gives an accurate idea of the enormous size of these lithic
saurians. The monsters were made with an eye to artistic proportion;
their bodies were of carved gray, red or yellow sandstone, their eyes of
sard, carnelian, jasper or other colored silicious stone, while fangs
for their yawning mouths were made from gleaming white quartz, set on
each side of the entranceway.

So much sawed and hewn stone forces the modern mind to wonder if the
Atlanteans obtained the finished product through the unremitting toil of
slaves, in which case we must have been a barbarous people, whose
political autonomy was ever menaced by the uplifting forces of the
social volcano which slavery always creates, or else we possessed
peculiarly efficient stone-cutting machinery. This latter is the correct
assumption, for our machinery for that purpose, like an almost infinite
variety of other implements for every sort of service, was our pride
amongst the nations. Let me here make an assertion, not for argument but
to be understood in the light of subsequent chapters, namely, that if we
as Atlanteans had not possessed this wide range of mechanical inventions
and the inventive talent which gave us these triumphs, then neither
would

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

ye of this modern day have possession of a like creative ability, nor of
any of the results of such genius. It may be that thou canst not
understand the connection between the two ages and races whilst conning
this statement; but as thou shalt draw nearer to the close of this
history thy mind will recur to it with the fullness of comprehension.

Trusting that the effort has been successful to depict by words the
appearance of Atlantean governmental edifices, let us next obtain an
idea of the Caiphalian promontory, whereon was enthroned Caiphul, the
Royal City, the greatest of that ancient day, within the limits of which
resided a population of two million souls, unencompassed by walled
fortifications. Indeed, none of the cities of that age were girt about
with walls, and in this respect they differed from the cities and towns
known to later historical epochs. To call my records of this Poseidic
age history, is not exceeding fact, since what I relate in these pages
is history derived from the astral-light records. Nevertheless, it
precedes the histories handed down in manuscript, papyrus rolls and
rock-inscriptions by many centuries, seeing that Poseid was no longer
known in the earth when history's first pages were chronicled by the
earliest historian using papyrus; nay, nor even yet earlier, when the
sculptors of the obelisks of Egypt and the rock-inscribers of the
temples cut pictorial histories in enduring granite. No longer known was
Poseid, for it is to-day approaching nine thousand years since the
waters of the ocean engulfed our fair land and left no sign, not even so
much as was left of those two cities hidden away beneath lava and ashes
and for sixteen centuries of the Christian era thought never to have had
existence. Excavators dug away the scoriae from Pompeii, but from
Caiphul no man can turn aside the floods of the Atlantic and reveal what
no more exists, for were every day a century it were even so nearly
three months of such lengthy days since the dread fiat of GOD went forth
unto the waters:

"Cover the land, so that the all-beholding sun shall see it no more in
all his course."

And it was so.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

In preceding pages the promontory of Caiphul was described as reaching
out into the ocean from the Caiphalian plain and as visible from a great
distance at night because of the glow of light from the capital. For
three hundred miles westward from Numea the peninsula projected outwards
from the plain, averaging almost to its extreme cape. a breadth of fifty
Miles and rising much like the chalk-cliffs of England directly from the
ocean to a height of nearly one hundred feet to reach a plain almost
floor-like in its evenness. On the point of this great peninsula was
Caiphul or "Atlan, Queen of the Wave." Beautiful, peaceful, with its
wide spreading gardens of tropical loveliness,

"Where a leaf never fades in the still, blooming bowers,  
And the bee banquets on thro' a whole year of flowers,"

its broad avenues shaded by great trees, its artificial hills, the
largest surmounted by governmental palaces, and pierced and terraced by,
the avenues which radiated from the city-center like spokes in a wheel.
Fifty miles these ran in one direction, while at right angles from them,
traversing the breadth of the peninsula, forty miles in length, were the
shortest avenues. Thus lay, like a splendid dream, this, the proudest
city of that ancient world.

At no point did Caiphul approach the ocean nearer than five miles.
Though it had no walls, around the whole city extended a huge moat,
three-quarters of a mile broad by an average of sixty feet in depth and
supplied by the waters of the Atlantic. On the north side, a great canal
entered the moat-a canal in which the outflowing waters of a large
river, the Nomis, created an outgoing current of considerable swiftness.
A current was thus naturally made to cause suction through the entire
circle of the moat, of which the ocean supply entered at an ingress on
the south side. In this manner efflux into the sea of all the drainage
of the artificial circular island on which stood the city was allowed.
Immense pumping engines forced fresh ocean water through large stone
pipes and conduits all over the city, flushing the drains, furnishing
motive power for all requisite purposes, for electric

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

fighting and electric services of vast variety--but enough. Electric
service? Electric power? Indeed we had deepest knowledge of this
motor-force of the universe; we used it in countless ways which have yet
to be rediscovered in this modern world of ours, and ways, too, which
are every day coming more and more into recollection as men and women of
that past age reincarnate in this.

It is not strange that thou art incredulous, my friend, when I speak of
these inventions which thou hast considered the special property of
to-day; but I speak from a knowledge born of experience, seeing that I
lived then, and live now; lived not only in Poseid twelve thousand years
ago, but also in the United States of America, before, during and after
the War of the Secession.

We drew our electrical energies partly from the waves beating the ocean
shores, more largely from the rise and fall of the tides; from mountain
torrents and from chemicals; but chiefly from what might aptly be termed
the "Night-Side of Nature." High-grade explosives were known to us, but
our employment of them was of much wider range than thine. If thou
couldst cause them substances gradually to yield up their vast
imprisoned force without fear of an explosion, thinkest thou that thy
machinery would long be propelled by clumsy, because ponderous, steam or
electric engines? If a great steamship could dispense with its coal-bins
and boilers and, instead have dynamite in an absolutely safe compound
form yielding, from what a man could carry in a handbag, force
sufficient to drive the ship from England to America, or to send a train
six thousand miles, how long wouldst thou see steam enginery? Yet this
was a power, and a least valued, one at that, which we--possibly you;
certainly I--knew in the, Atlantean life. It will be again with thee,
because Our Race in coming again from devachan to earth.

But not alone this resource of power was ours; indeed, it was our forces
of the Night-Side as an alcohol-vapor motor is to thy steam-engine. The
Night-Side forces--what are they? At this place I will answer only by a
counter-question,

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

namely: The force of Nature, of gravitation, of the sun, of light,
whence is it? If thou wilt answer me, "It is of God," so then will I
make answer that, likewise, Man is the Heir of the Father, and
whatsoever is His, is also the Son's. If Incal is impelled by God, the
Son shall find how his Father doeth this thing, and shall presently do
likewise again, even as Man so once in Poseid. But greater things than
these which we did might ye do; ye are now, ye were then; ye are Poseid
returned, and on a higher plane!

The original object for which the great moat encircling the capital was
excavated, had, since long centuries, been fulfilled. That purpose was
purely maritime, in the days when ships had been used as carriers,
before the later general use of aerial vessels; and it had served this
purpose in such stead as to win for Caiphul its proud title "Sovereign
of the Seas," a name retained even when the original uses of its moat
had become a matter of history. When the better means of transportation
had supplanted the old, then the ships, which for ten centuries bad
graced all the seas and waterways of the globe, had been suffered to
decay or had been converted to other uses. Only, a few sails now roved
the waters, and those were merely pleasure craft belonging to
novelty-loving people of leisure, who thus indulged their taste for
sport.

This radical change was, however, no reason why the masonry quays of the
one hundred and forty miles, more or less, of the moat should be allowed
to go to destruction. This would have entailed the loss of valuable
property through the encroachment of the unchecked waters, as well as
the deterioration of the sanitary system of the city, besides which such
a course would have destroyed the beauty of the moat and its
environments. Therefore, in all of the seven centuries since we ceased
to employ marine transportation, no sign of weakness had been suffered
to menace this great length of masonry.

A marked feature of Caiphul was the wealth and rare beauty of its trees
and tropical shrubbery, lining the avenues, covering the multitudinous
palace-crowned hills, many of which had been constructed to rise two or
even three hundred feet

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

above the level of the plain. Trees and shrubs and plants, vines and
flowers, annuals and perennials, filled the mimic canyons, gorges,
defiles and levels which it had delighted the art-loving Poseidi to
create. They covered the slopes, twined the miniature cliffs, the walls
of buildings, and hid even the greater part of the steps which led a
wide-sweeping banks to the edges of the moat, overlaying everything like
a glorious verdant garment.

Perhaps the reader is beginning to wonder where all the people lived.
Truly the query is well timed, and the answer will, I trust, prove
interesting.

In the work of altering the configuration of the surface of the great
promontory from that of a plain to the more beautiful variations of
hills and their intervening depressions, the scheme pursued had been to
make keyed-shells of rock, of enormous strength, in the form of
terraces, and leaving arched passages wherever the avenues intersected
such elevations, to fill in the interiors then remaining with a concrete
of clay, rubble and cement carefully tamped. The exteriors were
thereafter covered with rich soil on the levels and. terraced for the
support of vegetable life of all kinds. These elevations covered many
square miles of the level once existent, leaving little that remained as
plane surface except the avenues, and not all of these, inasmuch an
quite a number of the thoroughfares ascended the rise between the hills
or followed the ascending bed of some canyon until they reached the
ridge at the head of the latter. They then penetrated the divide and
debouched upon the opposite side through an arched way, wherein tubes of
crystal, absolutely exhausted of air, gave a continuous light derived
from the "Night-Side" forces. The vertical faces and inclinations of the
terraces, as well as the sides of the canyons, were made into rooms of
varied and ample size. The entrances to these, and to the windows, were
concealed under mimic hedges of rock, over which clambered vines and
rock-loving plants, thus removing from view the stiff ugliness of the
metallic casings underneath. These apartments were arranged in artistic
suites for the accommodation

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

of families. The metal sheathing with which they were lined prevented
moisture within, while their position under the surface insured an even
degree of temperature at all at seasons of the year. As these residences
were designed and built by the government, the ownership was vested in
the same power and the tenants acquired leasehold from the Minister of
Public Buildings. The rental was merely nominal and only sufficient to
keep the property in repair, furnish the expenses of the incandescent
lighting and heating service, the water supply, and the salaries of the
necessary officials to attend to these duties. All of this cost not
above ten or fifteen per cent of an ordinarily skilled mechanic's wages.
The mention of so much detail may be pardoned. for, were it omitted,
only & vague and unsatisfactory conception of life in this antediluvian
age would be acquired by the reader.

The great charm of thew residences lay in the fact of their retired
situations, which prevented the dismal appearance of masses of angular
houses, an effect of extreme ugliness seen in our modern days, but
seldom, or never, in our Atlantean, cities. The result of this
arrangement was that, to a beholder, looking from any high elevation,
the city would have been [conspicuous](errata.htm#3), to one accustomed
to the modern atrocities of stone, brick or wood,. chiefly, for the
absence of sky-piercing piles separated by narrow, dark, treeless and
too often filthy tunnels, miscalled streets.. Here a hill, and there
another and yet another until the eye counted them by score--there were,
one hundred, and nineteen in all; here a lake, or there a. cliff with a
lake, or wooded park at its foot; gorges of mimic grandeur, little
forests, so regularly irregular; cascades and tumbling torrents, fed
from the inexhaustible supply of fresh water belonging to the city,
their banks and shores covered with those plants, trees, and shrubs that
love contiguity to abundant water. Such, dear friends, would have been
the scene presented to thine eyes, couldst thou have gazed on Caiphul
with me; perchance thou didst. And yet, Caiphul was not devoid of houses
built much after the modern fashion, for the city franchise to build
neat mansions here and there in situations

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and styles calculated to add to the beauty of the scene was a privilege
of which any one of means might avail himself, under official approval.
Many did so. Museums of art, edifices for histrionic entertainment and
other structures not designed for habitation were also in tasteful
numbers.

I found, in going about the city, that the avenues, in certain
instances, seemed to come to an abrupt termination in some grotto, whose
interior was usually hung with stalactites pendent from the roof.
Perhaps a slight turn occurred from the straight course, and thus
prevented one from seeing through the grotto. In these places, shaded,
high-tension, airless cylinder lamps cast a soft glow throughout the
interior, making a moonlight effect very pleasing to one who came in
from the brightness of the sunlight.

While, in the majority of cases, our people were accomplished
equestrians, this mode of travel was not used except for physical
culture and grace, electric transit being provided by the government.
Indeed, the social reformers of these days of the Christian nineteenth
century would have been in their ideal land had they been Caiphalians,
and this because the government pursued the paternalistic principle so
systematically as to have vested in itself the ownership of all the
land, methods of public transit, and communications, in a word, all
property, The system was a most beneficent one, which no Poseida wanted
to see disused or supplemented by any other. Did a citizen desire, a
vailx (airship) for any use, he applied to the proper officials, who
were on duty at numerous vailx-yards throughout the city. Or, to
cultivate the land, he applied to the department of Soils and Tillage.
Perhaps it was desired to manufacture some product; the machinery was
for lease at the nominal rate necessary to meet working expenses and the
salary of the officers overseeing that portion of the public property.
Let these samples suffice. Enough, that no political harmony exists in
this modern time of the world like that which sprang from this
paternalism on the part of our elected officials. Governmental

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

paternalism is a thing regarded with jealousy and semi-alarm by modem
republics. But it is to-day a different quality from what it was then.
Ours was a paternalism closely watched and duly checked by the
suffragists of the nation, and its life was essentially exponent of true
socialistic principles.

I have not even now been so precise in details as to explain many of the
most peculiar adjustments maintained between the political parent and
its children, nor between labor and capital. But neither can I do so in
these pages with any degree of propriety, because this is not a plea for
readoption, in this age of the world, of methods pursued in that remote
period. Yet, this much I can say, not inappropriately at this juncture,
that Poseid had not in my day, the modem, yet also very ancient,
annoyance of labor strikes, blocking capital and enterprise, starving
the artisan, and causing more suffering on the part of the poor than
such annoyances can ever bring to the doors of the rich. The secret of
this immunity was not far to seek in a nation whose government was the
voice of those people who possessed sufficient education to wield the
power of franchise, and this, too, regardless of sex, because inborn in
our national life was this principle: "An educational measuring-rod for
every voter; the sex of the suffragist in immaterial." In such a nation,
and under such a government, it were strange indeed if industrial
inharmonies could long disturb social polity. The broad principle of
equity between employer and employee governed in Poseid; it mattered not
what a person did for another person, but the whole equation hinged on
this question: Was some service performed by one person for another? If
so, the fact that the service was or was not accomplished by physical
labor counted for nothing. It might be equally a service deserving
compensation whether it was a physical or a purely intellectual service;
nor was it held to be important whether the employer represented (me or
more individuals or the employee one or more people.

Our local enactments on the subject of industrial equity were complete
and rather voluminous. While I care not to give in detail a reproduction
of what may be termed labor law, a

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

few excerpts are worthy of place. It will be well to preface these with
a short history of their enactment, and thus show how, in that olden
time, labor troubles quite similar, and fully as menacing to peace and
order as any modern industrial upheaval, were finally and equitably
settled.

On the "Maxin-Stone," to which legal code reference in full is made in
the proper place, was found this vital seed of settlement of the fearful
menace embroiling labor and capital, to wit:

"What time those who work for hire shall be oppressed, and shall rise in
wrath to destroy their oppressor--lo! let their hand be stayed, that
they shall obey Me. I say unto them: Harm not the person or the property
of any man, not even though by that man -they be oppressed. For are not
all brothers and sisters? Are not all children of one Father, even the
nameless Creator? But this I command: That they destroy oppression.
Shall things, which are less than man, rule over and oppress their
masters? Seek diligently my meaning."

The students of ethics interpreted this command to mean that the
oppressed industrial classes should not harm the oppressing capitalists
nor their property. The rich classes were perhaps as much victims of
circumstances as the poorer people; the remedy lay, not in blind
anarchy, but in eradicating conditions. This was easy, if properly
attempted. The oppressed were as a thousand to one of the oppressor. The
majority of them held the elective franchise, and it was determined
that, as the government was the people's servant, the proper method was
to deal with the question at the polls, and not to employ violence
against the rich. Therefore the call went forth amongst all the people
to vote on the adoption of a code of industrial regulations and to vote
its respectful submission to the Rai. Of the many articles and sections,
I shall insert only those that are pertinent to modem times and
troubles, so that if these selections are not articled and sectioned in
consecution the reason is obvious.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

EXCERPTS FROM THE POSEID LABOR LAWS.

"No employer shall demand of any employee any service outside of legal
hours of work without extra remuneration."

"Sec. 4. These hours shall not be less nor more than nine in number for
physical labor in any period of twenty-four hours; nor less nor more
than eight hours for sedentary employments chiefly requiring
intellectual exertion."

This statute allowed the two parties to a labor contract to arrange to
suit themselves when the working hours were to begin or end, with
reference to the first hour of the day, namely, the modern noon hour. In
regard to wage matters, the law was very clear. It held that as mankind
was. selfish by nature, that is, the lower nature, that he would operate
on a basis of self-aggrandizement, the modern doctrine of "laissez-nous
faire." Hence if be should not be actuated by the sense of duty to his
fellowman to treat that man right, when right was not dictated by might,
then the law must compel him to be. fair. It is in this that the modern
Anglo-Saxon world, which is Poseid (and Suern) reincarnating, shows one
mark of the slow but sure upward progress begotten of time; proves that
although man moves, as does all else, sensate and insensate, in a
circle, yet that circle is like a screw-thread, ever progressing around
and around, but each time moving on a higher plane. Poseid must be
compelled by its advanced minds to do what is fair towards the weak.
America and Europe are growing willing to do rightly, fairly, because it
is the part of duty. Thus we behold modern employers often doing of free
will what the ancient Poseid did because of law, namely, sharing profits
with their employees.

The law then having gone to the lawmakers, the suffragists decreed that
the government should establish a Department of Commissary, the duties
of which should be to collect all statistics concerning the food
products of commerce, also concerning all textile fabrics necessary for
clothing and, in brief, all articles necessary for the proper social
maintenance of individuals. On these statistical reports was to be
founded

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

an estimate of the cost of all such necessaries, amongst which books
were reckoned as mental food, and the cost of these things for a year
was calculated. Upon this calculation, day's wages were estimated by
dividing the annual cost into the number of days. This rate was decided
anew every ninety days, as the cost of the chief staples was found to
fluctuate, hence the rate was not wholly stable, and the wages of any
given three months' term might probably differ from those of any
previous quarter.

Let me quote:

"See. VII, Art. V. Employers shall divide the gross profits of business
operations upon the following plan: The wage, salary or emolument of
each employee shall be paid in the sum directed by the quarterly
estimate of living cost determined by the Department of Commissary. From
the remainder, the amount of six parts in each hundred on the capital
invested shall be set aside. This increment shall be and represent the
employer's net profits. From the remaining income the running expenses
shall be deducted, and of any sum thereafter remaining, one-half shall
be invested to provide annuities for sick or disabled, or assurance for
the dependents of deceased employees. The remaining half shall be
periodically distributed amongst the employees on. the basis of their
various compensations.

"See. VIII, Art. V. The whole of a body of employees is only equal to
the Superintendent thereof. The Superintendent is equal to all the
underlings. Hence, employers, when not themselves managers of the
business, shall pay to managers a salary equal to the combined wages of
the subordinates."

Truly, these labor laws and other matters have a modern sound. But
civilization in all ages, among all nations, is wont to express itself
in ways which, if modern language be used to describe them, will seem
almost identical; so that in ancient Atl and in modem America the term
"strike" may be properly used to designate a labor revolt; the same
principle characterizes all other phases; for from age to age the world
makes but

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

slow progress, and is to-day not as far advanced in its present
sub-cycle, nor as civilized, as it was in olden Poseid. This may seem a
hard saying, but it will presently be understood.

Such, in the main, were the chief features of the industrial world in
Poseid. The old-time strikes and riots out of which these laws were born
disappeared and peace took its sway. The change was beneficent, indeed,
yet always the strong looked to see how they might evade the law, and
though they did not succeed to a harmful extent, still the wish on their
part entered the sum of karma. So when the modem world of the Christian
epoch came to the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, particularly the
last named, then began the reincarnation of this Poseid era, and for a
time the tendency to oppression again came uppermost. But overriding
this tendency now faintly appears the willingness to do right for the
sake of right, which, as applied to industrial matters, has of very,
very recent years been manifested--a sign of the evening afterglow of
the last day, now near striking its last hour, telling of a spent age. I
particularly refer to the greater willingness of man to treat his fellow
rightly, without being forced thereto by legal enactments. Truly, it is,
as yet, only done because it is found to pay; but it would never have
been found to pay if the reincarnated rightwardness had not induced
experiments in profit-sharing to be made, in hopes of exterminating the
strike iniquity and with the idea of harmonizing society to be active in
doing as it would be done by. Finally, strange and paradoxical as it may
appear, this betterment is the direct child of the old-time rights
extorted by might in Poseid, and to-day, reincarnated offspring of
reincarnated oppression, as in Atlantis oppression sprang reincarnate
from the grave of other ages gone before, previous to the wondrous
memorial of Gizeh. But to more than mention this here would be to trench
upon work given unto another by the Messiah; therefore only a hint can I
give now, but more later. Suffice it then, that those were ages when man
was struggling, with scarcely perceptible upward motion, from

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

our fallen ancestry. Glory be to our Father that His children surely, if
slowly, are by devious ways climbing His heights; many are their falls,
but they shall rise again, not suffering the enemy to triumph.

It may be a seemingly inopportune intrusion, but I must here briefly
describe the electro-odic transit system of Caiphul, and the other
cities, towns and villages scattered throughout the empire and its
colonies. The description is of the local transit-carriages only. On
each side of every avenue was a broad tessellated pavement for
pedestrians. A line of massive, bottomless stone vases in which throve
ornamental shrubs and foliage plants stood upon the curb, and on either
side of these was a metal rail, placed at a height of about nine feet,
and supported upon davits similar to those from which ship-boats are
swung. At regular distances other rails crossed these main runners,
rails capable of being raised or lowered to form a switch-junction, a
simple lever effecting this process. These rails served as cross
streets, there being in comparatively few instances any paved street
underneath the rails on any but the great radiate avenues. On the maps
of the City Department of Transit these main and cross rails looked like
the web of a garden spider. For each transit-district there were
multitudes of carriages, having aut-odic mechanism, whereby they were
made to speed at tremendous swiftness with their passengers; but
collisions could not occur, as the conveying rods formed a double-track
system.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: Faith Is Knowledge Also, And It Giveth To Removing
Mountains](dtp07)
