[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp07)  [Next](dtp09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IV

### "AXTE INCAL, AXTUCE MUN"

In their consideration of natural laws, the philosophers of Poseid had
come to the conclusive hypothesis and working theory that the material
universe was not a complex entity but in its primality extremely simple.
The glorious truth, "Incal malixetho," was clear to them, that is, that
"Incal (God) is immanent in Nature." To this they appended, "Axte Incal,
axtuce mun," "To know God is to know all

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

worlds whatever." After centuries of experimentations, recording of
phenomena, deductions, analyzing and synthetizing, these students had
arrived at the final proposition that the universe--not here dwelling on
their wondrous astronomical knowledge--was, with all its varied
phenomena, created and continuously kept in operation by two primal
force-principles. Briefly stated, these basic facts were that matter and
dynamic energy (which were Incal made externally manifest) could readily
account for all things else. This conception held that only One
Substance existed and but One Energy, the one being Incal externalized
and the other His Life in action in His Body. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1) This One Substance assumed many forms under
the action of variant degrees of dynamic force. Because it was the basic
principle of all natural and a psychic, but not of spiritual, phenomena,
allow here a postulate with which not a few of my friends will find
themselves at least partially familiar, perhaps wholly so. Commencing
with dynamic energy as first sensibly manifest in the example furnished
by simple vibration, the Poseid position may be outlined as follows: A
very low rate of vibration may be felt; an increase of rate heard. For
example, first we feel the pulsing of a harp-string, and then if the
rate of vibration be increased we hear its sound. But substances of
other sorts, able to endure greater vibratory impulses, manifest under
more intense action, following sound, first heat, then light. Now again,
light varies in color. The first color produced is red, and thence, by a
constantly augmenting vibratile energy, orange, yellow, green, blue,
indigo, violet, each spectrum-band being due to an exact and definite
increase in the number of the vibrations. Succeeding the violet, further
augmentation gives pure white, more gives a gray, then more extinguishes
light, replacing it with

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

electricity, and so on through an ever-increasing voltage until the
realm of vital or psychic force is attained. This may truly be regarded
as going inward from those manifestations of nature, of Incal or God, or
the Creator, which are external; as going toward the internal from
externality. A very brief study will show thee that the laws of the
physical world continue inward to their spiritual source; that they are,
truly, but prolongations the one of the other. But, ere entering into
the realm of vibration, whose doorkeeper is sound, we find that the One
Substance vibrates in variant, but definite, dynamic degree, and that
thence arise each and all of the diverse forms of matter; in short, the
difference between any given substances, as gold and silver, iron and
lead, sugar and sand, is not one of matter, but of dynamic degree
solely. Do I weary thee, my friend? Bear yet a little longer, I pray
thee, for it is an important matter. In this dynamic affection the
degree is no loose limitation, for if the vibratile rate be a shade
variant, lower or higher than in any special material which may be under
notice, the variation will be different in appearance and in its
chemical nature; thus to proper substantial entities definite if
enormous vibrations per second may be imparted, and the resulting
substance (for light is substantial) is, say, red light, <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2) but if one-eighth greater it will be orange,
and if more or less, then the resultant must inevitably be a reddish
orange, or a yellowish, respectively. It thus appears that certain
definite degrees exist as plainly as mileposts, and that these major
degrees are absolute. In other words, the One Substance is not as
readily kept between these greater definitions as upon them, a fact
which explains the tendency of composites, or intermediate affections,
to decompose into the

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

definite or simple elements; chemical compounds are not as stable as
chemical primaries. The modern "wave theory," that sound, heat, light
and correlatives are but forms of force, is only half correct; they are
this, but they are more also. They are, in brief, affections of the One
Substance by specific degrees of the One Energy, and except that the
rate of this affection is vastly greater in the case of electricity than
in that of lead or gold, there is no difference between these widely
diverse appearing things. This is the energy by the Rosicrucians named
"Fire," that which gives entrance to that. mysterious realm of nature
penetrated only by the adept thaumaturgist, magician. Call these
students it whose will all nature bends obedient, by whatever name best,
please, thee, only bearing ever in mind that the real Magian never
speaks of self or works, and is not known by his fellows to be what he
is, save an accident hath revealed the secret. To this membership
belonged He at whose command the winds and the waves were stayed on
tempestuous Galilee. But He spoke not of Himself. Of that sublime
brotherhood I will relate much ere long. No better proof is needed that
all the variant manifestations are but variants of the odic force, the
Rosicrucian "Fire," than this: offer resistance to an electric current,
thereby reducing or diverting it against an opposing force, and thou
hast light; oppose to this (are) light a combustible obstruction, and
flame results. So mightest thou go on to the discovery soon to be made
by the world of science, that light, all light, of the sun, or from any
source, can he made to yield sound; upon this discovery hinge some of
the most astounding inventions that thine age hath even dreamed of in
its visions. But the primal discovery in this wonderful link, first of
the sequence, will be the greatest of all, and so heralded. And this
will be warranted, for the fact that it will be but a reincarnate
unfoldment will not diminish its importance to mankind, nor the credit
of its rediscoverer. In brief, the truths of our Father's Kingdom are
eternal; have ever been, will ever be existent, and only the discoverers
themselves will be new to the fact. The fact not being a new one in
itself, nor new even to the

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

world, but only to this age of it. Poseid knew that light gives out
sound when correctly resisted. It knew that magnetism gives rise to
electricity in the same manner and for the same reason. Thus, the
loadstone exhibits magnetism; revolve it in the field of a dynamo and so
cut the current and pile it upon itself, so to speak, and electricity
develops. So, resist this and light appears; this, and heat comes; again
resisted properly, and sound results, then next energy appears as
pulsing motion. But these various processes may be "short-circuited" and
all of the intermediate phenomena cut out.

Have I been wearisome in this discourse? If so, and I suspect that I
have, the reward is at hand.

The Poseidi found that in the realm beyond magnetism were yet other
forces, superior and more intense of pulsation, forces operated by the
mind. And Mind is of our Father, and is the constantly creating source
of all things whatsoever. Were the perpetual **vis a tergo** of divine
creation to cease for one instant, in that instant the Universe would
cease to exist. Now wilt thou see the sublime beauty of the Atlan
postulate not long since repeated: "Incal malixetho. Axte Incal, axtuce
mun." For down from His heights, marking the descent by "forcefalls" as
a river marks declivities fin its bed by cataracts, comes this supreme
power; comes far, oh! very far, adown its course to the cascades of
magnetism, electricity, light, heat, sound, motion--and far off where
the bed of this Divine stream becomes nearly level, exhibits those
little ripples of material differentiation which thou termest chemical
elements, insisting on there being sixty-three, when there is but One.
From this knowledge came all the wondrous triumphs of that old age, and
one by one they are emerging to-day after their long oblivion, till
to-morrow they shall awake in crowds, and press to rediscovery by threes
and fours, and then by platoons and companies and legions, till all the
treasures of Poseid shall be again on earth, in air, and sea. O, bright
to-morrow of time, and fortunate thou who shalt open thine eyes upon it
and its marvels. And yet, although so fortunate, still shalt thou find
it well behooves thee to temper all things by the spirit, and

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

not to let the match of physical discovery outstrip the advance of the
soul. O, sad shall be found any day wherein man approacheth the arcane
treasury of his Father from the side of the blind physical eye; for if
by this the whole world shall be gained, what shall it profit if it lose
the soul?

Having thus acquired insight into a new realm, if it be new to thee, let
me ask, and answer thou me: How explainest thou these two great
phenomena, heat and light? They are not easy to explain; cold and
darkness are not merely the absence of heat and light.

Having given the basis thereof, now will I show a new philosophy:

I have said that the Atlans recognized Nature in its entirety to be
Deity externalized. Their philosophy asserted that force moved, not in
straight fines but in circles, that is, so as always to return into
itself. If the dynamism operating the universe acts in circular
progression, it follows that an infinity of increase in vibration
possible to One Substance would be an untenable concept. There must be a
point in the circle where extremes meet and run the round again, and
this we find between cathodicity and magnetism. As vibration brought
substance into the realm of light, it must carry it out. It does so. It
conveys it into what the Poseidi termed "Navaz, the Night-Side of
Nature," where duality becomes manifest, cold opposing heat, darkness
light, and where positive polarity opposes negative, all things
antipodal. Cold is as much a substantial entity as heat, and darkness as
light. There is a prism of seven colors in each white ray of light;
there is also a septuple prism of black entities in the blackest
gloom--the night is as pregnant as the day.

The Poseid investigator thus became cognizant of wondrous forces of
nature which he might bend to the uses of mankind. The secret was out,
the discovery being that attraction of gravitation, the law of weight,
had set over against it the "repulsion by levitation"; that the first
belonged to the Light-Side of Nature, and the second to Navaz, the
Night-Side; that vibration governed the darkness and the cold. Thus
Poseid,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

like Job of old, knew the path to the. house of darkness, and the
treasures of the hail (cold). Through this wisdom Atlantis found it
possible to adjust weight (positiveness) to lack of weight
(negativeness) so evenly that no "tug of war" was manifest. This
achievement meant much. It meant aerial navigation without wings or
unwieldy gas-reservoirs, through taking advantage of repulsion by
levitation opposed in overmatching strength to the attraction of
gravitation. That vibration of the One Substance governed and composed
all realms was a discovery which solved the problem of the conveyance of
images of light, pictures of forms, as well as of sound and heat, just
as the telephone thou knowest so well conveys images of sound, only In
Poseid no wires or other sensible material connection was required in
the use, at whatever distance, of either telephones or telephotes, nor
even in caloriveyance, that is, heat-conduction.

To digress a little, it is to the employment of these and the higher
forces of the night-side that seemingly magic feats of occult adepts,
from the Man of Nazareth down to the least Yogi, are indebted for their
possibility.

And now, let me close this chapter by saying that when modern science
shall have seen its way to the acceptance of the Poseidonic knowledge
herein outlined, physical nature will no longer posses any hidden
recess, any penetralia, for the scientific investigator. Not earth, air,
the depth of the seas nor those of interstellar space will hold secrets
from that man who approaches from the Godward side, as did Poseid. I do
not say that Atl knew the very all; it knew more than this day has yet
uncovered, but not all. Yet, the search commenced then by them might be
continued now by thee, for America, my people, thou wert of Atlantis. Of
either, I can sing, "My country, 'tis of thee."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[61:1](dtp08.htm#fr_1) NOTE--As, in its outgoing
impulse the Created draws away from the Creator it looks back to its
origin and notes its progression-marks, that is, its multiplied
realizations of its increasing separation from its Source. The greater
this separateness, the greater the field (Matter) wherein these points
appear, because the divine element in the Created has noted more points,
or in other things, more material objects as being between it and its
source. Only when we look back at these things we have sensed these
thought-forms of God, do we perceive matter, for when we look forward to
reunion with Him, matter disappears, giving place to Spirit.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[62:1](dtp08.htm#fr_2) NOTE--Redlight is stated
to occur at 395,000,000,000,000 vibrations of that "ether" which by
Phylos is termed the last form of matter below where matter ceases and
mind begins. And the highest visible light vibration is placed at
790,000,000,000,000. So says science. But Phylos says: "Vastly higher
than the high purple range where light ceases ordinarily to be visible,
the One Substance again vibrates visibly. As a synchronous harp-string
that responds to key of low C, for example, struck on another harp, will
also respond to every C in the whole register, be it low, or middle or
high, so the One Substance responds at 831,000,000,000,000; at, again,
the next octave of vibration, and again at the next, where it becomes
visible as the fatal Unfed Light, called in Atla the "Maxin," and again,
by the Tchin as the "Vis Mortuus."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V: Life In Caiphul](dtp09)
