[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp12)  [Next](dtp14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER IX

### CURING CRIME

During the subsequent four years after my strange meeting with the tall
and straight, white-haired old man who had prophesied concerning me,
events, one after another shaped themselves in harmony with his
forecast. In all that time we never met, indeed I met him but once more
before my death.

Before going further I must recall and finally dismiss from the scene
the partners in my gold mine and also the one who bought the gold,
knowing the act to be unlawful.

Several months had elapsed since the interview with Rai Gwauxln in his
private apartments, when a youth wearing an orange-hued turban and upon
its front a gold-mounted garnet pin, denoting him to be a guard in the
imperial service, entered the geology room in the Xioquithlon and going
to the instructor-in-chief, spoke in a low tone. Rapping on his desk for
attention from the ninety or more students in session in the minerals
class, the chief asked if a Xioqene named Zailm Numinos was present.

I arose in my place in response to the question.

"Come forward."

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

The other Xioqeni looked interestedly on, as I went up, not without some
trepidation, for I well knew what service was represented by the
messenger, and there seemed to be a sternness in the tones of the
instructor not at all pleasant.

"This courier desires that thou wilt go with him before the Rai, who has
so commanded. He is at the Tribune, of the Criminal Court, and thou art
needed as a witness."

Remembering what the Rai had said, I was considerably reassured by the
import of the words addressed to me, and no longer specially
apprehensive, went as required. Arrived at the Court of the Tribunes, I
saw my mining partners there in custody, along with the incriminated
purchaser of the gold. The judge of the court sat on the judicial divan
on its raised platform, and by his side sat, in simple dignity, Gwauxln,
Rai of the greatest nation of the earth; but he was nevertheless
studiously observant of the fact that the judge was, as such, entitled
to the place of first rank while in the hall. Several spectators were in
the seats provided for the public in the auditorium.

There could be but one verdict concerning the malefactors, "Guilty as
charged," This opinion was reached very quickly, and by the culprits
admitted to be a just one. Immediately, an officer took the prisoners
into another part of the building, where was a well-lighted apartment,
fitted with various portable and stationary instruments. He was
accompanied by all persons present.

A chair with a head-clasp rest, and with other rests, clasps and straps
for the limbs and body of the occupant, stood in the center of the room.
A guardsman seated and firmly strapped one of the prisoners in the
chair. This preliminary attended to, a Xioqa approached bearing in his
hands a small instrument of which, from its general appearance, I knew
the nature to be magnetic. He placed the two poles of this in the hands
of the condemned man, and after a brief manipulation a slight, purring
sound was heard from the instrument. Immediately the prisoner's eyes
closed and his every appearance indicated profound stupor; he was in
fact magnetically anesthetized. Then

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

the operator carefully felt all over the head of the unconscious man,
and this examination concluded, ordered the attendant to shave the
entire cranium. When this order had been obeyed, he made a blue mark
upon the shaven surface in front and above the ears. Feeling further, he
made the Poseid numeral <span id="img_09800"></span> ![](img/09800.jpg)
(or 2) above and a very little back of each ear. These operations done,
he gave his attention to the spectators, but, on being spoken to by Rai
Gwauxln, he paused long enough from making his proposed address to the
audience to call me to his side from where I stood outside the railing.
Then he spoke:

"In the prisoner I find that the predominant, most positive faculties
are those which I have marked one and two; these are, number one, a
grasping desire to acquire property, and his disposition is to do all
things secretly, as may be seen from the exceeding prominence of the
organs of secretivness. While the skull does not extend upwards very
high, but at number two is very wide between the ears, I should infer
that here we have a very acquisitive individual, lacking
conscientiousness and spirituality, and therefore the moral nature,
almost wholly. As he has also a very destructive temperament, we have
withal a very dangerous character, one which I marvel has so managed as
not ere this to have exposed himself to this office for correction. Why
any one should hesitate, even voluntarily, to undergo corrective
treatment causes me much wonder. It is something, I suppose, explicable
on the theory that one on the low moral plane of this poor fellow is
unable to see the advantage of being on any higher plane, but is able to
see the immediate advantages due to the pursuit of nefarious methods. He
is, in short, a man who would not hesitate at the commission of murder,
could he see any immediate gain in it, and be wholly oblivious of after
consequences. Is this true, Zo Rai?"

"It is," replied the emperor.

"My diagnosis of the case," continued the Xioqa, "having been confirmed
by so high an authority, I will now apply the cure."

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

He summoned an attendant, who wheeled out another magnetic apparatus
contained in a heavy metal case. Having placed this in a satisfactory
condition of activity, the Xioqa next applied its positive pole to that
place on the head of the patient marked by the figure one, and the other
pole he placed at the back of the neck. He then took out his timepiece
and laid it on the metal case of the instrument, near a dial the pointer
of which he adjusted. All was then still, except the low-toned
conversation in various parts of the room, during the ensuing half hour.
At the end of this time the Xioqa arose from his seat and changed the
positive pole to the other side of the head, where the duplicate figure
was marked. Then again a half-hour's quiet, broken only by the exit of
some of the spectators and the entrance of others. When the half hour
had again elapsed, the operator changed the pole to the place marked
"two." This time only half an hour was given to both sides of the head.
I had been told by the emperor to remain. He bad only stayed a few
moments after the beginning of the operation which was not new to him.
At the end of the work on the first man be was taken from under the
influence of the magnetic anesthetizer by merely reversing the poles of
the instrument at a second application. The Xioqa lectured upon the
theme afforded by the operation while the first patient was being
removed. To the considerable audience that had, by this time, assembled,
he said:

"You have seen the treatment of those mental qualities which tended
through their predominance to warp his moral nature, something but
partially developed. The process has been partially to atrophy the
vascular channels supplying that portion of the brain where are located
the organs of greed and of destruction. But mark well this point, after
all is said, the soul is superior to the physical brain, and it is in
the soul, the nature of the man, in which these criminal tendencies
inhere-the brain and other organs being the seat of psychic
expression--the business office, so to speak. Hence, merely to have
mechanically hypnotized this subject would not accomplish our purpose.
Hypnotizing is an indrawing, and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the cerebral blood-vessels contract and become partially bloodless;
indeed, they may become fatally empty; this art is a very dangerous one.
But the opposite effect is produced in aphaism (Poseid equivalent for
the modern word "mesmerism"). The brain is filled with blood, and the
reversion of the instrument cessated the hypnotic and initiated the
aphaic process. It is at this moment that the mind of the operator may
assume control of the mind of the subject, and suggest to the erring
soul a permanent cessation of the error. This man has been so treated,
doubly treated, since not only has the blood supply been partially cut
off which went to those organs where was the seat of his weakness, but
with my will I have impressed his soul to cease its sin, and I have
supplied it with a work to execute which will have a counter action. He
may be slightly ill for a few days, but his tendencies to sin will be
gone. It requires a superior mind, which has gone wrong in several
directions. to make a successful evil-doer, and where the lower nature,
chiefly a perverted sex-nature predominates, there will be found the
criminal. Atla has no debauchees, for if a person show such disposition,
the State takes the wayward one in hand and operates upon the proper
organs. But I need not dilate upon these subjects any further."

The first man having been taken away to receive careful nursing, the
next of my whilom partners was placed in the chair. Examination of the
cerebral development revealed that he was more weak than wicked; an
habitual prevaricator, and of libertine tendencies: one whose skull was
mostly behind and above the ears. I need not pause to describe his
treatment; it was on the lines of the other; mesmeric suggestion was the
chief cure.

As I went to my home that evening, I resolved to add the science of
prophylactic penology to my chosen curriculum. I did so. By practice of
the knowledge of men then acquired I interfered with the karma of not a
few individuals but, as the result has proven, the interference was in
no case injurious, so that I have not to-day to answer for any harm
done. I have

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

sometimes wished that I had submitted myself for treatment at the hands
of the State, for it would at least have prevented the commission of
errors which have wrought much misery, to me, and to others by me. That
I did not, is as well, not only on the principle that in our Father's
kingdom whatever is, is best, but also because no one can in any way
whatever, shirk the responsibilities inbound in character by the karma
of all preceding incarnations. To have so submitted myself for
correction would have been an evasion of the ordeal, a sort of cowardly
attempt similar to the act of the self-murderer who seeks to avoid
trouble on earth by suicide, and who in every ease escapes nothing, not
one jot nor tittle of the law of God. Instead, he piles his miseries and
penalties mountains higher and prolongs through inexorable karma, and
other earthly incarnations, his anguish. Thus it is with those who die
by self-destruction; but those who die by unavoidable causes
involuntarily, are not visited by such penalties. So the Poseid culprits
who could in no wise avoid the treatment were benefited, whereas for me
voluntary submission would have sown dragon's teeth for my pathway.
Penalties, observe, concern not those who know and, knowing, do God's
will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X: Realization](dtp14)
