[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp37)  [Next](dtp39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER III

### TAKE THEREFORE NO THOUGHT FOR THE MORROW

When I awoke, rich, delicate perfumes, and the low hum of voices greeted
my still slumberous senses. On opening my eyes, I found that Quong was
by my side, having either remained while I slept, or returned before I
roused. In the center of the room, sitting on the floor, I saw about a
dozen people,

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

each clad in a long gray robe. Quong had one of these robes on his
person, and to my astonishment, I found myself attired in like manner. A
high caste Thibetan, two Hindoo pundits and an Egyptian were, excepting
Quong, the only foreign brethren, the remaining persons being American
and English. The Egyptian was to the Sakaza what the Grand Master is to
a Masonic fraternity. Understand that he was not a teacher in the sense
that a professor in a college is an instructor. He was in himself more
of the Way, more of the Truth, more of the Life of God than any other
present. And hence, as in himself the highest plane, he stood before the
rest as a pinnacle each might study, and rise unto. This man alone was
standing.

Perceiving that I had awakened, Quong said:

"Let us seat ourselves in the circle, brother, that the ceremonies of
the evening may commence."

When seated we formed two in a circle of ten persons, arranged in a ring
in the center of the chamber, our hands clasped on either side by our
neighbors, and so around the circle. In its center stood the brazen
censer, and beside it the Grand Master. Presently this person began to
speak in the best of English, giving a clear, concise statement of the
wisdom-religion of the Lothinians. He disclaimed the idea that anything
which was performed under occult law could be a miracle, and declared
that no miracle had ever yet taken place in the world, because a miracle
would be a contravention of law, and what was a violation of law but
evil? It being evil, Jesus the Christ would have been the last ever to
have worked one. Not a man or woman, it was asserted, and it is true,
comprehends how these laws operate, or understands anything of their
nature, unless such man or woman is an occult student. The world of
science is more ignorant of these mysterious forces of Nature than even
the sect styled "Spiritualists," for these do comprehend a little, but
so very, very little as to expose them to fearful dangers, handling as
they do forces so terrible when abused that their field of operation
might well give pause to the wisest ere they trod therein. Yet science
soon shall know, following the Cross-Bearer.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

Beyond admitting me to free hearing of what was said and done, no notice
other than salutatory courtesy was paid me; that is, I was not invested
with any membership degrees; no degrees can be conferred, for each is in
self the degree represented. But the Adept, as I clearly perceived, had
spoken so personally direct that I knew he addressed me. This was when
he said:

"There is within this sacred place of meeting one who hath studied
deeply; studied as scientific modernism contemplates all life, and ever
hath the study filled him with melancholy, yea, even despair. He hath
questioned of the stars, 'What art thou?' and no reply hath been given
beyond that which astronomy, ever returns, 'Worlds, suns, blazing orbs,
mighty beyond power of mentality to conceive.' And of the grass, and it
hath said, 'I am of cells aggregated and vitalized by the spirit of
nature.' The animal hath replied, but in Darwinian terms: 'I am a form
evolutionized, and come up from protoplasm.' Man has he seen to be at
the apex of animal life, and so he says of himself: 'Lo! there is naught
but at one end the simple cell; at the other a complexity of cells
aggregated. But to me the world and all its forms speak of action, and
eternity; but of the immortality of man, of a soul or a spirit, or of
God, nay, no word! Death ends all!' O my brother! speaketh not this joy,
these griefs of thine, to thee of aught but magnetic vibration? Art thou
blind to the message of God that the 'vibratory' joy or grief or
'unconscious cerebral action,' where by thou comest to a given
knowledge, is but the method of thy life? And the animal, saith it not:
'Lo! I am a soul, and this animal body is fit tool for my soul powers,
which, if they increase beyond the power of the tool to express, force
me (the ego controlling) to cast it aside and seek a fitter tool in a
body suited to my progress.' And saith not man to thee: 'O brother in
darkness, I am at the apex of animal life, truly; in my admirably
adapted physical body is a fit tool to prose cute to the utmost any and
all material processes. It brings me to the wall of all physical life,
and behold! it enables me, the ego, to reach the top of this wall, and
find that I am a

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

spirit, not a vital stone. And because of my sight, I will leave behind
the pursuit of materiality for that of spirituality, and go even unto my
Father's house, where are many mansions (conditions) of spirit, but
where matter breaketh not in to corrupt nor steal the treasures.' Who
hath asked, let him hear me. I have spoken. May peace be with thee."

I thought my friend Quong was speaking in a humorous vein when he said
that the Adept, whose name was Mendocus, had not so much as opened his
lips, or used his vocal organs at all. Not so, however; I was mistaken.
Quong read my thought, and said:

"Nay, my brother, not in jest! Each of us has heard Mendocus, and to
each it seemed that his national tongue was used; to me, my own; to you
and five others, Anglo-Saxon; to the Hindoo pundits, their tongue.
Because Mendocus spoke from his soul unto ours is the reason of this
seeming paradox."

I thought at once of my Bible, which was a treasure to me above all
other books, and of the passage wherein it is written:

"'Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together and were
confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own
language."

In answer to the unspoken thought, Mendocus, the Adept, turned to me and
said:

"Verily, they spoke unto the souls of that multitude; it was no miracle,
but law. The Bible is sound occult doctrine so far as the matter in it
has escaped the revisers, and worse than revisers, the Roman Catholic
interpolators and twisters of its truths. Thou doest well to read it; I
have read it through eighty-seven times."

Here another brother joined with the remark: "The hearers and the
speakers were to each other as a perfectly attuned violin to its bow,
every string ready to respond to the least master-touch."

To this Mendocus added:

"They heard the speakers as thou heardst me, not with ears, for no
aerial connection is needed between souls in sympathy, but the
consciousness of what was said existed as does the consciousness

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of one's own thoughts; thou needst not speak thy thoughts that thine
ears may convey to thy consciousness what 'thoughts thou thinkest.
Neither are thine ears of more use in comprehending me. Yet because the
thoughts did not originate in thy brain, but in mine, and so were
external to thine, inner consciousness, therefore thou didst suppose
that thou heardst me with thine ears, when it was thy soul which
understood, for my voice I used not."

I now understood in the light of the mind-reading power which these
students had revealed, why no question had been put to me concerning my
life, my thoughts or will in regard to affiliation with themselves; they
knew these things, through this ability, without asking.

Mendocus, Master, now requested attention from all present, and then
made an invocation to God and to all occult initiates in this world and
elsewhere in the universe. At the conclusion of this petition, he slowly
raised his right hand, whence, after half a minute, he dropped it to his
side and bowed his head. The wonderful light commenced to wane and,
simultaneously with its disappearance, a blinding flash of light seemed
to dart from the ceiling overhead, striking the censer by his side. Then
succeeded that inky blackness which follows the midnight flashing of the
lightning of heaven; but it was not destined to last very long. Soon in
the deep darkness there was a [noticeable](errata.htm#20) lightening
which continued to increase until the whole interior of the Sagum was
illumined by a lurid glow which rendered every object clearly visible.
Like the other, it seemed not to emanate from any particular point, but
as if the entire atmosphere were like red-hot iron, self luminous. The
next instant I observed that the faces of the Lothins had assumed an
exceedingly ghastly hue, bloodless in appearance as are the countenances
of dead men. Their pallor was soon explained, however, when my eyes fell
on the brazen censer standing in our midst. The gaze of every brother
was fixed with unwavering intensity upon a small globe of blue fire
which rested on the firepan. I noticed also that the self-luminosity of
the atmosphere was gone, and that the light

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

from the blue globe cast shadows. Although in size it was not larger
than a filbert, yet its intensity counteracted the luridness of the air.
It was beautiful in the extreme, but not dazzling. On the contrary it
was cool and calm, resting the eyes. Evidently the light was the same as
the positive flaming of the Vis Naturae with which I had seen the Tchin
envelop himself. It trembled and quivered like a globule of molten,
boiling metal.

Such absolute silence reigned, not even a sound of breathing being
audible--that I turned a quick glance on my friends. Except for the
glitter in their eyes as they gazed on the blue light, every one would
have seemed only a perfect but non-vital semblance of a human being.
Then my gaze reverted to the! object which centered the common
attention. It had been growing, and, now of a size of half a dozen
inches, was gloriously beautiful. Although I had seen no human agency
concerned in its creation, yet I felt that it was produced by the occult
knowledge of which I had witnessed so many other manifestations. Mind
over matter. Marvelous, novel, all this to me, but I knew it was not
miracle, although magical. "What is magic?" do you ask? Magic is the
comprehension of laws not ordinarily possible to grasp by means of
physical experiment, because their phenomena in general lie higher than
the physical realm, just a little lower than mental or psychic
operations, and partaking of the last to a major extent.

As I watched the blue globe, I gradually became en rapport with the
mental condition of the Lothins about me. Instead of wondering what were
to be the perfected dimensions and what the object of this glowing ball,
I contentedly watched it, with a sense of perfect knowledge of its
ultimate size and use. But this intuition aroused in my mind no train of
disturbing conjecture. I thought of nothing, absolutely nothing, taking
no thought for the morrow, or the next moment. My intelligent friend,
try this once; try to think of nothing; to have no thought, not even the
one that you are not thinking. I doubt your success in the attainment of
such a state of mind; but if you are, happily, successful, you will
remember to the end of

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

your allotted years on earth how great was the sense of rest, of peace,
of perfect joy, felt, not thought of, in that moment. Could you attain
and then retain such a mental state for half an hour, you would become
clairvoyant and clairaudient during that time, and both see and hear
across the leagues of earth; aye! and be conscious of futurity, so that
a prophecy then made by you would be found to come true in every detail,
though in scope was over years mounting to centuries. You must perceive,
then, what a beautiful condition the Lothins enjoy: thc whole present,
and each way, from the present almost to eternity, is theirs to know.
These states of mind are protracted with them, and in the quiescence
which is theirs at such times, they find themselves en rapport with the
architect of the world, and know His ways. Like Job are they then:
hearing of Him by the hearing of the ear, their eyes also behold
Him. <span id="fr_20"></span>[1](#fn_20) Some few of God's works they
can do, many more of them they can understand, laying the line on the
foundations of the earth; entering the springs of the sea, knowing where
light hath its way, and the place of darkness and the bounds thereof;
yea, in this still time of their souls God opens to them even the gates
of death, through which they go and return. But though they know all
this, and so friend, might you, too, yet it is because the Creator shows
them the paths unto the place thereof; and He will show you if you enter
the occult door through which Christ has gone unto the Father. Follow
Him, and greater things than these shall ye do.

Mendocus, Master, now perceived that the lurid glow of the atmosphere
had been neutralized by the light of the blue sphere, which, full twelve
inches through, rested motionless in completion, its glorious, radiant
center of entrancing loveliness. He raised his hand slightly, as if
giving an unspoken command. Upon this the sphere of light rose to a
height of perhaps eight feet from the floor, where it hung without
visible means of support. Again the hand waved in command, and the
sphere moved horizontally over our heads to a point about fifteen feet
from the center of the chamber. Here it

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

was permitted to remain. Although every one present was intuitively
aware of all that was about to occur, I will describe every incident for
the benefit of my readers. Following the pure blue light came a sphere
of intense indigo color upon the brazier, its process the same as that
of its predecessor, and when complete it was assigned position thirteen
feet from its neighbor, on the same eight-foot plane. Next came a sphere
of violet, of equally intense brilliancy, differing only in color, not
size. Then followed a globe of pure red, then one of orange, another of
pure yellow, and lastly one of glorious green. Every one was at the same
height from the floor, and equidistant, approximately, from its
neighbors. Any attempt at describing the extreme beauty of these
iris-hued spheres would indeed The futile, as they hung, motionless,
above our heads.

Once again the Master gave silent order, and the spheres began to move
horizontally around their common center. Slowly at first, gradually the
speed increased until persistence of vision presented them to the sight
as a great circle of light ninety feet in circumference; nevertheless
the orbital revolution did not in any degree merge the colors into
becoming white light. And now an additional feature of beauty was
presented: as the seeming ring sped around, from each of its compound
globes a shaft colored like its parent was simultaneously projected
horizontally to the center, when, from the junction a. perpendicular
column of light of purest white went forth, up-ward and downward, the
one to the great quartz crystal in the ceiling overhead, the other to
the carpet of gray below, for the censer had been removed from
underneath. Thus was presented the spectacle of an enormous wheel, axle,
spokes and rim, revolving at great speed, and all formed of imponderable
light. Though it rested on the carpet, there was no scorching, for this
was but Viviant Fire, positive, not the negative Vis Mortuus. Buddhism
symbolizes the latter element as "Siva," the destroyer; it is the Fire
of Death, the one wherein I had seen the moth perish and the stone
disappear. There is an esoteric Buddhism as well as an exoteric, or

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

religion of the masses, and the names of Siva and Vishnu, which to the
exoterist are names of personal Gods, of the Destroyer and the Preserver
respectively, are to the esoterist merely the terms distinguishing the
obverse and reverse aspects of Nature, that is, growth and satiety,
change and destruction.

Would power like this of the Lothins ever be mine? It seemed to me that
if Mendocus, Master, had come to such wisdom, he, being but a man, could
not do more than I--we were both souls. The wondrous temple in the heart
of the mountain; the lighting of the darkness; the lifting of the great
stone at the entrance; the Vis Viva and the Vis Mortuus; all this that I
had seen and was to see, was only the work of men who had, in their
calmness of soul and purity of heart and body, done these things because
the Christ-Spirit, in the pure of heart, is perfect human and extends
unto the Father. Could I not hope to attain the power of doing likewise?
I asked myself, and knew that I could, for I was then in the peace of
clairvoyance. Yet I saw not all that must intervene, not all the events
of the nearer future, nothing of them, in fact, but only the more
distant perspective of my soul's destiny.

"Verily," said Mendocus, "but not now, not until a time of trial be
past. To thee, as to all other occult neophytes, will come moments of
darkest doubt. and thy very soul will weep in the agony of despair. No,
thou wilt not doubt the truth of hermetic wisdom at any time, but thine
ability to acquire it only. Study, then, the principles of truth, not
its phenomena only. For its own sake it is more to be desired than its
works, though usually less attractive to neophytes. Thy doubts will be
born of an imperfect conception of thine own self, a want of perception
of symmetry; giving undue proportion to certain facts, and upon finding
these of less importance than thy conception of them originally painted,
thy heart will fail thee, for in themselves they are great, and if
comparison declares them small, what power shall grasp the greater? Then
will it be that thou wilt fear thou art but finite, and these things
infinite, and thou wilt say to thy soul: 'My weakness is to

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

these things as packthread wherewith to draw leviathan.' But this is not
so, for no creature is more than the Creator, and thou art of the Father
and joint Creator with Him. What shall prevail? Only Faith like that of
the Spirit who overlighteth Jesus and all them that triumph over time.
Woe unto thee if thou shall faint while buffeting the billows of doubt.
Miserable indeed is the lot of such a one, for, debarred from. the
society of the Brothers because, of his faint heart, he is yet possessed
of a knowledge of something purer, better, higher than the ordinary
ambitions of humanity. After his glimpse into the greater possibilities
of his being, he disdains to resume his former sense-relations with the
world. He can not descend to the world's level, nor raise his fellowman
to his own height. So through the rest of his life on earth he is alone.
My friend, there is no solitude so drear as he hath who is in the world,
but not of it. Wilt thou venture onwards, braving this peril? At this
point there is yet a chance of return without incurring the danger which
follows when further advanced. Set not thy hand to the plow if thou
canst not go to the end of the furrow; it is long and difficult to
follow. The world hath not so hard a task as this to impose in all its
power. I offer thee option."

Mendocus now watched me as I pondered the proposition. I felt that I
could not in any event resume the old life; within me the fire was
already alight, and the Sword of the Lord had cut off the old from the
new, so that I felt it was between me and the past. No; "Onward,
Christian Soldier," must be my song leading to victory. I was decided in
my mind, though I had not as yet said so; but I had no need to utter
aloud my decision, although, forgetting this fact, I was about to do so,
when Mendocus said:

"Thou hast, then, decided to go onward. I am sorrowful because of it.
For though thou shalt come forth at last as gold burned in the fire, yet
the ordeal confronting thee is fierce. But I will not allow that thy
feet go alone; for that were unwise.

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will so do for
thee that the step be not irretrievable, lest it perchance be as I fear.
O, Brother! I fear me woe is thine!"

After this decision I was required to take vows of secrecy, whereby I
was bound not to reveal any part of what I should learn in any manner
which might give the hearer of my words practical use of what I told
him. I might drop a hint which might be followed as a clue to the
Voiceless Silence where blooms the Flower of Life; but, beyond a hint,
my friend, I can tell you nothing. Of hints I have given many. Nor, were
I to disregard my word, and divulge secrets of immediate working value,
would you thank me. No, rather would you curse me. Why? Suppose we wit
an instance: Suppose I were to reveal the secret of the Vis Mortuus,
would you thank me? It is, remember, that force which may be projected
in all its fatal strength to any distance and which is personified in
the famous poem, "The Destruction of Sennacherib," in the line:

"The Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast."

Suppose I revealed that secret? How long would it be ere the world would
find that the unscrupulous amongst men were using it to work
undetectable murder? And its uses are many besides, for it is the
principle in nature which governs transmutation, disintegration, decay,
destruction, death. All these, but never does it build anew; it is Siva,
the Destroyer. Used aright, it is a beneficent force, for without it
there would be no progress in nature, because no change could
occur--there could not even be retrogression, but utter stagnation. Its
sign is <span id="img_circcrss"></span> ![](img/circcrss.jpg). Much as
that means to me, it can be but a hint to you. Study it if you will, and
one day it shall be revealed to you. In reason you can no longer ask why
occult matters are so imperatively secret, for it must be evident that
this fair earth would be made by the unscrupulous into a very hell of
misery and crime, were they not thus secret. For a time those who chose
to subvert their knowledge would seem to thrive and prosper, even though
the world about them suffered. But subversion of the law is violation,
and the penalty at last visited is in tenfold

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

degree upon those who went most astray in their blindness and sin. It
would cause them to curse the giver of such wisdom. Nine-tenths of the
people of this world are unable to govern themselves well; they cannot
in saneness expect to be made sharers of such awful knowledge as Siva
represents. Men and women are really not following the Christ until
every part of their own nature is held in an iron grasp of merciless
subjection to high principles. But study, my friends, study.
Christianize the money power of this world, so that capital shall not
work harm to men but good, and from good thus born the karma of the
world will lead to the goodness of heart which gives calmness of soul;
in that calmness your study will bear fruit, and then it will not be a
mockery, in seeming, of your hopes for me to say "Study!" I rejoice in
those earnest workers whose motto is: "Look up, not down; look out, not
in; look forward, and not back, and lend a hand." Only this: the occult
student gazes in, and not out! But these are not esoterists. Their name
shall one day be great in the world, and though you who desire to study
and know occult truths now may not see your hopes fruit in your present
incarnation, yet in coming lives you will grasp these truths which elude
you at present. Follow Him.

Before me, Mendocus, Master, had opened a view of life so radically
different from the old, restless existence, that my heart grew warm,
regardless of his prophecy that bitter woe was perhaps to be my portion
ere I could enter the haven of my desires. The fact was that my
optimistic nature deceived me with a hope that somehow I could manage to
avoid the threatened sorrow, and, having escaped its menace, could go
happily onward. Alas, poor me! I knew nothing of karma, and in that day
knew nothing of Zailm of Poseid. Else, had I known, I would have
trembled when the Master expressed his fears for my sake. I saw before
me a great ocean of wisdom, flashing in the light of truth, its horizon
defined only by the voyager's temporary inability to go farther, its
depth measurable only by that of the Universe. Free from the dogmatism
of cramping creeds and of superstition, that ocean reaches out

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

into the eternity which enshrouds the stars as well as the dust in
mystery, that mystery which veils the Creator from the created, veils it
from the joint Creator, man, too, just so long as his soul shall lean to
creation instead of to the Creator, his Father. Veils it until the aeons
of time shall be swallowed up in eternity--beyond the stars, Earth,
Venus, and Mars, when man shall cease to be man in becoming more than
man, and Life the Less be gathered into Nirvana, sum of all the, parts.
I repeat it, sum of all the parts, for it is not in any wise that
horrible cessation of being which Sanscrit scholars have interpreted the
word "Nirvana" to mean. They have misconceived the facts; it is not the
end of life, except Life the Less, any more than the statement "God is
nothing" (that is, not one thing, but the sum of all things) should be
construed as a denial of the being of God, the Eternal Father of Life.

A change had come over the Master. Up to the present his attention had
been that of one controlling a process. Now, with his back to the shaft
of the wheel of light, he stood beside the censer, looking upward, his
gaze like that of one beholding a sight pleasing, yet absorbing. At last
he bowed his head and said:

"Welcome Mol Lang, friend and brother!"

I saw no one, but was aware that the person addressed could not be one
of the Sach. Mendocus, Master, turned to the brazier by his elbow and
struck it lightly with his outspread fingers, whereupon the fire pan
became red hot. Then he thrust his hand into a pouch depending from his
waist and drew it out filled with a white powder, which he cast on the
fire plate, producing a dense white smoke. I regarded this as a mere
ceremonial offering of incense, and thought it savored of superstition,
for I had now lost my intuitive perceptive power, and could only depend
on conjecture. This idea was scarcely formed ere abandoned, for the
cloud of smoke rapidly took the human form, into which the solid
appearance of genuine personality was introduced as the incense
consumed, until upon the glowing stand stood a man of commanding
presence.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

Some men seem to be not of any distinctive nationality but very citizens
of the world, or, even more largely, representatives of the race, and
one feels that they might be of this world or of any other capable of
supporting human life. Such was the man before us. He was addressed by
Mendocus as, Mol Lang, of Pertoz, and though I knew no such country, I
unquestioningly accepted this appellation.

His deepset eyes, under massive brows, and a head of similar contour to
that of the philosopher Socrates; his snowy hair and long, white beard,
together with a soldierly erectness of person, made Mol Lang, the
Pertozian, the very personification of occult wisdom, from my point of
view; nor was I far wrong. His turban, which in fact was blue, mottled
with brown, seemed, chameleon like, to assume different colors as the
varicoiored spokes of the wheel of light passed by, not through him, but
he through them. He wore a long, gray robe, depending from the shoulders
and belted at the waist. On his feet, of goodly, delicate shape, were
sandals.

The Pertozian stooped and put his hand on the shoulder of the Master,
making some remark, the import of which I did not catch, then stepped to
the floor with a light bound, and with Mendocus went to the divan and
sat down, engaging in an earnest conversation, which they held secret
from the knowledge of the others. Do you ask where our clairaudient,
mind-reading ability was, that this converse should have been unknown to
any of us? Unless one who knows that mind readers present are apt to
exercise their ability desires to have them share his thoughts, they can
not. He preserves as an almost unconscious habit the mental desire of
having his thoughts remain impenetrable, and to such a will no human
power can pierce the barrier it sets.

At length they returned to our circle, and Mendocus seated himself with
us. The visitor then said:

"Though the men of Lothus have known others of my fellow Pertozians, few
heretofore have known me; none, indeed, but thy Master. I am come to
induct one of thy number into the land of the departed, while another I
take home with myself.

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

To you, Lothins, I need not say that the body is like unto a coat, to be
put off or on at pleasure-by those who know how. I say this only for him
known in the world as Walter Pierson, but unto me is Phylos. And some
day the world will bear of him as Phylos the Thibetan, yet shall he not
reside in Thibet in Asia, but shall be so called because he shall for a
time live on the soul plane of the occult Adepts of Thibet. Unto thee,
then, Phylos, I say when thou shalt be free of thy mundane body, then if
thou wouldst go to any sphere of heaven, unto Neptune, or any planet or
star, thou hast but to desire such transference of thyself, and it is
accomplished. Wilt thou go with me this night, which is now nearly
morning"

Where was this I was asked to go? I knew not clearly whether he meant
the soul realm, or in fact just where he did mean to go. But my faith
was strong, and I replied:

"Whither thou goest, I go also, for I have faith in thee that thou wilt
do me no hurt."

The faith inspired in that hour by the gentle dignity and kindly love I
saw beaming from those deepset, calm gray eyes, has known in all these
subsequent years no cause for regret; nor for the action which my faith
then inspired me to make, has this heart any but a feeling of supreme
thankfulness that the Christ-Spirit then put it into my soul to have
that faith. I fancy I bear some reader, timid at the prospect of trying
the unknown, which might for all I knew at the moment include my
corporeal death, saying: "How came it that you felt so sure of Mol Lang;
did you not fear he was a devil?" No, I did not, for I was under the
protection of goodly men, into whose midst no demon could enter more
than night can reign beneath the noonday sun. At least one of my
protectors (Mendocus) had arrived at a finality so far as earth's
present cyclic age can teach; the physical nature had no secrets from
him; but the illimitable realms of the Father hold many "mansions"
besides the universe of matter and the house of light, or the dwelling
place of darkness. In this mansion of the material universe nothing
remained for Mendocus to gain; he stayed but to give. Death

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

had no power over him; he was supra-mundane, and until himself otherwise
elected, he must live; only the word of God (the true Logos) by himself
invoked could "loose the silver cord." Would you, protected by such an
one, fear demoniacal influences? One other query of the multitude you
may desire to ask, I will answer. You inquire how these highly favored
ones of God can be certain of the truth of their intuitive perceptions,
and I answer: the man who lives in his spiritual nature does not
believe, but knows that his being is one with God the Father, the Great
Parent. And his spirit speaks by the voice of intuition, informing him
by a single flash of that which otherwise he would be long years in
learning by external methods of investigation, if, indeed, externality
could ever impart the knowledge. His spirit gives him from its own
source, the Father, an effortless, instantaneous perception of facts,
principles and things. I am reminded of the words of Mol Lang to me in
this connection: "Phylos, some day thou wilt comprehend this: Earth is a
letter in a seven-fold alphabet; the stellar universe is but one book;
its pages truly are myriad, its chapters legion, yet, besides this book,
the library of the Creator is of endless number."

It occurred to me that we were the ones who should thank our visitor,
and he not thank us at the conclusion of his remarks, for it seemed to
me a lecture of wonderful power. A few minutes later he turned to me and
said:

"Phylos, art thou ready to go with me now?"

I replied affirmatively, as did Quong, whom the visitor called Semla,
when the same question was put to him.

Gravely the Brethren arose and took the hands of the Tchin in their own,
as one by one they said to him, as to one going into a far country to
return not for years, and perhaps not forever, "Semla, may the peace of
God attend thee evermore; fare thee well." Then Mendocus, Master, said:
"Semla, my peace I give unto thee."

I noted the difference in valedictory, and at another time asked of Mol
Lang and received the explanation that while the Brethren could not give
peace, not yet themselves perfectly

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

possessing it, Mendocus, Master, having it himself could give it,
especially to one who, like Semla, was so near its attainment. To all
these Semla said, quietly:

"Peace do I wish thee."

To me no such farewells were accorded, for they said, "We shall see thee
here again." This to me was unpleasant, in the frame of mind I was in,
but I concealed my feelings as well as I was able, and replied as kindly
as they spoke. Then Mol Lang said, "Come."

He started forward to the door of the Sagum, and I should have followed
without looking back, had it not seemed as it some one touched me.
Imagining that some Brother wished to speak with me and had thus called
my attention, I turned and saw that which will never fade from the
tablets of memory! Lying on the long, soft silk of the carpet was a
human form. Looking more closely I saw that this was my own physical
form, my body, my materiality, in short. In the act of raising it from
the recumbent position were four of the brethren, two on each side.
Others were doing a similar act for the corporeal shell of Semla. It was
my consciousness that something was being done to my earthly body which
f had mistaken for a touch. It had not occurred to me that I was
divested of my mortal casket, so easy had been my disembodiment.

"Death is, after the agony of illness for those long sick, as easy and
pleasant an experience," said Mol Lang, in answer to my mental
reflection. "If thou wert not to re-enter thy corporeal body again, this
would be death for thee," he added.

I was so greatly amazed at this last phenomenon that I stood still,
saying nothing, as I watched the bodies being removed from the main
apartment and laid on couches in a smaller room. Mol Lang then remarked:

"Essentially this is death. Behold then, body death is but a casting
aside of the grosser forms of life, which have served their purpose. As
thou wilt return, this is not absolutely death for thee. Semla will not
return. His body is therefore dead. When real death takes place, the
gross body

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

is cast off, and the sword of the Lord <span id="img_29200"></span>
![](img/29200.jpg) cuts it off, and Siva <span id="img_circcrss"></span>
![](img/circcrss.jpg) takes possession of it and distributes it to the
elements, in order that Vishnu <span id="img_circslsh"></span>
![](img/circslsh.jpg) may receive it for new uses from Brahm ○ the
Creator. Then the soul is free for a great length of time, compared to
that spent on earth. Though the astral shell can come into
spiritualistic circles and manifest through mediums, yet the I AM comes
not into any earthly condition until it returns for reincarnation; and
then always on a higher, never on a lower plane of progress, still
exists a penalty of sin, or, what is the same thing, incomplete
severance of one's self from desires for earthly experiences. Will ye
prefer Earth to Life?

"We go not immediately to mine own home, but into that realm where those
go who have died from earth into devachan, that is, heaven, or the
'Summerland' of the 'Spiritualists,' or the 'Land of the Obb River,' or,
again, to 'that bourne from whence no traveler returns.' Phylos, the
sect known as 'Spiritualists' are in error when they speak of 'spirit
communion' and regard it as they do, for no ego returns out of devachan
except it be forced, and this is harmful and vastly unjust to the
ego. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21) The astral soul and animal
principle may thus return, but the I AM never. To the latter there is no
past earth state; mind, I do not say for it, but to it. That is, it has
no consciousness of anything earthly or of anything occurring on the
earth. We can go to them, but they can not come to us. Let us, then,
go."

The mind works quickly, and ere we had reached the bronze door, my
consciousness had mastered the truth that death is not in itself agony;
that it brings no startling changes, and does not invest the soul born
into the hereafter with any wonderful power of foresight. In fact, there
is but freedom given from the earthly body, and a few concomitant powers
bestowed; nothing remarkable, considering that earth has no more hold on
the soul. I speak of those who in mundane decession seek disenthralment
from earth, having but little love for its conditions, though much love
for its children. Such as

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

these have worked for their brethren and accumulated a good and high
karma which takes them away from the prisoning conditions of earth.

Mol Lang here interrupted my reflections, saying:

"One thing else; let us leave thy second self, that part of thee which
perceives earthly things and preserves earthly memories. This in order
that no disturbing comparisons may arise between that state into which
thou goest and the earth behind thee, which thou shalt not see more than
they can who really die. But between thee and earth will I preserve a
vital link formed of thy second natural principle, so that it shall not
be death to thee."

Then he said: "I believe I have no further use for this transient form."

Had an uninitiated observer then been present, the astonishing, not to
say terrible, spectacle would have been presented to him or her of a man
dissolving into smoke, for Mol Lang liberated the bonds of his
smoke-form and it floated away in formless cloud.

Mol Lang laid his hand on my head, and as he took it away I no more
remembered anything of the world. I dimly saw before me the bronze door
of the Sagum; I knew that Mol Lang opened it, and that we three stepped
forth, not into the long hall of the temple, but into an open expanse of
green, sunlit meadow or prairie land. But it was no surprise, for I
remembered nothing of any special features of earth life: I only knew
that I was I, and that I was in a pleasant land; it was much like a
vivid dream; no one in viewing a dream landscape is conscious of any
other belonging to and seen only in waking hours; the faces in dreams
are natural, not novel, not strange, and when seen are not compared with
those known during wakefulness, for knowledge of the latter state is
blotted out during sleep.

Mol Lang spoke:

"Thou hast come through the portal; lo! physical nature and laws do not
reign here; they reign in the objective world, but not here, for this is
the subjective world, in no sense physical or

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

existent, nor perceptible to senses belonging to matter. Yet it is real,
for Spirit is real, and subjective states, no less than objective ones,
are born of the Spirit of the. Father. This is another of the Mansions
in His House. It is farther from the earth than the farthest star of the
sky, because in no wise of material nature. Things of earth to the
inhabitants of this world are but dreams, and vice versa. To either, the
other seems unreal. This we are in is the 'Far away home of-the soul.'"

I listened to Mol Lang and had ears to hear, so that I understood.
Earth, of which he spoke, was vague, and knowledge of it as an almost
forgotten dream. And the vagueness was because that principle of my
terrene nature which was the seat of earthly sensing, and of memories of
things perceived, was left with the body, This principle might visit a
spiritist medium and it would be called me. Yet it would not be me, but
my shell, my link of connection between my spirit and my corporeal body.
Friend, you will agree that an author is reflected in his autobiography;
but that book is not the author. No more is that which has its "actions,
passions, beings, use and end" in the body the MAN. Yet that book may
live and guide men to action. So may the astral shell of a man or woman
who is dead. And the vitality of the medium may galvanize that shell so
long as its influence governs any living earthly man or woman. Hence we
see the phenomena of the "circles" of believers in spirit communion.
There is no return of the ego (the I AM) to circles, neither communion
from their plane down, though sometimes from your plane up to theirs.
And yet you persist, my spiritist friends, in saying that I am in error.
You say that what I call "shells" can not be such because they tell of
events after death. Yes; they do, I admit. And they do because they are
but records of the ego which for a few brief moments at death is
sometimes highly prophetic, and sees forward over every detail,
frequently for coming centuries. Or again, the departing soul catches a
glimpse of its own self-conceived devachan, and the record of this is
imparted to the shell, which carries such views to the spiritist

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

medium. Witness the often absurd description given of the character of
the "spirit-world," and that through honest mediums, too. They give none
of CHRIST, save where two or three are gathered in His name.

Mediumship is true; its ordinary explanation is false. The medium goes
into a trance, his or her vital force is transferred to the "control"
which is but a shell, and not the true spirit or ego. Then the hearers
enjoy a "communication." Like a reader of a book of record is that
medium; events of the past are retold, and more or less accurate
prophecies made; the shell lives for the nonce a galvanic life, just as
Poe lives anew in the person of an elocutionist rendering "The Raven,"
from the rostrum. Just so long as the "Commentaries" influence mankind,
just that long will the "spirit" of Caesar control mediums; and while
the Book of Mormon retains its hold on the deluded masses of Utah, so
long will the "Prophet Joseph Smith" influence sensitives. But I grow
prolix. Let us therefore turn to the world of effects, and see what it
presented to our psychic perceptions. Will you come with us and see what
we three saw as we went forth across the plain which confronted us at
the door of the Sagum?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_20"></span>[281:1](dtp38.htm#fr_20) Job xiii.--5.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[292:1](dtp38.htm#fr_21) I Samuel xxviii, 14-15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Paying Life's Rewards](dtp39)
