[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp33)  [Next](dtp35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI

Returned from the far south, and in camp. In camp at the timber line on
Tchastel's side, awaiting the nightfall, and through the long afternoon
gazing out over a wealth of scenery not in word power to paint. To the
north "Goose Nest" mountain, its crater ever full of fleecy snow, rears
itself aloft eleven thousand feet. Down yonder in that gemlike valley is
the lovely town of Sissons; down, to our traveler, albeit on a plane
seven thousand feet above the ocean. Night. But not in a tent door. No,
on muleback, he and a companion are toiling upwards. There is no moon,
no wind, no sound, save a few strange noises arising from the nether
regions. No moon, yet plenty of light, since the snow seems self
luminous, so that objects appear against it in sharp silhouette. How
black the bleak rocks and ledges! And those glimmerings of light afar in
the night, what are they? Lamps; lamps miles away, thousands of feet
lower, yet in seeming not so far off. It is cold; oh, so frightfully
cold, numbing the mind! And still-as the grave. No sounds now arise to
the ear; 'tis too high for aught save silence. So cold; and yet midday
sun heats reflect from the snows as from a mirror, and then the
temperature if fearful to feel, yet the snow melts not. Here is a hot,
sulphur spring, one-thousand feet below the apex. Warm your chilled
hands in the hot mud, wipe them quickly, lest they freeze, and climb on.
Your eyes, could you see them, congested as they are in the rarefied
atmosphere, the color of liver, would horrify you. Your breathing pains
you; your heartbeats sound like the thuds of a piledriver; your throat
is afire from thirst. No matter; here is the top! Two o'clock a. m. in
July, 188-. As yet no light, but faint dawn. But ere long the soul is
awestricken by a weird glow in the cut, which lights nothing. The
beholders

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

are filled with a strange disquiet; see the waxing light, and--in a
fearful wonder, almost terror---see the great sun, scarce heralded by
the aerial rarity, spring from. beneath the horizon. Yet all below is in
"the darkest hour before the dawn." No ridges, no hills appear, no
valleys, nothing but "night's deep darkness." We seem to have lost the
world, and, for the nonce, are free of time! The planet is swallowed up,
leaving the mountain top's half acre sole visible spot of all the
Universe, save only the fearful splendor of Helios. Understand now, for
you may, the sensations of Campbell's "last man." The world all gone,
and self and comrade alone on a small spot in midair, whereon the almost
rayless sun casts cold beams of strange, weird brightness. Look north.
Afar in the night axe four cones of light, Mt. Hood, Mt. Adams, Mt.
Tacoma, and St. Helen's tall torch, all peers of our Ieka. As the Day
King soars higher lesser peaks appear, then long black ridges, ranges of
vast extent, begin near by, only to lose themselves in distant darkness.

Now the void of night vanishes, hills stand forth, silvery spots and
streaks appear as the dawn lights lakes and rivers, and at last, no fog
obscuring, in the distant west, seventy miles away, is seen a great gray
plain, the Pacific's broad expanse. To the south, interrupted streaks of
silver show where flow Pitt and Sacramento rivers, while over two
hundred miles away behold an indentation of California's central coast,
marking the Golden Gate, and San Francisco's world-famed bay.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII](dtp35)
