[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp40)  [Next](dtp42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VI

### AN INDIRECT ANSWER

An eminent author has said that "literary themes are necessarily
limited; that authors can not create as a fiction that which has no
counterpart in fact." And this is absolutely true. Literature is
restricted to ringing the changes on love, hatred, hope, despair, greed,
indifference, envy, the gamut of our human emotions, in short. When
these are presented in their threefold aspects, tragedy, comedy, or
serio-comic, the scale is run, and the only further variations possible
are the lights or shadows of faintness or intensity of emotion.

Perhaps the thought arises that in this history some new phase will
appear, that Theo-Christianity has some new phases to present. Such an
idea is doomed to disappointment. Indeed, the occult will be found to
exclude even certain potent earthly factors of literature, all those of
the lower animal nature, because these have no place in human life.
Envy, greed, hatred, have no place in a nature which is close kin to
that soul of love, Jesus. Indifference, sloth, despair, these can have
no room in a soul which scans so absorbing a vista as that open to Mol
Lang, yet so loving a soul that, like Jesus and Gautama, perfect
willingness existed to turn from such sublime reward in order that they
might lead their least [brethren](errata.htm#22) thither also. You may
say that such love as this is not animal when I say it is not human.
Right. But it is spiritual; it is that love which only those know who
have begun to tread the Path, knowing within the soul the advent of the
Spirit. If any of you come to feel that You will not shrink, though
karma demand you also to show

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

that "greater love hath no man" than that he "give up his life for a
friend," then brother, sister, you have known the birth of the Spirit
within you. Blessed are you then.

No one can rightfully expect that by the relation of weird things I
shall give him a half-hour's amusement; such is not my aim. This book is
a work of love, done for a sacred purpose. The second coming of Christ
is upon the world, not only as a time simultaneously arriving for all,
but also unto each human soul as it becomes ready to receive Him in the
heart, and do His work. <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25) He is at
hand now in the sense that if you will open your soul to receive His
spirit, He is there to enter in. Truly, of the moment He comes to His
own no man can tell the day or the hour; yet I say, tarry not for Him as
a man or an external spirit, but as the Christ Spirit entering into your
very being. And He shall not wait to come an a man, but come as the
Spirit of Divine Love, just so soon as you are ready to make that your
rule of life; and as the Christ and Father are One, so therefore shall
you that hear and attend be glorified, and presently arise, depart from
tide world, and go unto the Life. Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
Likewise He shall come as a person at the last. <span
id="fr_26"></span>[2](#fn_26)

I certainly have strange things to relate, but nothing weird, unreal or
sensational. That which I say is from my Father, and can lead the
earnest hearer into the Path whither the Christ led the way. What I say
concerns a larger measure of life, Hesper, the planet of Divine Love. I
hope to reveal some further idea than I have hitherto of the extent,
kind and duration of occult life. Heretofore I have given only rules;
now I give the result of faithfulness to them. I hope to show what a
glorious being man becomes through heeding occult law, the law of the
Spirit whereof I testify. Upward through all the ages, with never any
descent, Man pursues still the glorious march which shall eventuate in
making him one with the Father--more than man finite, Man infinite!
Angelic!

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

But my pen is years ahead of my visit to Hesper. I must return to that
time lest my words become merely words, erected like modem buildings,
fourteen stories high.

My desire to investigate the occult truth did not diminish because of
the rapid growth of my desire for a life more familiar. Yet ever and
again I caught myself studying whether psychic truth might not be
pursued where, ah! amidst--well, some set of conditions less rigorous to
the animal instincts struggling within me, and setting me so far below
my friends. As well hope to mix oil and water as to study the occult
amidst unspiritual, earthly influence!

As preceptor, Sohma contented himself with telling me of principles, and
not of marvels, lest in pursuing wonders I should lose sight of causes;
the fruit of a tree is apt always to be more attractive to the ignorant
than is the tree itself. Here is a chief truth in guidance to occult
study: pay small heed to the marvels, or to magic, and all heed to laws,
for the laws are the tree. The marvel worker is the least of the
brethren, understanding not the laws of the rather to any profitable
extent. Know the law, know the marvels incident; know not the law, but
only the marvel, and you are not following Him, nor shall you inherit
His kingdom, though you could do more magic then the Tchin, Mendocus, or
even Mol Lang. It was their possession of least value; may you regard it
likewise.

During a stroll in the garden, I asked Sohma concerning his remark that
though I should be given the key to occult wisdom, I should not be
taught details. "Sohma, you say details are omitted, and effects also,
and only general laws are to he taught me. Now, my nature seems
incapable of learning much in that way. I seem to feel a different
method necessary, a method born of--of--" here I passed my hand across
my brow in perplexity, for earth memories were not supporting me. "Well,
I know not exactly what; I seem to have some vague idea of a past life,
somewhere, in which other methods of learning were in use. I do not know
now, brother. I am lost."

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

"No, not lost, Phylos; misplaced, ahead of thy common place in life. But
thou makest reference to the analytical philosophy, which reasons from
effects back to a common cause. It is not a sure process, as witness the
status of chemical science in that vaguely remembered life of thine.
Chemistry is a proud science, though handicapped by clumsy analytical
processes. It cannot tell what a grain of sand is."

Suddenly my chemical learning returned to me, in obedience to Sohma's
will, although the environing circumstances of its acquirement were
prevented. But with the return of the knowledge itself I became
immediately argumentative, and I replied to Sohma:

"Pardon me, but chemistry can tell that. Sand is silica, silicic acid,
and it is composed of the element silicon and the oxygen of the air, in
the proportion of two of the latter to one of the former."

"Precisely. But thou hast not really told anything; thou art as far from
a finality as before. Thou sayest sand is composed of two primary
elements?"

"Certainly."

"And being primary, cannot he reduced farther?"

"No, they cannot," I said, yet, remembering certain wonderful things I
had already witnessed, I was beginning to he nervous.

"No! Art thou sure?" he queried, persistently; and I, both from a
feeling of stubbornness which his manner aroused and a determination to
be true to my science at, all hazards, replied:

"Assuredly!"

"Phylos, if it were not that thy stubbornness were tempered with an
admirable fidelity to principle, I should say that wisdom will die with
thee. But, my friend, thy system of chemistry, with its sixty-odd
'primal elements' and its 'monads, dyads, triads' and so on; its
simples, binaries, tertiaries and the like numerous compounds, is
nothing but a fine working hypothesis, well adapted to producing the
result it has produced, but because it is not the whole chemical

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

truth, not capable of ever attaining that wholeness of results which
marks the sublime constitution of nature. So far from conducting to the
truth these theories have just the opposite effect; they teach the
multiformity of matter, whereas its unity is the truth. As I said,
though, the chemists of the earth have a good working hypothesis, one
which will do until the better method of truth is found."

Sohma paused, whereupon I asked what the better method was. He did not
answer me in direct words, but instead he put before my mental vision a
workshop, wherein were many kinds of instruments and machines in states
either of completion or approaching completion, lying upon tables and
benches. I saw here a clock, there watches, there again an old style
typewriter; there were time locks and combination tools, besides many
intricate mechanisms that even the sight of suggested no use for. At a
little distance upon a table lay a confused mass of parts of machinery
not put together. He said:

"Phylos, canst thou put these things together? In this pile are portions
of clocks, typewriters, locks and so forth. Thou sayest thou art not a
machinist, hence cannot deal with these things. These things are not
unfamiliar to me, who am a machinist. With all the parts before thee
thou couldst not construct a clock or other mechanism. But suppose thou
shouldst take carefully apart a clock now in running' order, and study
carefully all its relations, and do so by not one only, but by several
of these instruments, then the whole would become familiar to thee, and
while merely taking one clock apart would not be apt to teach thee,
doing so by many would enable thee to put them all together again as
they were. That is the process of analysis, deduction and synthesis; it
is the same, practically, in physics, or in mechanics or chemics."

"But my friend," I said in dismay, "I cannot do these acts, not having
opportunity to thus experiment."

"That is my point, Phylos. I will show thee the better method of which I
spoke. Here before us is an invention of

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

my own; practically I am its creator, and therefore do I understand it.
Here also is another identical machine, but it is in separate state; its
parts are a confused pile. Now thou knowest nothing of constructive
mechanics; I do, and I will point out to thee the principal parts of the
machine, which is in running order. Observe!"

Sohma went up to the machine, which stood, a marvel of mechanical
beauty, its burnished brass and silver wheels, springs, cogs, chain
belts, etc., showing through the quadrangular glass case. He spoke into
the mouthpiece, explaining the machine to me the while. He said that he
would remain near the mouthpiece, so that his words should be reported
and printed and bound in book form. As he spoke he loosened a set screw.
Then he said:

"A microphonic diaphragm sets strong currents of electricity in
operation. These act only as my tones impinge on that vocal diaphragm,
whereby, as thou seest, carbon discs close other circuits, and operate
levers carrying type upon their extremities. Observe that this vocal
diaphragm is made of sonant steel cords, like those of a piano, and
there are of these just as many as experience has demonstrated that
there are vocal tones and octaves. Hence there is in one alphabet just
that number of letters, and our written language consists in the proper
sequential arrangement of these letters, either type, if printed, or
symbolic chirography, if written. Along with our spoken tones, then, if
near such an instrument as this, we can 'utter' a printed volume. The
congregate tones affect each its own chord; this in vibration compresses
the carbon discs, sets going the instant electric current, the type
lever does its work, the paper is carried a space forward and the next
type strikes, and so on till the voice ceases utterance. The spacing
between words, even, is automatically done, for, so long as one is
talking connectedly there is a utilization made of the return of the
carbon disc from its compressed active state, whereby a spring moves the
paper carriage one space for every minor pause in the voice, and two for
periods, but it is not sufficient for more than a double

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

spacing motion. I am done speaking, nearly, and will move this lever up,
thus releasing the stored force which arose from the motion of the
parts, especially of the heavy balance wheel. No more printing will be
done, but the reserve force will fold, cut and bind my speech, and when
this is done, the last of the force stored, equal in all cases to the
special work, is exhausted entirely by the ringing of a bell which
signifies the end."

Though Sohma ceased to speak, the instrument still worked, and almost
quicker than this sentence will be put in type, the bell rang and
behold! Sohma's words in book form dropped into a little box at the end
of the case. The instrument stood motionless in its case, and for the
first time its compactness struck me; it was but eighteen inches high,
by two feet in width and three in length, yet it had done all that
marvelous work.

"Couldst thou take apart this instrument and put it together properly
again?"--was the startling question, startling because I thought he
intended me to do it! "No, my brother; but as its creator, knowing all
its most obscure points, my comprehension of it and of other machinery,
and of truths not mechanical as well, but scientific psychics, is a
veritable spirit of knowledge, and observe-this spirit I will to enter
into thy mind, at least so far as concerns this mechanism. Behold it and
know it."

Strange to relate, I, who previously knew almost nothing of such things,
seemed on the instant to understand the whole of the delicate apparatus,
as a watchmaker does a watch. Sohma, perceiving this, said:

"Such, Phylos, is that key to all wisdom whereof I spoke. God, creator
of all things whatever, shall one day enter into thee. Then thy spirit,
which is a ray of His Spirit, shed into the darkness of life by Him,
shall reunite with Him. And because He creates by constant Logos all
things and states of Being, and is immanent in it all, knowing it all,
so when He entereth thy soul, thou shalt know all things likewise, and,
in less measure, truly, create also. Thou shalt know that, in

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

chemical sense, only one element exists, operated upon by Force. Then
all 'elements,' as thou knowest them, shall be seen to be but different
speeds of the molecular formation of the One Element by varying degrees
of the One Force, and light, heat, sound and all solid, liquid and
gaseous substances will be seen to be different not in material, but in
speed only.

"That knowledge underlies all life, physics, chemics, sonants, calories,
chromatics, electrics and all and every possible aspect of nature. Such
is the supreme law of God, and He is nature, though nature is not
conversely God. Another law is that of compensation; may I tell thee of
it?"

I replied that I should be but too glad to listen, for his words
revealed God in all things, whether high or low. So he continued:

"This law, then, not only governs all matter, but that of which matter
is the reflection, Spirit, and the soul realm. I need state but a single
brief instance in material nature, the screw plane. As the plane of a
screw is greater or less in its inclination, so will its action be
either rapid or powerful, but never both at once. If the thread be
slight in pitch, the screw bar will progress through its nut very
slowly, but, as exerted in a screw press, the crushing force will be
enormous. Vice versa; if the pitch be steep, the screw bar will progress
rapidly, as to wit, the screw nail, which may be driven into wood with a
hammer, and revolve as it goes in.

"Now, in the soul realm, if a human being is content with the gradual,
easy pitch of the Godward ascending plane of pure daily life, daily
temptations to work in error, and too often fall, progress upward will
be slow, but very sure. But, on the contrary, if eager to learn rapidly,
it must meet in a few hours all the crushing force of temptations to err
and to sin which the ordinary man meets distributed through many, many
incarnations, covering ages, aye, aeonian time. In the one case the
Father giveth sufficient of the daily bread of strength unto men to
enable them to progress very slowly, but with certitude. In the other,
all the splendid reserve of [resistant](errata.htm#23) force of a

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

very God is needed, for all the power of Lucifer, that high nature
spirit who was incarnate in the planet which disrupted into the solar
asteroidal belt, upon the lapse, the failure of its Soul, all of his
glorious power sufficed not to carry him to victory, so he fell.
God-Christ in thee can alone win this struggle. Truly, no mere human, so
long as he remains Man, can have such a temptation; not thyself, not Mol
Lang, my father, hardly Gautama were subjected to such a severe test as
was that sublime world soul, Lucifer, except relatively. I say
relatively, for consider this: that if a fly or an ant be subjected to
all it can endure, then its pain at that, point is as severe as that of
a man at his breaking strain. But as Jesus and Gautama were tempted to
the utmost and did not fail, therefore their victory was greater than
Lucifer's failure, and when thou shalt come to a trial like his, thou'lt
doubtless succeed; though, again, thou mayest fail. There is but *one*
Guide; follow and win; *follow* not, and fail. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27) It is a new conception to thee to learn
there is an animating ego, a world spirit, inmateriated in each star,
each planet, every stellar body, just as there is an individual soul in
each human, animal or plant body. Yet this is true. True also it is that
the spirits of men will progress; will face the supreme ordeal, and, if
they pass victorious, will enter that long rest, heaven, devachan, call
it as thou wilt, Nirvana. But that is not the end, for life had a
beginning--it hath also an end. And the perfect human ego emerging
eventually from Nirvana, that long devachan of all the incarnations,
emerges not as Man; it does not live, but It Is, and Its post-viviant
existence is a state of Being which no human mind could understand,
except inferentially it do so through the knowledge that that state is
to Life as the senior to the junior. But ere then is the *trial of
transfiguration*; to it my father hath come, I have not. If we fail,
then that is the second death, <span id="fr_28"></span>[2](#fn_28) but
meet it we must, humanity must. But it is long ere then, for it cometh
not until the essaying soul be perfect, and be ready to leave the
pupaceous state of Human Life,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

to be judged according to (its) works for Him who made it. Do I weary
thee, Phylos?"

I replied that he did not, though it did seem that I grasped his meaning
only to lose it again. None the less I was eager to have him go on,
fancying I understood, just as every Person you or I know is fond of
thinking his or her comprehension of abstruse subjects perfect. Sohma
smiled and said in reply that, when he was done, all that I would have
gained would be the [psychic](errata.htm#24) bent favoring my progress,
for I was destined to forget the very ideas I fancied I was gaining. But
he continued, observing that a favorable prejudice was a worthy thing,
calling for his best effort for me.

"I wish thee to observe also this: that if thou thinkest the judgment
day, when according to its works thy soul is arraigned by thy spirit,
which is God in thee, if thou thinkest that because that day may be in
remote aeons ere it come, and therefore thou hast ample time to lag, to
err, I counsel thee it is a fatal mistake. For if at the great trial any
man fail it is because day by day, as the lives were run, he neglected
his chances, either by omission or commission. Then shall such suffer
the second death, be cast into the 'lake of fire,' in other words, their
Spirit will depart from the soul and go unto the Father, while the soul
will be gathered into the sum of force, the 'Fire' element, that which
is sum of all lesser force forms, out of which springeth life, heat and
vibration. But this will not be until the erring one hath passed from
his soul into his spirit. So the 'second death' <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29) is not of the sinner; it is the cutting
off of all his, or her, spoiled work, and a chance to begin again, to
build better; our Father damneth not His child, but only the imperfect
work, the sinning soul. In our library thou canst see a book brought
here to Hesper from the Earth, a book which speaketh of the order of the
Rosicrux, wherein this supreme Fire is written of. 'Tis also that Fire
once called in the Earth the Maxin.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

"Phylos, thou wilt suffer the ordeal of the Crisis before other men;
whether thou shalt succeed or fail no man knoweth save those who have
passed heretofore."

When Sohma ceased speaking, I looked around me, and found that while the
clocks and typewriters, and locks and various instruments, were gone,
the vocal printer was not gone; it was an actuality, the rest only
concepts which Sohma had willed me to see. My mind was not trained
sufficiently well to continue on a special line of thought so long, and
while I fancied that I possessed a clear idea of all my companion had
said, and was pleased by the notion, yet had I tried at that moment to
recollect his meanings, I should have been chagrined to find that I had
nothing beyond vague ideas. Still, I did not try the experiment, but,
content with the supposition of possession, my mind wandered to a new
theme, and I asked Sohma if Hesperians had not found aerial vessels
possible among so many triumphs. He turned toward me and looking behind
me, smiled as he answered:

"I will leave Phyris to tell thee that; I must go elsewhere."

I was pleased at this new event, yet shyness at once asserted itself,
and though vexed at this fact, my vexation seemed only to increase my
diffidence. Taking, as I supposed, no notice of this diffidence, she
said:

"We rarely go, except we go astrally. We care but seldom to avail
ourselves of our aerial vessels; but we have them. It may be that thou,
or shall I say 'you' to lessen thy--your--shyness of me?" and Phyris
bent a pair of laughing eyes upon me, a gaze that, while it gave most
delicious pleasure, effectually confused me, past recovery, I feared.

"Perhaps," she continued, after gently laughing at my piteous abashment,
"perhaps you think we Hesperians can transport our physical bodies here
and there by some occult process, or other. For instance, as all forms
of matter are but divine ideas clothed in the One Substance, it is
possible to disintegrate the material form, but preserve the psychic
idea and transport that as other thoughts move, by effort of will, then
rehabilitate it in matter. Thus it is, articles can be brought

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

from the earth here to us. But if you think we can do this by our own
bodies you err, for ourselves are the ideas embodied. Truly we can
emerge from these bodies, and travel in one brief instant from one to
any other star. But we can not have two corporeal bodies at once. If we
leave the one we have, we can, by putting it in a cataleptic trance,
leave it in fit state to reoccupy upon our return. But if we leave it
and make around ourselves a new one, like in all respects to the other,
and abide in it, the deserted temple will perish. We could do it; but we
have no need to, and consequently do not. All about you is matter, every
breath is matter, differing only from iron in its molecular speed. The
air is matter; electricity is matter. I will show you. See, I wish a
plate, several plates, cups, saucers, knives and forks, so I image them
(imagio, I create) in the mental or psychic form. Do you see them? Eyes
of Earth could not; thou hast for a time Hesperian vision."

Before me was a pile of delicate tableware, with the pattern upon each
piece of a different kind.

"These articles are really only thought forms; no eye unable to perceive
a thought could see them. But now look, I gather to myself the higher
rate of speed, the extra force which makes air of the One Substance, and
the force which I leave is just that of the various minerals of which I
desire my ware to be 'made,' observe that one plate is a ruby, the real
crystal aluminum; and another is a pearl, others are of various gem
stones, as that cup and saucer, crystal carbon, diamond each one. On the
Earth those dishes would be valued into the millions of dollars, yet
here they are valued for their uses and their beauty only. Do you see,
Phylos, I know the terms of your language and what ideas are conveyed by
your words. But now I, like Sohma, must go, for I have a dinner to get,
a use for my plates, cups and saucers, which I have made, as well as
more yet to make. Quite like an ordinary mortal, you say? Indeed, and
why not? Do you think an occultist is always rapt in abstruse
speculations? You err, Phylos, you err, indeed. You may go into the
library, where you may find something to interest you."

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

To the library, therefore, I went, and if you will, you may go with me,
in a mental way, and see something of it. Do not object that these
Hesperian objects were unreal, just because I have said that no one with
ordinary terrestrial eyes could see any evidences of life on Venus.
Reality does not necessarily imply terrene solidity.

At least forty thousand volumes lined the shelves; many of them were
plainly, but some richly, bound. On my first introduction to this
apartment I had found that the books on the shelves were all in the
phonetic print of Hesper. But I saw on a table one whose cover bore in
Anglo-Saxon in gilt letters the title and name of the publishers, and as
I looked, for a brief time the memory power of Earth returned. The
inscription was:

"A THOUSAND MILES UP THE NILE"  
By Miss A. B. Edwards  
Published by  
Longmans & Co.  
1876

That volume had been brought all the many millions of miles across
inter-planetary space along the "currents," just as Phyris had done when
she "made" the tableware, only in the case of this book she had not
created the thoughts in the book, but had disintegrated the matter,
preserving the astral, the only reality about an object, and after
bringing it from Earth to Hesper, had reclothed it in matter after its
journey. I looked about, and found other volumes, one entitled:

"THE ROSICRUCIANS"  
By  
Hargrave Jennings.

I found copies of Milton's works, of Tennyson's earlier poems, of Moore,
and a pile several feet high of other standard works; on top of all lay
the "Essays of Emerson," upon which, as I gazed, appeared a piece of
white paper, and as I looked, the words seemed to form as if
precipitated from the air,

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

"Phylos, these books I have brought for you from the distant earth. I
did so that you might contrast them with our Hesperian works. Finally,
consider this: that we who are illumined by the Spirit of the Creator do
little with books or such crude methods of learning, caring only for
them as specimens of the work of souls on certain planes. To read them
we have no need, no desire, they serve only as texts, for when we would
learn, we retire within our souls and listen to the All Knowing Spirit."

That message was signed by Phyris. It was written in English. Written?
No, precipitated, and as soon as I had read it, it disappeared as it had
appeared, with no hand to remove it, no person save myself in the room.
With its disappearance I also ceased to retain memories of the world
whence I came. As I stood, considering what next to do, Phyris came in
and said:

"Here is an invention by Sohma which will render thy delight greater; I
know it is always great where books abound."

She picked up a book from Earth, Shakespeare, and placed it in an
instrument which turned the pages automatically, and a strong electric
light being cast on the visible pages, its beams reflected upon a
metallic plate. Unseen wheels revolved within a case, and a voice issued
from a funnel-shaped mouthpiece. To my pleasure I heard the reading of
page after page of the great English literary gem, in appropriate tones
for the various characters. While I listened, absorbed, Phyris withdrew,
and it was some time ere I noticed her absence. I think I should then
have gone in search of her, or of Sohma--Mol Lang had gone to a
distance, on duty bent, leaving his body asleep in his room--but as I
was about to go out of the library, a hand--a woman's hand, reached over
my shoulder, and a soft voice said:

"Put these over your eyes."

It was Phyris, who gave me a seeming pair of spectacles. They were
indeed spectacles which all the fortunes of earth could not obtain. How
thoughtful she was of my pleasure! As I put them on, all the shelves of
books disappeared, and a book being pieced in my hand, as I know from
retrospection,

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

for I did not know then, I found myself seemingly amid scenes of most
familiar aspect. All the mental pictures conjured up by vivid perusal of
Scott's famous poem, "The Lady of the Lake," all the voices of its
characters became seen and heard, as if I were on the spot where all was
said to have transpired. For the time I was transported by means of
those magical eyespieces into the mental world of Walter Scott, which,
while he wrote,

"Lay around him like a cloud,  
A world he could not see."

except with the vision of the creative imagination.

The whole was presented in a few moments, for thought is swifter than
the senses, and when the King threw his golden fetters over Malcom's
neck and laid the chain in fair Ellen's hand, without waiting for the
rest Phyris withdrew the wonderful spectacles from my eyes and said:

"These would banish material surroundings, and let the reader directly
into the author's realms of imagery, whatever the book, but not whoever
the reader, for only fine, developing human senses, none that are
controlled by the animal, can enjoy the use of them. And this because
they are a species of sensitive magnet, linking psychic facts but not
material things. But there, I do not know much more about them, and you
must ask father of them if you would learn more. I am only a girl, and
must learn to be more ere I can assume to teach. And I should dislike to
fail in offering you an explanation. Your good opinion of me would
lessen, and that would be mortifying, for I treasure it--I, well, never
mind," she said, as a delicate flush spread over her face, "come with
me; I think it is well not to be too long a time amidst any one set of
influences, as literary environs."

Much, aye, most that I saw in Hesper had been unfamiliar. But that
delicate blush--it set me thinking, my own ideas meantime in a confused,
ecstatic whirl. What did it mean? Did it denote reciprocal affection?

"It does in truth," she said, in reply to my unspoken query. "But the
significance of it is beyond my knowledge. Thou,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

nay, you, see me a maid of not many years. Your love shall behold me a
woman. Do I speak a riddle? Only time can solve it. You are with me, and
I with you, and our ages differ not greatly. You have little
understanding; I have more; both are imperfect, yet the Spirit shall
make us whole. If I asked you now, 'What is will power?' you could not
answer it truly. Yet I tell you, and my words shall sink deep, and guide
you to me. I said erroneously that you are with me, and behold, you are
so only in the sight of our Father in the beginning, but not now. Yet
one day shall come, and when I shall ask, 'What is will?' you shall say
of your own knowledge: 'Will is the fiat of consciousness.' If it be
will of the animal soul, its result will be only a subjective thought
which shall energize muscles to do an objective reality conforming to
the subjective plan. If it be of the human soul, it will be of greater
intensity and nobler, but still the brain, and through it the muscles,
must render its fiat into material form. But if the will be the fiat of
our Spirits, and trained, we shall say to any material force, 'Obey me,'
and it shall obey. Because our Spirits are of our Father and one with
Him, and the Will of the Spirit shall need no mediate brain nor muscle,
but shall find every natural power its direct servant, and this is the
faith whereof Jesus spoke. So, Phylos, my own, I have told you, and yet
you, hearing, hear not. Why not? Because our Father is not yet manifest
in you. But when you, having heard, understand, then shall we twain be
one, for it is so written in the Book of Life."

As she ceased speaking we came into a plot of ground wherein grew the
fruits for table use. Of these she gathered some, but of others desired,
none were growing. Stooping, she drew on the soil a figure which looked
familiar, although I could not tell where I had seen it previously. It
was this <span id="img_circslsh"></span> ![](img/circslsh.jpg); and the
reader will remember that it is the same that I described the Tchin as
making when he caused the Vita Mundi to flame as he stood within it. It
was also creative fire in Phyris hands, though it had not been so as
exhibited by Quong. In the space Phyris

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

planted seeds, and then, completing the symbol, the flames rose above
the area sown.

"Behold, Phylos! If I have but the seed, the herb shall come forth after
its kind. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30) But if I have not the
seed, my poor, human soul wisdom could not make that herb grow. Mol Lang
could, being transfigured. Having seed, I can bring God's Viviant Fire
to aid its germination--see! it sprouts; and again watch it--it grows
visibly."

I was astonished to see, mounting up as fast as evening shadows
lengthen, green tendrils, and buds unfolding even as the flowers of
primula spring forth, flowers, blossoming, blossomed; seed scarps
forming, formed; and the matured fruit hanging in clusters in the
radiant flame of the Vita Mundi, as high as my head from the ground,
where erst there had been but vacant soil. And this girl, who declared
herself not a grown woman, exercising such magic as this and thinking it
only ordinary! This was an inherent power of the Human Principle, my
friends, and will be common to you also when you become developed in the
Human. Earthly man is yet only in the initial of his humanity in a few
favored cases, but is very largely in his animality. Most of mankind is
merely animal, not human, save by courtesy. Yet the dawn of the glorious
new era is at hand, and in its fullness of days Christ shall come again
to it and enter into the hearts of his own; and it shall be the Father
that shall enter, and by Messias. Be ye then prepared for the coming of
the Spirit, for no man knoweth the day nor hour thereof.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[322:1](dtp41.htm#fr_25) Luke xxi; 34, 35, 36.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[322:2](dtp41.htm#fr_26) Mark xiii, 26.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[329:1](dtp41.htm#fr_27) John xvi; 13.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[329:2](dtp41.htm#fr_28) Rev. xx; 13, 15.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[330:1](dtp41.htm#fr_29) Rev. xx, 13-15.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[337:1](dtp41.htm#fr_30) Genesis, i, 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII: The Desert Is Before Thy Feet](dtp42)
