[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp46)  [Next](dtp48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

# BOOK THE THIRD

## CHAPTER I

### YE SHALL REAP AS YE HAVE SOWN. THE PERCEPTION

Suppose the struggle had proven me wanting, and the verdict had been,
"Mene Mene Tekel Upharsin"? 'Then my--our--fate would have been that of
Mainin of Caiphul. To me who know the dread meaning of this fate, it is
more utterly frightful to contemplate than it can be to thee. It means
being a brother to devils, and subjection to Satan, who could so
cunningly, awfully tempt as we were tempted, and when successful, make a
servant of the victim, ever to pile up fresh karma. And such karma as
Satan's service makes is worse in a moment than the wickedest man could
pile up in a long lifetime. It means such servitude until--when?
Forever? Until the end of material things. Then, when the heavens are
rolled as a scroll and melt in fervent heat, Satan (Lucifer) shall, with
his minions, be cast into that lake of fire which is the second death:
which meaneth that the force, the energy of the rebels, that which has
made them distinct, potent souls through all the past, shall become
depersonalized, and disindividualized, cast into the sum of the Fire of
Elements, which form the forces of Nature, the winds, odic and magnetic
and electric forces. But annihilation there is not, death there is not,
though there be such a change as constitutes the destruction of the
union between soul and Spirit, the return of the \]first to the great
impersonal Vis Natura, the return of the other to Him who created life.
Then, after millions of years the Father will gather the fervid elements
into nebulae, star-plasm, worlds, suns, systems, and a "new heaven and a
new earth" shall come forth. Then will the depersonalized rebel host
begin to reincarnate

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

in protoplasmic life, and thence evolutionize up, up, up along the
myriad incarnations until, after an eternity of matter, they come once
more to human conditions, to another Crisis, to win or fail, and either,
like Sisyphus, run again the weary course, or else inherit hard-won
entrance to unconditional being. There is not nor can be, any death of
the Spirit, but of the individuality only. Study this well, my friend,
for such is the fate of evildoers who sell to Satan, because such is
Satan's portion. Our Father hath provided a Way. It is the sharp,
knife-edge Path, whereon all things so evenly balance that there is
turning neither to the right nor left, but steady, even pursuit of the
Path, wherein all who travel that way, contain themselves in all things,
in eating and drinking, in sleeping and all those things which cause the
cares of this world. Those who shall be accounted worthy, without
further incarnation, to obtain the resurrection from the body of
materiality neither marry nor are given in marriage, but must receive
the Kingdom of God even as if still little children. Yet whoso doeth not
so, it shall not be eternally counted against them, but only till
another incarnation. It must be that the things of sensation which are
an offense unto the Spirit occur, but karmic woe will attend the
offender until he finds the Path and travels therein. Hear, if hearing
and understanding be in thee, for these are the words of the Master.

----------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Job xxxviii:7](dtp48)
