[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp42)  [Next](dtp44) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VIII

### OLD TEACHERS TAUGHT OF GOD

I awoke. The place was in one of the smallest rooms of the Sagum; it
seemed not unfamiliar, although I had theretofore been only in the
greater apartment. Mendocus sat by my side. There was a sense of having
lost something; I knew not what, but the loss made me inexpressibly sad.
I felt hampered, as if my freedom had contracted. Otherwise, too, I felt
weak, as if long ill. But Mendocus put his hand over my eyes, and I
slept.

The next conscious moment came, and the weariness was gone, but not
wholly so the sense of loss, of restricted freedom. It was one thing to
lose prehension of memory and

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

events; to have entirely forgotten Hesperus and Phyris, and Mol Lang and
Sohma, as I had done; but it was a wholly different and impossible thing
to forget or in any wise put away the growth of my soul during my five
weeks of absence from the Earth. Yes, five weeks, for despite the
seeming months in devachan, and the time in Pertoz, all but one part in
a thousand of my time of absence had been spent in Hesperus. Five weeks
of Earth time.

It would have been impossible for me to have remained in Pertoz and been
happy. It would be impossible for you, my friends. Why? Because it was a
plane of soul life so exalted above our familiar Earth that only growth
can introduce the soul there, long, slow, ofttimes painful, but growth.
To me, then, or to you now, irrevocable transference to such a high
plane of life would be fearful punishment; all our ordinary powers of
life, all our present selves put away, and an entirely different set of
sensibilities and a new, unknown, untried self in their place, knowledge
in the use of all which, amidst wholly strange phenomena and unlearned
laws, the misplaced soul would have to acquire through long, unhappy
years. It is a divine blessing to humanity that sudden transition from
one plane to a higher is as impossible as is any real retrogression.

I sat up, and then stood up, Mendocus assisting me, for I was weak and
dizzy I remained at the Sach until several days had elapsed, learning of
various occurrences and making various decisions and resolutions. Asking
for Quong, I was told he was dead, and knowing now nothing of the past
five weeks, I accepted the news with keen regret.

Mendocus told me that I was a man yet possessed of earthly appetites and
passions, although I had lately been where humanity was of the heavenly
order, as measured by terrestrial standards, where no sensuality ever
invaded, although the people were not austere, nor was life there devoid
of pleasure.

I assented for the sake of courtesy, without knowing anything of whom or
what he spoke, more than an untraveled commoner

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

of a great city knows of interior Africa, He saw my ignorance and became
silent.

His remarks about social sin I felt inapplicable to myself, for although
I mingled with the people of this world, I did not sin in the meaning of
the term as he applied it. Perhaps from environment I was not free, but
free of these errors I was, and without any pharisaical self-praise.

Speaking of the fallen, however, where was the really sweet noble girl I
had tried to raise, and who, seconding my efforts, had gone to
Melbourne? Life interests were again claiming me. The animal soul was
reasserting itself, and warring as strongly as its feeble selfhood
allowed with the human soul and the stirring spirit which cannot sin nor
err, because it is one with the Over Soul, and so ever draws the human
soul upward, whilst the animal pulls it downward.

Then said Mendocus to me:

"Mr. Pierson, the sins thou dost condemn in thy fellow-creatures were
once thine, and, if thou shalt condemn the doer, may become thine again.
That thou judgest, thou art not past danger of committing.

"Judge not, lest thou be judged. But in thine inner soul these past five
weeks have placed a light, a lamp from God. Hide it not, but let it so
shine that it give light to the Sinful who have no light. Pity them,
deplore their error, but if thou condemn them thou wilt not follow Him
who said 'neither do I condemn thee; go and sin no more.'"

Mol Lang had set a proper estimate on my powers in refusing to make
irrevocable my ascent to the Hesperian plane. I had stood ready with the
torch of desire to fire my earthly ships. If I could have known of my
escape I would have felt thankful. As it was, Hesper was become an
unmeaning name, and the ships were not burned. Pleased as a child I had
gone to the devachanic plane, where all things that the child in
experience desired, although it wished never so foolishly, seemed to
occur. Now the child having confronted the sober fact that inexorable
laws govern all the reign of being, had become stricken, broken-hearted
at his failure; had returned to his

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

own sphere, and, blessed mercy, was enabled to forget it all until such
time as the five weeks' leaven had leavened the whole, and return was
possible in the circumstances of one coming to his own. Friend, never
assume the attitude of childishness toward the sublime--you may not
escape as lightly as I did. Count the cost, or else plod along with the
commonplace masses. Both roads lead to the goal, one short but
inexpressibly severe, the other long, and, alas! quite severe enough. It
is no paradox to say that the shortest road is the longest; life is not
always measured by years--some lives are but a few short years--but oh,
the bitternesses and not impossibly, sweets, too, crowded in them would
require a thousand years of other and less marked lives to essay.

Before I left the Sagum, Mendocus laid down esoteric rules for my
guidance in the days to come, days when sole dependence must be stayed
on my knowledge of these rules, since no esoterist would be near to
counsel me,

"Mr. Pierson," said the grand old sage, "I have here a Bible. Lo! I have
read it, the Old Testament, eighty-seven times; the New, even more
times. Yet I see ever now beauties in the Book. I have here the Books of
Manu, and also the Vedas. All are authorized by the Christ-Spirit, under
different human names, truly, and in different ages. All are more or
less allegorical; all require His Light to interpret; without it,
serious errors may arise as they have arisen heretofore in the world
with sad frequency and fearfully long lived persistency.

"I will therefore declare unto thee a guidance from them. Knock, and it
shall be opened unto thee. But see thou knockest with the will of the
Spirit, for although the mind knock, forever, the Way shall not be
opened.

"Ask, and it shall be given. But although the animal man ask ever, no
answer shall be given, for this meaneth also except the request be made
by the Spirit in thee for the Truths of God, and not for earthly things;
these last follow as shade the sun.

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

"Whatsoever is asked of the Father in the Christ's name, that shall He
grant. But consider that asking in the name of the Christ is asking for
the things of His Kingdom. With the gift of these things all lesser
things shall be added, food, raiment and all else the body bath need
for. This is hard for the natural mind to comprehend. He will not let
thee perish though thou die of hunger.

"Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. This is karma and the
law, and every jot of it must be fulfilled. Man is a creature of many
incarnations, each earth life one personality, strung on the unbreakable
string of his egoic individuality, which reacheth from everlasting to
everlasting, from the East unto the West.

"No demand of karma may be ignored; all must be paid in the course of
the lives.

"Then 'do unto others as thou wouldst be done by,' and remember, as thou
doest unto the least of thy fellow creatures, in that manner and measure
is it done unto our Savior, and unto the Father, and shall be done unto
thee again.

"Keep all the commandments; thou shalt so come to everlasting, where is
all wisdom."

That evening I went out of the sacred precincts and back to the town.

There I learned of things various. My mining partners were now willing
to buy my share without further parley. From that sale I received
approaching three hundred thousand dollars, paid in installments, seven
quarterly payments of nearly forty-three thousand dollars gold coin,
each one.

The arrangement having been made for depositing these sums, as they fell
due, with my bankers in Washington, D. C., I was overcome with a desire
to travel; this and my ability to gratify it took me to nearly every
civilized land. Yet no object except unrest prompted this nomadism.

----------------

Almost two years had passed since I left ------------ City, the scene of
my esoteric experiences. I was in Norway, away from the wide, wide
world, in a little hamlet close to a celebrated

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

fjord, where I had arrived the previous day. My guide and general
utility man spoke English sufficiently well to make himself readily
intelligible. He proved to have been a sailor on the ship in which I
took my first voyage, and had returned to his native land to minister to
the wants of travelers, in which service his knowledge of Anglo-Saxon
did him good stead. He was delighted to see me, a feeling which I
reciprocated. His name? Certainly, Hans Christison.

Hans said that four or five other summer travelers were staying in the
village, "One ish ein young leddy; she haf a crazy for paint und
brushes--ish ein nardist, I think so."

A week elapsed before I met this "purty leddy," and meantime Hans guided
me, equipped with gun and fish rod, he rowing our light skiff. One
afternoon I took the skiff and went off alone to a rock jutting out of
the fjord, whereon grew several birch trees of graceful beauty. I tied
the skiff, and then climbed out and sat down to read the letters
forwarded to me from New York.

While reading these I heard a little sound behind me as of some person
else on the tiny island. Turning my head I saw a woman, and then I laid
down my paper and sprang to my feet. I was too much surprised to raise
my cap or even to speak, and she seemed equally astonished. Then I said
the one word:

"Lizzie!"

"Mr. Pierson!" she replied.

"How came you here?" was our next exchange. I told her of my aimless
wanderings, and she related her life since we parted in ------------
City. From Melbourne she had gone to New York and thence to Washington.
There she bought a residence and established an art studio, assuming the
name of Harland. People were told little and learned less of her
antecedents, and were allowed to suppose that she was a young Australian
widow of moderate wealth. Each of the two summers after her advent to
life at the capital had been spent abroad, and this, the third summer,
she was spending in Norway. Her pictures had sold well, and she had made
up the

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

entire sum which she had used from what she called my "loan." This she
insisted on giving back to me, but I laughed, and tentatively agreed,
saying, "Before I leave, if you insist." I stayed four weeks, there,
stayed until I learned from a chance remark that she was going away in a
few days for a little stay among the Scottish lakes. Then without saying
anything to Mrs. Harland, I bade Hans take me by night to the steamer
which visited the little port once a fortnight, and was then due, and
going on board, paid Hans, adding a douceur. As the ropes were being
cast off, I said:

"Hans, let the 'young leddy' know that I am gone; tell her, if she asks,
I am going to St. Petersburg. Good bye, Hans."

To the Capital of the Czar I went, and was there a week.

Then back to Paris, then to London, and in another week I sailed for New
York, thence to Washington.

A year passed. One afternoon as I strolled up Pennsylvania Avenue, I
carne face to face with Elizabeth Harland. We stopped, spoke, and then I
turned and walked with her. The old surged over us; I remembered the
days in California; then more tenderly, the peaceful month in Norway,
when I had come to really believe I loved this girl, not only for her
radiant beauty and sedately sweet womanhood, but for her tremendous
effort to triumph over error, and her success, wherefore she was come
forth from the fire, pure gold.

Before we parted I learned her address, and resolved to call as soon as
an opportunity offered.

Next evening a bank messenger came to my apartments, and left a packet.
It held two hundred bank notes of the value of one hundred dollars each,
and a letter. This I opened hastily and read:

Sept. 3rd, 1869.

"Mr. Walter Pierson:

"Enclosed find the sum of my indebtedness to you, and accept my
heartfelt gratitude for the same. And we will be friends; you are ever
welcome to come to the home of

Your sincere friend,

Elizabeth Harland."

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

I pondered the situation, and when the moment of decision came made up
my mind very suddenly. The money which she had returned I put into my
pocketbook, took my hat and, being in proper attire, went down the
street until I found a cab. Entering this, I gave directions to the
driver to take me to No. --, -------- Street.

It was a pretty place. When I rang the bell it was answered by Mrs.
Harland herself. Her manner was cordial, but I fancied somewhat
constrained.

On the wall of the parlor hung a picture of rare merit. A man whose face
and mien was as expressive of divinity as it lies in the power of paint
and brush to depict, stood looking on a woman whose face was hidden by
her hands. In the dust at his feet were characters written. The
environment was that of the architecture of the Holy Land. Under the
painting, which was half life size, were the words, "St. John, VII:11."

I sat down in a proffered chair, and for a moment silence reigned. My
hostess broke this, saying:

"You received the money, Mr. Pierson?"

"Yes." I drew it out of my pocket and following my resolve, and waiving
all prefatory remarks, I said:

"Except you give me yourself with this money, I will not take it out of
the house. Will you be my wife, Elizabeth?" I asked as I knelt by her
side.

Her eyes gazed into mine a moment, and she said.

"For myself, because you love me, and veil the past with the success of
the present?" tears in her eyes, tears in her voice as she spoke.

"Yes, darling!"

With a convulsive sob she rested in my arms, and cried as if her heart
would break. At length she said, tremulously.

"All the world is less worth than this true love."

Our wedding was quiet, and after it we went for a brief trip abroad,
going only to England, and in a short time returned home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: They Who Heed Have Peace](dtp44)
