[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dtp52)  [Next](dtp54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00213KFQ8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*A Dweller on Two Planets*, by by Phylos the Thibetan (Frederick S.
Oliver), \[1894\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER VII

### THE TRANSFIGURATION

I might give many more life scenes. Let these suffice. Turn now to our
present.

The reunion of the semi-egoii is one in which, after the mighty ordeal
of the Great Crisis, the souls of the feminine and masculine elements
become on the same plane; both are perfect. This is the marriage made in
heaven. Become so that each thinks, wills and expresses itself the same
in all ways simultaneously, the two alter egoii are then one, having a
feminine, negative, and a masculine, positive, aspect. Then these two
potentials unite and receive the Spirit, or I AM, which was always
undivided, and which illumined each soul of its pair equally. So is this
last union. Thus Phyris is me, living, being, immanent, and speaks this
message with me; is I, and yet, mysterious truth, is herself! Likewise I
am her and yet again, myself. I speak, and it is she; she speaks and it
is I; for we are one being, one spirit, androgyne, perfect. Yet not
perfect as our Father is, for He is perfect as Conditionless Being, but
our perfection is that of a part, because we are all of God, but not He
of any one of us. Indeed, were this not true, then our attainment of
perfection, Jesus' attainment of it, or any child of the Father, would
find in its realization annihilation.

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But only the soul
that sins is cast into the second death, fated to the Sisyphic round
till it does succeed. Perfection may be conditionless in all respects
save that it is not that of the whole. And because we each axe parts,
therefore are we forever attracted to the Father, who is sum of all
parts, and this attraction is to onward Being. And we are ever attracted
to the other parts, both those which are peer and those which are less.
It is because the part is forever drawn to the sum that there is no
death, save in defying and abandoning all hold on the Whole. Perfection
of a part but draws it nearer to the Whole, and perfection of the Whole
compels It to depend on each of Its parts. There may be change; there is
no death. And there may be extinction of personality, the erring soul
may perish, and itself and deeds he annihilated, but the Spirit from the
Father dieth not. If for thy soul thou wouldst have eternal life; if
thou wouldst not see thy soul, that product of untold ages of time, lost
in the second Death, and thyself, oh Spirit, child of our Father, doomed
to recreate another soul to lay as acceptable offering before our Lord,
then subdue it, subdue thy soul, at--one it to God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, by recognizing that it is His, given Him by God, made by thee
to serve the Creator. If thou make thy soul serve thee in His service,
thou hast it eternally. But if thou serve it thou shalt lose it and have
to make another during coming aeons.

Wilt thou follow the Path. even as I have pointed out to thee that it
leadeth to the Kingdom? Be sure of thyself ere thou dost embrace occult
learning, lest it prove a veritable Bridge of Mirzah, full of fatal
pitfalls for thy feet. Better shun the Secret Wisdom than fail, for
strait is the gate and narrow is the way that leadeth unto Being, and
few there be that find it.

Knowest thou me? A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, but a
corrupt tree. Wilt thou hew me down and cast me into the fire, who
testifieth concerning the Spirit? "Not every one that sayeth Lord, Lord,
shall enter into Heaven," but he that doeth the will of my Father in
Heaven. The time is brief.

I have spoken. Peace be with thee.

The End.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Note By The Author](dtp54)
