<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa21)  [Next](taa23.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XIX

1\. O mouldering remains (of the encampment) at al-Uthayl, where I
played with friendly maidens!

2\. Yesterday it was cheerful and smiling, but to-day it has become
desolate and frowning.

3\. They went far away and I was unaware of them, and they knew not that
my mind was watching over them,

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

4\. Following them wherever they journeyed and pitched tents, and
sometimes it was managing the beasts of burden,

5\. Until, when they alighted in a barren wilderness and pitched tents
and spread the carpets,

6\. It brought them back to a meadow verdant and ripe which erstwhile
had been an arid desert.

7\. They did not halt at any place but its meadow contained forms
beautiful as peacocks,

8\. And they did not depart from any place but its earth contained tombs
of their lovers.

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'Al-Uthayl,' i.e. the natural constitution. Its remains are
described as 'mouldering' because they are changed by the various
spiritual emotions (\#\#\#) which pass over them.

'Friendly maidens,' i.e. forms of Divine wisdom by which by the
gnostic's heart is gladdened.

2\. 'Desolate and frowning,' because he has returned to the world of
sense and consciousness.

3\. 'And they knew not,' etc.: as, when a man leaves a place, he remains
there in imagination and keeps the picture of it in his soul.

4\. 'It was managing the beasts of burden,' i.e. he was influencing them
by his thought, so that their thoughts turned to him. This was the
result of his sincerity; for the inferior, if he turn sincerely to God,
may influence the superior, as often happens with sincere novices and
their spiritual directors.

5\. 'In a barren wilderness,' i.e. the station of absolute and abstract
unification.

'And spread the carpets,' in reference to the Divine favours which they
received on reaching the abode of the Truth.

6\. In this verse he points out that no reality except the Divine
substance can subsist together with abstract unification. Hence, when
they gained this station and realized it and knew the meaning of God's
word, '*There is nothing like unto*

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Him*,' He brought
them back to the unification of their own essences in respect of their
oneness, which is incomparable in respect of the Divine substance
contained in its essence.

'To a meadow verdant and ripe,' referring to the Divine mysteries which
the Truth conveyed to them by the realities of the Names.

7\. 'Forms beautiful as peacocks,' i.e. their lovely spiritual states,
actions, and dispositions.

8\. 'Tombs of their lovers,' i.e. the realities which desire that their
traces should be manifested in gnostics. These objects of knowledge only
exist through those who know them, and therefore they love the existence
of the gnostic, in so far as he knows them, more intensely than they are
desired by him. Accordingly the author describes them as dying when the
gnostics depart.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX](taa23.md)

</div>
