<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa26)  [Next](taa28.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXIV

The author says: A dervish recited to me the following verse, to which I
knew not any brother—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">'Everyone who hopes for thy bounty receives copious
showers thereof; thy lightning never breaks its promise of rain except
with me.'</span>

</div>

I admired its application and pursued its meaning, and I composed some
verses in the same rhyme, including this verse among them on account of
its perfection, and I said in answer to that dervish (may God have mercy
on him!) as follows:—

1\. Halt by the ruined abodes at La‘la‘ and mourn for our loved ones in
that wilderness.

2\. Halt by thy dwelling-places and call to them, wondering at their
loneliness, with exquisite lamentation.

3\. 'Beside thy *bán* tree I have seen many a one like myself plucking
the fruit of comely forms and the roses of a verdant meadow.

4\. Everyone who hopes for thy bounty receives copious showers thereof;
thy lightning never breaks its promise of rain except with me.'

5\. She said, 'Yes; there hath been that meeting in the shadow of my
boughs in the most plenteous spot,

6\. When my lightning was one of the lightnings of smiling mouths; but
to-day my lightning is the flash of this brilliant stone.

7\. Reproach, then, a fate which we had no means of averting: what is
the fault of the camping-place at La‘la‘?'

8\. I excused her when I heard her speech and how she was complaining
even as I complain with a sorrowful heart,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

9\. And I asked her, when I saw her demesne, through which the four
winds sweep at night,

10\. 'Did their winds tell thee where they rested at noontide?' She
said, 'Yes; they rested at Dhát al-Ajra‘,

11\. Where the white tents are radiant with those rising suns within.'

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'The ruined abodes,' i.e. the vestiges of the dwelling-places of the
Divine Names in the hearts of gnostics.

'In that wilderness,' i.e. in his empty heart.

3\. 'Plucking the fruit of comely forms,' i.e. the manifold knowledge of
the Divine Self-subsistence (\#\#\#) with which, according to our
doctrine, it is possible to be invested. This investiture (\#\#\#) is a
matter of dispute amongst the Ṣúfís; Ibn Junayd al-Ifríqí and his
followers consider that it is not correct.

'The roses of a verdant meadow,' referring to the station of Shame
(\#\#\#), which results from meditation and contemplation.

4\. 'Thy lightning never breaks its promise,' etc., i.e. through the
lack of Divine favour (\#\#\#). He also indicates that he himself is in
a lofty station which was not reached by any of his peers, because the
lightning is a *locus* of manifestation for the Essence, and from this
*locus* the soul of the seer gains no knowledge, inasmuch as it is a
manifestation devoid of material form.

6\. 'When my lightning,' etc., i.e. that manifestation took place in a
lovely form, but my manifestation to thee is formless and inanimate
(\#\#\#\#) and is not determined by love and passion.

11\. 'The white tents,' in reference to the veils of light which are
drawn over the splendours of the face of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXV](taa28.md)

</div>
