<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa43)  [Next](taa45.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLI

1\. God save a bird on a *bán* tree, a bird that has revealed to me the
true story

2\. How the loved ones bound the saddles on their camels and then gat
them away at dawn.

3\. I journeyed—and in my heart for their sake was a blazing fire
because of their departure—

4\. Striving to outpace them in the darkness of the night, calling to
them, and then following their track.

5\. I had no guide in pursuing them except a perfumed breath of their
love.

6\. The women raised the curtain, the darkness became light, and the
camels journeyed on because of the moonshine.

7\. Then I let my tears pour in front of the camels, and the riders
said, 'When did this river flow?'

8\. And were unable to cross it. I said, 'My tears rolled in streams.'

9\. ’Tis as though the thunderclaps at the gleam of the lightnings and
the passing of the clouds at the fall of rain

10\. Were the palpitation of hearts at the flash of teeth and the flow
of tears for travellers who rode away.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

11\. O thou who likenest the lissomeness of the tall forms (of the loved
ones) to the softness of the fresh verdant bough,

12\. If thou hadst reversed the comparison, as I have done, thou wouldst
have taken a sound view;

13\. For the softness of the branches is like the lissomeness of the
tall forms, and the rose of the meadow is like the rosy blush of shame.

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'A bird on a *bán* tree,' i.e. the Prophet's spirit in his body.

'The true story,' i.e. the Tradition concerning the descent of God to
the terrestrial heaven.

2\. 'How the loved ones,' etc., i.e. how God descended into the night of
phenomenal forms and 'gat Him away at dawn', that is, manifested Himself
in the intermediate world, which, like the dawn, is light mingled with
darkness; for this manifestation is impure in comparison with the purity
and holiness of the Godhead *per se*.

4\. 'Following their track': he refers to the investiture with Divine
qualities.

5\. 'A perfumed breath,' alluding to the habit of guides, who on losing
their way in desert places try to recover it by smelling the earth.

6\. This verse refers to Kor. xxxiv, 22: '*when the terror shall be
removed from their hearts*,' etc.

7\. 'The riders,' i.e. the angels mentioned in Kor. ii, 206.

8\. 'And were unable to cross it,' because these tears were shed in the
grief of parting, and the Heavenly Host lack this emotion, for they are
not veiled from God: hence they are not allowed to traverse this
station.

11-13. The author says that, in accordance with the real relation
subsisting between God and His creatures, they should be connected with
Him, not He with them. Thus the supple bough should be compared to the
form of the Divine Beloved and the rose to His cheeks, not *vice versâ*,
as

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

happens in those Traditions which attribute human qualities to God,
although in reality He is the eternal source of such qualities and
therefore incomparable.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII](taa45.md)

</div>
