<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Islam](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](taa44)  [Next](taa46.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Tarjuman al-Ashwaq*, by Ibn al-Arabi, tr. Reynold A. Nicholson,
\[1911\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLII

1\. O men of intelligence and understanding, I am distraught between the
sun and the gazelles.

2\. He who forgets Suhá is not forgetful, but he who forgets the sun is
forgetful.

3\. Let him offer himself to his herd, for gifts open the mouth to utter
praise.

4\. Verily, she is an Arab girl, belonging by origin to the daughters of
Persia, yea, verily.

5\. Beauty strung for her a row of fine pearly teeth, white and pure as
crystal.

6\. I boded ill from her unveiling, and at that moment her loveliness
and splendour affrighted me.

7\. From those twain I suffered two deaths: thus hath the Koran revealed
her.

8\. I said, 'Wherefore did thy unveiling affright me?' (She answered),
'Thy foes have trysted to attack thee when the sun shines.'

9\. I said, 'I am in a guarded demesne of black hair that hides thee:
let it fall at their coming.'

10\. This poem of mine is without rhyme: I intend by it only Her.

11\. The word 'Her' is my aim, and for Her sake I am not fond of
bartering except (with) 'Give and take' (*há wa-há*). <span
id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md)

#### COMMENTARY

1\. 'Between the sun and the gazelles,' referring to Kor. lxv, 12: '*The
Divine command descendeth between them*' (viz. the heavens and the
earth).

2\. The heedless man is not he who neglects what is

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

invisible, like the star Suhá, but he who neglects what is visible and
manifest, like the sun.

3\. 'Let him offer himself to his herd,' etc., i.e. let him sacrifice
himself for the sake of those whom he loves, and then they will praise
him.

4\. 'An Arab girl,' i.e. one of the Muḥammadan kinds of knowledge.

'Belonging by origin to the daughters of Persia': for the foreign and
barbarous idiom (\#\#\#) is more ancient than the Arabic (\#\#\#).

6\. 'I boded ill from her unveiling': when a woman unveiled herself to
an Arab with no particular motive, he used to regard it as a sign that
she was unlucky to him, and he used to be afraid in consequence.

7\. 'Two deaths,' i.e. dying to (becoming unconscious of) others, and
dying to himself, so that he remained with her in virtue of her, not in
virtue of himself.

'Thus hath the Koran revealed her,' in reference to Kor. xl, 11: '*Thou
hast caused us to die twice*.'

8\. 'Thy foes,' etc., i.e. they will beguile thee with a form resembling
mine at the moment when I manifest my essence to thee, i.e. thy desire
to obtain possession of my essence will deceive thee and make thee
imagine that the form in which I appear to thee is I myself.

9\. 'I am in a guarded demesne,' etc., as it is said of the Prophet:
'*for He causes a guard (of angels) to go before and behind him*' (Kor.
lxxii, 27), that he might be in no doubt concerning his inspiration.
This is the meaning of my verse, 'At night the angels descended upon my
heart and circled it like the sphere that circles the pole-star.'

10\. 'This poem of mine is without rhyme,' i.e. it has no recurring
rhyme-letter (\#\#\#), which in a rhymed poem would invariably precede
the \#\#\#.

'I intend by it only Her' (or, as the author expresses it, only the
letter (\#\#\#), i.e. 'I have no connexion except with Her, since my
connexion with the phenomenal world is entirely for Her sake, in so far
as She reveals Herself there.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[127:1](taa45.htm#fr_29.md) The meaning of the last
hemistich is obscure. Possibly \#\#\# was a formula used in completing a
bargain.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLIII](taa46.md)

</div>
