[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps03) 
[Next](mps05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I

### STORY OF ROSTEVAN, KING OF THE ARABIANS

<span class="margnote"><span id="32">32</span></span> There was in
Arabia Rostevan, a king by the grace of God, happy, exalted, generous,
modest, lord of many hosts and knights, just and gracious, powerful,
far-seeing, himself a peerless warrior, moreover fluent in speech:

<span class="margnote"><span id="33">33</span></span> No other child had
the king save one only daughter, the shining light of the world, to be
ranked with nought but the sunny group; whoever looked on her, she
bereft

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

him of heart, mind and soul. It needs a wise man to praise her, and a
very eloquent tongue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="34">34</span></span> Her name is
T’hinat’hin; let it be famous! When she had grown up to full womanhood,
she contemned even the sun. The king called his viziers, seated himself,
proud yet gentle, and, placing them by his side, began to talk
graciously to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="35">35</span></span> He said: "I will
declare to you the matter on which we are to take counsel together. When
the flower of the rose is dried and withered it falls, and another
blooms in the lovely garden. The sun is set for us; we are gazing on a
dark, moonless night.

<span class="margnote"><span id="36">36</span></span> "My day is done;
old age, most grievous of all ills, weighs on me; if not to-day, then
to-morrow I die--this is the way of the world. What light is that on
which darkness attends? Let us instate as sovereign my daughter, of whom
the sun is not worthy."

<span class="margnote"><span id="37">37</span></span> The viziers said:
"O king, why do you speak of your age? Even when the rose fades we must
needs give it its due; it still excels all in scent and fair colour. How
can a star declare enmity even to the waning moon!

<span class="margnote"><span id="38">38</span></span> "Speak not then
thus, O king. Your rose is not yet faded. Even bad counsel from you is
better than good counsel from another, It was certainly fitting to speak
out what your heart desires. It is better. Give the kingdom to her who
prevails against the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="39">39</span></span> "Though indeed she
be a woman, still as sovereign she is begotten of God. She knows how to
rule. We say not this to flatter you; we ourselves, in your absence,

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

often say so. Her deeds, like her radiance, are revealed bright as
sunshine. The lion's whelps are equal (alike lions), be they male or
female."

<span class="margnote"><span id="40">40</span></span> Avt’handil was
general, son of the commander-in-chief. He was more graceful than the
cypress; his presence was like sun and moon. Still beardless, he was to
be likened to famous crystal and glass. The beauty of T’hinat’hin and of
the host of her eyelashes was slaying him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="41">41</span></span> He kept his love
hidden in his heart. When he was absent and saw her not, his rose faded;
when he saw her, the fires were renewed, his wound smarted more. Love is
pitiable; it makes man heart-slain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="42">42</span></span> When the king
commanded that his daughter should be enthroned as king, gladness came
upon Avt’handil; the extinction (concealment) of that jewel irks him. He
said to himself: "Often will it now fall to my lot to gaze upon her
crystal face; perchance I may thus find a cure for my pallor."

<span class="margnote"><span id="43">43</span></span> The great
sovereign of the Arabs published throughout Arabia an edict: "I, her
father, appoint my T’hinat’hin king; she shall illumine all, even as the
shining sun. Come and see, all ye who praise and extol!" (or, praise and
extol her!).

<span class="margnote"><span id="44">44</span></span> All the Arabians
came; the crowd of courtiers increased. The sun-faced Avt’handil, chief
of ten thousand times a thousand soldiers, the vizier Sograt, the
nearest to the king of all his attendants. When they placed the throne
the people said: "Its worth is beyond words!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="45">45</span></span> T’hinat’hin,
radiant in countenance, was led in by her sire. He seated her, and with
his own hands set the crown on her head; he gave her the sceptre, and
clad her

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

in the royal robes. The maiden looks on with understanding, all-seeing,
like the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="46">46</span></span> The king and his
armies retired and did homage. They blessed her and established her as
king, many from many places told forth her praises; the trumpets were
blown and the cymbals sounded sweetly. The maiden wept, she shed many
tears; she drooped her raven eyelashes (the tail feathers of the raven).

<span class="margnote"><span id="47">47</span></span> She deemed herself
unworthy to sit on her father's throne; therefore she weeps, filling the
rose-garden (of her cheeks) with tears. The king admonishes her: "Every
father hath a peer in his child," quoth he. "Until now the raging fire
in my bosom has not been extinguished."

<span class="margnote"><span id="48">48</span></span> He said: "Weep
not, daughter, but hearken to my counsel: To-day thou art King of
Arabia, appointed sovereign by me; henceforth this kingdom is entrusted
to thee; mayest thou be discreet in thy doings, be modest and
discerning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="49">49</span></span> "Since the sun
shines alike on roses and middens, be not thou weary of mercy to great
and small. The generous binds the free, and he who is already bound will
willingly obey. Scatter liberally, as the seas pour forth again the
floods they have received.?

<span class="margnote"><span id="50">50</span></span> "Munificence in
kings is like the aloe planted in Eden. All, even the traitor, are
obedient to the generous. It is very wholesome to eat and drink, but
what profits it to hoard? What thou givest away is thine; what thou
keepest is lost."

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="51">51</span></span> The maiden
hearkened discreetly to this her father's advice; she lent ear, she
heard, she wearied not of instruction. The king drank and sported; he
was exceeding joyful. T’hinat’hin contemned the sun, but the sun aped
T’hinat’hin.

<span class="margnote"><span id="52">52</span></span> She sent for her
faithful, trusty tutor, and said: "Bring hither all my treasure sealed
by thee, all the wealth belonging to me as king's daughter." He brought
it; she gave without measure, without count, untiringly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="53">53</span></span> That day she gave
away all she had gathered since her childhood; she enriched both small
folk and great. Then she said: "I do the deed my father taught me; let
none keep back any of my hoarded treasure."

<span class="margnote"><span id="54">54</span></span> She said: "Go,
open whatever treasure there is! Master of the Horse, lead in the droves
of asses, mules, and horses." He brought them. She gave them away
without measure; she wearied not of generosity. The soldiers gathered
together stuff like pirates.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="55">55</span></span> They pillaged her
treasury as ’twere booty from Turks; they carried off her fine, sleek
Arab steeds. Her munificence was like a snowstorm whirling down from the
sky; none remained empty, neither youth nor maiden.

<span class="margnote"><span id="56">56</span></span> One day passed;
there was a banquet, food and drink--a feast of fruit. A great gathering
of warriors sat there to make merry. The king hung his head, and his
brow was furrowed with sadness. They began to discuss this one with
another: "What weighs upon him, and why grieves he?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="57">57</span></span> At the head sat
the sun-faced Avt’handil, desirable to them that look upon him, the
agile leader of the hosts; like a panther and a lion is he. The old
vizier Sograt sat by his side. They said one to the other: "What ails
the king, and why has he grown pale?"

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="58">58</span></span> They said: "Some
unpleasant thought has come into the king's mind, for nothing has
happened here to make him sad." Quoth Avt’handil: "Let us inquire, O
Sograt, let him tell us why he is displeased with us; let us venture on
some pleasantry; why hath he shamed us?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="59">59</span></span> Sograt and the
graceful Avt’handil arose; each filled his winecup, and with meek mien
drew nigh. Then with smiling faces they cast themselves on their knees
before the king. The vizier sportively spoke thus, with eloquent words:

<span class="margnote"><span id="60">60</span></span> "You look sad, O
king; there is no longer a smile on your face. Thou art right, for, lo!
your daughter with lavish hand has given away all your rich and costly
treasure. Make her not king at all; why bring grief on thyself?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="61">61</span></span> When the king
heard him he looked up with a smile. He marvelled how he had ventured
thus, how he dared to speak such words! "Well hast thou done!" He
thanked his vizier. He confirmed this by what he said: "He who lays
avarice to my charge is a lying chatterer.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="62">62</span></span> "That afflicts me
not, O vizier. This it is that troubles me: Old age draws nigh; I have
spent the days of youth, and nowhere in our dominions is there a man who
hath learned from me the knightly arts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="63">63</span></span> "It is true I have
a daughter tenderly nurtured, but God has given me no son; I suffer in
this fleeting life. There is none to be compared with me in archery or
at the game of ball. It is true that Avt’handil resembles me somewhat,
thanks to my teaching."

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="64">64</span></span> The proud youth
hearkened modestly to these words of the king; with bent head he smiled.
Well did a smile befit him; his shining white teeth gleamed like
sunshine on a mead. The king asked: "Why smilest thou? or why wert thou
shy of me?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="65">65</span></span> Yet again he said:
"Why dost thou smile at me? What is laughable in me?" The youth replied:
"I shall tell you if you grant me leave to speak. With what I say be not
offended; be not wroth, blame me not, call me not bold, ruin me not for
this!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="66">66</span></span> He answered: "How
can I take aught thou sayst a displeasing?" He took an oath by the sun
(*i.e.*, life) of T’hinat’hin, that contemner of the sun. Avt’handil
said "Then will I speak boldly; vaunt not yourself of your archery, it
is better to speak modestly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="67">67</span></span> "I, Avt’handil,
earth under your feet, am an archer before you; let us lay a wager; let
your armies attend as witnesses. 'Who is like me in the lists?' said you
vain indeed is denial!--that is decided by the ball and the field."

<span class="margnote"><span id="68">68</span></span> "I will not let
thee thus dispute with me! Say the word, let us draw the bow; do not
shirk. Let us make good men witnesses of our rivalry; then in the field
it will be manifest whose praises should be sung."

<span class="margnote"><span id="69">69</span></span> Avt’handil obeyed;
they ceased their discourse. They laughed, they sported like children,
lovingly and becomingly they behaved. They fixed the wager, and laid
down this condition: Whoever shall be beaten, let him go bareheaded for
three days.

<span class="margnote"><span id="70">70</span></span> (The king)
commanded, moreover: "Let twelve slaves be chosen to attend us, twelve
to give me arrows

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

and wait upon me; Shermadin alone is for thee; he is equal to them (my
retinue). Let them count the shots and the hits, and give a faithful,
unerring report."

<span class="margnote"><span id="71">71</span></span> To the huntsmen he
said: "Travel over the plain, beat in many droves, go yourselves to do
this, invite the soldiers to look on, (bid them) assemble and close
round!" The wassail and banquet broke up; there were we pleasantly
merry.

<span class="margnote"><span id="72">72</span></span> Early in the
morning he (Avt’handil) came forth like a well-grown lily; he was clad
in crimson, his face was of crystal and ruby, over his face was a golden
veil, he was fair in huntsman's apparel. He rode upon a white steed; he
invited the king to come forth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="73">73</span></span> The king was
arrayed, he mounted, they set out for the chase. The people surrounded
the field, they made a ring round about it; there was much mirth and
excitement; the armies kept the ground. For their wager were they
shooting and striving together.

<span class="margnote"><span id="74">74</span></span> The king commanded
the twelve slaves: "Come, accompany us, bring us the swift bows, prepare
the arrows, compare what is struck and keep count of the shots." Game
began to come in from every corner of the plain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="75">75</span></span> Herds of game,
innumerable, flocked in: stags, goats, wild-asses, high-leaping chamois.
Lord and vassal pursued them; what sight could be fairer! Behold the
bow, the arrow, and the untiring arm!

<span class="margnote"><span id="76">76</span></span> The dust from
their horses’ tracks cut off the sun's

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

rays. They slew, their arrows sped, blood flowed through the field; as
the shafts were shot away the slaves brought more of them. The beasts
wounded by them could not take another step.

<span class="margnote"><span id="77">77</span></span> They ran through
that field; they drove the herd before them. They slew and exterminated,
they made wroth the God of the heavens, the fields were dyed crimson
with the blood they shed from the beasts. Those who watched Avt’handil
said: "He is like an aloe-tree planted, in Eden."

<span class="margnote"><span id="78">78</span></span> They coursed over
the whole of that plain only they had travelled over. There on the
farther edge of the plain flows a stream; on the bank of the stream are
rocks. The game fled into the wood, where horse could not follow.
(Rostevan and Avt’handil) were both fatigued, (yet) how spirited they
were! (? They were tired in spite of their strength.)

<span class="margnote"><span id="79">79</span></span> Each laughingly
said to the other: "’Tis I that have won!" Merry were they; they
sported, hither and thither they frolicked. Then came the slaves who had
tarried, and (the king) said: "Tell the truth; we seek not flattery from
you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="80">80</span></span> The slaves said:
"We shall speak the truth; think not we shall deceive you, O king; we
may by no means liken you to him. Slay us at once if you will, it
matters not; this cannot help you in any way. We observed the beasts
stricken by him; they could not move a forward step.

<span class="margnote"><span id="81">81</span></span> "Together ye have
slain in all a hundred score, but Avt’handil killed more by a score; he
missed not even one at which he aimed his bow, but of yours we cleaned
up many which left blots on the earth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="82">82</span></span> The king heard
this with as little concern as (if it had been the result of) a game of
backgammon, he rejoiced

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

so at the victory of his foster-son; he loved him as the rose loves the
nightingale; smiling he made merry, all grief was gone from his heart.

<span class="margnote"><span id="83">83</span></span> There they both
sat to cool themselves at the foot of the trees; the soldiers assembled
and stood round them, countless as chaff; near them were the twelve
slaves, bravest of the brave. As they sported they gazed at the stream
and the edge of the glens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. How The King of the Arabians Saw the Knight Clad in the
Panther's Skin](mps05)
