[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps00) 
[Next](mps02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

### PREFACE

THIS is an attempt to give a faithful rendering, word by word, of a book
which is the mirror of the soul of a cultured people with a great past;
the mirror is chipped and tarnished by time and mischance, but the
loving labour of scholars may soon renew its lustre and repair some of
its injuries. Even in the state in which it is here presented the work
can hardly fail to provoke interest. The history of the poem makes it
worthy of perusal, for it has been in a unique manner the book of a
nation for seven hundred years; down to our own days the young people
learned it by heart; every woman was expected to know every word of it,
and on her marriage to carry a copy of it to her new home. Such
veneration shown for so long a period proves that the story of the
Panther-clad Knight presents an image of the Georgian outlook on life,
and justifies the presumption that merits tested by the experience of a
quarter of a million days, most of them troublous, may be apparent to
other races, that such a book may be of value to mankind, and chiefly to
those peoples which, like the Georgian, came under the influence of
Greek and Christian ideals. Here we are dealing with no alien
psychology, but with a soul which, though readily responsive to the
great cultural movements of nearer Asia, <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) showed in a thousand years of struggle that
its natural gravitation was towards Western Europe, whither with
pathetic constancy it kept its gaze fixed. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) Iberia of

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

the East and Iberia of the West, the high-water marks of Arab conquest,
were both fertilized by the Semitic flood, and, whether or not they have
some ancient ethnic affinity, this has given them not a few common
characteristics; Spain had Christendom at her back, Georgia carried on
her glorious crusade in isolation till the struggle was hopeless, and a
century ago she was forced into an alliance with the Russian Empire.
From her situation, geographical and political, Georgia was the country
most likely to show that approximation of Eastern and Western thought
typical of the epoch of the Crusades, and in these latter days it is
largely due to the infusion of Iberian blood that Turkey and Persia have
still sufficient vitality to attempt reforms.

It might have been expected that a people whose life was a ceaseless
fight to keep for Christendom the bridge between Asia and Europe would
have put into its greatest artistic effort an uncompromising confession
of faith; but freedom of thought rather than fanaticism is
characteristic of Shot’ha, so at various times, down to the eighteenth
century, the orthodox clergy destroyed manuscripts of the poem, and the
*editio princeps* of 1712 could only appear because its royal editor
appended to it a pious mystical commentary. We find one reference apiece
to Mohammed ([1010](mps31.htm#1010)) and Mecca ([1144](mps38.htm#1144)),
and three mentions of the Koran ([339](mps09.htm#339),
[514](mps16.htm#514), [1144](mps38.htm#1144)); the official
representatives of Islam are spoken of with scant sympathy
([339](mps09.htm#339)). To Christianity as an ecclesiastical system we
have, possibly, allusions (Easter Eve, [536](mps16.htm#536); icon,
[247](mps07.htm#247); shrine, [1345](mps44.htm#1345); halo, aureole,
[226](mps07.htm#226), [229](mps07.htm#229), [1110](mps38.htm#1110),
[1410](mps47.htm#1410)); there may be a few quotations from the
Scriptures ("gall of bitterness," [99](mps05.htm#99); "hart and
waterbrooks," [835](mps27.htm#835), [1564](mps50.htm#1564); "tinkling
cymbals," [772](mps24.htm#772);" charity faileth not,"
[1520](mps49.htm#1520); "through a glass darkly," [110](mps05.htm#110),
[656](mps21.htm#656), [707](mps21.htm#707), [1431](mps47.htm#1431);
"hidden treasure," ?[882](mps27.htm#882); "be content," "judge not,"
[18](mps03.htm#18); "rivers run into the sea," [49](mps04.htm#49)); the
Biblical personages incidentally mentioned are--Adam, Beelzebub, ?Ezra,
Goliath, Levi, and Satan, and the geographical, names Eden, Euphrates,
Gihon, Pison, and Gibeon, are used in similes; there seems to be a
reference to the doctrine of regeneration ([184](mps07.htm#184)), and
another perhaps to purgatory ([785](mps24.htm#785)).

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When he wrote his
poem, Rust’haveli had evidently no violent prejudice for one religion
more than another, but was of a critical and eclectic turn of mind, and
formed for himself a working philosophy of life, showing Persian and
Arabian tendencies, but with so much of Christianity and Neo-Platonism
as to bring it near to Occidental minds. "The Georgians in the tenth and
eleventh centuries interested themselves in the domain of philosophy in
those same questions which occupied the leading minds of the Christian
world of that period both in the East and the West, with this
distinction from the others--*e.g.*, Europeans--that in those days the
Georgians responded earlier than others to the newest tendencies of
philosophic thought, and worked in a panoply, exemplary for its time, of
textual criticism directly on the Greek originals." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

There is throughout the poem manifest joy in life and action: God
createth not evil ([1468](mps49.htm#1468), [1485](mps49.htm#1485)); ill
is fleeting ([1337](mps44.htm#1337)); since there is gladness in the
world, why should any be sad? ([687](mps21.htm#687)); it is after all a
good world, fair to look upon despite its horrid deserts, a world to
sing in either because one is happy or because one wishes to be so
([946](mps29.htm#946)); there are flowers to gaze on, good wine to
drink, fair apparel and rich jewels to wear, beasts worth hunting, games
worth playing, foes to be fought, and friends to be loved and helped.
There are grievous troubles, but they are to be battled against; it is a
law with men that they should struggle and suffer
([776](mps24.htm#776)); for them is endeavour, and victory lies with God
([883](mps27.htm#883)); however black the outlook, there must be no
shirking, for the one deed especially Satan's is suicide
([728](mps22.htm#728), [768](mps23.htm#768), [815](mps27.htm#815),
[854](mps27.htm#854), [1169](mps38.htm#1169)); the game must be played
to the end manfully, and God is generous though the world be hard
([911](mps28.htm#911), [1338](mps44.htm#1338)); He will make all right
in the end ([1365](mps45.htm#1365)), and sorrow alone shows a man's
mettle ([945](mps29.htm#945)). The keynote is optimism *quand* *même*.
Life is a passing illusion ([1572](mps50.htm#1572)), brief and
untrustworthy ([1575](mps50.htm#1575)), in itself nothing but a silly
tale ([697](mps21.htm#697)); we are gazers through a cloudy, distorting
glass ([110](mps05.htm#110), [656](mps21.htm#656), [707](mps21.htm#707),
[1431](mps47.htm#1431)); our deeds are mere

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

childish sports making for soul-fitness. The one way of escape from
illusion is in the exercise of that essential part of ourselves which
unites us with the choir of the heavenly hosts ([771](mps24.htm#771));
love lifts us out of the mundane marsh ([772](mps24.htm#772)); brother
must act brotherly ([914](mps28.htm#914)); we must loyally serve our
chosen friends, those with whom we have formed a bond stronger than the
ties of blood: for such we must die if need be ([296](mps07.htm#296)).
The poem is a glorification of friendship, and the story is of the
mutual aid of three starlike heroes wont to serve one another
([6](mps03.htm#6)); even the gratification of the tenderest love must be
postponed to this high duty; the betrothed, the newly-wedded, must part
for this ([292](mps07.htm#292), [685](mps21.htm#685),
[688](mps21.htm#688), [1541](mps50.htm#1541)); friend makes of himself a
road and a bridge ([685](mps21.htm#685)) by which his friend passes to
joy. That women have their share in such friendships is shown by the
fraternity between Asmat’h and Tariel, and it is a proof of the deep
culture of the people that such bonds still exist; there is probably no
country where men have so many pure ties with women, where they are
bound by affection to so many with whom the idea of marriage is never
permitted to present itself. It is to the influence of such customs that
we may partly attribute the high civilization of the race; it is equally
true that respect for women is a sign of ancient culture. Rust’haveli is
the poet of the whole people, and refinement of manners is not limited
to, or absent from, any rank of life; the passage ([234](mps07.htm#234),
[235](mps07.htm#235)) in which Avt’handil forgets for a moment that he
is a "gentleman" makes every Georgian blush, and even in these days of
comparative degeneracy one never hears of any man behaving with
discourtesy in the presence of a woman. Woman is man's equal; the lion's
whelps are alike lions ([39](mps04.htm#39)); the three heroines are
queens in their own right, free to dispose of themselves in marriage,
fitted to rule kingdoms; Dame P’hatman is Acting Collector of Customs
and Master of the Merchant Guild in her husband's absence.

Friendship is thus the main fact of life, the thing that makes it worth
living; but its highest form is that noblest love ([12](mps03.htm#12))
of which some of the introductory quatrains treat.

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is the divine
frenzy ([27](mps03.htm#27), [29](mps03.htm#29)), breathed only into the
gentle, the fair, the wise, the brave, and the generous
([9](mps03.htm#9)), unseating the charioteer Reason, antecedent to a
nuptial choice, transforming the lover into the divine likeness, and
thus preparing him for the creative act by which mankind is renewed from
age to age. It is a tender feeling ([9](mps03.htm#9)), pure in its
essence ([10](mps03.htm#10)), hiding itself from the view of the world
([12](mps03.htm#12)), needing not love in return, but enduring patiently
the wrath of the beloved ([10](mps03.htm#10)); it is changeless in its
object ([11](mps03.htm#11)), steadfast to the end; when it is
reciprocated it sweetens death, for in eternity it finds full fruition
([1280](mps42.htm#1280)-[1282](mps42.htm#1282)). It is in this passion,
relentless and beautiful like the panther whose coat he wears, that
Tariel is wrapped.

If in his advocacy of reticence in affairs of the heart, and his
insistence on "playing the game," Rust’haveli makes a special appeal to
British readers, there are at least two points wherein he might seem
likely to lack their approval: his hyperbolic descriptions of grief at
separation, and his hackneyed astronomic similes for human beauty. But
such emotional excesses are by himself disapproved
([855](mps27.htm#855), [911](mps28.htm#911)), and they find parallels in
our own literature as late as the eighteenth century, and with passages
like those in [806](mps26.htm#806) and [1423](mps47.htm#1423) we have
numerous analogies in Western literature; it is to be remembered that
every parting is looked upon as possibly, or even probably, the last,
and is thus invested with the bitterness of death
([994](mps30.htm#994)). The radiant loveliness of the heroes and
heroines is described in terms of the brightest celestial lights,
because the shining forth of the soul through a fair countenance is in
sober fact more brilliant, even, than those heavenly bodies which were
of old the objects of worship.

Then, again, there are three unpleasant incidents in the story:
Avt’handil's murder of the Chachnagir, and his intrigue with P’hatman,
and Tariel's assassination of Khvarazmsha. We are not concerned to
defend the morality of those transactions, and prefer to suppose that
they were as repugnant to Rust’haveli as to ourselves; they are
necessary to the working out of the plot, and they

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

were all for the sake of women and directly instigated by women. As for
Tariel's ill-treatment of Rostevan's men and the Cathayans, we are to
presume that his madness is his excuse; like Hamlet, grief at a father's
death, loss of both sovereignty and mistress, combined to produce a
mania sometimes murderous in its manifestations; but as soon as he is
cured, his natural kindness of heart returns, and his boyish disposition
exhibits itself in frolic ([1351](mps45.htm#1351),
[1352](mps45.htm#1352)).

Enough has been said to show the main idea of the poem, and in the
Appendix will be found groups of references to particular points of
interest, things abstract and concrete. It now becomes necessary to say
something of the poet, though we have much less historical knowledge of
him than of Shakespeare. His life seems to have lasted from 1172 to
1216. The personal name Shot’ha is said to be a form of Ashot’ha, an
appellation of the idol of Armaz (Ormuzd), and is occasionally met with
in the chronicles of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Rust’haveli
means Rust’havian, man of Rust’havi; one place of that name was an
episcopal see, but the other is evidently the poet's birthplace, for he
describes himself as a Meskhian ([1572](mps50.htm#1572)); so it is from
Rust’havi in the district of Akhaltzikhe (which means Newcastle) that he
came; he was thus of the race of Meshech (Gen. x. 2; Ps. cxx. 5; Ezek.
xxvii. 13, xxxii. 26). Tradition says he was early left an orphan in the
care of an uncle who was a monk, that he was educated at the church
school of Rust’havi and the monasteries of Tbeti, Gremi, and Iqalt’ho,
and was then, in accordance with the custom of the period, sent to
Athens, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3) Olympus, and Jerusalem. On his
return he wrote Odes <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) in honour of the
sainted Queen T’hamara (A.D. 1184-1212), and as a reward was appointed
treasurer at the brilliant court of that great and good sovereign, whose
reign saw Georgia's political power and literary culture at their
highest point of achievement. We are told that his native

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

place was given to him as an estate in lieu of salary. There is a
document preserved in the Tiflis Synodal Archives, dated 1190 (?),
signed by him as royal treasurer; he must have been singularly
precocious if the date of his birth were really 1172. The popular story
tells how, hopelessly in love with his queen, he retired to the
monastery of Holy Rood at Jerusalem, where, on a pillar, over a portrait
is the inscription: "May God pardon Shot’ha, the painter of this. Amen.
Rust’haveli." <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5) It seems strange that
the word "Rust’haveli" should be added after "Amen"; in any case there
is a portrait which readers can accept as not discordant with the
character displayed in the epic. Many legends are attached to his name;
they represent him as enamoured of T’hamara and married to an unworthy
wife.

The oldest manuscript is said to be an undated parchment, which,
according to Plato Ioseliani, was the property of a Colonel Gregory
Tseret’heli; another copy, on paper, is alleged to be of the year 1443;
and a third is dated 1678. These were used by King Vakhtang VI. for his
edition of 1712; but they have apparently been lost, and, so far as we
know, there is no existing manuscript earlier than the seventeenth
century, and none dated before 1646. <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6)
It is most desirable that attention should be devoted to the
purification of the text.

The poem is written in quatrains of rhyming lines of sixteen syllables,
with an accentuation dividing the lines into halves . <span
id="fr_7"></span>[3](#fn_7) It is meant to be sung to the "Davidic" harp
([1574](mps50.htm#1574)), which may have come to the Caucasus with the
Jews of the Babylonish Captivity. In the remoter parts of the country,
minstrels may perhaps even now be heard chanting the story of Tariel.

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

The following transliteration of a quatrain will give an idea of the
verse, and may help to remove from the language the reproach cast upon
it by some writers who had not even an elementary acquaintance with it:

1281\.

*Mzé ushénod vér ikmnébis/ rádgan shén khar mísi tsíli  
gághanámtza más iákhle/ mísi étli ár t’hu tsbíli  
múna gnákho mándve gsákho/ gánminát’hlo gúli chrdíli  
t’hú sitzótzkhle mtsáre mkónda/ sícvdilímtza mkóndes tcbíli*.

The Europeans who have heard of Georgian think it a cacophonous
assemblage of consonants with many gutturals and a sparing use of
vowels. It is true, indeed, that groups of consonants repellent to a
Western eye and ear are frequently found, and herein lies the vigour of
the language. A modern Turkish poet addresses a Georgian lady thus: "O
thou whose speech is like a lion's roar!" This, however, is but one
phonetic aspect of a tongue which in its love lyrics and lullabies can
be as soft and caressing as Italian, ("sweet-sounding Georgian,"
[692](mps21.htm#692)) in its rhetorical and philosophic passages as
sonorous and dignified as Castilian. Georgian has been a
highly-developed literary language from the dawn of the Christian era,
and students of cuneiform are engaged in the task of tracing it back to
the earliest periods of history; it has a vocabulary so rich, a
flexibility so great, that it renders metaphysical Greek works not only
word for word, but sometimes syllable by syllable. In the monastery of
Petritzos, now called Bachkovo, in the Rhodope, founded, or renovated,
by Georgians in 1083, and still bearing traces of their occupation, was
a philosophic seminary where many Neo-Platonist and other translations
were made. One of the monks, John Petritzi, in the late eleventh or
early twelfth century, wrote thus: "In the translation of difficult
speculative and philosophic works I consider myself obliged to apply all
possible simplicity, and follow the peculiarities of the language (of
the original) to the utmost." In commenting

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

on this passage, Professor Marr <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)
writes: "John Petritzi translated not only ideas, but words, even words
existing in the Georgian language: terms do not satisfy him unless they
cover the original etymologically, or even in some cases by the number
of their syllables. . . . To him we owe a ready-made philosophic
terminology in the Georgian language, marvellously exact and concisely
rendering by Georgian roots all those terms which in European languages
are borrowed from Greek and Latin."

It was such a language that Rust’haveli used, with a perfection of art
which makes a foreign student at first despair of perceiving even the
outline of the story. A quatrain may have four quadrisyllabic endings
apparently identical (*e.g.*, *asadages*, [136](mps05.htm#136)), and no
little knowledge and thought are needed to arrive at the sense in which
each of them is to be taken. The beginner is occasionally tempted to
believe that the poem is rather music than narrative, that it aims more
at inspiring moods than speaking clearly to the intelligence; it is only
after some labour that the logical unity of the fable is grasped.

Some controversy has arisen as to the dramatic story which forms the
groundwork of the epic, and not a few inkhorns have been emptied by
commentators on the passages, "This Persian tale now done into Georgian"
([16](mps03.htm#16)) and "I, Rust’haveli, have composed this work by my
art" ([15](mps03.htm#15)). It may here suffice to say that no trace of
such a Persian story has yet been discovered; and even if it were found,
our author's fame would thereby suffer no more than Shakespeare's does
from Luigi da Porto's novel. Perhaps Rust’haveli used a pre-existing
fable; this, at least, seems the simplest way of accounting for the
episode of Avt’handil's intrigue with P’hatman, which is treated with
distaste, though it serves to throw a brighter light on Tariel as the
faultless lover compared with his sworn brother the tactful, heroic man
of the world, and the poet would hardly have invented it, or even used
it, unless it had

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

been indispensable in the working out of the plot. It is true that
nearly all the characters have Persian names--perhaps none but Tariel,
T’hinat’hin, Davar, and Avt’handil are originally Georgian (and the last
is doubtful)--and a large number of Persian words are used <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9); but this seems to be due partly to a desire
of avoiding the appearance of hinting at current events, and partly to a
fashion of the time, the natural result of literary sympathies between
two neighbouring cultured peoples. There is something to be said in
favour of Professor Khakhanov's theory, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) that the folk ballads about Tariel and
Avt’handil, of which variants are still sung, especially by the
mountaineers, were part of the popular literature before the T’hamaran
age; while the historical fact of the great queen's elevation to the
throne during her father's lifetime was used as a preface to the story.

There is a point to which attention might be given: In Arabic literature
one of the earliest forms is that of the eulogy in brief epigrammatic
verse. Now, in *The Man in the Panther's Skin* we find a remarkably
frequent use of the word *keba* (praise); in a score of quatrains <span
id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11) *keba* occurs; we also meet with the
Arabic word *khotba* ([3](mps03.htm#3), [1009](mps31.htm#1009),
[1025](mps31.htm#1025)) in approximately the same sense, and there is
one reference to a professional eulogist, *makebi catzi*
([1527](mps50.htm#1527)); finally, one passage ([1574](mps50.htm#1574))
says the poem is made up out of *kebani* (eulogies). It is for scholars
to inquire into the matter, and see whether the numerous *kebani* may
not be more ancient than the poem, and perhaps the determinant factor in
the choice of the verse form (called *shairi*); whether, in fact,
Rust’haveli did not take from oral tradition certain short verses
uniform in their prosody, and weave his work round them after their
pattern. In the Athos manuscript of the Georgian Bible, copied in A.D.
978

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

for the great warrior-monk T’hornici from an earlier translation, the
"Song of Songs" is *Keba Kebat’ha;* this seems to show that in ancient
Georgia the *keba*, or eulogy, was the poem *par excellence*. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

The English translation endeavours to present the author's ideas and
expressions with such fidelity that it may be of use to those who wish
to read the original. This version was begun in Kent in 1891, and the
first draft was completed at Kertch on November 1, 1898; but in spite of
frequent revision and correction, carried on till December, 1909, it is
imperfect, and the translator estimated that ten more years of study at
least would be required to bring it to its final shape. Nevertheless, as
it stands it is a contribution to Georgian studies in Europe, a
steppingstone to help others in a difficult task. It is believed that
several attempted literal translations into Russian (including one by
the late M. Poltoratzky), and one into French (by M. Meunargia), exist,
but the translator never saw them. Since her death an attempt has been
made to publish a Russian version in a Tiflis newspaper, but the public
received it so ill that the editor was, unfortunately, compelled to
desist. Herr Arthur Leist's metrical paraphrase in German (*Der Mann im
Tigerfelle*, Dresden and Leipzig, no date) gives an excellent summary of
the poem, and is recommended to readers. Through the corruption of the
text and the lack of critical editions and such aids, lexicographic,
grammatical, philological, historical, as readers of other great
literatures enjoy, there are many passages which seem incapable of
satisfactory interpretation; these are rendered as literally as
possible. It is a pleasing duty to set down here an acknowledgment of
the generous assistance given in preparing this work for the press; so
many have collaborated that it is impossible to mention them
individually, but special thanks are due to M. Michel Tseret’heli for
reading through the whole

xiv

manuscript, and to Professor Nicholas Marr, of the University of St.
Petersburg, who has supplied additional material, and has permitted the
publication, in the Appendix, of an English version of his Russian
rendering of the obscure introductory and concluding quatrains, and of
other passages. Helpers will find sufficient recompense in the thought
that they are co-workers with one who loved Rust’haveli and Georgia.

Last of all, this book, designed to be the translator's chief work,
should contain some notice of her life. She was born in London on
November 26, 1869; died at Bucharest on December 7, 1909; and was buried
at Sevenoaks. She began the study of Georgian, as her learned
predecessor, M.-F. Brosset, had done, with an alphabet and a Gospel, and
when she had made some progress it was his grammar and dictionary she
first used; as a girl of twenty she chose this as the idea of her life.
She was already equipped with a sound education, and during her varied,
busy career she not only used French, German, Italian, Russian, and
Roumanian in the daily concerns of the household and the amenities of
social intercourse, but applied herself to those tongues and their
literatures. From early womanhood she spent nearly all her time
abroad--in Italy, France, and North Africa, comparatively short periods;
in Hayti over a year; in Roumania three years; in various parts of the
Russian dominions about ten years. Her published works are--*Georgian
Folk-Tales;* London, 1894 (D. Nutt). *The Hermit*, a legend by Prince
Ilia Chavchavadze (in verse); London, 1895 (B. Quaritch). *Life of St.
Nino;* Oxford, 1900 (Clarendon Press). She left *The Man in the
Panther's Skin* and other translations in manuscript.

A letter to Ilia Chavchavadze, asking permission to translate *The
Hermit*, was printed in his newspaper *Iveria* of September 8 (O.S.),
1894, as a model of style, and led to a revival of interest in their
language and literature among the younger generation. On her arrival in
Transcaucasia in December, 1894, she was received

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

with enthusiasm, and her travels during a second visit, in 1896, brought
her into touch with every class of the people. She formed many lasting
friendships, and kept up a large correspondence in the Georgian
language. There is hardly a household in the Western Caucasus where her
name is unknown. Others, have studied the language, literature, and
history, of Georgia; she in addition felt an affection for the
nation, <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) kept herself informed of all
that concerned its welfare, and was sometimes able unobtrusively to do
good work for it. To the less fortunate of her own countrywomen, with
whom she had much opportunity of acquaintance abroad, she was a sincere
friend and comforter; her loss was deplored even by many who knew her
but slightly, for, though fragile and weak of body, she never spared
herself in her efforts for others. Her intimates found in her a mastery
of the arts that make an English home, subtle humour, strength of mind,
and warmth of heart. Her reticence about her own achievements was such
that few of those who prized her social charm and domestic virtues were
aware that her leisure was devoted to study. She calmly, cheerfully, and
helpfully faced pestilence, war, and other dangers; at three successive
places of residence--Port-au-Prince (1902), St. Petersburg (1905),
Bucharest (1907)--she heard cannon fired in civil strife, and she shared
the perils, joys, and sorrows, of the peoples among whom she lived. In
accordance with a wish she had frequently expressed, the nucleus of a
fund for the encouragement of Georgian studies has been formed at
Oxford, and her books and manuscripts are being transferred to the
Bodleian Library.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[iii:1](mps01.htm#fr_0) Professor Marr (t. xii.,
p. liv), points out that, while Georgian religious poetry was influenced
by Byzantium, the secular poetry was closely akin to Iranic Islam; in
the T’hamaran age the currents were distinctly apart, but later the two
streams united.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[iii:2](mps01.htm#fr_1) M. Tamarati, *L’Église
Géorgienne*, Rome, 1910 (ch. xiv.-xvi.); and original documents (Latin,
French, Italian) in his *Istoria Catholicobisca*, Tiflis, 1902 (pp.
563-836).

<span id="fn_2"></span>[v:1](mps01.htm#fr_2) Marr, *Ioann Petritzki*,
St. Petersburg, 1902, p. 61.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[viii:1](mps01.htm#fr_3) ?Athos.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[viii:2](mps01.htm#fr_4) Professor Marr thinks
the Odes of the T’hamaran age, of which he recently published a
scholarly edition (vide Bibliography), are by Rust’haveli.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[ix:1](mps01.htm#fr_5) *Journal of Biblical
Literature*, Boston, 1894, p. 179; translated from Professor Tsagareli's
*Svyedeniya*. The portrait has been defaced.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[ix:2](mps01.htm#fr_6) Professor Khakhanov,
*Ocherki*, ii. 247, 248; E. T’haqaishvili, *Opisanie rukopisei*, t. ii.
57, 393, 395, 468, 554-592.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[ix:3](mps01.htm#fr_7) A Sinai manuscript,
apparently of the tenth century, contains a hymn for Christmas in honour
of the B.V.M., written in rhymed lines of sixteen feet; it is not,
however, divided into quatrains (Marr, t. xii., p. liv).

<span id="fn_8"></span>[xi:1](mps01.htm#fr_8) *Ioann Petritzki*, p. 35.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[xii:1](mps01.htm#fr_9) In the footnotes, words
believed to be of Arabic and Persian origin are marked "A." and "P."

<span id="fn_10"></span>[xii:2](mps01.htm#fr_10) *Ocherki*, ii. 252-255;
but Professor Marr thinks the ballads are based on the epic.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xii:3](mps01.htm#fr_11) [5](mps03.htm#5),
[46](mps04.htm#46), [68](mps04.htm#68), [144](mps05.htm#144),
[438](mps13.htm#438), [450](mps14.htm#450), [595](mps18.htm#595),
[603](mps19.htm#603), [711](mps22.htm#711), [754](mps22.htm#754),
[881](mps27.htm#881), [968](mps30.htm#968), [983](mps30.htm#983),
[1027](mps31.htm#1027), [1073](mps36.htm#1073), [1410](mps47.htm#1410),
[1430](mps47.htm#1430), [1435](mps47.htm#1435), [1512](mps49.htm#1512),
[1524](mps49.htm#1524), [1574](mps50.htm#1574).

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xiii:1](mps01.htm#fr_12) Professor Tsagareli
has published the Athos text of the "Song of Songs" in his *Svyedeniya o
pamyatnikakh* (St. Petersburg Academy of Sciences).

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xv:1](mps01.htm#fr_13) Cf. E. S.
T’haqaishvili's oration at Tiflis on January 24 (O.S.), 1911, reported
in *T’hemi*, No. 4, of January 31 (O.S.), 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](mps02)
