[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps15) 
[Next](mps17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VIII

### TARIEL'S LETTER IN ANSWER TO HIS BELOVED

<span class="margnote"><span id="487">487</span></span>"I wrote: 'O sun!
thy ray beaming forth from thee struck my heart; my alertness and
boldness are brought to nought; mad for thee, I have perceived thy
beauty and loveliness; with what service can I pay thee in exchange for
life?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="488">488</span></span>"'Then when thou
didst make me to survive (and) sufferedst me not to be wholly sundered
from life, now this time I compare with that time. I have received thine
armlet; I have bound it round mine arm. How can I show my joy as much as
is fitting?

<span class="margnote"><span id="489">489</span></span>"'Of a truth I
offer thee, lo! the veil which thou demandest; also a cloak, of the same
(stuff), the like of which thou wilt not find. Leave me not to faint,
help me, succour me, come!' Whom can I entreat in this world save thee?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="490">490</span></span>"The maid arose
and forsook me. I lay down and fell pleasantly asleep, but I shivered, I
saw my beloved in my sleep; I awoke, I had her no more, life was a
burden to me; thus I passed the night, I heard not her voice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="491">491</span></span>"Early in the
morning they summoned me to the palace, when day was yet at the dawn. I
rose; I learned their tidings and went at the same moment. I saw them
both sitting with pleased faces. When I entered they bade me be seated;
I sat down before them on a chair.

<span class="margnote"><span id="492">492</span></span>"They said to me:
'God has brought old age upon

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

us so that we are exhausted, the time of age approaches us, youth has
passed from us. We have no son, but we have a daughter whose rays fail
us not; we care not for the lack of a son, we are reconciled to that.

<span class="margnote"><span id="493">493</span></span>"'Now we want a
husband for our daughter. Where shall we find him to whom we may give
our throne, whom we may form in our image, make him ruler of the
kingdom, guardian of the realm, that we be not destroyed, that we may
not let our enemies whet their swords for us?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="494">494</span></span>"I said: 'How can
your heart not feel the want of a son! But she who is like the sun
suffices for our hope. Whomsoever you choose as son-in-law, he will
rejoice greatly. What more can I say? You yourselves know what will be
fitting.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="495">495</span></span>"We began to take
counsel on the matter. I tried to keep my heart firm though it was
weakened; I said to myself: 'I shall say nothing and can do nothing to
hinder this.' The king said: "There is Khvarazmsha, King of the
Khvarazmians, if he would give us his child for ours there is none like
him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="496">496</span></span>"It was clear
that they had settled it beforehand; they glanced at each other, their
words also were guarded; it was not for me to venture to say anything to
hinder them, only I became as earth and cinders; my heart quivered to
and fro.

<span class="margnote"><span id="497">497</span></span>"The queen said:
'Khvarazmsha is a king reigning with power. Who could be better than his
son for our son-in-law!' How could I dare to dispute since they
themselves desired it! I added assent. The day of the overthrow of my
soul was fixed.

<span class="margnote"><span id="498">498</span></span>"They sent a man
to Khvarazmsha asking for his son. Their message was: 'Our whole realm
is without an heir, there is one daughter fit for childbearing, not to
be wedded abroad; if thou wilt give us thy son for her, wait not for
aught further.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="499">499</span></span>"The man arrived
loaded with mantles and veils.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Khvarazmsha
rejoiced with great joy; he said: From God has befallen us that which we
desired; what other child like unto her could we take to our arms?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="500">500</span></span>"Again they sent
other men to bring the bridegroom; they entreated him: 'Tarry not, come
at our demand.' I was wearied after exercise at ball-playing, and went
to my chamber to rest; sadness entered into my heart, I began to endure
woes.

<span class="margnote"><span id="501">501</span></span>"Excessive
melancholy approached my heart as if to strike with a knife, (but when)
Asmat’h's slave entered I sat proud and strong. He gave me a letter; in
it was written: She who is like an aloe-tree in form commands thee to
come hither soon without putting off time.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="502">502</span></span>"I mounted, went
forth, entered the little garden, as thou canst imagine, with a full
measure of joy; I passed through the little garden and arrived at the
tower; I saw Asmat’h standing at the foot; I looked and saw that she had
been weeping, tear stains could be seen on her cheeks; I was sad, and
did not ask; she was troubled by desire for my coming.

<span class="margnote"><span id="503">503</span></span>"I saw her
frowning; this oppressed me exceedingly. She no longer smiled on me as
she had formerly smiled; she said no word to me, only her tears showered
down; thereby she wounded me the more, she healed not my wounds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="504">504</span></span>"She carried my
thoughts very far away. She led me into the tower and raised the
curtain. I went in, I saw that moon, every woe forsook me, the ray fell
on my heart, but my heart was not melted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="505">505</span></span>"The light
falling upon the curtain was not light; her golden face was carelessly
covered by the veil I had given her; the peerless one, apparelled in
that same green garment, was seated in a reclining position on the
couch; a shower of tears fell on her face flashing with radiance.

<span class="margnote"><span id="506">506</span></span>"She crouched,
like a panther on the edge of a rock, her face flashing fury; no longer
was she like the sun, the

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

moon, an aloe-tree planted in Eden. Asmat’h seated me far off; my heart
was struck as by a lance. Then she sat erect with frowning brows, angry,
enraged.

<span class="margnote"><span id="507">507</span></span>"She said to me:
'I marvel why thou art come, thou breaker of thy binding oath, fickle
and faithless, thou forsworn; but high Heaven will give thee guerdon and
answer for this!' I said: 'How can I reply to what I know not?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="508">508</span></span>"I said: 'I
cannot answer thee if I know not the truth. Wherein have I sinned, what
have I done, (I) senseless and pale?' Again she said to me: 'What shall
I say to thee, false and treacherous one! Why did I let myself be
deceived, woman-like! For this I burn with flame.

<span class="margnote"><span id="509">509</span></span>"'Knowest thou
not of the bringing of Khvarazmsha to wed me? Thou wert sitting as
counsellor, thy consent to this was given, thou hast broken thine oath
to me, the firmness and bindingness thereof. Would to God I might bring
thy cunning to nought!

<span class="margnote"><span id="510">510</span></span>"'Rememberest
thou when thou didst sigh "Ah! Ah!" when thy tears bathed the fields,
and the physicians and surgeons brought thee medicines? What else is
there that resembles a man's falsehood? Since thou hast denied me, I,
too, will renounce thee. Let us see who will be the more hurt?

<span class="margnote"><span id="511">511</span></span>"'I tell thee
this: Whosoever shall rule India I have the rule also, whether they go
trackless or by the road! It may not be thus! Now thou hast fallen into
error. Thine opinions and like thee--even so untrue!

<span class="margnote"><span id="512">512</span></span>"'While I live,
by God, thou shalt no more dwell in India. If thou seekest to tarry, the
soul shall be parted from thy body! None other shalt thou find like me,
even though thou stretch thy hand unto heaven!'" When the knight had
ended these words he wept, moaned, and said: "Ah me!"

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="513">513</span></span>He said: "When I
heard this from her, hope revived in me exceedingly; once more mine eyes
had power to look upon her light; now I have lost it, why art thou not
surprised that dazed I live? Woe to thee fleeting world! why seekest
thou to drain my blood?

<span class="margnote"><span id="514">514</span></span>"I looked, and
saw on the lectern the Koran lying open; I raised it, I stood up, and,
praising God and afterwards her, said: 'O sun, thou burnedst me, and in
truth my sun is set; since thou slayest me not, I will venture to make
thee some answer:

<span class="margnote"><span id="515">515</span></span>"'If what I tell
thee, these words, be falsely cunning, may Heaven itself be wrathful
with me, may all the sun's rays be turned against me! If thou
considerest me worthy to be judged, I have done no ill.' She said: 'What
thou knowest, speak!' She nodded to me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="516">516</span></span>"Then again I
ventured to say: 'If I, O sun, have broken my vow to thee, may God now
forthwith show His anger by hurling a thunderbolt from heaven upon me!
Who save thee has for me a face like a sun, a form like a tree? so how
can I remain alive if a lance strike my heart!

<span class="margnote"><span id="517">517</span></span>"'The sovereigns
summoned me to court, they held a solemn council, beforehand they had
appointed that youth as thy husband; (even if) I had opposed it I could
not prevent it, I should have been a fool for my pains; I said to
myself: "Agree with them for the nonce; it is better for thee to fortify
thy heart."

<span class="margnote"><span id="518">518</span></span>"'How could I
dare to forbid it, since he (P’harsadan) understands not, knows not that
India shall not remain masterless! It is I alone who am her (India's)
owner; none other has any right. I know not him whom he (P’harsadan)
will bring hither, nor who is mistaken (in this matter).

<span class="margnote"><span id="519">519</span></span>"'I said: "I can
do nothing in this; I shall contrive some other means." I said: "Be not
assailed by a multitude of thoughts." My heart was like a wild beast; a

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

thousand times I was ready to fly to the fields. To whom can I give
thee? Why shouldst thou not take me?'

<span class="margnote"><span id="520">520</span></span>"I sold soul for
heart's sake; thus the tower became for me a market. That rain which at
first had frozen the rose became milder; I saw pearl in the coral, round
about (the pearl) (the coral) was tenderly enfolded; she said: Why do I,
too, judge this to be right?

<span class="margnote"><span id="521">521</span></span>"'I do not
believe thee to be treacherous and faithless, a denier of God, not
thankful to him; entreat of him myself and lordship in gladness over
India; I and thou I shall be sovereigns--that is the best of all
matches!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="522">522</span></span>"The wrathful,
enraged one became tender to me; either the sun was on earth or the
full-faced moon; she set me near her, she caressed me, hitherto unworthy
of this, she conversed with me; thus she extinguished the fire kindled
in me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="523">523</span></span>"She said to me:
'The prudent should never hasten, he will contrive whatever is best, he
will be calm under Fate. If thou suffer not the suitor to come in (to
India), woe if the king be wroth with thee, thou and he will quarrel,
India will be laid waste.

<span class="margnote"><span id="524">524</span></span>"On the other
hand, if thou allow the bridegroom to come in, (if) he wed me, (if) it
so fall out, we shall be sundered each from other, our gay garb will be
turned to mourning, they will be happy and glorious, our sufferings will
be magnified an hundredfold. This shall not be said, that the Persians
hold sway in our court.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="525">525</span></span>"I said: 'May God
avert the wedding of thee by that youth! When they come into India (and)
I discover their quality, I shall show forth to them my
strong-heartedness and prowess; I shall so slay them that they become of
no account!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="526">526</span></span>"She spoke to me
saying: 'A woman should act in

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

a womanly way as befits her sex; I cannot have thee shed much blood, I
cannot become a wall of division. When they come, slay the bridegroom
without killing his armies. To do true justice makes even a dry tree
green.

<span class="margnote"><span id="527">527</span></span>"'Thus do, my
lion, most excellent of all heroes; slay the bridegroom stealthily, take
not soldiers, slaughter not his armies like cattle or asses; how can a
man bear the burden of much innocent blood!

<span class="margnote"><span id="528">528</span></span>"'When thou hast
killed him, tell thy lord, my father, say to him: "I could never let
India be food for the Persians; it is mine own heritage, never will I
give up even an ounce of it; if thou wilt not leave me in peace I will
make a wilderness of thy city!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="529">529</span></span>"'Say not that
thou wantest my love or desirest me, so will the righteousness of thy
deed seem the greater; the king will then entreat thee in the most
desperate and abject manner; I shall give myself into thy hands,
reigning together will suit us."'

<span class="margnote"><span id="530">530</span></span>"This counsel and
advice pleased me exceedingly; I boasted that I would wield my sword for
the slaying of my foes. Then I rose to depart. She began to entreat me
to sit down; I longed to do so, but could not bring myself to clasp and
embrace her.

<span class="margnote"><span id="531">531</span></span>"I tarried some
time, (then) I left her; but I became like one mad; Asmat’h went in
front of me; I shed hot tears; my grief increased a thousandfold, my 
joy was reduced to one; then I went unwillingly away, and so I went
slowly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="532">532</span></span>"A man came. 'The
bridegroom cometh,' announced he but, wretched man! he knew not what God
was preparing for him. The king looked pleased, he spoke no woeful
words; he bade me sit near him; 'Come,' said he, and inclined his head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="533">533</span></span>"He said to me:
'For me this is a day of joy and merriment. Let us celebrate the
wedding, since it is

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

necessary that the matter he concluded; let us send a man, let us have
all the treasures brought from every part, generously let us distribute,
let us fill them (with treasure); avarice is clownishness.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="534">534</span></span>"I sent in all
directions men carrying treasure. The bridegroom also came, they were no
laggards; our men met them from inside, from outside came the
Khvarazmians; the sum of their soldiers could not be contained even by
the fields.

<span class="margnote"><span id="535">535</span></span>"The king
commanded: 'Prepare the *maidan* with tents, let the bridegroom rest,
let him tarry there a little while; the other armies can go thither
without thee to see him, thou shalt see him here, go not, this will
suffice for thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="536">536</span></span>"I raised on the
*maidan* tents of red satin. The bridegroom arrived and entered (the
tent), he dismounted; it seemed not like Easter Eve; those inside began
to go out, there was a host of courtiers there, the soldiers began to
form in ranks according to their clans.

<span class="margnote"><span id="537">537</span></span>"I was wearied,
as is the wont of one who has done duty; tired, I turned homeward, and
wished to sleep. A slave came and gave me a letter from Asmat’h the
sweet: 'Come quickly! She who is like a full-grown aloe commands thee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="538">538</span></span>"I dismounted
not; I went quickly obedient. The maiden (Asmat’h) had been weeping; I
asked her: 'Why flow thy tears?' She said to me: 'Being engaged in thy
defence, how can I avoid weeping? How can I justify thee unceasingly,
whatever kind of advocate I may have become!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="539">539</span></span>"We went in, we
saw her seated on a cushion, her brows puckered; the sun could not more
illume the vicinage than she. I stood before her. She said to me: 'Why
standest thou there? The day of battle comes--or, wert thou forsaking
me, wert thou false to me and deceiving me again?'

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="540">540</span></span>"I was angered, I
said nothing, hastily I went out: again; I called back: 'Now shall it be
seen if I did not wish it! Am I become so cowardly that a woman urges me
to fight?' I went home, I concerted his slaughter, I was not idle.

<span class="margnote"><span id="541">541</span></span>"I commanded a
hundred servants: 'Prepare for battle!' We mounted, we passed through
the city without, letting anyone perceive us. I went into the tent. It
is a horror to tell with the tongue how the bridegroom was lying; I
killed that youth without shedding of blood (? on our side), though his
blood cried out as it flowed.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="542">542</span></span>"I cut the
tangled edge of the tent, I tore it, I seized the youth by his legs and
struck his head on the tent-pole. Those lying at the door cried; their
lamentation was marvellous. I mounted my horse, departed, my coat of
chain mail protected me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="543">543</span></span>"An alarm was
raised against me; there was a cry to pursue me. I went on, they began
to follow, I slew my pursuers. I had a strong city, impregnable to the
foe; I reached it in safety, pleasantly, unhurt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="544">544</span></span>"I sent a man, I
made known to all the soldiers: 'Let all who will aid me come hither!'
My pursuers did not weary of coming in the depth of dark night; when
they recognized me they kept their heads whole.

<span class="margnote"><span id="545">545</span></span>"I arose at
daybreak; I apparelled myself when night dawned into morn. I saw three
lords sent by the king; he sent a message, saying: 'God knows I have
fostered thee like my son; why hast thou thus changed my rejoicing into
heaviness?

<span class="margnote"><span id="546">546</span></span>"'Why didst thou
make Khvarazmsha's innocent blood to fall on our house! If thou didst
desire my daughter, why didst thou not tell me so? Thou hast made life
distasteful to me, thine aged foster-father; thou thyself

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

hast brought it about that thou remainest not with me till the day of my
death.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="547">547</span></span>"In answer I sent
a message: 'O king, I am stronger than bronze, and this alone hinders me
from being destroyed by the fire and flame of death; but, as you know, a
king should be a doer of justice; by your sun! I am far from desiring
your daughter.

<span class="margnote"><span id="548">548</span></span>"'Thou knowest
how many palaces and thrones are in India; I am the sole heir left, all
has fallen into your hands, all their heirs have died out, their
heritage remains to you; by right the throne belongs to none but me.

<span class="margnote"><span id="549">549</span></span>"'I swear by your
virtue, I cannot flatter you, now this is not just: God gave thee no
son; thou hast an only daughter. If thou appointedst Khvarazmsha king,
what would have been left for me in exchange? Can another king be seated
on the throne of India while I wear my sword?

<span class="margnote"><span id="550">550</span></span>"'I want not thy
daughter, marry her, rid her of me. India is mine, to no man else will I
give it; whoever contests my right, him will I cause to be uprooted from
the earth; kill me! if I need any foreign helpers.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Tariel Hears Tidings of the Loss of Nestan-Daredjan](mps17)
