[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps41) 
[Next](mps43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XXXIX

### THE LETTER WRITTEN BY NESTAN-DAREDJAN TO HER BELOVED

<span class="margnote"><span id="1269">1269</span></span>"Now will I,
sobbing, weeping, write to my beloved; by the tear of that one who burns
him is a man's fire quenched." She wrote a letter piercing the heart of
the hearers. She splits the rose (opens her mouth); there appears the
translucent crystal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1270">1270</span></span>"O mine own!
this letter is the work of my hands; for pen I have my form, a pen
steeped in gall; for paper I glue thy heart even to my heart; O heart,
black (sad) heart, thou art bound, loose not thyself, now be bounds!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1271">1271</span></span>"Thou seest, O
mine own! of what deeds the world is a doer. However much light shines,
for me it is but darkness. The wise know it (the world), therefore they
despise it, to them it is contemptible. My life without thee, woe is me!
how exceeding hard it is!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1272">1272</span></span>"Thou seest,
mine own! how Fate and cursed time have parted us; no longer do I glad
see thee, my glad loved one; what, indeed, can the heart rent by thee do
without thee! Secret thought manifests to thee what is hidden (?).

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1273">1273</span></span>"By thy sun
(life)! until now I thought not thou wert alive; as for me, methought my
life and all my resource had passed away. Now when I hear (news of
thee), I magnify the Creator and humble myself before God. All mine
erstwhile grief I weigh as joy.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1274">1274</span></span>"Thy life is
sufficient for my heart to hope in, a heart all wounded and so consumed!
Think of me, remember me as one lost to thee; I sit nursing the love I
planted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1275">1275</span></span>"Now, O mine
own, my story is not to be written to thee by me; the tongue will tire,
none that hear will believe! P’hatman took me from sorcerers; may God
protect her! Now again Fate hath done what befits it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1276">1276</span></span>"Fate hath now
added worse woe to my woe, my ill luck was not appeased by these
manifold afflictions; and again it delivered me into the hands of the
Kadjis, hard to combat; Fate hath done to us, mine own, all that hath
befallen us.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1277">1277</span></span>"I am sitting
in a castle so lofty that eyes can scarce see the ground; the road
enters by a passage, over it stand guards; day and night knights miss
not their turn as sentries, they will kill those that engage them, like
fire will they envelop them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1278">1278</span></span>"Surely thou
thinkest not that these are of the same kind as other warriors? Slay me
not with woes worse than the present! I shall see thee dead, I shall be
burnt up like tinder by steel. (Since) I am sundered from thee, renounce
me with a heart harder than rock itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1278a">1278a</span></span>" Beloved,
sorrow not with such grief! Tell me, can there be for me another with
the form of an aloe-tree! Life without thee is nought for me, henceforth
I should be full of regret; either I would cast myself down from the
rock or slay myself with a knife.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1279">1279</span></span>"By thy sun
(life)! thy moon <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_35) will fall to the
lot of none save thee! By thy sun! to none shall she

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

fall though triple suns shone forth! Here would I dash myself down; the
great rocks are very nigh to me. To thee would I commit my soul;
perchance wings would be given to me by Heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1280">1280</span></span>"Entreat God
for me; it may be He will deliver me from the travail of the world and
from union with fire, water, earth and air. Let Him give me wings and I
shall fly up, I shall attain my desire--day and night I shall gaze on
the sun's rays flashing in splendour.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1281">1281</span></span>"The sun cannot
be without thee, for thou art an atom of it; of a surety thou shalt
adhere to it as its zodiac (Leo), and not as one rejected. There shall I
see thee; I shall liken thee to it, thou shalt enlighten my darkened
heart. If my life was bitter, let my death be sweet!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1282">1282</span></span>"Death is no
longer grievous to me, since it is to thee I commit my soul; but I have
laid thy love in my heart, and there it rests. When I think of parting
from thee, for me wound is added to wound. Weep not and mourn not for
me, O mine own, for love of me!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1283">1283</span></span>"Go, betake
thyself to India, be of some help to my father, who is straitened by
foes, helpless on all sides; comfort the heart of him who suffers
separation from me. Think of me weeping for thy sake with undrying
tears.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1284">1284</span></span>"Whatever
complaint I have made against my Fate is sufficient complaint. Know
this, that true justice goeth from heart to heart; for thy sake will I
die, I shall

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

become the prey of ravens! But as long as I live I shall weep and suffer
enough for thee, too.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1285">1285</span></span>"Lo, mark the
token from the veil that was thine; from one end I have cut off a strip,
O mine own; this (the veil) is all that is left to me in place of that
great hope; in wrath the wheels of the seven heavens has turned upon
us."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1286">1286</span></span>When she had
finished this letter written to her beloved, she cut off a fringe from
those veils; bareheaded, the thick, long locks of her hair became her
well, the scent blows from the aloe, breathing through the raven's
wings.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1287">1287</span></span>That slave
departed, journeying to Gulansharo; in one instant he reached
P’hatman's, he travelled not many days. When this matter so dear to him
had been accomplished, Avt’handil with hands upraised thanks God, with
full understanding, not as one bemused.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1288">1288</span></span>He said to
P’hatman: "The thing desired is timely finished for me; thy great zeal
for my sake is (still) unrecompensed. I go, I have no leisure to tarry
longer, last year's time is come. Swiftly shall I lead into Kadjet’hi
him who will annihilate and destroy them."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1289">1289</span></span>The lady said:
"O lion, the fire now becomes hotter; (my) heart will be sundered from
(thee) its light, thereby will it be darkened; hasten, grieve not for
me, the madman will thus become furious. Should the Kadjis arrive before
you, going thither will be made difficult for you."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1290">1290</span></span>The knight
called P’hridon's slaves who attended him. He said: "Corpses hitherto,
now indeed are we enlivened; we are renewed by the hearing of what we

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

wished. I shall show you our enemies wounded and thereby woe-stricken.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1291">1291</span></span>"Go and tell
P’hridon this unvarnished story. I cannot see him, I am hurried, my road
is one of haste. Let him strengthen his great voice to make it still
more bold. I will give you all the treasure taken by me as booty.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1292">1292</span></span>"Great is the
debt laid upon me by you; I will show my gratitude in another way when I
join P’hridon again. For the nonce, take away all that was reft from the
pirates; I can give you no more than this, I know that so I shall seem
to you niggardly.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1293">1293</span></span>"I have no home
near; I have no power to dispense gifts." He gave them a ship full,
beautiful things, a host in number. He said: "Go, take them away, travel
the road to that same region. Give this letter from me, his sworn
brother, to P’hridon."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[207:1](mps42.htm#fr_36) "I, Nestan, thy
satellite."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XL. Avt’handil's Letter to P’hridon](mps43)
