[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Myths/Legends](../../neu/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](mps43) 
[Next](mps45) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0947593438/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XLI

### AVT’HANDIL'S DEPARTURE FROM GULANSHARO, AND HIS MEETING WITH TARIEL

<span class="margnote"><span id="1303">1303</span></span>Avt’handil has
crossed the seas in a certain ship for travellers. He rides glad-hearted
all alone. To meet Tariel with such tidings rejoices him. With hands
uplifted, with his heart he hopes in God.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1304">1304</span></span>Summer was
come, from the earth came forth verdure, the token of the rose bursting
into bloom, the time of their tryst, the change of course by the sun,
the setting out of the cypress-formed. He sighed when he saw the flower
long time unseen by him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1305">1305</span></span>The sky
thundered and the cloud rained crystal dew; he kissed the rose with his
rose-like lips; he said: "I gaze on you with tenderly-observant eye; I
rejoice to have converse with you in her (T’hinat’hin's) stead."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1306">1306</span></span>When he thought
on his friend, the bitter tears flowed; he travelled those weary ways
towards Tariel, deserted and pathless, unknown regions; lion and panther
of the reedy thickets he slew wherever he saw them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1307">1307</span></span>The caves came
in sight, he was glad, he recognized them. He said: "These be the rocks
where my friend is, he for whom my tears have flowed. I am indeed worthy
to see him face to face, to relate to him what I have heard. If he be
not come, what shall I do? Vain will have been my travail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1308">1308</span></span>"If he be come,
doubtless he would not tarry within; he would go somewhere into the
plain, like a wild

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

beast he would roam in the fields; it is better for me to go round by
the rushes." He bethought himself, he looked about; thus he spoke and
turned, he went towards the plains.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1309">1309</span></span>. He canters
along and sings with merry heart; he shouts to him by name with cheerful
voice. He went a little farther, there appeared the sun in full
splendour, at the edge of the rushes stands Tariel with sharp sword.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1310">1310</span></span>. Tariel had
slain a lion; its blood anointed his sword. He stood dismounted at the
edge of the rushes; his horse was not with him. He heard Avt’handil's
shout, he was astonished; he looked at him, recognized him, started, ran
towards him, bounded.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1311">1311</span></span>. Tariel flung
aside his sword and went towards his adopted brother. The knight
alighted from his horse; it seemed to him that he had attained his goal
(?). They kissed each other; their necks were as if riveted together.
There was the sugary sound of the rose frequently opening.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1312">1312</span></span>. Tariel,
weeping, uttered polished, exquisite words--the tear of blood dyed the
jetty thickets crimson, the fountain of tears, many streams, waters the
aloe: "Since I have seen thee, what matters it to me if eight pains
oppress me?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1313">1313</span></span>. Tariel weeps
and Avt’handil was speaking to him laughing, he smiles, he opens his
coral (lips), the flash from his teeth quivers; he said: "I have learned
tidings

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

which will please thee; now the flower will be renewed, the rose
hitherto fading."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1314">1314</span></span>Tariel said: "O
brother, that which rejoices me to-day is enough, in seeing thee I have
seen all my comfort, whatever other balm God gives; hast thou not heard:
How can man find in the world that which is not of Heaven's doing!" (?)

<span class="margnote"><span id="1315">1315</span></span>When Tariel was
not convinced, Avt’handil was ill at ease, he could no longer delay to
tell the tale; he hastened, he drew forth the veil of her on whose lips
the rose blooms; when Tariel saw, he recognized it, seized upon it,
started.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1316">1316</span></span>He recognized
the letter and the fringe of the veil and unfolded them, he pressed them
to his face; he fell, a rose pale in hue, his spirits fled, the watchman
of jet bowed his head. Neither Caen nor even Salaman could bear sorrows
like his.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1317">1317</span></span>Avt’handil
gazes at Tariel lying lifeless; he flew to him, he set about helping
him, the sweetly-speaking; he could not be of avail to the consumed one,
completely burned up with fire; her tokens had laid hold of his life.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1318">1318</span></span>Avt’handil sat
down to weep; he mourns with melodious voice, full oft he tears his
raven locks, he rouses them by seizing them with his crystal (hand), he
brake the ruby polished with a hammer of adamant, thence issue streams
which I likened to coral in hue.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1319">1319</span></span>He scratches
his face; blood flows from his cheeks while gazing at (Tariel). "What I
have done neither madman nor fool hath done. Why did I in my haste pour
water on a fire difficult to quench! The heart struck hastily by
exceeding joy cannot bear it.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1320">1320</span></span>"I have slain
my friend! What befits me disgraced? I blame myself for a deed not
thought out with heed. A stupid man cannot do well in a difficult
matter. It is said: 'Chidden slowness is better than praised haste.'"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1321">1321</span></span>Tariel lay
unconscious, as if scorched, Avt’handil rose, he passed through the
rushes in search of water; he found the lion's blood, he carries it to
quench the flame, he sprinkled it on (Tariel's) breast; the lapis-lazuli
became ruby-hued.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1322">1322</span></span>Avt’handil
sprinkled the breast of that lion (Tariel) with the lion's blood. Tariel
started up, the ranks of the race of India moved, he opened his eyes, he
received power to sit up; blue seems the ray of the moon diminished in
ray by the sun.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1323">1323</span></span>Winter makes
the roses fade, their leaves fall; the ardour of the summer sun burns
them, they bemoan the drought, but upon them nightingales complain with
lovely voice; heat consumes, frost freezes; the wounds hurt them in
either case.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1324">1324</span></span>Even so is it
hard to deal with the heart of man; it is mad alike both in grief and in
joy; it is always wounded, its fate is never whole. He only can trust
this world who is his own foe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1325">1325</span></span>Tariel gazed
again on the writing of his slayer; he reads, though the reading of her
letter maddens him; his tears blind him to the light, dark seems the
beam of day. Avt’handil rose, he began to speak with rough? words.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1326">1326</span></span>He said: "Such
behaviour is unworthy of an instructed man! Why should we weep now? It
behoves us to set about the making of smiles. Arise, let us go in

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

quest of that lost sun. Soon shall I lead thee to her; I must bring thee
to thy desired one.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1327">1327</span></span>"What joy
befits us, therewithal let us first rejoice. Then let us mount and set
out, let us wend towards Kadjet’hi. Be our swords our guides, let us
sheath them in their (the Kadjis') backs; untroubled shall we return, we
shall reduce them to carrion."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1328">1328</span></span>Then Tariel
asks for tidings; he no longer fainted. He looked up, he raised his
eyes, the black and white lightning glittered, as a ruby by the sun so
was his colour increased. Who is worthy that towards him the sky turn
ever in mercy?

<span class="margnote"><span id="1329">1329</span></span>To Avt’handil
he gave thanks; he conversed with him: "How shall I speak thy praise,
worthy to be praised by the wise! Like a spring up on a mountain thou
hast watered the flower of the plain; thou hast cut off for me the flow
of tears of the pool of the narcissi (the eyes).

<span class="margnote"><span id="1330">1330</span></span>"I can never
make thee a return; may the God of heaven repay thee! May He in my stead
reward thee from His height!" They mounted and went home; they made
great rejoicing. Now the world (Fate) will indeed sate Asmat’h so long
hungering.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1331">1331</span></span>At the door of
the cave Asmat’h sits alone, not fully dressed; when she had looked she
recognized Tariel, and with him a knight on a white horse; both were
sweetly singing like songster nightingales. Immediately she recognized
them she rose hastily, bare but for her smock.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1332">1332</span></span>Hitherto she
had ever seen him come to the cave weeping, now she wondered to behold
him singing, laughing; seized with fear she arose, her understanding was

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

like a drunkard's; she heard not yet the news she so longed for.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1333">1333</span></span>When they saw
her they shouted to her, laughing and showing their teeth: "Ho! Asmat’h!
God's mercy is come down on us from on high; we have found the lost
moon; what we desired that have we done; now we shall have our fires
quenched by Fate, our sorrows turned to joy."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1334">1334</span></span>Avt’handil
alighted from his horse to embrace Asmat’h; she laid hold of the aloe,
pliant to the touch was its branch (his arm); she kisses his neck and
face; she sheds tears. "Tell me what thou hast discovered, what thou
hast done. Beseeching thee, I weep on the field."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1335">1335</span></span>Avt’handil gave
to Asmat’h the letter of her charge, the aloe with faded branch, the
pale moon. He said: "See the writing of her who hath passed through
troubles; the sun approaches us, it hath given us the putting away of
shadow."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1336">1336</span></span>When Asmat’h
saw the letter she knew (Nestan's) hand; she marvelled, fear seized her,
she quakes like one possessed, from head to foot overwhelming wonder
laid hold on her; she says: "What have I seen, what do I heard is it
indeed true?"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1337">1337</span></span>Avt’handil
said: "Fear not, this story is true, joy is given to us, all sore grief
is put away from us, the sun is come nigh us, darkness is no longer dark
for us. Good hath overcome ill; the essence of (good) is lasting."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1338">1338</span></span>The King of the
Indians merrily spoke somewhat with Asmat’h; they embraced each other,
joy made them weep; the raven's tail (eyelashes) dropped light dew upon
the rose (cheeks). God forsaketh not man if man comprehend this.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1339">1339</span></span>They gave God
great thanks. They said: "Thou hast done to us what was best; now we
recognize that your mouth would not have adjudged to us the worst." The
King of the Indians, with uplifted hand, joyously shouted this. Merry
they went into the caves; Asmat’h made ready somewhat for their
refreshment.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1340">1340</span></span>Tariel said to
Avt’handil: "Hearken to these words: I will tell thee something, think
me not a tedious narrator. Since the time when I captured the caves
(and) slew droves of Devis, their precious treasury lies here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1341">1341</span></span>"Never have I
seen it, for I have not wished to do so. Come and let us open it; let us
see how much treasure there is." It pleased him; both arose, nor did
Asmat’h stay seated. They broke down forty doors; it was no great
struggle for them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1342">1342</span></span>They found
unequalled treasure, hitherto unseen by their eyes. There stood a heap
of jewels of fair workmanship. There were seen pearls each as big as a
ball for play. Who could make account of the gold not to be numbered by
any!

<span class="margnote"><span id="1343">1343</span></span>Inside those
forty rooms were full. They found an armoury newly made for armour;
there all kinds of armour were placed like preserves (in a store
cupboard); therein was a coffer, sealed, unopened.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1344">1344</span></span>Upon it was
written: "Here lieth wondrous armour: chain helmet, habergeon,
steel-cutting sword. If the Kadjis attack the Devis it will be a hard
day. Whoever openeth at any other time is a slayer of kings!"

<span class="margnote"><span id="1345">1345</span></span>They opened the
coffer; they found in it three suits of armour fit for three warrior
knights to don; coats of mail, swords, helmets, greaves of like sort;
they were in emerald nests, as it were shrines.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="1346">1346</span></span>Each clothed
himself with each, they tested them on themselves; chain helmet and
habergeon nought could dint; they struck the swords on iron, they cut it
like cotton-thread. I tell you they prize them more than all the world;
they would not barter them for it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1347">1347</span></span>They said: "As
a sign this is enough for us; we are in good luck. God has gazed on us
with His eye, looking down from above." They took up that armour, each
put it on his neck; they bound up one (set) with leather thongs to
present to P’hridon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="1348">1348</span></span>They took with
them some gold, some rare pearls; they went forth, they sealed up the
forty treasuries. Avt’handil said: "Henceforth will I fasten my palm to
the sword; nowhere shall I go to-night, when day dawns I shall not
tarry."

<span class="margnote"><span id="1349">1349</span></span>Now, painter,
limn the sworn brothers more steadfast than brothers, these lovers of
stars, excelled by none, both heroic knights renowned in bravery. When
they go to Kadjet’hi you shall see a battle of piercing lances.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLII. Tariel and Avt’handil Go to P’hridon](mps45)
