[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mlcr01)  [Next](mlcr03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter II: The Religion of the Celts

 

Ireland and the Celtic Religion

WE have said that the Irish among the Celtic peoples possess the unique
interest of having carried into the light of modern historical research
many of the features of a native Celtic civilisation. There is, however,
one thing which they did not carry across the gulf which divides us from
the ancient world - and this was their religion.

It was not merely that they changed it ; they left it behind them so
entirely that all record of it is lost. St. Patrick, himself a Celt, who
apostolised Ireland during the fifth century, has left us an
autobiographical narrative of his mission, a document of intense
interest, and the earliest extant record of British Christianity; but in
it he tells us nothing of the doctrines he came to supplant. We learn
far more of Celtic religious beliefs from Julius Caesar, who approached
them from quite another side. The copious legendary literature which
took its present form in Ireland between the seventh and the twelfth
centuries, though often manifestly going back to pre-Christian sources,
shows us, beyond a belief in magic and a devotion to certain ceremonial
or chivalric observances, practically nothing resembling a religious or
even an ethical system. We know that certain chiefs and bards offered a
long resistance to the new faith, and that this resistance came to the
arbitrament of battle at Moyrath in the sixth century, but no echo of
any intellectual controversy, no matching of one doctrine against
another, such as we find, for instance, in the records of the
controversy of Celsus with Origen, has reached us from this period of
change and strife. The literature of ancient Ireland, as we

\[51\]

shall see, embodied many ancient myths; and traces appear in it of
beings who must, at one time, have been gods or elemental powers; but
all has been emptied of religious significance and turned to romance and
beauty. Yet not only was there, as Caesar tells us, a very well
developed religious system among the Gauls, but we learn on the same
authority that the British Islands were the authoritative centre of this
system ; they were, so to speak, the Rome of the Celtic religion.

What this religion was like we have now to consider, as an introduction
to the myths and tales which more or less remotely sprang from it.

  
The Popular Religion of the Celts

But first we must point out that the Celtic religion was by no means a
simple affair, and cannot be summed up as what we call "Druidism."
Beside the official religion there was a body of popular superstitions
and observances which came from a deeper and older source than Druidism,
and was destined long to outlive it-indeed, it is far from dead even
yet.

  
The Megalithic People

The religions of primitive peoples mostly centre on, or take their rise
from, rites and practices connected with the burial of the dead. The
earliest people inhabiting Celtic territory in the West of Europe of
whom we have any distinct knowledge are a race without name or known
history, but by their sepulchral monuments, of which so many still
exist, we can learn a great deal about them. They were the so-called
Megalithic People, \[from Greek megas, great and lithos, a stone\] the
builders of dolmens, cromlechs, and chambered tumuli, of which more than
three

\[52\]

thousand have been counted in France alone. Dolmens are found from
Scandinavia southwards, all down the western lands of Europe to the
Straits of Gibraltar, and round by the Mediterranean coast of Spain.
They occur in some of the western islands of the Mediterranean, and are
found in Greece, where, in Mycenae, an ancient dolmen yet stands beside
the magnificent burial-chamber of the Atreidae. Roughly, if we draw a
line from the mouth of the Rhone northward to Varanger Fiord, one may
say that, except for a few Mediterranean examples, all the dolmens in
Europe lie to the west of that line. To the east none are found till we
come into Asia. But they cross the Straits of Gibraltar, and are found
all along the North African littoral, and thence eastwards through
Arabia, India, and as far as Japan.

 

Dolmens, Cromlechs, and Tumuli

A dolmen, it may be here explained, is a kind of chamber composed of
upright unhewn stones, and roofed generally with a single huge stone.
They are usually wedge-shaped in plan, and traces of a porch or
vestibule can often be noticed. The primary intention of the dolmen was
to represent a house or dwelling-place for the dead. A cromlech (often
confused in popular language the dolmen) is properly a circular
arrangement of standing stones, often with a dolmen in their midst.

It is believed that most

\[53\]

if not all of the now exposed dolmens were originally covered with a
great mound of earth or of smaller stones. Sometimes, as in the
illustration we give from Carnac, in Brittany, great avenues or
alignments are formed of single upright Stones, and these, no doubt, had
some purpose connected with the ritual of worship carried on in the
locality. The later megalithic monuments, as at Stonehenge, may be of
dressed stone, but in all cases their rudeness of construction, the
absence of any sculpturing (except for patterns or symbols incised on
the surface), the evident aim at creating a powerful impression by the
brute strength of huge monolithic masses, as well as certain subsidiary
features in their design which shall be described later on, give these
megalithic monuments a curious family likeness and mark them out from
the chambered tombs of the early Greeks, of the Egyptians, and of other
more advanced races. The dolmens proper gave place in the end to great
chambered mounds or tumuli, as at New Grange, which we also reckon as
belonging to the Megalithic People. They are a natural development of
the dolmen. The early dolmen-builders were in the Neolithic stage of
culture, their weapons were of polished stone. But in the tumuli not
only Stone, but also bronze, and even iron, instruments are found-at
first evidently importations, but afterwards of local manufacture.

 

Origin of the Megalithic People

The language originally spoken by this people can only be conjectured by
the traces of it left in that of their conquerors, the Celts.\[see
p.78\] But a map of the distribution of their monuments irresistibly
suggests the idea that their builders were of North African origin; that
they were not at first accustomed to traverse the

\[54\]

sea for any great distance; that they migrated west wards along North
Africa, crossed into Europe where the Mediterranean at Gibraltar narrows
to a strait of a few miles in width, and thence spread over the western
regions of Europe, including the British Islands, while on the eastward
they penetrated by Arabia into Asia. It must, however, be borne in mind
that while originally, no doubt, a distinct race, the Megalithic People
came in the end to represent, not a race, but a culture. The human
remains found in these sepulchres, with their wide divergence in the
shape of the skull, &c., clearly prove this. \[See Borlase's "Dolmens of
Ireland," pp. 605, 606, for a discussion of this question.\] These and
other relics testify to the dolmen-builders in general as representing a
superior and well-developed type, acquainted with agriculture,
pasturage, and to some extent with seafaring. The monuments themselves,
which are often of imposing size and imply much thought and organised
effort in their construction, show unquestionably the existence, at this
period, of a priesthood charged with the care of funeral rites and
capable of controlling large bodies of men. Their dead were, as a rule,
not burned, but buried whole - the greater monuments marking, no doubt,
the sepulchres of important personages, while the common people were
buried in tombs of which no traces now exist.

 

The Celts of the Plains

De Jubainville, in his account of the early history of the Celts, takes
account of two main groups only-the Celts and the Megalithic People. But
A. Bertrand, in his very valuable work '"La Religion des Gaulois,"
distinguishes two elements among the Celts themselves. There are,
besides the Megalithic People, the two groups

\[55\]

of lowland Celts and mountain Celts. The lowland Celts, according to his
view, started from the Danube and entered Gaul probably about 1200 B.C.
They were the founders of the lake-dwellings in Switzerland, in the
Danube valley, and in Ireland. They knew the use of metals, and worked
in gold, in tin, in bronze) and towards the end of their period in iron.
Unlike the Megalithic People, they spoke a Celtic tongue, \[Professor
Ridgeway (see Report of the Brit. Assoc. for 1908) has contended that
the Megalithic People spoke an Aryan language; otherwise he thinks more
traces of its influence must have survived in the Celtic which
supplanted it. The weight of authority, as well as such direct evidence
as we possess, seems to be against his view.\] though Bertrand seems to
doubt their genuine racial affinity with the true Celts. They were
perhaps Celticised rather than actually Celtic. They were not warlike; a
quiet folk of herdsmen, tillers, and artificers. They did not bury, but
burned their dead. At a great settlement of theirs, Golasecca, in
Cisalpine Gaul, 6000 interments were found. In each case the body had
been burned; there was not a single burial without previous burning.

This people entered Gaul not (according to Bertrand), for the most part,
as conquerors, but by gradual infiltration, occupying vacant spaces
wherever they found them along the valleys and plains. They came by the
passes of the Alps, and their starting-point was the country of the
Upper Danube, which Herodotus says "rises among the Celts." They blended
peacefully with the Megalithic People among whom they settled, and did
not evolve any of those advanced political institutions which are only
nursed in war, but probably they contributed powerfully to the
development of the Druidical system of religion and to the bardic poetry

\[56\]

 

The Celts of the Mountains

Finally, we have a third group, the true Celtic group, which followed
closely on the track of the second. It was at the beginning of the sixth
century that it first made its appearance on the left bank of the Rhine.
While Bertrand calls the second group Celtic, these he styles Galatic,
and identifies them with the Galatae of the Greeks and the Galli and
Belgae of the Romans.

The second group, as we have said, were Celts of the plains. The third
were Celts of the mountains. The earliest home in which we know them was
the ranges of the Balkans and Carpathians. Their organisation was that
of a military aristocracy - they lorded it over the subject populations
on whom they lived by tribute or pillage. They are the warlike Celts of
ancient history - the sackers of Rome and Delphi, the mercenary warriors
who fought for pay and for the love of warfare in the ranks of Carthage
and afterwards of Rome. Agriculture and industry were despised by them,
their women tilled the ground, and under their rule the common
population became reduced almost to servitude; "plebs poene servorum
habetur loco," as Caesar tells us. Ireland alone escaped in some degree
from the oppression of this military aristocracy, and from the sharp
dividing line which it drew between the classes, yet even there a
reflexion of the state of things in Gaul is found, even there we find
free and unfree tribes and oppressive and dishonouring exactions on the
part of the ruling order.

Yet, if this ruling race had some of the vices of untamed strength, they
had also many noble and humane qualities. They were dauntlessly brave,
fantastically chivalrous, keenly sensitive to the appeal of poetry, of
music, and of speculative thought. Posidonius found the bardic
institution flourishing among them about

\[57\]

100 B.C. and about two hundred years earlier Hecateus of Abdera
describes the elaborate musical services held by the Celts in a Western
island-probably Great Britain-in honour of their god Apollo (Lugh).
\[See Holder, "Altceltischer Sprachschatz" *sub voce* "Hyperboreoi"\]
Aryan of the Aryans, they had in them the making of a great and
progressive nation; but the Druidic system - not on the side of its
philosophy and science, but on that of its ecclesiastico-political
organisation - was their bane, and their submission to it was their
fatal weakness.

The culture of these mountain Celts differed markedly from that of the
lowlanders. Their age was the age of iron, not of bronze; their dead
were not burned (which they considered a disgrace) but buried.

The territories occupied by them in force were Switzerland, Burgundy,
the Palatinate, and Northern France; parts of Britain to the west, and
Illyria and Galatia to the east, but smaller groups of them must have
penetrated far and wide through all Celtic territory, and taken up a
ruling position wherever they went.

There were three peoples, said Caesar, inhabiting Gaul when his conquest
began; "they differ from each other in language, in customs, and in
laws." These people he named respectively the Belgae, the Celtae and the
Aquitani. He locates them roughly, the Belgae in the north and east, the
Celtae in the middle, and the Aquitani in the west and south. The BeIgae
are the Galatae of Bertrand, the Celtae are the Celts, and the Aquitani
are the Megalithic People. They had, of course, all been more or less
brought under Celtic influences, and the differences of language which
Caesar noticed need not have been great; still it is noteworthy, and
quite in accordance with Bertrand's views, that Strabo speaks of the
Aquitani as differing markedly from the rest of the inhabitants, and as

\[58\]

 

resembling the Iberians. The language of the other Gaulish peoples, he
expressly adds, were merely dialects of the same tongue.

 

The Religion of Magic

This triple division is reflected more or less in all the Celtic
countries, and must always be borne in mind when we speak of Celtic
ideas and Celtic religion, and try to estimate the contribution of the
Celtic peoples to European culture. The mythical literature and the art
of the Celt have probably sprung mainly from the section represented by
the Lowland Celts of Bertrand. But this literature of song and saga was
produced by a bardic class for the pleasure and instruction of a proud,
chivalrous, and warlike aristocracy, and would thus inevitably be
moulded by the ideas of this aristocracy. But it would also have been
coloured by the profound influence of the religious beliefs and
observances entertained by the Megalithic People - beliefs which are
only now fading slowly away in the spreading day-light of science. These
beliefs may be summed up in the one term Magic. The nature of this
religion of magic must now be briefly discussed, for it was a potent
element in the formation of the body of myths and legends with which we
have afterwards to deal. And, as Professor Bury remarked in his
Inaugural Lecture at Cambridge, in 1903 :

"For the purpose of prosecuting that most difficult of all inquiries,
the ethnical problem, the part played by race in the development of
peoples and the effects of race-blendings, it must be remembered that
the Celtic world commands one of the chief portals of ingress into that
mysterious pre-Aryan foreworld, from which it may well be that we modern
Europeans have inherited far more than we dream."

\[59\]

The ultimate root of the word Magic is unknown, but proximately it is
derived from the Magi, or priests of Chaldea and Media in pre-Aryan and
pre-Semitic times, who were the great exponents of this system of
thought, so strangely mingled of superstition, philosophy, and
scientific observation. The fundamental conception of magic is that of
the spiritual vitality of all nature. This spiritual vitality was not,
as in polytheism, conceived as separated from nature in distinct divine
personalities. It was implicit and immanent in nature; obscure,
undefined, invested with all the awfulness of a power whose limits and
nature are enveloped in impenetrable mystery. In its remote origin it
was doubt-less, as many facts appear to show, associated with the cult
of the dead, for death was looked upon as the resumption into nature,
and as the investment with vague and uncontrollable powers, of a
spiritual force formerly embodied in the concrete, limited, manageable,
and therefore less awful form of a living human personality. Yet these
powers were not altogether uncontrollable. The desire for control, as
well as the suggestion of the means for achieving it, probably arose
from the first rude practices of the art of healing. Medicine of some
sort was one of the earliest necessities of man. And the power of
certain natural substances, mineral or vegetable, to produce bodily and
mental effects often of a most startling character would naturally be
taken as signal evidence of what we may call the "magical" conception of
the universe.\[Thus the Greek *pharmakon* = medicine, poison, or charm;
and I am informed that the Central African word for magic or charm is
*mankwala* which also means medicine.\] The first magicians were those
who attained a special knowledge of healing or poisonous herbs; but
"virtue" of some sort being attributed to every natural object and
phenmenon,

\[60\]

a kind of magical science, partly the child of true research, partly of
poetic imagination, partly of priestcraft, would in time spring up,
would be codified into rites and formulas, attached to special places
and objects, and represented by symbols. The whole subject has been
treated by Pliny in a remarkable passage which deserves quotation at
length

 

Pliny on the Religion of Magic

"Magic is one of the few things which it is important to discuss at some
length, were it only because, being the most delusive of all the arts,
it has everywhere and at all times been most powerfully credited. Nor
need it surprise us that it has obtained so vast an influence, for it
has united in itself the three arts which have wielded the most powerful
sway over the spirit of man. Springing in the first instance from
Medicine - a fact which no one can doubt-and under cover of a solicitude
for our health, it has glided into the mind, and taken the form of
another medicine, more holy and more profound. In the second place,
bearing the most seductive and flattering promises, it has enlisted the
motive of Religion, the subject on which, even at this day, mankind is
most in the dark. To crown all it has had recourse to the art of
Astrology; and every man is eager to know the future and convinced that
this knowledge is most certainly to be obtained from the heavens. Thus,
holding the minds of men enchained in this triple bond, it has extended
its sway over many nations, and the Kings of Kings obey it in the East.

"In the East, doubtless, it was invented - in Persia and by Zoroaster.
\[If Pliny meant that it *was* here first codified and organised he may
be right, but the conceptions on which magic rest are practically
universal, and of immemorial antquity.\] All the authorities agree in
this.

\[61\]

But has there not been more than one Zoroaster? …

I have noticed that in ancient times, and indeed almost always, one
finds men seeking in this science the climax of literary glory - at
least Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democritus, and Plato crossed the seas,
exiles, in truth, rather than travellers, to instruct themselves in
this. Returning to their native land, they vaunted the claims of magic
and maintained its secret doctrine … In the Latin nations there are
early traces of it, as, for instance, in our Laws of the Twelve
Tables'\[Adopted 451 B.C. Livy entitles them "the fountain of all public
and private right" They stood in the Forum till the third century A.D.,
but have now perished, except for fragments preserved in various
commentaries\] and other monuments, as I have said in a former book. In
fact, it was not until the yeay 657 after the foundation of Rome, under
the consulate of Cornelius Lentulus Crassus, that it was forbidden by a
*senatus* *consultum* to sacrifice human beings; a fact which proves
that up to this date these horrible sacrifices were made. The Gauls have
been captivated by it, and that even down to our own times, or it was
the Emperor Tiberius who suppressed the Druids and all the herd of
prophets and medicine-men. But what is the use of launching prohibitions
against an art which has thus traversed the ocean and penetrated even to
the confines of Nature?" *(Hist. Nat*. xxx.)

Pliny adds that the first person whom he can ascertain to have written
on this subject was Osthanes, who accompanied Xerxes in his war against
the Greeks, and who propagated the "germs of his monstrous art" wherever
he went in Europe.

Magic was not - so Pliny believed - indigenous either in Greece or in
Italy, but was so much at home in Britain and conducted with such
elaborate ritual that

\[62\]

Pliny says it would almost seem as if it was they who had taught it to
the Persians, not the Persians to them.

 

Traces of Magic in Megalithic Monuments

The imposing relics of their cult which the Megalithic People have left
us are full of indications of their religion. Take, for instance, the
remarkable tumulus of Mané-er-H'oeck, in Brittany. This monument was
explored in 1864 by M. René Galles, who describes it as absolutely
intact-the surface of the earth unbroken, and everything as the builders
left it. \[See "Revue Archéologique," t. xii., 1865, "Fouilles de René
Galles."\]

At the entrance to the rectangular chamber was a sculptured slab, on
which was graven a mysterious sign, perhaps the totem of a chief.
Immediately on entering the chamber was found a beautiful pendant in
green jasper about the size of an egg. On the floor in the centre of the
chamber was a most singular arrangement, consisting of a large ring of
jadite, slightly oval in shape, with a magnificent axe-head, also of
jadite, its point resting on the ring. The axe was a well-known symbol
of power or godhead, and is frequently found in rock-carvings of the
Bronze Age, as well as in Egyptian hieroglyphs, Minoan carvings, &c. At
a little distance from these there lay two large pendants of jasper,
then an axe-head in white jade, \[Jade is not found in the native state
in Europe, nor nearer than China.\] then another jasper pendant. All
these objects were ranged with evident intention *en suite,* forming a
straight line which coincided exactly with one of the diagonals of the
chamber, running from north-west to south-east. In one of the corners of
the chamber were found 101 axe-heads in jade, jadite, and

\[63\]

fibrolite. There were no traces of bones or cinders, no funerary urn ;
the structure was a cenotaph. "Are we not here," asks Bertrand, "in
presence of some ceremony relating to the practices of magic?"

 

Chiromancy at Gavr'inis

In connexion with the great sepulchral monument of Gavr'inis a very
curious observation was made by

M. Albert Maitre, an inspector of the Musée des Antiquités Nationales.
There were found here-as commonly in other megalithic monuments in
Ireland and Scotland - a number of stones sculptured with a singular and
characteristic design in waving and concentric lines. Now if the curious
lines traced upon the human hand at the roots and tips of the fingers be
examined under a lens, it will be found that they bear an exact
resemblance to these designs of megalithic sculpture. One seems almost
like a cast of the other. These lines on the human hand are so distinct
and peculiar that, as is well known, they have been adopted as a method
of identification of criminals. Can this resemblance be

\[64\]

the result of chance ? Nothing like these peculiar assemblages of
sculptured lines has ever been found except in connexion with these
monuments. Have we not here a reference to chiromancy - a magical art
much practised in ancient and even in modern times? The hand as a symbol
of power was a well-known magical emblem, and has entered largely even
into Christian symbolism - note, for instance, the great hand sculptured
on the under side of one of the arms of the Cross of Muiredach at
Monasterboice.

 

Holed Stones

Another singular and as yet unexplained feature which appears in many of
these monuments, from Western Europe to India, is the presence of a
small hole bored through one of the stones composing the chamber.

Was it an aperture intended for the spirit of the dead ? or for
offerings to them ? or the channel through which revelations from the
spirit-world were supposed to come to a priest or magician ? or did it
partake of all these characters?

Holed stones, not forming part of a dolmen, are, of course, among the
commonest relics of the ancient cult, and are still venerated and used
in practices connected

\[65\]

with child-bearing, &c. Here we are doubtless to interpret the emblem as
a symbol of sex.

 

Stone-Worship

Besides the heavenly bodies, we find that rivers, trees, mountains, and
stones were all objects of veneration among this primitive people.
Stone-worship was particularly common, and is not so easily explained as
the worship directed toward objects possessing movement and vitality.
Possibly an explanation of the veneration attaching to great and
isolated masses of unhewn stone may be found in their resemblance to the
artificial dolmens and cromlechs. \[Small stones, crystals, and gems
were, however, also venerated. The celebrated Black Stone of Pergamos
was the subject of an embassy from Rome to that city in the time of the
Second Punic War, the Sibylline Rooks having predicted victory to its
possessors. It was brought to Rome with great rejoicings in the year
205. It is stated to have been about the site of a man's fist, and was
probably a meteorite. Compare the myth in Hesiod which relates how
Kronos devoured a stone in the belief that it was his offspring, Zeus It
was then possible to mistake a stone for a god.\] No superstition has
proved more enduring. In A.D. 452 we find the Synod of Aries denouncing
those who "venerate trees and wells and stones," and the denunciation
was repeated by Charlemagne, and by numerous Synods and Councils down to
recent times. Yet a drawing, here reproduced, which was lately made on
the spot by Mr. Arthur Bell, shows this very act of worship still in
full force in Brittany, and shows the symbols and the sacerdotal
organisation of Christianity actually pressed into the service of this
immemorial paganism. According to Mr. Bell, the clergy take part in
these performances with much reluctance; but are compelled to do so by
the force of local opinion. Holy wells, the water of which is supposed
to cure diseases, are still very common in Ireland,

\[66\]

and the cult of the waters of Lourdes may, in spite of its adoption by
the Church, be mentioned as a notable case in point on the Continent.

 

Cup-and-Ring Markings

Another singular emblem, upon the meaning of which no light has yet been
thrown, occurs frequently in connexion with megalithic monuments.

The accompanying illustrations show examples of it. Cup-shaped hollows
are made in the surface of the stone, these are often surrounded with
concentric rings, and from the cup one or more radial lines are drawn to
a point outside the circumference of the rings. Occasionally a system of
cups are joined by these lines, but more frequently they end a little
way outside the widest of the rings. These strange markings are found in
Great Britain and Ireland, in Brittany, and at various places in

\[67\]

India, where they are called *mahadeos*. \[See Sir J. Simpson', "Archaic
Sculpturings" 1867\] I have also found a curious example - for such it
appears to be - in Dupaix' "Monuments of New Spain." It is reproduced in
Lord Kingsborough's "Antiquities of Mexico," vol. iv. On the circular
top of a cylindrical stone, known as the "Triumphal Stone," is carved a
central cup, with nine concentric circles round it, and a duct or
channel cut straight from the cup through all the circles to the rim.
Except that the design here is richly decorated and accurately drawn, it
closely resembles a typical European cup-and-ring marking. That these
markings mean something, and that, wherever they are found, they mean
the same thing, can hardly be doubted, but what that meaning is remains
yet a puzzle to antiquarians. The guess may perhaps be hazarded that
they are diagrams or plans of a megalithic sepulchre. The central hollow
represents the actual burial-place. The circles are the standing Stones,
fosses, and ramparts which often surrounded it; and the line or duct
drawn from the centre outwards represents the subterranean approach to
the sepulchre. The apparent "avenue" intention of the duct is clearly
brought out in the varieties given below, which I take from Simpson.

As the sepulchre was also a holy place or shrine, the occurrence of a
representation of it among other carvings of a sacred character is
natural enough ; it would seem symbolically to indicate that the place
was holy ground. How far this suggestion might apply to the Mexican
example I am unable to say.

\[68\]

 

The Tumulus at New Grange

One of the most important and richly sculptured of European megalithic
monuments is the great chambered tumulus of New Grange, on the northern
bank of the Boyne, in Ireland. This tumulus, and the others which occur
in its neighbourhood, appear in ancient Irish mythical literature in two
different characters, the union of which is significant. They are
regarded on the one hand as the dwelling-places of the *Sidhe*
(pronounced Shee), or Fairy Folk, who represent, probably, the deities
of the ancient Irish, and they are also, traditionally, the
burial-places of the Celtic High Kings of. pagan Ireland. The story of
the burial of King Cormac, who was supposed to have heard of the
Christian faith long before it was actually preached in Ireland by St.
Patrick and who ordered that he should not be buried at the royal
cemetery by the Boyne, on account of its pagan associations, points to
the view that this place was the centre of a pagan cult involving more
than merely the interment of royal personages in its precincts.
Unfortunately these monuments are not intact; they were opened and
plundered by the Danes in the ninth century, \[The fact is recorded in
the "Annals of the Four Masters" under the date 861 and in the "Annals
of Ulster" under 862\] but enough evidence remains to show that they
were sepulchral in their origin, and were also associated with the cult
of a primitive religion. The most important of them, the tumulus of New
Grange, has been thoroughly explored and described by Mr. George Coffey,
keeper of the collection of Celtic antiquities in the National Museum,
Dublin.\[See "Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy," vol. xxx. Pt. i,
1892, and "New Grange," by G. Coffey, 1912\] It appears from the outside
like a large mound, or knoll, now over-grown with bushes. It measures
about 280 feet across,

\[69\]

at its greatest diameter, and is about 44 feet in height. Outside it
there runs a wide circle of standing stones originally, it would seem,
thirty-five in number. Inside this circle is a ditch and rampart, and on
top of this rampart was laid a circular curb of great stones 8 to 10
feet long, laid on edge, and confining what has proved to he a huge
mound of loose stones, now overgrown, as we have said, with grass and
bushes. It is in the interior of this mound that the interest of the
monument lies. Towards the end of the seventeenth century some workmen
who were getting road-material from the mound came across the entrance
to a passage which led into the interior, and was marked by the fact
that the boundary stone below it is richly carved with spirals and
lozenges. This entrance faces exactly south-east. The passage is formed
of upright slabs of unhewn stone roofed with similar slabs, and varies
from nearly 5 feet to 7 feet 10 inches in height ; it is about 3 feet
wide, and runs for 62 feet straight into the heart of the mound. Here it
ends in a cruciform chamber, 20 feet high, the roof, a kind of dome,
being formed of large flat stones, overlapping inwards till they almost
meet at the top, where a large flat stone covers all. In each of the
three recesses of the cruciform chamber there stands a large stone
basin, or rude sarcophagus, but no traces of any burial now remain.

 

Symbolic Carvings at New Grange

The stones are all raw and undressed, and were selected for their
purpose from the river-bed and elsewhere close by. On their flat
surfaces, obtained by splitting slabs from the original quarries, are
found the carvings which form the unique interest of this strange
monument. Except for the large stone with spiral carvings and one other
at the entrance to the mound,

\[70\]

the intention of these Sculptures does not appear to have been
decorative, except in a very rude and primitive sense. There is no
attempt to cover a given surface with a system of ornament appropriate
to its size and shape. The designs are, as it were, scribbled upon the
waals anyhow and anywhere. \[It must be observed, however, that the
decoration was, certainly in some, and perhaps in all cases, carried out
before the stones were placed in position. This is also the case at
Gavr'inis.\] Among them everywhere the spiral is prominent. The
resemblance of some of these carvings to the supposed finger-markings of
the stones at Gavr'inis is very remarkable. Triple and double spiral are
also found, as well as lozenges and zigzags. A singular carving
representing what looks like a palm-branch or fern-leaf is found in the
west recess. The drawing of this object is naturalistic, and it is hard
to interpret it, as Mr. Coffey is inclined to do, as merely a piece of
so-called "herring\~bone" pattern. \[He has modified this view in his
latest work, "New Grange," 1912\] A similar palm-leaf design, but with
the ribs arranged at right angles to the central axis, is found in the
neighbouring tumulus of Dowth, at Loughcrew, and in combination with a
solar emblem, the swastika, on a small altar in the Pyrenees, figured by
Bertrand.

 

The Ship Symbol at New Grange

Another remarkable and, as far as Ireland goes, unusual figure is found
sculptured in the west recess at New Grange. It has been interpreted by
various critics as a mason's mark, a piece of Phoenician writing, a
group of numerals, and finally (and no doubt correctly) by Mr. George
Coffey as a rude representation of a ship with men on board and uplifted
sail. lt is noticeable that just above it is a small circle, forming,
apparently, part of the design. Another example occurs at Dowth.

\[71\]

The significance of this marking, as we shall see, is possibly very
great.

It has been discovered that on certain stones in the tumulus of
Locmariaker, in Brittany, \["Proc. Royal Irish Acad.," vol. viii. 1863,
p. 400, and G. Coffey, *op. cit.* p. 30\] there occur a number of very
similar figures) one of them showing the circle in much the same
relative position as at New Grange. The axe, an Egyptian hieroglyph for
godhead and a well-known magical emblem, is also represented on this
stone. Again, in a brochure by Dr. Oscar Montelius on the
rock-sculptures of Sweden \["Les Sculptures de Rochers de la Suède,"
read at the Prehistoric Congress, Stockholm, 1874; and see G. Coffey,
*op. cit.* p. 60\] we find a reproduction (also given in Du Chaillu's "
Viking Age") of a rude rock-carving showing a number of ships with men
on board, and the circle quartered by a cross-unmistakably a solar
emblem-just above one of them.

That these ships (which, like the Irish example) are often so summarily
represented as to be mere symbols which no one could identify as a ship
were the clue not given by other and more elaborate representations)
were drawn so frequently in conjunction with the solar disk merely for
amusement or for a purely decorative object seems to me most improbable.

\[72\]

In the days of the megalithic folk sepulchral monument, the very focus
of religious ideas, would hardly nave been covered with idle and
meaningless scrawls. "Man," as Sir J. Simpson has well said, "has ever
conjoined together things sacred and things sepulchral." Nor do these
scrawls, in the majority of instances, show any glimmering of a
decorative intention.

But if they had a symbolic intention, what is it that they symbolise ?

We have here come, I believe, into a higher order of Ideas than that of
magic. The suggestion I have to make may seem a daring one ; yet, as we
shall see, it is quite in line with the results of certain other
investigations as to the origin and character of the megalithic culture.

If accepted, it will certainly give much greater definiteness to our
views of the relations of the Megalithic People with North Africa, as
well as of the true origin of Druidism and of the doctrines associated
with that system. I think it may be taken as established that the
frequent conjunction of the ship with the solar disk on rock-sculptures
in Sweden, Ireland, and Brittany cannot be fortuitous. No one, for
instance, looking at the example from Hallande given above, can doubt
that the two objects are intentionally combined in one design.

 

The Ship Symbol in Egypt

Now this symbol of the ship, with or without the actual portrayal of the
solar emblem, is of very ancient and

\[73\]

very common occurrence in the sepulchral art of Egypt. It is connected
with the worship of Ra which came in fully 4000 years B.C. Its meaning
as an Egyptian symbol is well known. The ship was called the Boat of the
Sun. It was the vessel in which the Sun-god performed his journeys; in
particular, the journey which he made nightly to the shores of the
Other-world, bearing with him in his bark the souls of the beatified
dead.

The Sun-god, Ra, is sometimes represented by a disk, some-times by other
emblems, hovering above the vessel or contained within it. Any one who
will look over the painted or sculptured sarcophagi in the British
Museum will find a host of examples. Sometimes he will find
representations of the life-giving rays of Ra pouring down upon the boat
and its occupants. Now, in one of the Swedish rock-carvings of ships at
Backa, Bohuslan, given by Montelius, a ship crowded with figures is
shown beneath a disk with three descending rays, and again another ship
with a two-rayed sun above it. It may be added that in the tumulus of
Dowth, which is close to that of New Grange and is entirely of the same
character and period, rayed figures and quartered circles, obviously
solar emblems, occur abundantly, as also at Loughcrew and other places
in Ireland, and one other ship figure has been identified at Dowth.

\[74\]

In Egypt the solar boat is sometimes represented as containing the solar
emblem alone, sometimes it contains the figure of a god with attendant
deities, sometimes it contains a crowd of passengers representing human
soul; and sometimes the figure of a single corpse on a bier.

The megalithic carvings also sometimes show the solar emblem and
some-times not; the boats are sometimes filled with figures and are
sometimes empty. When a symbol has once been accepted and understood,
any conventional or summary representation of it is sufficient. I take
it that the complete form of the megalithic symbol is that of a boat
with figures in it and with the solar emblem overhead. These figures,
assuming the fore-going interpretation of the design to be correct, must
clearly be taken for representations of the dead on their way to the
Other-world.

They cannot be deities, for representations of the divine powers under
human aspect were quite unknown to the Megalithic People, even after the
coming of the Celts - they first occur in Gaul under Roman influence.
But if these figures represent the dead, then we have clearly before us
the origin of the so-called "Celtic" doctrine of immortality. The
carvings in question are pre-Celtic. They are found where no Celts ever
penetrated. Yet they point to the existence of just that Other-world
doctrine which, from the time of Caesar

\[75\]

downwards, has been associated with Celtic Druidism, and this doctrine
was distinctively Egyptian.

 

The "Navetas"

In connexion with this subject I may draw attention to the theory of Mr.
W. C. Borlase that the typical design of an Irish dolmen was intended to
represent a ship. In Minorca there are analogous structures, there
popularly called *navetas* (ships), so distinct is the resemblance. But,
he adds, "long before the caves and *navetas* of Minorca were known to
me I had formed the opinion that what I have so frequently spoken of as
the 'wedge-shape' observable so universally in the ground-plans of
dolmens was due to an original conception of a ship. From sepulchral
tumuli in Scandinavia we know actual vessels have on several occasions
been disinterred. In cemeteries of the Iron Age, in the same country, as
well as on the more southern Baltic coasts, the ship was a recognised
form of sepulchral enclosure."\["Dolmens of Ireland," pp. 701-704\] If
Mr. Borlase's view is correct, we have here a very strong corroboration
of the symbolic intention which I attribute to the solar ship-carvings
of the Megalithic People.

 

The Ship Symbol in Babylonia

The ship symbol, it may be remarked, can be traced to about 4000 B.C. in
Babylonia, where every deity had his own special ship (that of the god
Sin was called the Ship of Light, his image being carried in procession
on a litter formed like a ship. This is thought by Jastrow \["The
Religion of Babylonia and Assyria"\] to have originated at a time when
the sacred cities of Babylonia were situated on the Persian Gulf, and
when religious processions were often carried out by water.

\[76\]

  
The Symbol of the Feet

Yet there is reason to think that some of these symbols were earlier
than any known mythology, and were, so to say, mythologised differently
by different peoples, who got hold of them from this now unknown source.
A remarkable instance is that of the symbol of the Two Feet. In Egypt
the Feet of Osiris formed one of the portions into which his body was
cut up. In the well-known myth.

They were a symbol of possession or of visitation. "I have come upon
earth," says the "Book of the Dead" (ch. xvii.), "and with my two feet
have taken possession. I am Tmu." Now this symbol of the feet or
footprint is very widespread. It is found in India, as the print of the
foot of Buddha, \[A good example from Amaravati (after Fergusson) is
given by Bertrand, "Rel. des G.," p. 389.\] it is found sculptured on
dolmens in Brittany, \[Sergi, "The Mediterranean Race," p.313.\] and it
occurs in rock-carvings in Scandinavia. \[At Lökeberget, Bohuslän; see
Montelius, *op. cit.*\] In Ireland it passes for the footprints of St.
Patrick or St. Columba. Strangest of all, it is found unmistakably in
Mexico. \[See Lord Kingsborough's "Antiquities of Mexico," *passim*, and
the Humboldt fragment of Mexican painting (reproduced in Churchward's
"Signs and Symbols of Primordial Man',).\] Tyler, in his "Primitive
Culture" (ii. p. '97) refers to "the Aztec ceremony at the Second
Festival of the Sun God, Tezcatlipoca, when they sprinkled maize flour
before his sanctuary, and his high priest watched till he beheld the
divine footprints, and then shouted to announce, 'Our Great God is
come.' "

 

The *Ankh* on Megalithic Carvings

There is very strong evidence of the connexion of the Megalithic People
with North Africa. Thus, as

\[77\]

Sergi points out, many signs (probably numerical) found on ivory tablets
in the cemetery at Naqada discovered by Flinders Petrie are to be met
with on European dolmens.

Several later Egyptian hieroglyphic signs, including the famous *Ankh,*
or *crux ansata,* the symbol of vitality or resurrection, are also found
in megalithic carvings. \[See Sergi, *op. cit.* p.190, for the *Ankh* on
a French doImen.\] From these correspondences Letourneau drew the
conclusion "that the builders of our megalithic monuments came from the
South, and were related to the races of North Africa." \["Bulletin de Ia
Soc. d'Anthropologie," Paris, April 1893.\]

 

Evidence from Language

Approaching the subject from the linguistic side, Rhys and Brynmor Jones
find that the African origin - at least proximately - of the primitive
population of Great Britain and Ireland is strongly suggested. It is
here shown that the Celtic languages preserve in their syntax the
Hamitic, and especially the Egyptian type. \["The Welsh People," pp.
616-664, where the subject is fully discussed in an appendix by
Professor J. Morris Jones. "The pre-Aryan idioms which still live in
Welsh and Irish were derived from a language allied to Egyptian and the
Berber tongues."\]

 

Egyptian and "Celtic" Ideas of Immortality

The facts at present known do not, I think, justify us in framing any
theory as to the actual historical relation of the dolmen-builders of
Western Europe with the people who created the wonderful religion and
civilisation of ancient Egypt. But when we consider all the lines of
evidence that converge in this direction it seems clear that there was
such a relation. Egypt was the classic land of religious symbolism. It
gave to

\[78\]

Europe the most beautiful and most popular of all its religious symbols,
that of the divine mother and child. \[Flinders Petrie, "Egypt and
Israel," pp.137, 899.\] I believe that it also gave to the primitive
inhabitants of Western Europe the profound symbol of the voyaging
spirits guided to the world of the dead by by the God of Light.

The religion of Egypt, above that of any people whose ideas we know to
have been developed in times so ancient, centred on the doctrine of a
future life. The palatial and stupendous tombs, the elaborate ritual,
the imposing mythology, the immense exaltation of the priestly caste,
all these features of Egyptian culture were intimately connected with
their doctrine of the immortality of the soul.

To the Egyptian the disembodied soul was no shadowy simulacrum, as the
classical nations believed-the future life was a mere prolongation of
the present; the just man, when he had won his place in it, found
himself among his relatives, his friends, his workpeople, with tasks and
enjoyments very much like those of earth. The doom of the wicked was
annihilation; he fell a victim to the invisible monster called the Eater
of the Dead.

Now when the classical nations first began to take an interest in the
ideas of the Celts the thing that principally struck them was the Celtic
belief in immortality, which the Gauls said was "handed down by the
Druids." The classical nations believed in immortality; but what a
picture does Homer, the Bible of the Greeks, give of the lost, degraded,
dehumanised creatures which represented the departed souls of men !
Take, as one example, the description of the spirits of the suitors
slain by Odysseus as Hermes conducts them to the Underworld :

\[79\]

"Now were summoned the souls of the dead by Cyllenian Hermes …  
Touched by the wand they awoke, and obeyed him and followed him,
squealing,  
Even as bats in the dark, mysterious depths of a cavern  
Squeal as they flutter around, should one from the cluster be fallen  
Where from the rock suspended they hung, all clinging together;  
So did the souls flock squealing behind him, as Hermes the Helper  
Guided them down to the gloom through dank and mouldering pathways."  
\[I quote from Mr. H. B. Cotterill's beautiful hexameter version.\]

The classical writers felt rightly that the Celtic idea of immortality
was something altogether different from this. It was both loftier and
more realistic; it implied a true persistence of the living man, as he
was at present, in all his human relations. They noted with surprise
that the Celt would lend money on a promissory note for repayment in the
next world. \[Valerius Maximus (about A.D. 30\] ) and other classical
writers mention this practice\] That is an absolutely Egyptian
conception. And this very analogy occurred to Diodorus in writing of the
Celtic idea of immortality - it was like nothing that he knew of out of
Egypt. \[Book V\].

 

The Doctrine of Transmigration

Many ancient writers assert that the Celtic idea of immortality embodied
the Oriental conception of the transmigration of souls, and to account
for this the hypothesis was invented that they had learned the doctrine
from Pythagoras, who represented it in classical antiquity. Thus Caesar
: "The principal point of their \[the Druids'\] teaching is that the
soul does not perish, and that after death it passes from one body into
another." And Diodorus: "Among them the doctrine of Pythagoras prevails,
according to which the souls of men are immortal, and after a fixed term
recommence

\[80\]

to live, taking upon themselves a new body." Now traces of this doctrine
certainly do appear in Irish legend. Thus the Irish chieftain, Mongan,
who is an historical personage, and whose death is recorded about A.D.
625, is said to have made a wager as to the place of death of a king
named Fothad, slain in a battle with the mythical hero Finn mac Cumhal
in the third century. He proves his case by summoning to his aid a
*revenant* from the Other-world, Keelta, who was the actual slayer of
Fothad, and who describes correctly where the tomb is to be found and
what were its contents. He begins his tale by saying to Mongan, "We were
with thee," and then, turning to the assembly, he continues: "We were
with Finn, coming from Alba. . . ." "Hush," says Mongan, "it is wrong of
thee to reveal a secret." The secret is, of course, that Mongan was a
reincarnation of Finn. \[De Jubainville, " Irish Mythological Cycle," p.
191 *sqq.*\] But the evidence on the whole shows that the Celts did not
hold this doctrine at all in the same way as Pythagoras and the
Orientals did. Transmigration was not, with them, part of the order of
things. It *might* happen, but in general it did not; the new body
assumed by the dead clothed them in another, not in this world, and so
far as we can learn from any ancient authority, there does not appear to
have been any idea of moral retribution connected with this form of the
future life. It was not so much an article of faith as an idea which
haunted the imagination, and which, as Mongan's caution indicates, ought
not to be brought into clear light.

However it may have been conceived, it is certain that the belief in
immortality was the basis of Celtic Druidism. \[The etymology of the
word "Druid " is no longer an unsolved problem. It had been suggested
that the latter part of the word might be connected with the Aryan root
VID, which appears in "Wisdom"' in the Latin *videre*, &c., Thurneysen
has now shown that this root in combination with the intensiye particle
*dru* would yield the word *dru-vids*, represented in Gaelic by *draoi,*
a Druid, just as another intensive, *su*, with *vids* yields the Gaelic
*saoi*, a sage.\] Caesar affirms this distinctly, and declares

\[81\]

the doctrine to have been fostered by the Druids rather for the
promotion of courage than for purely religious reasons. An intense
Other-world faith, such as that held by the Celts, is certainly one of
the mightiest of agencies in the hands of a priesthood who hold the keys
of that world. Now Druidism existed in the British Islands, in Gaul,
and, in fact, so far as we know, wherever there was a Celtic race amid a
population of dolmen-builders. There were Celts in Cisalpine Gaul, but
there were no dolmens there, and there were no Druids. \[See Rice
Holmes, "Caesar's Conquest," p. 15, and pp.532-536.

Rhys, it may he observed, believes that Druidism was the religion of the
aboriginal inhabitants of Western Europe "from the Baltic to Gibraltar"
("Celtic Britain," p. 73). But we only *know* of it where Celts and
dolmen-builders combined. Caesar remarks of the Germans that they had no
Druids and cared little about sacrificial ceremonies.\] What is quite
clear is that when the Celts got to Western Europe they found there a
people with a powerful priesthood, a ritual, and imposing religious
monuments ;a people steeped in magic and mysticism and the cult of the
Underworld. The inferences, as I read the facts, seem to be that
Druidism in its essential features was imposed upon the imaginative and
sensitive nature of the Celt - the Celt with his "extraordinary
aptitude" for picking up ideas - by the earlier population of Western
Europe, the Megalithic People, while, as held by these, it stands in
some historical relation, which I am not able to pursue in further
detail, with the religious culture of ancient Egypt. Much obscurity
still broods over the question, and perhaps will always do so, but if
these

\[82\]

suggestions have anything in them, then the Megalithic People have been
brought a step or two out of the atmosphere of uncanny mystery which has
surrounded them, and they are shown to have played a very important part
in the religious development of Western Europe, and in preparing that
part of the world for the rapid extension of the special type of
Christianity which took place in it. Bertrand, in his most interesting
chapter on L'Irlande Celtique," \["Rel. des Gaulois," lecon xx.\] points
out that very soon after the conversion of Ireland to Christianity, we
find the country covered with monasteries, whose complete organisation
seems to indicate that they were really Druidic colleges transformed *en
masse.* Caesar has told us what these colleges were like in Gaul. They
were very numerous. In spite of the severe study and discipline
involved, crowds flocked into them for the sake of the power wielded by
the Druidic order, and the civil immunities which its members of all
grades enjoyed. Arts and sciences were studied there, and thousands of
verses enshrining the teachings of Druidism were committed to memory.
All this is very like what we know of Irish Druidism. Such an
organisation would pass into Christianity of the type established in
Ireland with very little difficulty. The belief in magical rites would
survive-early Irish Christianity, as its copious hagiography plainly
shows, was as steeped in magical ideas as ever was Druidic paganism. The
belief in immortality would remain, as before, the cardinal doctrine of
religion. Above all the supremacy of the sacerdotal order over the
temporal power would remain unimpaired; it would still be true, as Dion
Chrysostom said of the Druids, that "it is they who command, and kings
on thrones of gold, dwelling in

\[83\]

splendid palaces, are but their ministers, and the servants of their
thought." \[Quoted by Bertrand, *op. cit.* p. 279\]

 

Caesar on the Druidic Culture

The religious, philosophic, and scientific culture superintended by the
Druids is spoken of by Caesar with much respect. "They discuss and
impart to the youth," he writes, "many things respecting the stars and
their motions, respecting the extent of the universe and of our earth,
respecting the nature of things, respecting the power and the majesty of
the immortal gods" (bk. vi. 14). We would give much to know some
particulars of the teaching here described. But the Druids, though well
acquainted with letters, strictly forbade the committal of their
doctrines to writing; an extremely sagacious provision, for not only did
they thus surround their teaching with that atmosphere of mystery which
exercises so potent a spell over the human mind, but they ensured that
it could never be effectively controverted.

 

Human Sacrifices in Gaul

In strange discord, however, with the lofty words of Caesar stands the
abominable practice of human sacrifice whose prevalence he noted among
the Celts. Prisoners and criminals, or if these failed even innocent
victims, probably children, were encased, numbers at a time, in huge
frames of wickerwork, and there burned alive to win the favour of the
gods. The practice of human sacrifice is, of course, not specially
Druidic - it is found in all parts both of the Old and of the New World
at a certain stage of culture, and was doubtless a survival from the
time of the Megalithic People. The fact that it should have continued in
Celtic lands after an other-wise

\[84\]

fairly high state of civilisation and religious culture had been
attained can be paralleled from Mexico and Carthage, and in both cases
is due, no doubt, to the uncontrolled dominance of a priestly caste.

 

Human Sacrifices in Ireland

Bertrand endeavours to dissociate the Druids from these practices, of
which he says strangely there is "no trace" in Ireland, although there,
as elsewhere in Celtica, Druidism was all-powerful. There is little
doubt, however, that in Ireland also human sacrifices at one time
prevailed. In a very ancient tract, the "Dinnsenchus," preserved in the
" Book of Leinster," it is stated that on Moyslaught, "the Plain of
Adoration," there stood a great gold idol, Crom Cruach (the Bloody
Crescent). To it the Gaels used to sacrifice children when praying for
fair weather and fertility - " it was milk and corn they asked from it
in exchange for their children - how great was their horror and their
moaning !" \["The Irish Mythological Cycle," by d'Arbois de Jubainville,
p. 61. The" Dinnsenchus" in question is an early Christian document. No
trace of a being like Crom Cruach has been found as yet in the pagan
literature of Ireland, nor in the writing: of St. Patrick, and I think
it is quite probable that even in the time of St. Patrick human
sacrifices had become only a memory.\]

 

And in Egypt

In Egypt, where the national character was markedly easy-going,
pleasure-loving, and little capable of fanatical exaltation, we find no
record of any such cruel rites in the monumental inscriptions and
paintings, copious as is the information which they give us on all
features of the national life and religion. \[A representation of human
sacrifice has, however, lately been discovered in a Temple of the Sun in
the ancient Ethiopian capital, Meroe.\] Manetho, indeed, the

\[85\]

Egyptian historian who wrote in the third century B.C., tells us that
human sacrifices were abolished by Amasis I. so late as the beginning of
the XVIII Dynasty - about 1600 B.C. But the complete silence of the
other records shows us that even if we are to believe Manetho, the
practice must in historic times have been very rare, and must have been
looked on with repugnance.

 

The Names of Celtic Deities

What were the names and the attributes of the Celtic deities? Here we
are very much in the dark. The Megalithic People did not imagine their
deities under concrete personal form. Stones, rivers, wells, trees, and
other natural objects were to them the adequate symbols, or were half
symbols, half actual embodiments, of the supernatural forces which they
venerated. But the imaginative mind of the Aryan Celt was not content
with this. The existence of personal gods with distinct titles and
attributes is reported to us by Caesar, who equates them with various
figures in the Roman pantheon - Mercury, Apollo, Mars, and so forth.
Lucan mentions a triad of deities, Aesus, Teutates, and Taranus ; \["You
(Celts) who by cruel blood outpoured think to appease the pitiless
Teutates, the horrid Aesus with his barbarous altars, and Taranus whose
worship is no gentler than that of the Scythian Diana," to whom captives
were offered up. (Lucan, "Pharsalia," i. 444) An altar dedicated to
Aesua has been discovered in Paris.\] and it is noteworthy that in these
names we seem to be in presence of a true Celtic, *i.e.,* Aryan,
tradition Thus Aesus is derived by Belloguet from the Aryan root *as,*
meaning "to be," which furnished the name of Asura-masda *(l'Esprit
Sage)* to the Persians, Aesun to the Umbrians, Asa (Divine Being) to the
Scandinavians. Teutates comes from a Celtic root meaning " valiant," .'
warlike," and indicates

\[86\]

a deity equivalent to Mars. Taranus (?Thor), according to de
Jubainville, is a god of the Lightning *(taran* in Welsh, Cornish, and
Breton is the word for "thunderbolt"). Votive inscriptions to these gods
have been found in Gaul and Britain. Other inscriptions and sculptures
bear testimony to the existence in Gaul of a host of minor and local
deities who are mostly mere names, or not even names, to us now. In the
form in which we have them these conceptions bear clear traces of Roman
influence. The sculptures are rude copies of the Roman style of
religious art. But we meet among them figures of much wilder and
stranger aspect-gods with triple faces, gods with branching antlers on
their brows, ram-headed serpents, and other now unintelligible symbols
of the older faith. Very notable is the frequent occurrence of the
cross-legged "Buddha" attitude so prevalent in the religious art of the
East and of Mexico, and also the tendency, so well known in Egypt, to
group the gods in triads.

 

Caesar on the Celtic Deities

Caesar, who tries to fit the Gallic religion into the framework of Roman
mythology - which was exactly what the Gauls themselves did after the
conquest - says they held Mercury to be the chief of the gods, and
looked upon him as the inventor of all the arts, as the presiding deity
of commerce, and as the guardian of roads and guide of travellers. One
may conjecture that he was particularly, to the Gauls as to the Romans
the guide of the dead, of travellers to the Other-world, Many bronze
statues to Mercury, of Gaulish origin. still remain, the name being
adopted by the Gauls, as many place-names still testify. \[Mont Mercure,
Mercoeur; Mercoirey, Montmartre Apollo was regarded

\[87\]

as the deity of medicine and healing, Minerva was the initiator of arts
and crafts, Jupiter governed the sky, and Mars presided over war. Caesar
is here, no doubt, classifying under five types and by Roman names a
large number of Gallic divinities.

 

The God of the Underworld

According to Caesar, a most notable deity of the Gauls was (in Roman
nomenclature) Dis, or Pluto, the god of the Underworld inhabited by the
dead. From him all the Gauls claimed to be descended, and on this
account, says Caesar, they began their reckoning of the twenty-four
hours of the day with the oncoming of night. \[To this day in many parts
of France the peasantry use terms like *annuity, o'né, anneue,* &c., all
meaning "to-night," for *aujourd hui* (Bertrand, "Rel. des G.," p. 356\]
The name of this deity is not given. D'Arbois de Jubainville considers
that, together with Aesus, Teutates, Taranus, and, in Irish mythology,
Balor and the Fomorians, he represents the powers of darkness, death,
and evil, and Celtic mythology is thus interpreted as a variant of the
universal solar myth, embodying\~ the conception of the eternal conflict
between Day and Night.

 

The God of Light

The God of Light appears in Gaul and in Ireland as Lugh, or Lugus, who
has left his traces in many place-names such as *Lug-dunum* (Leyden),
Lyons, &c. Lugh appears in Irish legend with distinctly solar
attributes. When he meets his army before the great conflict with the
Fomorians, they feel, says the saga, as if they beheld the rising of the
sun. Yet he is also, as we shall see, a god of the Underworld, belonging
on the side of his mother Ethlinn, daughter of Balor, to the Powers of
Darkness.

\[88\]

 

The Celtic Conception of Death

The fact is that the Celtic conception of the realm of death differed
altogether from that of the Greeks and Romans, and, as I have already
pointed out, resembled that of Egyptian religion. The Other-world was
not a place of gloom and suffering, but of light and liberation. The Sun
was as much the god of that world as he was or this. Evil, pain, and
gloom there were, no doubt, and no doubt these principles were embodied
by the Irish Celts in their myths of Balor and the Fomorians, of which
we shall hear anon; but that they were particularly associated with the
idea of death is, I think, a false supposition founded on misleading
analogies drawn from the ideas of the classical nations. Here the Celts
followed North African or Asiatic conceptions rather than those of the
Aryans of Europe. It is only by realising that the Celts as we know them
in history, from the break-up of the Mid- European Celtic empire
Onwards) formed a singular blend of Aryan with non-Aryan
characteristics, that we shall arrive at a true understanding of their
contribution to European history and their influence in European
culture.

 

The Five Factors in Ancient Celtic Culture

To sum up the conclusions indicated: we can, I think, distinguish five
distinct factors in the religious and intellectual culture of Celtic
lands as we find them prior to the influx of classical or of Christian
influences. First, we have before us a mass of popular superstitions and
of magical observances, including human sacrifice. These varied more or
less from place to place, centring as they did largely on local features
which were regarded as embodiments or vehicles of divine or of diabolic
power. Secondly, there was certainly in existence a

\[89\]

thoughtful and philosophic creed) having as its central object of
worship the Sun, as an emblem of divine power and constancy, and as its
central doctrine the immortality of the soul. Thirdly, there was a
worship of personified deities, Aesus, Teutates, Lugh, and others,
conceived as representing natural forces, or as guardians of social
laws. Fourthly, the Romans were deeply impressed with the existence
among the Druids of a body of teaching of a quasi-scientific nature
about natural phenomena and the constitution of the universe, of the
details of which we unfortunately know practically nothing. Lastly, we
have to note the prevalence of a sacerdotal organisation, which
administered the whole system of religious and of secular learning and
literature, \[The *fili*, or professional poets it must be remembered,
were a branch of thc Druidic order.\] which carefully confined this
learning to a privileged caste, and which, by virtue of its intellectual
supremacy and of the atmosphere of religious awe with which it was
surrounded, became the sovran power, social, political, and religious,
in every Celtic country. I have spoken of these elements as distinct,
and we can) indeed, distinguish them in thought, but in practice they
were inextricably intertwined, and the Druidic organisation pervaded and
ordered all. Can we now, it may be asked, distinguish among them what is
of Celtic and what of pre-Celtic and probably non-Aryan origin? This is
a more difficult task; yet, looking at all the analogies and
probabilities, I think we shall not be far wrong in assigning to the
Megalithic People the special doctrines, the ritual, and the sacerdotal
organisation of Druidism, and to the Celtic element the personified
deities, with the zest for learning and for speculation; while the
popular superstitions were merely the local form assumed by conceptions
as widespread as the human race.

\[90\]

 

The Celts of Today

In view of the undeniably mixed character of the populations called
"Celtic" at the present day, it is often urged that this designation has
no real relation to any ethnological fact. The Celts who fought with
Caesar in Gaul and with the English in Ireland are, it is said, no
more-they have perished on a thousand battlefields from Alesia to the
Boyne, and an older racial stratum has come to the surface in their
race. The true Celts, according to this view, are only to be found in
the tall, ruddy Highlanders of Perthshire and North-west Scotland, and
in a few families of the old ruling race still surviving in Ireland and
in Wales. In all this I think it must be admitted that there is a large
measure of truth. Yet it must not be forgotten that the descendants of
the Megalithic People at the present day are, on the physical side,
deeply impregnated with Celtic blood, and on the spiritual with Celtic
traditions and ideals. Nor, again, in discussing these questions of
race-character and its origin must it ever be assumed that the character
of a people can be analysed as one analyses a chemical compound, fixing
once for all its constituent parts and determining its future behaviour
and destiny. Race-character, potent and enduring though it be, is not a
dead thing, cast in an iron mould, and there-after incapable of change
and growth. It is part of the living forces of the world; it is plastic
and vital; it has hidden potencies which a variety of causes, such as a
felicitous cross with a different, but not too different, stock, or in
another sphere-the adoption of a new religious or social ideal, may at
any time unlock and bring into action.

Of one thing I personally feel convinced-that tho problem of the
ethical, social, and intellectual development of the people constituting
what is called the

\[91\]

"Celtic Fringe" in Europe ought to be worked for on Celtic lines; by the
maintenance of the Celtic tradition, Celtic literature, Celtic speech -
the encouragement, in short, of all those Celtic affinities of which
this mixed race is now the sole conscious inheritor and guardian. To
these it will respond, by these it can be deeply moved; nor has the
harvest ever failed those who with courage and faith have driven their
plough into this rich field. On the other hand, if this work is to be
done with success it must be done in no pedantic, narrow, intolerant
spirit; there must be no clinging to the outward forms of the past
simply because the Celtic spirit once found utterance in them. Let it be
remembered that in the early Middle Ages Celts from Ireland were the
most notable explorers, the most notable pioneers of religion, science,
and speculative thought in Europe. \[For instance, Pelagius in the fifth
century ; Columba, Columbanus, and St. Gall in the sixth; Fridolin,
named *Viator,* "the Trayeller," and Fursa in the seventh ; Virgilius
(Feargal) of Salzburg, who had to answer at Rome for teaching the
sphericity of the earth, in the eighth; Dicuil, "the Geographer;" and
Johannes Scotus Erigena - the master mind of his epoch - in the ninth.\]
Modern investigators have traced their foot-prints of light over half
the heathen continent, and the schools of Ireland were thronged with
foreign pupils who could get learning nowhere else. The Celtic spirit
was then playing its true part in the world-drama, and a greater it has
never played. The legacy of these men should be cherished indeed, but
not as a museum curiosity; nothing could be more opposed to their free,
bold, adventurous spirit than to let that legacy petrify in the hands of
those who claim the heirship of their name and fame.

 

The Mythical Literature

After the sketch contained in this and the foregoing chapter of the
early history of the Celts, and of the forces

\[92\]

which have moulded it, we shall flow turn to give an account of the
mythical and legendary literature in which their spirit most truly lives
and shines. We shall not here concern ourselves with any literature
which is not Celtic. With all that other peoples have made - as in the
Arthurian legends - of myths and tales originally Celtic, we have here
nothing to do. No one can now tell how much is Celtic in them and how
much is not. And in matters of this kind it is generally the final
recasting that is of real importance and value. Whatever we give, then,
we give without addition or reshaping. Stories, of course, have often to
be summarised, but there shall be nothing in them that did not come
direct from the Celtic mind, and that does not exist to-day in some
variety, Gaelic or Cymric, of the Celtic tongue.

\[93\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Irish Invasion Myths](mlcr03)
