[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mlcr04)  [Next](mlcr06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter V: Tales of the Ultonian Cycle

 

The Curse of Macha

THE centre of interest in Irish legend now shifts from Tara to Ulster,
and a multitude of heroic tales gather round the Ulster king Conor mac
Nessa, round Cuchulain, \[pronounced "Koohoo´lin."\] his great vassal,
and the Red Branch Order of chivalry, which had its seat in Emain Macha.

The legend of the foundation of Emain Macha has already been told \[page
150\]. But Macha, who was no mere woman, but a supernatural being,
appears again in connexion with the history of Ulster in a very curious
tale which was supposed to account for the strange debility or
helplessness that at critical moments sometimes fell, it was believed,
upon the warriors of the province.

The legend tells that a wealthy Ulster farmer named Crundchu, son of
Agnoman, dwelling in a solitary place among the hills, found one day in
his dūn a young woman of great beauty and in splendid array, whom he had
never seen before. Crundchu, we are told, was a widower, his wife having
died after bearing him four sons. The strange woman, without a word, set
herself to do the houshold tasks, prepared dinner, milked the cow, and
took on herself all the duties of the mistress of the household. At
night she lay down at Crundchu's side, and thereafter dwelt with him as
his wife; and they loved each other dearly. Her name was Macha.

One day Crundchu prepared himself to go to a great fair or assembly of
the Ultonians, where there would be feasting and horse-racing,
tournaments and music, and merrymaking of all kinds. Macha begged her
husband

\[178\]

not to go. He persisted. " Then," she said, " at least do not speak of
me in the assembly, for I may dwell with you only so long as I am not
spoken of."

It has been observed that we have here the earliest appearance in
postclassical European literature of the well-known motive of the fairy
bride who can stay with her mortal lover only so long as certain
conditions are observed, such as that he shall not spy upon her,
ill-treat her, or ask of her origin.

Crundchu promised to obey the injunction, and went to the festival. Here
the two horses of the king carried off prize after prize in the racing,
and the people cried "There is not in Ireland a swifter than the King's
pair of horses."

"I have a wife at home," said Crundchu, in a moment of forgetfulness,
"who can run quicker than these horses."

"Seize that man," said the angry king, "and hold him till his wife be
brought to the contest."

So messengers went for Macha, and she was brought before the assembly;
and she was with child. The king bade her prepare for the race. She
pleaded her condition. "I am close upon my hour," she said. "Then hew
her man in pieces," said the king to his guards. Macha turned to the
bystanders. "Help me," she cried, " for a mother hath borne each of you
! Give me but a short delay till I am delivered." But the king and all
the crowd in their savage lust for sport would hear of no delay. "Then
bring up the horses," said Macha, "and because you have no pity a
heavier infamy shall fall upon you." So she raced against the horses,
and outran them, but as she came to the goal she gave a great cry, and
her travail seized her, and she gave birth to twin children. As she
uttered that cry, however, all the spectators felt

\[179\]

themselves seized with pangs like her own and had no more strength than
a woman in her travail. And Macha prophesied "From this hour the shame
you have wrought on me will fall upon each man of Ulster. In the hours
of your greatest need ye shall be weak and helpless as women in
childbirth, and this shall endure for five days and four nights - to the
ninth generation the curse shall be upon you." And so it came to pass;
and this is the cause of the Debility of the Ultonians that was wont to
afflict the warriors of the province.

  
Conor mac Nessa

The chief occasion on which this Debility was manifested was when Maev,
Queen of Connacht, made the famous Cattle-raid of Quelgny *(Tam Bo
Cuailgné*)*,* which forms the subject of the greatest tale in Irish
literature. We have now to relate the preliminary history leading up to
this epic tale and introducing its chief characters.

Fachtna the Giant, King of Ulster, had to wife Nessa, daughter of Echid
Yellow-heel, and she bore him a son named Conor. But when Fachtna died
Fergus son of Roy, his half-brother, succeeded him, Conor being then but
a youth. Now Fergus loved Nessa, and would have wedded her, but she made
conditions. "Let my son Conor reign one year," she said, "so that his
posterity may be the descendants of a king, and I consent." Fergus
agreed, and young Conor took the throne. But so wise and prosperous was
his rule and so sagacious his judgments that, at the year's end, the
people, as Nessa foresaw, would have him remain king; and Fergus, who
loved the feast and the chase better than the toils of kingship, was
content to have it so, and remained at Conor's court for a time, great,
honoured, and happy, but king no longer.

\[180\]

 

The Red Branch

In his time was the glory of the "Red Branch" in Ulster, who were the
offspring of Ross the Red, King of Ulster, with collateral relatives and
allies, forming ultimately a kind of warlike Order. Most of the Red
Branch heroes appear in the Ultonian Cycle of legend, so that a
statement of their names and relationships may be usefully placed here
before we proceed to speak of their doings. It is noticeable that they
have a partly supernatural ancestry. Ross the Red, it is said, wedded a
Danaan woman, Maga, daughter of Angus Og \[see page 121 - 123 for an
account of this deity\]. As a second wife he wedded a maiden named Roy.
His descendants are as follows:

But Maga was also wedded to the Druid Cathbad, and by him had three
daughters, whose descendants played a notable part in the Ultonian
legendary cycle.

\[Dectera also had a mortal husband, Sualtam, who passed as Cuchulain's
father.\]

\[181\]

  
Birth of Cuchulain

It was during the reign of Conor mac Nessa that the birth of the
mightiest hero of the Celtic race, Cuchulain, came about, and this was
the manner of it. The maiden Dectera, daughter of Cathbad, with fifty
young girls, her companions at the court of Conor, one day disappeared,
and for three years no searching availed to discover their
dwelling-place or their fate. At last one summer day a flock of birds
descended on the fields about Emain Macha and began to destroy the crops
and fruit. The king, with Fergus and others of his nobles, went out
against them with slings, but the birds flew only a little way off*,*
luring the party on and on till at last they found themselves near the
Fairy Mound of Angus on the river Boyne. Night fell, and the king sent
Fergus with a party to discover some habitation where they might sleep.
A hut was found, where they betook themselves to rest, but one of them,
exploring further, came to a noble mansion by the river, and on entering
it was met by a young man of splendid appearance. With the stranger was
a lovely woman, his wife, and fifty maidens, who saluted the Ulster
warrior with joy. And he recognised in them Dectera and her maidens,
whom they had missed for three years, and in the glorious youth Lugh of
the Long Arm, son of Ethlinn. He went back with his tale to the king,
who immediately sent for Dectera to come to him. She, alleging that she
was ill, requested a delay; and so the night passed ; but in the morning
there was found in the hut among the Ulster warriors a new-born male
infant. It was Dectera's gift to Ulster, and for this purpose she had
lured them to the fairy palace by the Boyne. The child was taken home by
the warriors and was given to Dectera's sister, Finchoom, who was then

\[182\]

nursing her own child, Conall, and the boy's name was called Setanta.
And the part of Ulster from Dundalk southward to Usna in Meath, which is
called the Plain of Murthemney, was allotted for his inheritance, and in
later days his fortress and dwelling-place was in Dundalk.

It is said that the Druid Morann prophesied over the infant : "His
praise will be in the mouths of all men charioteers and warriors, kings
and sages will recount his deeds; he will win the love of many. This
child will avenge all your wrongs; he will give combat at your fords, he
will decide all your quarrels."

  
The Hound of CuIlan

When he was old enough the boy Setanta went to the court of Conor to be
brought up and instructed along with the other sons of princes and
chieftains. It was now that the event occurred from which he got the
name of Cuchulain, by which he was hereafter to be known.

One afternoon King Conor and his nobles were going to a feast to which
they were bidden at the dun of a wealthy smith named Cullan, in Quelgny,
where they also meant to spend the night. Setanta was to accompany them,
but as the cavalcade set off he was in the midst of a game of hurley
with his companions and bade the king go forward, saying he would follow
later when his play was done. The royal company arrived at their
destination as night began to fall. Cullan received them hospitably, and
in the great hall they made merry over meat and wine while the lord of
the house barred the gates of his fortress and let loose outside a huge
and ferocious dog which every night guarded the lonely mansion, and
under whose protection, it was said, Cullan feared nothing less than the
onset of an army.

\[183\]

But they had forgotten Setanta ! In the middle of the laughter and music
of the feast a terrible sound was heard which brought every man to his
feet in an instant. It was the tremendous baying of the hound of Cullan,
giving tongue as it saw a stranger approach. Soon the noise changed to
the howls of a fierce combat, but, on rushing to the gates, they saw in
the glare of the lanterns a young boy and the hound lying dead at his
feet. When it flew at him he had seized it by the throat and dashed its
life out against the side-posts of the gate. The warriors bore in the
lad with rejoicing and wonder, but soon the triumph ceased, for there
stood their host, silent and sorrowful over the body of his faithful
friend, who had died for the safety of his house and would never guard
it more.

"Give me," then said the lad Setanta, "a whelp of that hound, O Cullan,
and I will train him to be all to you that his sire was. And until then
give me shield and spear and I will myself guard your house; never hound
guarded it better than I will."

And all the company shouted applause at the generous pledge, and on the
spot, as a commemoration of his first deed of valour, they named the lad
Cuchulain. \[It is noticeable that among the characters figuring in the
Ultonian legendary cycle many names occur of which the word *Cn* (hound)
forms a part. Thus we have Curoi, Cucorb, Beälcu, &c. The reference is
no doubt to the Irish wolf-hound, a fine type of valour and beauty.\]
the Hound of Cullan, and by that name he was known until he died.

 

Cuchulain Assumes Arms

When he was older, and near the time when he might assume the weapons of
manhood, it chanced one day that he passed close by where Cathbad the
Druid

\[184\]

was teaching to certain of his pupils the art of divination and augury.
One of them asked of Cathbad for what kind of enterprise that same day
might be favourable ; and Cathbad, having worked a spell of divination,
said : "The youth who should take up arms on this day would become of
all men in Erin most famous for great deeds, yet will his life be short
and fleeting." Cuchulain passed on as though he marked it not, and he
came before the king. "What wilt thou ?" asked Conor. "To take the arms
of manhood," said Cuchulain. "So he it," said the king, and he gave the
lad two great spears. But Cuchulain shook them in his hand, and the
staves splintered and broke. And so he did with many others ; and the
chariots in which they set him to drive he broke to pieces with stamping
of his foot, until at last the king's own chariot of war and his two
spears and sword were brought to the lad, and these he could not break,
do what he would ; so this equipment he retained.

 

His Courtship of Emer

The young Cuchulain was by this grown so fair and noble a youth that
every maid or matron on whom he looked was bewitched by him, and the men
of Ulster bade him take a wife of his own. But none were pleasing to
him, till at last he saw the lovely maiden Emer, daughter of Forgall,
the lord of Lusca, \[Now Lusk, a village on the coast a few miles north
of Dublin.\] and he resolved to woo her for his bride. So he bade
harness his chariot, and with Laeg, his friend and charioteer, he
journeyed to Dūn Forgall.

As he drew near, the maiden was with her companions, daughters of the
vassals of Forgall, and she was teaching them embroidery, for in that
art she excelled all women. She had "the six gifts of

\[185\]

womanhood - the gift of beauty, the gift of voice, the gift of sweet
speech, the gift of needlework) the gift of wisdom, and the gift of
chastity."

Hearing the thunder of horse-hoofs and the clangour of the chariot from
afar, she bade one of the maidens go to the rampart of the Dun and tell
her what she saw. "A chariot is coming on," said the maiden, "drawn by
two steeds with tossing heads, fierce and powerful; one is grey, the
other black. They breathe fire from their jaws, and the clods of turf
they throw up behind them as they race are like a flock of birds that
follow in their track. In the chariot is a dark, sad man, comeliest of
the men of Erin. He is clad in a crimson cloak, with a brooch of gold,
and on his back is a crimson shield with a silver rim wrought with
figures of beasts. With him as his charioteer is a tall, slender,
freckled man with curling red hair held by a fillet of bronze, with
plates of gold at either side of his face. With a goad of red gold he
urges the horses."

When the chariot drew up Emer went to meet Cuchulain and saluted him.
But when he urged his love upon her she told him of the might and the
wiliness of her father Forgall, and of the strength of the champions
that guarded her lest she should wed against his will. And when he
pressed her more she said "I may not marry before my sister Fial, who is
older than I. She is with me here - she is excellent in handiwork." "It
is not Fial whom I love," said Cuchulain. Then as they were conversing
he saw the breast of the maiden over the bosom of her smock, and said to
her "Fair is this plain, the plain of the noble yoke." "None comes to
this plain," said she, "who has not slain his hundreds, and thy deeds
are still to do."

So Cuchulain then left her, and drove back to Emain Macha.

\[186\]

  
Cuchulain in the Land of Skatha

Next day Cuchulain bethought himself how he could prepare himself for
war and for the deeds of heroism which Emer had demanded of him. Now he
had heard of a mighty woman-warrior named Skatha, who dwelt in the Land
of Shadows, \[owing to the similarity of the name the supernatural
country of Skath:, "the Shadowy," was early identified with the islands
of Skye, where the Cuchulain Peaks still bear witness to the legend.\]
and who could teach to young heroes who came to her wonderful feats of
arms. So Cuchulain went overseas to find her, and many dangers he had to
meet, black forests and desert plains to traverse, before he could get
tidings of Skatha and her land. At last he came to the Plain of
Ill-luck, where he could not cross without being mired in its bottomless
bogs or sticky clay, and while he was debating what he should do he saw
coming towards him a young man with a face that shone like the sun,
\[this of course, was Cuchulain's father, Lugh\] and whose very look put
cheerfulness and hope into his heart. The young man gave him a wheel and
told him to roll it before him on the plain, and to follow it
whithersoever it went. So Cuchulain set the wheel rolling, and as it
went it blazed with light that shot like rays from its rim, and the heat
of it made a firm path across the quagmire, where Cuchulain followed
safely.

When he had passed the Plain of Ill-luck, and escaped the beasts of the
Perilous Glen, he came to the Bridge of the Leaps, beyond which was the
country of Skatha. Here he found on the hither side many sons of the
princes of Ireland who were come to learn feats of war from Skatha, and
they were playing at hurley on the green. And among them was his friend
Ferdia, son of the Firbolg, Daman; and they all asked him of

\[187\]

the news from Ireland. When he had told them all he asked Ferdia how he
should pass to the dun of Skatha. Now the Bridge of Leaps was very
narrow and very high, and it crossed a gorge where far below swung the
tides of a boiling sea, in which ravenous monsters could be seen
swimming.

"Not one of us has crossed that bridge," said Ferdia, "for there are two
feats that Skatha teaches last, and one is the leap across the bridge,
and the other the thrust of the Gae Bolg. \[this means probably "the
belly spear." With this terrible weapon Cuchulain was fated in the end
to slay his friend Ferdia.\] For if a man step upon one end of that
bridge, the middle straightway rises up and flings him back, and if he
leap upon it he may chance to miss his footing and fall into the gulf,
where the sea-monsters are waiting for him."

But Cuchulain waited till evening, when he had recovered his strength
from his long journey, and then essayed the crossing of the bridge.
Three times he ran towards it from a distance, gathering all his powers
together, and strove to leap upon the middle, but three times it rose
against him and flung him back, while his companions jeered at him
because he would not wait for the help of Skatha. But at the fourth leap
he lit fairly on the centre of the bridge, and with one leap more he was
across it, and stood before the strong fortress of Skatha; and she
wondered at his courage and vigour, and admitted him to be her pupil.

For a year and a day Cuchulain abode with Skatha, and all the feats she
had to teach he learned easily, and last of all she taught him the use
of the Gae Bolg, and gave him that dreadful weapon, which she had deemed
no champion before him good enough to have. And the manner of using the
Gae Boig was that it was thrown with the foot, and if it entered an
enemy's

\[188\]

body it filled every limb and crevice of him with its barbs. While
Cuchulain dwelt with Skatha his friend above all friends and his rival
in skill and valour was Ferdia, and ere they parted they vowed to love
and help one another as long as they should live.

 

Cuchulain and Aifa

Now whilst Cuchulain was in the Land of the Shadows it chanced that
Skatha made war on the people of the Princess Aifa, who was the fiercest
and strongest of the woman-warriors of the world, so that even Skatha
feared to meet her in arms. On going forth to the war, therefore, Skatha
mixed with Cuchulain's drink a sleepy herb so that he should not wake
for four-and-twenty hours, by which time the host would be far on its
way, for she feared lest evil should come to him ere he had got his full
strength. But the potion that would have served another man for a day
and a night only held Cuchulain for one hour; and when he waked up he
seized his arms and followed the host by its chariot-tracks till he came
up with them. Then it is said that Skatha uttered a sigh, for she knew
that he would not be restrained from the war.

When the armies met, Cuchulain and the two sons of Skatha wrought great
deeds on the foe, and slew six of the mightiest of Aifa's warriors. Then
Aifa sent word to Skatha and challenged her to single combat. But
Cuchulain declared that he would meet the fair Fury in place of Skatha,
and he asked first of all what were the things she most valued. "What
Aifa loves most," said Skatha, "are her two horses, her chariot and her
charioteer." Then the pair met in single combat, and every champion's
feat which they knew they tried on each other in vain, till at last a
blow of Aifa's shattered the sword of Cuchulain to the hilt.

\[189\]

At this Cuchulain cried out: "Ah me ! behold the chariot and horses of
Aifa fallen into the glen !" Aifa glanced round, and Cuchulain, rushing
in, seized her round the waist and slung her over his shoulder and bore
her back to the camp of Skatha. There he flung her on the ground and put
his knife to her throat. She begged for her life, and Cuchulain granted
it on condition that she made a lasting peace with Skatha, and gave
hostages for her fulfilment of the pledge. To this she agreed, and
Cuchulain and she became not only friends but lovers.

 

The Tragedy of Cuchulain and Connla

Before Cuchulain left the Land of Shadows he gave Aifa a golden ring,
saying that if she should bear him a son he was to be sent to seek his
father in Erin so soon as he should have grown so that his finger would
fit the ring. And Cuchulain said, "Charge him under *geise* that he
shall not make himself known, that he never turn out of the way for any
man, nor ever refuse a combat. And be his name called Connla."

In later years it is narrated that one day when King Conor of Ulster and
the lords of Ulster were at a festal gathering on the Strand of the
Footprints they saw coming towards them across the sea a little boat of
bronze, and in it a young lad with gilded oars in his hands. In the boat
was a heap of stones, and ever and anon the lad would put one of these
stones into a sling and cast it at a flying sea-bird in such fashion
that it would bring down the bird alive to his feet. And many other
wonderful feats of skill he did. Then Conor said, as the boat drew
nearer: "If the grown men of that lad's country came here they would
surely grind us to powder. Woe to the land into which that boy shall
come !"

\[190\]

When the boy came to land, a messenger, Condery, was sent to bid him be
off. "I will not turn back for thee," said the lad, and Condery repeated
what he had said to the king. Then Conall of the Victories was sent
against him, but the lad slung a great stone at him, and the whizz and
wind of it knocked him down, and the lad sprang upon him, and bound his
arms with the strap of his shield. And so man after man was served; some
were bound, and some were slain, but the lad defied the whole power of
Ulster to turn him back, nor would he tell his name or lineage.

"Send for Cuchulain," then said King Conor. And they sent a messenger to
Dundalk, where Cuchulain was with Emer his wife, and bade him come to do
battle against a stranger boy whom Conall of the Victories could not
overcome. Emer threw her arm round Cuchulain's neck. "Do not go," she
entreated. "Surely this is the son of Aifa. Slay not thine only son."
But Cuchulain said: "Forbear, woman ! Were it Connla himself I would
slay him for the honour of Ulster," and he bade yoke his chariot and
went to the Strand. Here he found the boy tossing up his weapons and
doing marvellous feats with them. "Delightful is thy play, boy," said
Cuchulain; "who art thou and whence dost thou come ?" "I may not reveal
that," said the lad. "Then thou shalt die," said Cuchulain. "So be it,"
said the lad, and then they fought with swords for a while, till the lad
delicately shore off a lock of Cuchulain's hair. "Enough of trifling,"
said Cuchulain, and they closed with each other, but the lad planted
himself on 'a rock and stood so firm that Cuchulain could not move him,
and in the stubborn wrestling they had the lad's two feet sank deep into
the stone and made the footprints whence the Strand of the Footprints
has its name. At last they both fell

\[191\]

into the sea, and Cuchulain was near being drowned, till he bethought
himself of the Gae Bolg, and he drove that weapon against the lad and it
ripped up his belly. "That is what Skatha never taught me," cried the
lad. "Woe is me, for I am hurt." Cuchulain looked at him and saw the
ring on his finger. " It is true," he said; and he took up the boy and
bore him on shore and laid him down before Conor and the lords of
Ulster. "Here is my son for you, men of Ulster," he said. And the boy
said: "it is true. And if I had five years to grow among you, you would
conquer the world on every side of you and rule as far as Rome. But
since it is as it is, point out to me the famous warriors that are here,
that I may know them and take leave of them before I die." Then one
after another they were brought to him, and he kissed them and took
leave of his father, and he died; and the men of Ulster made his grave
and set up his pillar-stone with great mourning. This was the only son
Cuchulain ever had, and this son he slew.

This tale, as I have given it here, dates from the ninth century, and is
found in the "Yellow Book of Lecan." There are many other Gaelic
versions of it in poetry and prose. It is one of the earliest extant
appearances in literature of the since well-known theme of the slaying
of a heroic son by his father. The Persian rendering of it in the tale
of Sohrab and Rustum has been made familiar by Matthew Arnold's fine
poem. In the Irish version it will be noted that the father is not
without a suspicion of the identity of his antagonist, but he does
battle with him under the stimulus of that passionate sense of loyalty
to his prince and province which was Cuchulain's most signal
characteristic.

To complete the story of Aifa and her son we have anticipated events,
and now turn back to take up the thread again.

\[192\]

 

Cuchulain's First Foray

After a year and a day of training in warfare under Skatha, Cuchulain
returned to Erin, eager to test his prowess and to win Emer for his
wife. So he bade harness his chariot and drove out to make a foray upon
the fords and marches of Connacht, for between Connacht and Ulster there
was always an angry surf of fighting along the borders.

And first he drove to the White Cairn, which is on the highest of the
Mountains of Mourne, and surveyed the land of Ulster spread out smiling
in the sunshine far below and bade his charioteer tell him the name of
every hill and plain and dūn that he saw. Then turning southwards he
looked over the plains of Bregia, and the charioteer pointed out to him
Tara and Teltin, and Brugh na Boyna and the great dūn of the sons of
Nechtan. "Are they," asked Cuchulain, "those sons of Nechtan of whom it
is said that more of the men of Ulster have fallen by their hands than
are yet living on the earth ?" "The same," said the charioteer. Then let
us drive thither," said Cuchulain. So, much unwilling, the charioteer
drove to the fortress of the sons of Nechtan, and there on the green
before it they found a pillar-stone, and round it a collar of bronze
having on it writing in Ogham. This Cuchulain read, and it declared that
any man of age to bear arms who should come to that green should hold it
*geis* for him to depart without having challenged one of the dwellers
in the dūn to single combat. Then Cuchulain flung his arms round the
stone, and, swaying it backwards and forwards, heaved it at last out of
the earth and flung it, collar and all, into the river that ran hard by.
"Surely," said the charioteer, " thou art seeking for a violent death,
and now thou wilt find it without delay."

\[193\]

Then Foill son of Nechtan came forth from the dūn, and seeing Cuchulain,
whom he deemed but a lad, he was annoyed. But Cuchulain bade him fetch
his arms, "for I slay not drivers nor messengers nor unarmed men," and
Foill went back into the dūn.

"Thou canst not slay him," then said the charioteer, "for he is
invulnerable by magic power to the point or edge of any blade." But
Cuchulain put in his sling a ball of tempered iron, and when Foill
appeared he slung at him so that it struck his forehead, and went clean
through brain and skull; and Cuchulain took his head and bound it to his
chariot-rim. And other sons of Nechtan, issuing forth, he fought with
and slew by sword or spear; and then he fired the dūn and left it in a
blaze and drove on exultant. And on the way he saw a flock of wild
swans, and sixteen of them he brought down alive with his sling, and
tied them to the chariot; and seeing a herd of wild deer which his
horses could not overtake he lighted down and chased them on foot till
he caught two great stags, and with thongs and ropes he made them fast
to the chariot.

But at Emain Macha a scout of King Conor came running in to give him
news. "Behold, a solitary chariot is approaching swiftly over the plain;
wild white birds flutter round it and wild stags are tethered to it; it
is decked all round with the bleeding heads ot enemies." And Conor
looked to see who was approaching, and he saw that Cuchulain was in his
battle-fury, and would deal death around him whomsoever he met; so he
hastily gave order that a troop of the women of Emania should go forth
to meet him, and, having stripped off their clothing, should stand naked
in the way. This they did, and when the lad saw them, smitten with
shame, he bowed his head upon the chariot-rim. Then Conor's men
instantly seized him

\[194\]

and plunged him into a vat of cold water which had been made ready, but
the water boiled around him and the staves and hoops of the vat were
burst asunder. This they did again and yet again, and at last his fury
left him, and his natural form and aspect were restored. Then they clad
him in fresh raiment and bade him in to the feast in the king's
banqueting-hall.

  
The Winning of Emer

Next day he went to the dūn of Forgall the Wily, father of Emer, and he
leaped "the hero's salmon leap," that he had learned of Skatha, over the
high ramparts of the dūn. Then the mighty men of Forgall set on him, and
he dealt but three blows, and each blow slew eight men, and Forgall
himself fell lifeless in leaping from the rampart of the dūn to escape
Cuchulain. So he carried off Emer and her foster-sister and two loads of
gold and silver. But outside the dun the sister of Forgall raised a host
against him, and his battle-fury came on him, and furious were the blows
he dealt, so that the ford of Glondath ran blood and the turf on Crofot
was trampled into bloody mire. A hundred he slew at every ford from
Olbiny to the Boyne ; and so was Emer won as she desired, and he brought
her to Emain Macha and made her his wife, and they were not parted again
until he died.

 

Cuchulain Champion of Erin

A lord of Ulster named Briccriu of the Poisoned Tongue once made a feast
to which he bade King Conor and all the heroes of the Red Branch, and
because it was always his delight to stir up strife among men or women
he set the heroes contending among themselves as to who was the champion
of the land of Erin. At last it was agreed that the championship

\[195\]

must lie among three of them, namely, Cuchulain, and Conall of the
Victories and Laery the Triumphant. To decide between these three a
demon named The Terrible was summoned from a lake in the depth of which
he dwelt. He proposed to the heroes a test of courage. Any one of them,
he said, might cut off his head to-day provided that he, the claimant of
the championship, would lay down his own head for the axe to-morrow.
Conall and Laery shrank from the test, but Cuchulain accepted it, and
after reciting a charm over his sword, he cut off the head of the demon,
who immediately rose, and taking the bleeding head in one hand and his
axe in the other, plunged into the lake.

Next day he reappeared, whole and sound, to claim the fulfilment of the
bargain. Cuchulain, quailing but resolute, laid his head on the block.
"Stretch out your neck, wretch," cried the demon ; "tis too short for me
to strike at." Cuchulain does as he is bidden. The demon swings his axe
thrice over his victim, brings down the butt with a crash on the block,
and then bids Cuchulain rise unhurt, Champion of Ireland and her boldest
man.

 

Deirdre and the Sons of Usna

We have now to turn to a story in which Cuchulain takes no part. It is
the chief of the preliminary tales to the Cattle-spoil of Quelgny.

There was among the lords of Ulster, it is said, one named Felim son of
Dall, who on a certain day made a great feast for the king. And the king
came with his Druid Cathbad, and Fergus mac Roy, and many heroes of the
Red Branch, and while they were making merry over the roasted flesh and
wheaten cakes and Greek wine a messenger from the women's apartments

\[196\]

came to tell Felim that his wife had just borne him a daughter. So all
the lords and warriors drank health to the new-born infant, and the king
bade Cathbade perform divination in the manner of the Druids and
foretell what the future would have in store for Felim's base. Cathbad
gazed upon the stars and drew the horoscope of the child, and he was
much troubled; and at length he said: "The infant shall he fairest among
the women of Erin, and shall wed a king, but because of her shall death
and ruin come upon the Province of Ulster." Then the warriors would have
put her to death upon the spot, but Conor forbade them. "I will avert
the doom," he said, "for she shall wed no foreign king, but she shall he
my own mate when she is of age." So he took away the child, and
committed it to his nurse Levarcam, and the name they gave it was
Deirdre. And Conor charged Levarcam that the child should be brought up
in a strong dūn in the solitude of a great wood, and that no young man
should see her or she him until she was of marriageable age for the king
to wed. And there she dwelt, seeing none but her nurse and Cathbad, and
sometime: the king, now growing an aged man, who would visit the dūn
from time to time to see that all was well with the folk there, and that
his commands were observed.

One day, when the time for the marriage of Deirdre and Conor was drawing
near, Deirdre and Levarcam looked over the rampart of their dun. It was
winter, a heavy snow had fallen in the night, and in the still, frosty
air the trees stood up as if wrought in silver, and the green before the
dun was a sheet of unbroken white, save that in one place a scullion had
killed a calf for their dinner, and the blood of the calf lay on the
snow. And as Deirdre looked, a raven lit down from

\[197\]

a tree hard by and began to sip the blood. "O nurse," cried Deirdre
suddenly, "such, and not like Conor, would be the man that I would
love-his hair like the raven's wing, and in his cheek the hue of blood,
and his skin as white as snow. "Thou hast pictured a man of Conor's
household," said the nurse. "Who is he ?" asked Deirdre. "He is Naisi,
son of Usna. \[see genealogical table, p. 181\] a champion of the Red
Branch," said the nurse. Thereupon Deirdre entreated Levarcam to bring
her to speak with Naisi; and because the old woman loved the girl and
would not have her wedded to the aged king, she at last agreed. Deirdre
implored Naisi to save her from Conor, but he would not, till at last
her entreaties and her beauty won him, and he vowed to be hers. Then
secretly one night he came with his two brethren, Ardan and Ainlé, and
bore away Deirdre with Levarcam, and they escaped the king's pursuit and
took ship for Scotland, where Naisi took service with the King of the
Picts. Yet here they could not rest, for the king got sight of Deirdre,
and would have taken her from Naisi, but Naisi with his brothers
escaped, and in the solitude of Glen Etive they made their dwelling by
the lake, and there lived in the wild wood by hunting and fishing,
seeing no man but themselves and their servants.

And the years went by and Conor made no sign, but he did not forget, and
his spies told him of all that befell Naisi and Deirdre. At last,
judging that Naisi and his brothers would have tired of solitude, he
sent the bosom friend of Naisi, Fergus son of Roy, to bid them return,
and to promise them that all would be forgiven. Fergus went joyfully,
and joyfully did Naisi and his brothers hear the message, but Deirdre
foresaw evil, and would fain have sent Fergus home alone.

\[198\]

But Naisi blamed her for her doubt and suspicion, and bade her mark that
they were under the protection of Fergus, whose safeguard no king in
Ireland would dare to violate; and they at last made ready to go.

On landing in Ireland they were met by Baruch, a lord of the Red Branch,
who had his dūn close by, and he bade Fergus to a feast he had prepared
for him that night. " I may not stay," said Fergus, "for I must first
convey Deirdre and the sons of Usna safely to Emain Macha"
"Nevertheless," said Baruch, "thou must stay with me to-night, for it is
a *geis* for thee to refuse a feast." Deirdre implored him not to leave
them, but Fergus was tempted by the feast, and feared to break his
*geis,* and he bade his two sons Illan the Fair and Buino the Red take
charge of the party in his place, and he himself abode with Baruch.

And so the party came to Emain Macha, and they were lodged in the House
of the Red Branch, but Conor did not receive them. After the evening
meal, as he sat, drinking heavily and silently, he sent a messenger to
bid Levarcam come before him. "How is it with the sons of Usna ? " he
said to her. "It is well," she said. "Thou hast got the three most
valorous champions in Ulster in thy court. Truly the king who has those
three need fear no enemy." "Is it well with Deirdre ?" he asked. "She is
well," said the nurse, "but she has lived many years in the wildwood,
and toil and care have changed her - little of her beauty of old now
remains to her, O King." Then the king dismissed her, and sat drinking
again. But after a while he called to him a servant named Trendorn, and
bade him go to the Red Branch House and mark who was there and what they
did. But when Trendorn came the place was bolted and barred for the
night, and he could not get an entrance, and at last he

\[199\]

mounted on a ladder and looked in at a high window. And there he saw the
brothers of Naisi and the sons of Fergus, as they talked or cleaned
their arms, or made them ready for slumber, and there sat Naisi with a
chess-board before him, and playing chess with him was the fairest of
women that he had ever seen. But as he looked in wonder at the noble
pair, suddenly one caught sight of him and rose with a cry, pointing to
the face at the window. And Naisi looked up and saw it, and seizing a
chessman from the board he hurled it at the face of the spy, and it
struck out his eye. Then Trendorn hastily descended, and went back with
his bloody face to the king. "I have seen them," he cried, "I have seen
the fairest woman of the world, and but that Naisi had struck my eye out
I had been looking on her still."

Then Conor arose and called for his guards and bade them bring the sons
of Usna before him for maiming his messenger. And the guards went; but
first Buino,son of Fergus, with his retinue, met them, and at the
sword's point drove them back; but Naisi and Deirdre continued quietly
to play chess, "For," said Naisi, "it is not seemly that we should seek
to defend ourselves while we are under the protection of the sons of
Fergus." But Conor went to Buino, and with a great gift of lands he
bought him over to desert his charge. Then Illan took up the defence of
the Red Branch Hostel, but the two sons of Conor slew him. And then at
last Naisi and his brothers seized their weapons and rushed amid the
foe, and many were they who fell before the onset. Then Conor entreated
Cathbad the Druid to cast spells upon them lest they should get away and
become the enemies of the province, and he vowed to do them no hurt if
they were taken alive. So Cathbad conjured up, as it were, a lake of
slime that seemed to be about

\[200\]

the feet of the sons of Usna, and they could not tear their feet from
it, and Naisi caught up Deirdre and put her on his shoulder, for they
seemed to be sinking in the slime. Then the guards and servants of Conor
seized and bound them and brought them before the king. And the king
called upon man after man to come forward and slay the sons of Usna, but
none would obey him, till at last Owen son of Duracht and Prince of
Ferney came and took the sword of Naisi, and with one sweep he shore off
the heads of all three, and so they died.

Then Conor took Deirdre perforce, and for a year she abode with him in
the palace in Emain Macha, but during all that time she never smiled. At
length Conor said: "What is it that you hate most of all on earth,
Deirdre ?" And she said : "Thou thyself and Owen son of Duracht," and
Owen was standing by. "Then thou shalt go to Owen for a year," said
Conor. But when Deirdre mounted the chariot behind Owen she kept her
eyes on the ground, for she would not look on those who thus tormented
her; and Conor said, taunting her : "Deirdre, the glance of thee between
me and Owen is the glance of a ewe between two rams." Then Deirdre
started up, and, flinging herself head foremost from the chariot, she
dashed her head against a rock and fell dead.

And when they buried her it is said there grew from her grave and from
Naisi's two yew-trees, whose tops, when they were full-grown, met each
other over the roof of the great church of Armagh, and intertwined
together, and none could part them.

  
The Rebellion of Fergus

When Fergus mac Roy came home to Emain Macha after the feast to which
Baruch bade him and found

\[201\]

the sons of Usna slain and one of his own sons dead and the other a
traitor, he broke out against Conor in a storm of wrath and cursing, and
vowed to be avenged on him with fire and sword. And he went off
straightway to Connacht to take service of arms with Ailell and Maev,
who were king and queen of that country.

 

Queen Maev

But though Ailell was king, Maev was the ruler in truth, and ordered all
things as she wished, and took what husbands she wished, and dismissed
them at pleasure; for she was as fierce and strong as a goddess of war,
and knew no law but her own wild will. She was tall, it is said, with a
long, pale face and masses of hair yellow as ripe corn. When Fergus came
to her in her palace at Rathcroghan in Roscommon she gave him her love,
as she had given it to many before, and they plotted together how to
attack and devastate the Province of Ulster.

 

The Brown Bull of Quelgny

Now it happened that Maev possessed a famous red bull with white front
and horns named Finnbenach, and one day when she and Ailell were
counting up their respective possessions and matching them against each
other he taunted her because the Finnbenach would not stay in the hands
of a woman, but had attached himself to Ailell's herd. So Maev in
vexation went to her steward, mac Roth, and asked of him if there were
anywhere in Erin a bull as fine as the Finnbenach. "Truly," said the
steward, "there is - for the Brown Bull of Quelgny, that belongs to Dara
son of Fachtna, is the mightiest beast that is in Ireland." And after
that Maev felt as if she had no flocks and

\[202\]

herds that were worth anything at all unless she possessed the Brown
Bull of Quelgny. But this was in Ulster, and the Ulstermen knew the
treasure they possessed, and Maev knew that they would not give up the
hull without fighting for it. So she and Fergus and Ailell agreed to
make a foray against Ulster for the Brown Bull, and thus to enter into
war with the province, for Fergus longed for vengeance, and Maev for
fighting, for glory, and for the bull, and Audi to satisfy Maev.

Here let us note that this contest for the bull, which is the ostensible
theme of the greatest of Celtic legendary tales, the "Tam Bo Cuailgné,"
has a deeper meaning than appears on the surface. An ancient piece of
Aryan mythology is embedded in it. The Brown Bull is the Celtic
counterpart of the Hindu sky-deity, Indra, represented in Hindu myth as
a mighty bull, whose roaring is the thunder and who lets loose the rains
"like cows streaming forth to pasture." The advance of the Western
(Connacht) host for the capture of this bull is emblematic of the onset
of Night. The bull is defended by the solar hero Cuchulain, who,
however, is ultimately overthrown and the bull is captured for a season.
The two animals in the Celtic legend probably typify the sky in
different aspects. They are described with a pomp and circumstance which
shows that they are no common beasts. Once, we are told, they were
swineherds of the people of Dana. "They had been successively
transformed into two ravens, two sea-monsters, two warriors, two demons,
two worms or animalculae, and finally into two kine." \[Miss Hull, "The
Cuchullin Saga," p. Ixxii, where the solar theory of the Brown Bull is
dealt with at length.\] The Brown Bull is described as having a back
broad enough for fifty children to play on ; when he is angry with his
keeper he stamps the

\[203\]

man thirty feet into the ground; he is likened to a sea wave, to a boar,
to a dragon, a lion, the writer heaping up images of strength and
savagery. We are therefore concerned with no ordinary cattle-raid, but
with a myth, the features of which are discernible under the dressing
given it by the fervid imagination of the unknown Celtic bard who
composed the "Tain," although the exact meaning of every detail may be
difficult to ascertain.

The first attempt of Maev to get possession of the bull was to send an
embassy to Dara to ask for the loan of him for a year, the recompense
offered being fifty heifers, besides the bull himself back, and if Dara
chose to settle in Connacht he should have as much land there as he now
possessed in Ulster, and a chariot worth thrice seven *cumals,* \[A
*cumal* was the unit of value in Celtic Ireland. It is mentioned as such
by St. Patrick. It meant the price of a woman-slave.\] with the
patronage and friendship of Maev.

Dara was at first delighted with the prospect, but tales were borne to
him of the chatter of Maev's messengers, and how they said that if the
bull was not yielded willingly it would be taken by force; and he sent
back a message of refusal and defiance. " 'Twas known," said Maev, "the
bull will not be yielded by fair means; he shall now be won by foul."
And so she sent messengers around on every side to summon her hosts for
the Raid.

 

The Hosting of Queen Maev

And there came all the mighty men of Connacht - first the seven Mainés,
sons of Ailell and Maev, each with his retinue; and Ket and Anluan, sons
of Maga, with thirty hundreds of armed men; and yellow-haired Ferdia,
with his company of Firbolgs, boisterous giants

\[204\]

who delighted in war and in strong ale. And there came also the allies
of Maev - host of the men of Leinster, who so excelled the rest in
warlike skill that they were broken up and distributed among the
companies of Connacht, lest they should prove a danger to the host; and
Cormac son of Conor, with Fergus mac Roy and other exiles from Ulster,
who had revolted against Conor for his treachery to the sons of Usna.

 

Ulster under the Curse

But before the host set forth towards Ulster Maev sent her spies into
the land to tell her of the preparations there being made. And the spies
brought back a wondrous tale, and one that rejoiced the heart of Maev,
for they said that the Debility of the Ultonians \[the curse laid on
them by Macha. See p. 180\] had descended on the province. Conor the
king lay in pangs at Emain Macha, and his son Cuscrid in his
island-fortress, and Owen Prince of Ferney was helpless as a child;
Celtchar, the huge grey warrior, son of Uthecar Hornskin, and even
Conall of the Victories, lay moaning and writhing on their beds, and
there was no hand in Ulster that could lift a spear.

 

Prophetic Voices

Nevertheless Maev went to her chief Druid, and demanded of him what her
own lot in the war should be. And the Druid said only: "Whoever comes
back in safety, or comes not, thou thyself shalt come." But on her
journey back she saw suddenly standing before her chariot-pole a young
maiden with tresses of yellow hair that fell below her knees, and clad
in a mantle of green ; and with a shuttle of gold she wove a fabric upon
a loom. "Who art thou, girl ?" said Maev,

\[205\]

"and what dost thou ?" "I am the prophetess, Fedelma, from the Fairy
Mound of Croghan," said the maid, "and I weave the four provinces of
Ireland together for the foray into Ulster." "How seest thou our host ?
" asked Maev. "I see them all be-crimsoned, red," replied the
prophetess. "Yet the Ulster heroes are all in their pangs - there is
none that can lift a spear against us," said Maev. "I see the host all
be-crimsoned," said Fedelma. "I see a man of small stature, but the
hero's light is on his brow - a stripling young and modest, but in
battle a dragon; he is like unto Cuchulain of Murthemney; he doth
wondrous feats with his weapons ; by him your slain shall lie thickly."
\[Cuchulain, as the son of the god Lugh, was not subject to the curse of
Macha which afflicted the other Ultonians.\]

At this the vision of the weaving maiden vanished, and Maev drove
homewards to Rathcroghan wondering at what she had seen and heard.

 

Cuchulain Puts the Host under Geise

On the morrow the host set forth, Fergus mac Roy leading them, and as
they neared the confines of Ulster he bade them keep sharp watch lest
Cuchulain of Murthemney, who guarded the passes of Ulster to the south,
should fall upon them unawares. Now Cuchulain and his father Sualtam
\[His reputed father, the mortal husband of Dectera\] were on the
borders of the province, and Cuchulain, from a warning Fergus had sent
him, suspected the approach of a great host, and bade Sualtam go
northwards to Emania and warn the men of Ulster. But Cuchulain himself
would not stay there, for he said he had a tryst to keep with a handmaid
of the wife of Laery the *bodach* (farmer), so he went into the forest,
and there, standing on one leg,

\[206\]

and using only one hand and one eye, he cut an oak sapling and twisted
it into a circular withe. On this he cut in Ogham characters how the
withe was made, and he put the host of Maev under *geise* not to pass by
that place till one of them had, under similar conditions, made a
similar withe ; "and I except my friend Fergus mac Roy," he added, and
wrote his name at the end. Then he placed the withe round the
pillar-stone of Ardcullin, and went his way to keep his tryst with the
handmaid. \[In the Irish bardic literature, as in the Homeric epics,
chastity formed no part of the masculine ideal either for gods or men.\]

When the host of Maev came to Ardcullin, the withe upon the pillar-stone
was found and brought to Fergus to decipher it. There was none amongst
the host who could emulate the feat of Cuchulain, and so they went into
the wood and encamped for the night. A heavy snowfall took place, and
they were all in much distress, but next day the sun rose gloriously,
and over the white plain they marched away into Ulster, counting the
prohibition as extending only for one night.

 

The Ford of the Forked Pole

Cuchulain now followed hard on their track, and as he went he estimated
by the tracks they had left the number of the host at eighteen *triucha
cét* (54,000 men). Circling round the host, he now met them in front,
and soon came upon two chariots containing scouts sent ahead by Maev.
These he slew, each man with his driver, and having with one sweep of
his sword cut a forked pole of four prongs from the wood, he drove the
pole deep into a river-ford at the place called Athgowla, \["The Ford of
the Forked Pole"\] and impaled on each prong a bloody head. When the
host came up they wondered and feared at

\[207\]

the sight, and Fergus declared that they were under *geise* not to pass
that ford till one of them had plucked out the pole even as it was
driven in, with the finger-tips of one hand. So Fergus drove into the
water to essay the feat, and seventeen chariots were broken under him as
he tugged it the pole, but at list he tore it out; and as it was now
late the host encamped upon the spot. These devices of Cuchulain were
intended to delay the invaders until the Ulster men had recovered from
their debility.

In the epic, as given in the Book of Leinster, and other ancient
sources, a long interlude now takes place in which Fergus explains to
Maev who it is - viz., "my little pupil Setanta " - who is thus harrying
the host, and his boyish deeds, some of which have been already told in
this narrative, are recounted.

 

The Charioteer of Orlam

The host proceeded on its way next day, and the next encounter with
Cuchulain showing. the hero in a kindlier mood. He hears a noise of
timber being cut, and going into a wood he finds there a charioteer
belonging to a son of Ailell and Maev cutting down chariot-poles of
holly. "For," says he, "we have damaged our chariots sadly in chasing
that furious deer, Cuchulain." Cuchulain - who, it must be remembered,
was at ordinary times a slight and unimposing figure, though in battle
he dilated in size and underwent a fearful distortion, symbolic of
Berserker fury - helps the driver in his work. "Shall I," he asks, "cut
the poles or trim them for thee?" "Do thou the trimming," says the
driver. Cuchulain takes the poles by the tops and draws them against the
set of the branches through his toes, and then runs his fingers down
them the same way, and gives them over as smooth and

\[208\]

polished as if they were planed by a carpenter. The driver stares at
him. "I doubt this work I set thee to is not thy proper work," he says.
"Who art thou then at all?" "I am that Cuchulain of whom thou spakest
but now " "Surely I am but a dead man," says the driver. " Nay," replies
Cuchulain, "I slay not drivers nor messengers nor men unarmed. But run,
tell thy master Orlam that Cuchulain is about to visit him." The driver
runs off; but Cuchulain outstrips him, meets Orlam first, and strikes
off his head. For a moment the host of Maev see him as he shakes this
bloody trophy before them ; then he disappears from sight - it is the
first glimpse they have caught of their persecutor.

 

The Battle-Frenzy of Cuchulain

A number of scattered episodes now follow. The host of Maev spreads out
and devastates the territories of Bregia and of Murthemney, but they
cannot advance further into Ulster. Cuchulain hovers about them
continually, slaying them by twos and threes, and no man knows where he
will swoop next. Maev herself is awed when, by the bullets of an unseen
slinger, a squirrel and a pet bird are killed as they sit upon her
shoulders. Afterwards, as Cuchulain's wrath grows fiercer, he descends
with supernatural might upon whole companies of the Connacht host, and
hundreds fall at his onset. The characteristic distortion or *riastradh*
which seized him in his battle-frenzy is then described. He became a
fearsome and multiform creature such as never was known before. Every
particle of him quivered like a bulrush in a running stream. His calves
and heels and hams shifted to the front, and his feet and knees to the
back, and the muscles of his neck stood out like the head of a young
child. One

\[209\]

eye was engulfed deep in his head, the other protruded, his mouth met
his ears, foam poured from his jaws like the fleece of a three-year-old
wether. The beats of his heart sounded like the roars of a lion as he
rushes on his prey. A light blazed above his head, and "his hair became
tangled about as it had been the branches of a red thorn-bush stuffed
into the gap of a fence …

Taller, thicker, more rigid, longer than the mast of a great ship was
the perpendicular jet of dusky blood which out of his scalp's very
central point shot upwards and was there scattered to the four cardinal
points, whereby was formed a magic mist of gloom resembling the smoky
pall that drapes a regal dwelling, what time a king at nightfall of a
winter's day draws near to it." \[I quote from Standish Hayes O'Grady's
translation, in Miss Hull's "Cuchullin Saga."\]

Such was the imagery by which Gaelic writers conveyed the idea of
superhuman frenzy. At the sight of Cuchulain in his paroxysm it is said
that once a hundred of Maev's warriors fell dead from horror.

 

The Compact of the Ford

Maev now tried to tempt him by great largesse to desert the cause of
Ulster, and had a colloquy with him, the two standing on opposite sides
of a glen across which they talked. She scanned him closely, and was
struck by his slight and boyish appearance. She failed to move him from
his loyalty to Ulster, and death descends more thickly than ever upon
the Connacht host ; the men are afraid to move out for plunder save in
twenties and thirties, and at night the stones from Cuchulain's sling
whistle continually through the camp, braining or maiming. At last,
through the mediation of Fergus, an agreement was come to. Cuchulain
undertook not to harry the host provided they would

\[210\]

only send against him one champion at a time, whom Cuchulain would meet
in battle at the ford of the River Dee, which is now called the Ford of
Ferdia. \[*Ath Fherdia,* which is pronounced and now spelt "Ardee." It
is in Co. Louth, at the southern border of the Plain of Murthemney,
which was Cuchulain's territory.\] While each right was in progress the
host might move on, but when it was ended they must encamp till the
morrow morning. "Better to lose one man a day than a hundred," said
Maev, and the pact was made.

 

Fergus and Cuchulain

Several single combats are then narrated, in which Cuchulain is always a
victor. Maev even persuades Fergus to go against him, but Fergus and
Cuchulain will on no account right each other, and Cuchulain, by
agreement with Fergus, pretends to fly before him, on Fergus's promise
that he will do the same for Cuchulain when required. How this pledge
was kept we shall see later.

 

Capture of the Brown Bull

During one of Cuchulain's duels with a famous champion, Natchrantal,
Maev, with a third of her army, makes a sudden foray into Ulster and
penetrates as far as Dunseverick, on the northern coast, plundering and
ravaging as they go. The Brown Bull, who was originally at Quelgny (Co.
Down), has been warned at an earlier stage by the Morrigan \[see p.
126\] to withdraw himself, and he has taken refuge, with his herd of
cows, in a glen of Slievegallion, Co. Armagh. The raiders of Maev find
him there, and drive him off with the herd in triumph, passing Cuchulain
as they return. Cuchulain slays the leader of the escort - Buic son of
Banblai - but cannot

\[211\]

rescue the Bull, and "this," it is said, "was the greatest affront put
on Cuchulain during the course of the raid."

 

The Morrigan

The raid ought now to have ceased, for its object has been attained, but
by this time the hostings of the four southern provinces \[In ancient
Ireland there were five provinces, Munster being counted as two, or, as
some ancient authorities explain it, the High King's territory in Meath
and Westmeath being reckoned a separate province.\] had gathered
together under Maev for the plunder of Ulster, and Cuchulain remained
still the solitary warder of the marches. Nor did Maev keep her
agreement, for bands of twenty warriors at a time were loosed against
him and he had much ado to defend himself. The curious episode of the
fight with the Morrigan now occurs. A young woman clad in a mantle of
many colours appears to Cuchulain, telling him that she is a king's
daughter, attracted by the tales of his great exploits, and she has come
to offer him her love. Cuchulain tells her rudely that he is worn and
harassed with war and has no mind to concern himself with women. " It
shall go hard with thee," then said the maid, "when thou hast to do with
men, and I shall be about thy feet as an eel in the bottom of the Ford."
Then she and her chariot vanished from his sight and he saw but a crow
sitting on a branch of a tree, and he knew that he had spoken with the
Morrigan.

 

The Fight with Loch

The next champion sent against him by Maev was Loch son of Mofebis. To
meet this hero it is said that Cuchulain had to stain his chin with
blackberry juice so as to simulate a beard, lest Loch should disdain to
do combat with a boy. So they fought in the Ford, and the

\[212\]

Morrigan came against him in the guise of a white heifer with red ears,
but Cuchulain fractured her eye with a cast of his spear. Then she came
swimming up the river like a black eel and twisted herself about his
legs, and ere he could rid himself of her Loch wounded him. Then she
attacked him as a grey wolf, and again, before he could subdue her, he
was wounded by Loch. At this his battle-fury took hold of him and he
drove the Gae Bolg against Loch, splitting his heart in two. "Suffer me
to rise," said Loch, "that I may fall on my face on thy side of the
ford, and not backward toward the men of Erin." "It is a warrior's boon
thou askest," said Cuchulain, "and it is granted." So Loch died; and a
great despondency, it is said, now fell upon Cuchulain, for he was
outwearied with continued fighting, and sorely wounded, and he had never
slept since the beginning of the raid, save leaning upon his spear; and
he sent his charioteer, Laeg, to see if he could rouse the men of Ulster
to come to his aid at last.

 

Lugh the Protector

But as he lay at evening by the grave-mound of Lerga in gloom and
dejection, watching the camp-fires of the vast army encamped over
against him and the glitter of their innumerable spears, he saw coming
through the host a tall and comely warrior who strode impetuously
forward, and none of the companies through which he passed turned his
head to look at him or seemed to see him. He wore a tunic of silk
embroidered with gold, and a green mantle fastened with a silver brooch;
in one hand was a black shield bordered with silver and two spears in
the other. The stranger came to Cuchulain and spoke gently and sweetly
to him of his long toil and waking, and his sore wounds, and said in the
end:

"Sleep now, Cuchulain, by the grave in Lerga; sleep

\[213\]

and slumber deeply for three days, and for that time I will take thy
place and defend the Ford against the host of Maev." Then Cuchulain sank
into a profound slumber and trance, and the stranger laid healing balms
of magical power to his wounds so that he awoke whole and refreshed, and
for the time that Cuchulain slept the stranger held the Ford against the
host. And Cuchulain knew that this was Lugh his father, who had come
from among the People of Dana to help his son through his hour of gloom
and despair.

 

The Sacrifice of the Boy Corps

But still the men of Ulster lay helpless. Now there was at Emain Macha a
band of thrice fifty boys, the sons of all the chieftains of the
provinces, who were there being bred up in arms and in noble ways, and
these suffered not from the curse of Macha, for it fell only on grown
men. But when they heard of the sore straits in which Cuchulain, their
playmate not long ago, was lying they put on their light armour and took
their weapons and went forth for the honour of Ulster, under Conor's
young son, Follaman, to aid him. And Follaman vowed that he would never
return to Emania without the diadem of Ailell as a trophy. Three times
they drove against the host of Maev, and thrice their own number fell
before them, but in the end they were overwhelmed and slain, not one
escaping alive.

 

The Carnage of Murthemney

This was done as Cuchulain lay in his trance, and when he awoke,
refreshed and well, and heard what had been done, his frenzy came upon
him and he leaped into his war-chariot and drove furiously round and
round the host of Maev. And the chariot ploughed the earth till the ruts
were like the ramparts of a

\[214\]

fortress, and the scythes upon its wheels caught and mangled the bodies
of the crowded host till they were piled like a wall around the camp,
and as Cuchulain shouted in his wrath the demons and goblins and wild
things in Erin yelled in answer, so that with the terror and the uproar
the host of men heaved and surged hither and thither, and many perished
from each other's weapons, and many from horror and fear. And this was
the great carnage, called the Carnage of Murthemney, that Cuchulain did
to avenge the boy-corps of Emania ; six score and ten princes were then
slain of the host of Maev, besides horses and women and wolf-dogs and
common folk without number. It is said that Lugh mac Ethlinn fought
there by his son.

 

The Clan Calatin

Next the men of Erin resolved to send against Cuchulain, in single
combat, the Clan Calatin. \["Clan" in Gaelic means children or
offspring. Clan Calatin = the sons of Calatin\] Now Calatin was a
wizard, and he and his seven-and-twenty sons formed, as it were, but one
being, the sons being organs of their father, and what any one of them
did they all did alike. They were all poisonous, so that any weapon
which one of them used would kill in nine days the man who was but
grazed by it. When this multiform creature met Cuchulain each hand of it
hurled a spear at once, but Cuchulain caught the twenty-eight spears on
his shield and not one of them drew blood. Then he drew his sword to lop
off the spears that bristled from his shield, but as he did so the Clan
Calatin rushed upon him and flung him down, thrusting his face into the
gravel. At this Cuchulain gave a great cry of distress at the unequal
combat, and one of

\[215\]

the Ulster exile; Fiacha son of Firaba, who was with the host of Maev,
and was looking on at the fight, could not endure to see the plight of
the champion, and he drew his sword and with one stroke he lopped off
the eight-and-twenty hands that were grinding the face of Cuchulain into
the gravel of the Ford. Then Cuchulain arose and hacked the Clan Calatin
into fragments, so that none survived to tell Maev what Fiacha had done,
else had he and his thirty hundred followers of Clan Rury heen given by
Maev to the edge of the sword.

 

Ferdia to the Fray

Cuchulain had now overcome all the mightiest of Maev's men, save only
the mightiest of them all after Fergus, Ferdia son of Daman. And because
Ferdia was the old friend and fellow pupil of Cuchulain he had never
gone out against him; but now Maev begged him to go, and he would not.
Then she offered him her daughter, Findabair of the Fair Eyebrows, to
wife, if he would face Cuchulain at the Ford, but he would not. At last
she bade him go, lest the poets and satirists of Erin should make verses
on him and put him to open shame, and then in wrath and sorrow he
consented to go, and bade his charioteer make ready for to-morrow's
fray. Then was gloom among all his people when they heard of that, for
they knew that if Cuchulain and their master met, one of them would
return alive no more.

Very early in the morning Ferdia drove to the Ford, and lay down there
on the cushions and skins of the chariot and slept till Cuchulain should
come. Not till it was full daylight did Ferdia's charioteer hear the
thunder of Cuchulain's war-car approaching, and then he woke his master,
and the two friends faced each

\[216\]

other across the Ford. And when they had greeted each other Cuchulain
said: "It is not thou, O Ferdia, who shouldst have come to do battle
with me. When we were with Skatha did we not go side by side in every
battle, through every wood and wilderness ? were we not
heart-companions, comrades, in the feast and the assembly ? did we not
share one bed and one deep slumber ?" But Ferdia replied : "O Cuchulain,
thou of the wondrous feats, though we have studied poetry and science
together, and though I have heard thee recite our deeds of friendship,
yet it is my hand that shall wound thee. I bid thee remember not our
comradeship, O Hound of Ulster; it shall not avail thee, it shall not
avail thee."

They then debated with what weapons they should begin the fight, and
Ferdia reminded Cuchulain of the art of casting small javelins that they
had learned from Skatha, and they agreed to begin with these. Back-wards
and forwards, then, across the Ford, hummed the light javelins like bees
on a summer's day, but when noonday had come not one weapon had pierced
the defence of either champion. Then they took to the heavy missile
spears, and now at last blood began to flow, for each champion wounded
the other time and again. At last the day came to its close. "Let us
cease now," said Ferdia, and Cuchulain agreed. Each then threw his arms
to his charioteer, and the friends embraced and kissed each other three
times, and went to their rest. Their horses were in the same paddock,
their drivers warmed themselves over the same fire, and the heroes sent
each other food and drink and healing herbs for their wounds.

Next day they betook themselves again to the Ford, and this time,
because Ferdia had the choice of weapons the day before, he bade
Cuchulain take it

\[217\]

now. \[Together with much that is wild and barbaric in this Irish epic
of the "Tain" the reader will be struck by the ideals of courtesy and
gentleness which not infrequently come to light in it. It must be
remembered that, as Mr. A. H. Leahy points out in his " Heroic Romances
of Ireland," the legend of the Raid of Quelgny is, at the very latest, a
century earlier than all other known romances of chivalry Welsh or
Continental. It is found in the "Book of Leinster," a manuscript of the
twelfth century, as well as in other sources, and was doubtless
considerably older than the date of its transcription there. "The whole
thing," says Mr. Leahy, "stands at the very beginning of the literature
of modern Europe."\] Cuchulain chose then the heavy, broad-bladed spears
for close fighting, and with them they fought from the chariots till the
sun went down, and drivers and horses were weary, and the body of each
hero was torn with wounds. Then at last they gave over, and threw away
their weapons. And they kissed each other as before, and as before they
shared all things at night, and slept peacefully till the morning.

When the third day of the combat came Ferdia wore an evil and lowering
look, and Cuchulain reproached him for coming out in battle against his
comrade for the bribe of a fair maiden, even Findabair, whom Maev had
offered to every champion and to Cuchulain himself if the Ford might be
won thereby; but Ferdia said : "Noble Hound, had I not faced thee when
summoned, my troth would be broken, and there would be shame on me in
Rathcroghan." It is now the turn of Ferdia to choose the weapons, and
they betake themselves to their " heavy, hard-smiting swords, and though
they hew from each other's thighs and shoulders great cantles of flesh,
neither can prevail over the other, and at last night ends the combat.
This time they parted from each other in heaviness and gloom, and there
was no interchange of friendly acts, and their drivers and horses slept
apart. The passions of the warriors had now risen to a grim sternness.

\[218\]

 

Death of Ferdia

On the fourth day Ferdia knew the contest would be decided, and he armed
himself with especial care. Next his skin was a tunic of striped silk
bordered with golden spangles, and over that hung an apron of brown
leather. Upon his belly he laid a flat stone, large as a millstone, and
over that a strong, deep apron of iron, for he dreaded that Cuchulain
would use the Gae Bolg that day. And he put on his head his crested
helmet studded with carbuncle and inlaid with enamels, and girt on his
golden-hilted sword, and on his left arm hung his broad shield with its
fifty bosses of bronze. Thus he stood by the Ford, and as he waited he
tossed up his weapons and caught them again and did many wonderful
feats, playing with his mighty weapons as a juggler plays with apples;
and Cuchulain, watching him, said to Laeg, his driver "If I give ground
to-day, do thou reproach and mock me and spur me on to valour, and
praise and hearten me if I do well, for I shall have need of all my
courage.

"O Ferdia," said Cuchulain when they met, "what shall be our weapons
to-day ?" "It is thy choice today," said Ferdia. "Then let it be all or
any," said Cuchulain, and Ferdia was cast down at hearing this, but he
said, "So be it," and thereupon the fight began. Till midday they fought
with spears, and none could gain any advantage over the other. Then
Cuchulain drew his sword and sought to smite Ferdia over the rim of his
shield ; but the giant Firbolg flung him off*.* Thrice Cuchulain leaped
high into the air, seeking to strike Ferdia over his shield, but each
time as he descended Ferdia caught him upon the shield and flung him off
like a little child into the Ford. And Laeg mocked him, crying : "He
casts thee off as a river flings

\[219\]

its foam, he grinds thee as a millstone grinds a corn of wheat ; thou
elf, never call thyself a warrior."

Then at last Cuchulain's frenzy came upon him, and he dilated
giant-like, till he overtopped Ferdia, and the hero-light blazed about
his head. In close contact the two were interlocked, whirling and
trampling, while the demons and goblins and unearthly things of the
glens screamed from the edges of their swords, and the waters of the
Ford recoiled in terror from them, so that for a while they fought on
dry land in the midst of the riverbed. And now Ferdia found Cuchulain a
moment oft his guard, and smote him with the edge of the sword, and it
sank deep into his flesh, and all the river ran red with his blood. And
he pressed Cuchulain sorely after that, hewing and thrusting so that
Cuchulain could endure it no longer, and he shouted to Laeg to fling him
the Gae BoIg. When Ferdia heard that he lowered his shield to guard
himself from below, and Cuchulain drove his spear over the rim of the
shield and through his breastplate into his chest. And Ferdia raised his
shield again, but in that moment Cuchulain seized the Gae Bolg in his
toes and drove it upward against Ferdia, and it pierced through the iron
apron and burst in three the millstone that guarded him, and deep into
his body it passed, so that every crevice and cranny of him was filled
with its barbs. " 'Tis enough," cried Ferdia; " I have my death of that.
It is an ill deed that I fall by thy hand, O Cuchulain." Cuchulain
seized him as he fell, and carried him northward across the Ford, that
he might die on the further side of it, and not on the side of the men
of Erin. Then he laid him down, and a faintness seized Cuchulain, and he
was falling, when Laeg cried : "Rise up, Cuchulain, for the host of Erin
will be upon us. No single combat will they give after Ferdia has
fallen." But Cuchulain said: "Why should

\[220\]

I rise again, O my servant, now he that lieth here has fallen by my hand
?" and he fell in a swoon like death. And the host of Maev with tumult
and rejoicing, with tossing of spears and shouting of war-songs, poured
across the border into Ulster.

But before they left the Ford they took the body of Ferdia and laid it
in a grave, and built a mound over him and set up a pillar-stone with
his name and lineage in Ogham*.* And from Ulster came certain of the
friends of Cuchulain, and they bore him away into Murthemney, where they
washed him and bathed his wounds in the streams, and his kin among the
Danaan Folk cast magical herbs into the rivers for his healing. But he
lay there in weakness and in stupor for many days.

 

The Rousing of Ulster

Now Sualtam, the father of Cuchulain, had taken his son's horse, the
Grey of Macha, and ridden off again to see if by any means he might
rouse the men of Ulster to defend the province. And he went crying
abroad "The men of Ulster are being slain, the women carried captive,
the kine driven ! " Yet they stared on him stupidly, as though they knew
not of what he spake. At last he came to Emania, and there were Cathbad
the Druid and Conor the King, and all their nobles and lords, and
Sualtam cried aloud to them : "The men of Ulster are being slain, the
women carried captive, the kine driven ; and Cuchulain alone holds the
gap of Ulster against the four provinces of Erin. Arise and defend
yourselves I" But Cathbad only said "Death were the due of him who thus
disturbs the King"; and Conor said : " Yet it is true what the man
says"; and the lords of Ulster wagged their heads and murmured: "True
indeed it is."

Then Sualtam wheeled round his horse in anger and

\[221\]

was about to depart when, with a start which the Grey made, his neck
fell against the sharp rim of the shield upon his back, and it shore off
his head, and the head fell on the ground. Yet still it cried its
message as it lay, and at last Conor bade put it on a pillar that it
might be at rest. But it still went on crying and exhorting, and at
length into the clouded mind of the king the truth began to penetrate,
and the glazed eyes of the warriors began to glow, and slowly the spell
of Macha's curse was lifted from their minds and bodies. Then Conor
arose and swore a mighty oath, saying "The heavens are above us and the
earth beneath us, and the sea is round about us; and surely, unless the
heavens fall on us and the earth gape to swallow us up, and the sea
overwhelm the earth, I will restore every woman to her hearth, and every
cow to its byre." \[Another instance of the survival of the oath formula
recited by the Celtic envoys to Alexander the Great. See p.23.\] His
Druid proclaimed that the hour was propitious, and the king bade his
messengers go forth on every side and summon Ulster to arms, and he
named to them warriors long dead as well as the living, for the cloud of
the curse still lingered in his brain.

With the curse now departed from them the men of Ulster flocked joyfully
to the summons, and on every hand there was grinding of spears and
swords, and buckling on of armour and harnessing of war-chariots for the
rising-out of the province. \["Rising-out" is the vivid expression wed
by Irish writers for a clan or territory going on the war-path.
"Hosting" is also used in a similar sense.\] One host came under Conor
the King and Keltchar, son of Uthecar Hornskin, from Emania southwards,
and another from the west along the very track of the host of Maev. And
Conor's host fell upon eight score of

\[222\]

the men of Erin in Meath, who were carrying away a great booty of
women-captives, and they slew every man of the eight score and rescued
the women. Maev and her host then fell back toward Connacht, but when
they reached Slemon Midi, the Hill of Slane, in Meath, the Ulster bands
joined each other there and prepared to give battle. Maev sent her
messenger mac Roth to view the Ulster host on the Plain of Garach and
report upon it. Mac Roth came back with an awe-striking description of
what he beheld. When he first looked he saw the plain covered with deer
and other wild beasts. These, explains Fergus, had been driven out of
the forests by the advancing host of the Ulster men. The second time mac
Roth looked he saw a mist that filled the valleys, the hill-tops
standing above it like islands. Out of the mist there came thunder and
flashes of light, and a wind that nearly threw him off his feet. "What
is this ?" asks Maev, and Fergus tells her that the mist is the deep
breathing of the warriors as they march, and the light is the flashing
of their eyes, and the thunder is the clangour of their war-cars and the
dash of their weapons as they go to the fight "They think they will
never reach it," says Fergus. "We have warriors to meet them," says
Maev. "You will need that," says Fergus, "for in all Ireland, nay, in
all the Western world, to Greece and Scythia and the Tower of Bregon
\[see p. 130\] and the Island of Gades, there live not who can face the
men of Ulster in their wrath."

A long passage then follows describing the appearance and equipment of
each of the Ulster chiefs.

 

The Battle of Garach

The battle was joined on the Plain of Garach, in Meath. Fergus, wielding
a two-handed sword, the

\[223\]

sword which, it was said, when swung in battle made circles like the
arch of a rainbow, swept down whole ranks of the Ulster men at each
blow, \[the sword of Fergus was a fairy weapon called the *Caladcholg*
(hard dinter), a name of which Arthur's more famous "Excalibur" is a
Latinised corruption\] and the fierce Maev charged thrice into the heart
of the enemy.

Fergus met Conor the King, and smote him on his golden-bordered shield,
but Cormac, the king's son, begged for his father's life. Fergus then
turned on Con all of the Victories.

"Too hot art thou," said Conall, "against thy people and thy race for a
wanton." \[the reference is to Deirdre\] Fergus then turned from slaying
the Ulstermen, but in his battle-fury he smote among the hills with his
rainbow-sword, and struck off the tops of the three *Maela* of Meath, so
that they are flat-topped *(mael)* to this day.

Cuchulain in his stupor heard the crash of Fergus's blows, and coming
slowly to himself he asked of Laeg what it meant. "It is the sword-play
of Fergus," said Laeg. Then he sprang up, and his body dilated so that
the wrappings and swathings that had been bound on him flew off, and he
armed himself and rushed into the battle. Here he met Fergus. "Turn
hither, Fergus," he shouted; "I will wash thee as foam in a pool, I will
go over thee as the tail goes over a cat, I will smite thee as a mother
smites her infant." "Who speaks thus to me ?" cried Fergus. "Cuchulain
mac Sualtam; and now do thou avoid me as thou art pledged." \[see p.
211\]

"I have promised even that," said Fergus, and then went out of the
battle, and with him the men of Leinster and the men of Munster, leaving
Maev with her seven sons and the hosting of Connacht alone.

\[224\]

It was midday when Cuchulain came into the fight; when the evening sun
was shining through the leaves of the trees his war-chariot was but two
wheels and a handful of shattered ribs, and the host of Connacht was in
full flight towards the border. Cuchulain overtook Maev, who crouched
under her chariot and entreated grace. "I am not wont to slay women,"
said Cuchulain, and he protected her till she had crossed the Shannon at
Athlone.

 

The Fight of the Bulls

But the Brown Bull of Quelgny, that Macv had sent into Connacht by a
circuitous way, met the white-horned Bull of Ailell on the Plain of Aei,
and the two beasts fought ; but the Brown Bull quickly slew the other,
and tossed his fragments about the land so that pieces of him were
strewn from Rathcroghan to Tara; and then careered madly about till he
fell dead, bellowing and vomiting black gore, at the Ridge of the Bull,
between Ulster and Iveagh. Ailell and Maev made peace with Ulster for
seven years, and the Ulster men returned home to Emain Macha with great
glory.

Thus ends the "Tain Bo Cuailgnè," or Cattle Raid of Quelgny; and it was
written out in the "Book of Leinster" in the year 1150 by the hand of
Finn mac Gorman, Bishop of Kildare, and at the end is written "A
blessing on all such as faithfully shall recite the "Tain" as it stands
here, and shall not give it in any other form.

  
Cuchulain in Fairyland

One of the strangest tales in Celtic legend tells how Cuchulain, as he
lay asleep after hunting, against a pillar-stone, had a vision of two
Danaan women who came to him armed with rods and alternately beat

\[225\]

him till he was all but dead, and he could not lift a hand to defend
himself. Next day, and for a year thereafter, he lay in sore sickness,
and none could heal him.

Then a man whom none knew came and told him to go to the pillar-stone
where he had seen the vision, and he would learn what was to be done for
his recovery. There he found a Danaan woman in a green mantle, one of
those who had chastised him, and she told him that Fand, the Pearl of
Beauty, wife of Mananan the Sea-god, had set her love on him; and she
was at enmity with her husband Mananan; and her realm was besieged by
three demon kings, against whom Cuchulain's help was sought, and the
price of his help would be the love of Fand. Laeg, the charioteer, was
then sent by Cuchulain to report upon Fand and her message. He entered
Fairyland, which lies beyond a lake across which he passed in a magic
boat of bronze, and came home with a report of Fand's surpassing beauty
and the wonders of the kingdom; and Cuchulain then betook himself
thither. Here he had a battle in a dense mist with the demons, who are
described as resembling sea-waves - no doubt we are to understand that
they are the folk of the angry husband, Mananan. Then he abode with
Fand, enjoying all the delights of Fairyland for a month, after which he
bade her farewell, and appointed a trysting-place on earth, the Strand
of the Yew Tree, where she was to meet him.

 

Fand, Emer, and Cuchulain

But Emer heard of the tryst; and though not commonly disturbed at
Cuchulain's numerous infidelities, she came on this occasion with fifty
of her maidens armed with sharp knives to slay Fand. Cuchulain and Fand
perceive their chariots from afar, and

\[226\]

the armed angry women with golden clasps shining on their breasts, and
he prepares to protect his mistress. He addresses Emer in a curious
poem, describing the beauty and skill and magical powers of Fand- "
There is nothing the spirit can wish for that she has not got." Emer
replies : "In good sooth, the lady to whom thou dost cling seems in no
way better than I am, but the new is ever sweet and the well-known is
sour ; thou hast all the wisdom of the time, Cuchulain Once we dwelled
in honour together, and still might dwell if I could find favour in thy
sight." "By my word thou dost," said Cuchulain, "and shalt find it so
long as I live."

"Give me up," then said Fand. But Emer said: "Nay, it is more fitting
that I be the deserted one. "Not so," said Fand; "it is I who must go.
"And an eagerness for lamentation seized upon Fand, and her soul was
great within her, for it was shame for her to be deserted and
straightway to return to her home; moreover, the mighty love that she
bore to Cuchulain was tumultuous in her." \[S A. H. Leahy's translation,
" Heroic Romances of Ireland," vol.1.\]

But Mananan, the Son of the Sea, knew of her sorrow and her shame, and
he came to her aid, none seeing him but she alone, and she welcomed him
in a mystic song. "Wilt thou return to me ?" said Mananan, "or abide
with Cuchulain ?" "In truth," said Fand, "neither of ye is better or
nobler than the other, but I will go with thee, Mananan, for thou hast
no other mate worthy of thee, but that Cuchulain has in Emer."

So she went to Mananan, and Cuchulain, who did not see the god, asked
Laeg what was happening. "Fand," he replied, " is going away with the
Son of the Sea, since she hath not been pleasing in thy sight."

\[227\]

Then Cuchulain bounded into the air and fled from the place, and lay a
long time refusing meat and drink, until at last the Druids gave him a
draught of forgetfulness; and Mananan, it is said, shook his cloak
between Cuchulain and Fand, so that they might meet no more throughout
eternity. \[the cloak of Mananan (see p. 125) typifies the sea - here,
in its dividing and estranging power.\]

 

The Vengeance of Maev

Though Maev made peace with Ulster after the battle of Garech she vowed
the death of Cuchulain for all the shame and loss he had brought upon
her and on her province, and she sought how she might take her vengeance
upon him.

Now the wife of the wizard Calatin, whom Cuchulain slew at the Ford,
brought forth, after her husband's death, six children at a birth,
namely, three sons and three daughters. Misshapen, hideous, poisonous,
born for evil were they; and Maev, hearing of these, sent them to learn
the arts of magic, not in Ireland only, but in Alba; and even as far as
Babylon they went to seek for hidden knowledge, and they came back
mighty in their craft, and she loosed them against Cuchulain.

 

Cuchulain and Blanid

Besides the Clan Calatin, Cuchulain had also other foes, namely Erc, the
King of Ireland, son to Cairpre, whom Cuchulain had slain in battle, and
Lewy son of Curoi, King of Munster.\[this Curoi appears in various tales
of the Ultonian Cycle with attributes which show that he was no mortal
king, but a local deity.\] For Curoi's wife, Blanid, had set her love on
Cuchulain, and she bade him come and take her from Curoi's dūn, and
watch his time to

\[228\]

attack the dūn when he would see the stream that flowed from it turn
white. So Cuchulain and his men waited in a wood hard by till Blanid
judged that the time was fit, and she then poured into the stream the
milk of three cows. Then Cuchulain attacked the dūn, and took it by
surprise, and slew Curoi, and bore away the woman. But Fercartna, the
bard of Curoi, went with them and showed no sign, till, finding him-self
near Blanid as she stood near the cliff-edge of Bear; he flung his arms
round her, and leaped with her over the cliff, and so they perished, and
Curoi was avenged upon his wife.

All these now did Maev by secret messages and by taunts and exhortations
arouse against Cuchulain, and they waited till they heard that the curse
of Macha was again heavy on the men of UIster, and then they assembled a
host and marched to the Plain of Murthemney.

  
The Madness of Cuchulain

And first the Children of Calatin caused a horror and a despondency to
fall upon the mind of Cuchulain, and out of the hooded thistles and
puff-balls and fluttering leaves of the forest they made the semblance
of armed battalions marching against Murthemney, and Cuchulain seemed to
see on every side the smoke of burning dwellings going up. And for two
days he did battle with the phantoms till he was sick and wearied out.
Then Cathbad and the men of Ulster persuaded him to retire to a solitary
glen, where fifty of the princesses of Ulster, and among them Niam, wife
of his faithful friend Conall of the Victories, tended him, and Niam
made him vow that he would not leave the dūn where he was until she gave
him leave.

But still the Children of Calatin filled the land with apparitions of
war, and smoke and flames went up, and

\[229\]

wild cries and wailings with chattering, goblin laughter and the braying
of trumpets and horns were borne upon the winds. And Bave, Calatin's
daughter, went into the glen, and, taking the form of a handmaid of
Niam, she beckoned her away and led her to a distance among the woods
and put a spell of straying on her so that she was lost and could find
her way home no more. Bave then went in the form of Niam to Cuchulain
and bade him up and rescue Ulster from the hosts that were harrying it,
and the Morrigan came in the form of a great crow where Cuchulain sat
with the women, and croaked of war and slaughter. Then Cuchulain sprang
up and called Laeg to harness his chariot. But when Laeg sought for the
Grey of Macha to harness him, the horse fled from him, and resisted, and
only with great difficulty could Laeg yoke him in the chariot, while
large tears of dark blood trickled down his face.

Then Cuchulain, having armed himself, drove forth; and on every side
shapes and sounds of dread assailed him and clouded his mind, and then
it appeared to him that he saw a great smoke, lit with bursts of red
flame, over the ramparts of Emain Macha, and he thought he saw the
corpse of Emer tossed out over the ramparts. But when he came to his dūn
at Murthemney, there was Emer living, and she entreated him to leave the
phantoms alone, but he would not listen to her, and he bade her
farewell. Then he bade farewell to his mother Dectera, and she gave him
a goblet of wine to drink, but ere he could drink it the wine turned to
blood, and he flung it away, saying, "My life's end is near; this time I
shall not return alive from the battle." And Dectera and Cathbad
besought him to await the coming of Conall of the Victories, who was
away on a journey, but he would not.

\[230\]

  
The Washer at the Ford

When he came to the ford upon the plain of Emania he saw there kneeling
by the stream as it were a young maiden, weeping and wailing, and she
washed a heap of bloody raiment and warlike arms in the stream, and when
she raised a dripping vest or corselet from the water Cuchulain saw that
they were his own. And as they crossed the ford she vanished from their
sight. \[this apparition of the Washer of the Ford is of frequent
occurrence In Irish legend.\]

 

 

Clan Calatin Again

Then, having taken his leave of Conor and of the womenfolk in Emania, he
turned again towards Murthemney and the foe. But on his way he saw by
the roadside three old crones, each blind of one eye, hideous and
wretched, and they had made a little fire of sticks, and over it they
were roasting a dead dog on spits of rowan wood. As Cuchulain passed
they called to him to alight and stay with them and share their food.
"That will I not, in sooth," said he. "Had we a great feast," they said,
"thou wouldst soon have stayed; it doth not become the great to despise
the small." Then Cuchulain, because he would not be thought discourteous
to the wretched, lighted down, and he took a piece of the roast and ate
it, and the hand with which he took it was stricken up to the shoulder
so that its former strength was gone. For it was *geis* to Cuchulain to
approach a cooking hearth and take food from it, and it was *geis* to
him to eat of his namesake. \[see p. 164 for the reference to *geis*. "
His namesake ' refers, of course, to the story of the Hound of Cullan,
pp. 183, 184.\]

\[231\]

 

Death of Cuchulain

Near to Slieve Fuad, south of Armagh, Cuchulain found the host of his
enemies, and drove furiously against them, plying the champion's
"thunder-feat" upon them until the plain was strewn with their dead.
Then a satirist, urged on by Lewy, came near him and demanded his spear.
\[It was a point of honour to refuse nothing to a bard; one king is said
to have given his eye when it was demanded of him.\] "Have it' then,"
said Cuchulain, and flung it at him with such force that it went clean
through him and killed nine men beyond. "A king will fall by that
spear," said the Children of Calatin to Lewy, and Lewy seized it and
flung it at Cuchulain, but it smote Laeg, the king of charioteers, so
that his bowels fell out on the cushions of the chariot, and he bade
farewell to his master and he died.

Then another satirist demanded the spear, and Cuchulain said: "I am not
bound to grant more than one request on one day." But the satirist said
"Then I will revile Ulster for thy default," and Cuchulain flung him the
spear as before, and Erc now got it, and this time in flying back it
struck the Grey of Macha with a mortal wound. Cuchulain drew out the
spear from the horse's side, and they bade each other farewell, and the
Grey galloped away with half the yoke hanging to its neck.

And a third time Cuchulain flung the spear to a satirist, and Lewy took
it again and flung it back, and it struck Cuchulain, and his bowels fell
out in the chariot, and the remaining horse, Black Sainglend, broke away
and left him.

"I would fain go as far as to that loch-side to drink," said Cuchulain,
knowing the end was come, and they suffered him to go when he had
promised to return to them again. So he gathered up his bowels into his

\[252\]

breast and went to the loch-side, and drank, and bathed himself, and
came forth again to die. Now there was close by a tall pillar-stone that
stood westwards of the loch, and he went up to it and slung his girdle
over it and round his breast, so that he might die in his standing and
not in his lying down; and his blood ran down in a little stream into
the loch, and an otter came out of the loch and lapped it. And the host
gathered round, but feared to approach him while the life was still in
him, and the hero-light shone above his brow. Then came the Grey of
Macha to protect him, scattering his foes with biting and kicking.

And then came a crow and settled on his shoulder.

Lewy, when he saw this, drew near and pulled the hair of Cuchulain to
one side over his shoulder, and with his sword he smote off his head ;
and the sword fell from Cuchulain's hand, and smote off the hand of Lewy
as it fell. They took the hand of Cuchulain in revenge for this, and
bore the head and hand south to Tara, and there buried them, and over
them they raised a mound. But Conall of the Victories, hastening to
Cuchulain's side on the news of the war, met the Grey of Macha streaming
with blood, and together they went to the loch-side and saw him headless
and bound to the pillar-stone, and the horse came and laid its head on
his breast. Conall drove southwards to avenge Cuchulain, and he came on
Lewy by the river Liffey, and because Lewy had but one hand Conall tied
one of his behind his back, and for half the day they fought, but
neither could prevail. Then came Conall's horse, the Dewy-Red, and tore
a piece out of Lewy's side, and Conall slew him, and took his head, and
returned to Emain Macha. But they made no show of triumph in entering
the city, for Cuchulain the Hound of Ulster was no more.

\[233\]

 

The Recovery of the Tain

The history of the "Tain," or Cattle Raid, of Quelgny was traditionally
supposed to have been written by no other than Fergus mac Roy, but for a
long time the great lay or saga was lost. It was believed to have been
written out in Ogham characters on staves of wood, which a bard who
possessed them had taken with him into Italy, whence they never
returned.

The recovery of the "Tain" was the subject of a number of legends which
Sir S. Ferguson, in his "Lays of the Western Gael," has combined in a
poem of so much power, *so* much insight into the spirit of Gaelic myth,
that I venture to reproduce much of it here in telling this singular and
beautiful story. It is said that after the loss of the loss of the
"Tain" Sanchan Torpest, chief bard of Ireland, was once taunted at a
feast by the High King Guary on his inability to recite the most famous
and splendid of Gaelic poems. This touched the bard to the quick, and he
resolved to recover the lost treasure. Far and wide through Erin and
through Alba he searched for traces of the lay, but could only recover
scattered fragments. He would have conjured up by magic arts the spirit
of Fergus to teach it to him, even at the cost of his own life - for
such, it seems, would have been the price demanded for the intervention
and help of the dead - but the place of Fergus's grave, where the spells
must be said, could not be discovered. At last Sanchan sent his son
Murgen with his younger brother Eimena to journey to Italy and endeavour
to discover there the fate of the staff-book. The brothers set off on
their journey.

"Eastward, breadthwise over Erin straightway travell'd forth the
twain,  
Till with many days' wayfaring Murgen fainted by Loch Ein :

\[234\]

'Dear my brother, thou art weary : I for present aid am flown :  
Thou for my returning tarry here beside this Standing Stone.'

"Shone the sunset red and solemn: Murgen, where he leant, observed  
Down the corners of the column letter-strokes of Ogham carved.  
' 'Tis, belike, a burial pillar,' said he, ' and these shallow lines  
Hold some warrior's name of valour, could I rightly spell the signs.'

"Letter then by letter tracing, soft he breathed the sound of each  
Sound and sound then interlacing, lo, the signs took form of speech;  
And with joy and wonder mainly thrilling, part a-thrill with fear,  
Murgen read the legend plainly, 'FERGUS SON OF ROY IS HERE.' "

Murgen then, though he knew the penalty, appealed to Fergus to pity a
son's distress, and vowed, for the sake of the recovery of the "Tain,"
to give his life, and abandon his kin and friends and the maiden he
loves, so that his father might no more be shamed. But Fergus gave no
sign, and Murgen tried another plea:

"Still he stirs not. Love of women thou regard'st not, Fergus, now :  
Love of children, instincts human, care for these no more hast thou :  
Wider comprehension, deeper insights to the dead belong :-  
Since for Love thou wak'st not, Sleeper, yet awake for sake of Song.

" 'Thou, the first in rhythmic cadence dressing life's discordant
tale,  
Wars of chiefs and loves of maidens, gavest the Poem to the Gael;  
Now they've lost their noblest measure, and in dark days hard at hand,  
Song shall be the only treasure left them in their native land.'

"Fergus rose. A mist ascended with him, and a flash was seen  
As of brazen sandals blended with a mantle's wafture green;  
But so thick the cloud closed o'er him Eimena, return'd at last,  
Found not on the field before him but a mist-heap grey and vast.

"Thrice to pierce the hoar recesses faithful Eimena essay'd;  
Thrice through foggy wildernesses back to open air he stray'd;  
Till a deep voice through the vapours fill'd the twilight far and near  
And the Night her starry tapers kindling, stoop'd from heaven to hear.

\[235\]

"Seem'd as though the skiey Shepherd back to earth had cast the fleece  
Envying gods of old caught upward from the darkening shrines of
Greece;  
So the white mists curl'd and glisten'd, so from heaven's expanses
bare,  
Stars enlarging lean'd and listen'd down the emptied depths of air.

"All night long by mists surrounded Murgen lay in vapoury bars;  
All night long the deep yoice sounded 'neath the keen, enlarging stars
:  
But when, on the orient verges, stars grew dim and mists retired,  
Rising by the stone of Fergus, Murgen stood a man inspired.

Back to Sanchan ! -Father, hasten, ere the hour of power be past,  
Ask not how obtain'd but listen to the lost lay found at last !'  
Yea, these words have tramp of heroes in them; and the marching rhyme  
Rolls the voices of the eras down the echoing steeps of Time.'

"Not till all was thrice related, thrice recital full essay'd,  
Sad and shamefaced, worn and faded, Murgen sought the faithful maid.  
'Ah, so haggard; ah, so altered; thou in life and love so strong !'  
'Dearly purchased,' Murgen falter'd, 'life and love I've sold for song
!'

"'Woe is me, the losing bargain ! what can song the dead avail ?'  
'Fame immortal,' murmur'd Murgen, 'long as lay delights the Gael.'  
'Fame, alas ! the price thou chargest not repays one virgin tear.'  
'Yet the proud revenge I've purchased for my sire, I deem not dear.'

"So, again to Gort the splendid, when the drinking boards were spread,  
Sanchan, as of old attended, came and sat at table-head.  
'Bear the cup to Sanchan Torpost : twin gold goblets, Bard, are thine,  
If with voice and string thou harpest, *Tain--Bo-Cuailgine,* line for
line.'

" 'Yea, with voice and string I'll chant it.' Murgen to his father's
knee  
Set the harp: no prelude wanted, Sanchan struck the master key,  
And, as bursts the brimful river all at once from caves of Cong,  
Forth at once, and once for ever, leap'd the torrent of the song.

\[236\]

"Floating on a brimful torrent, men go down and banks go by :  
Caught adown the lyric current, Guary, captured, ear and eye,  
Heard no more the courtiers jeering, saw no more the walls of Gort,  
Creeve Roe's \[*Craobh Ruadh* -the Red Branch hostel\] a meads instead
appearing, and Emania's royal fort.

"Vision chasing splendid vision, Sanchan roll'd the rhythmic scene ;  
They that mock'd in lewd derision now, at gaze, with wondering mien  
Sate, and, as the glorying master sway'd the tightening reins of song,  
Felt emotion's pulses faster - fancies faster bound along.

"Pity dawn'd on savage faces, when for love of captive Crunn,  
Macha, in the ransom-races, girt her gravid loins, to run  
'Gainst the fleet Ultonian horses; and, when Deirdra on the road  
Headlong dash'd her 'mid the corses, brimming eyelids overflow'd.

"Light of manhood's generous ardour, under brows relaxing shone,  
When, mid-ford, on Uladh's border, young Cuchullin stood alone,  
Maev and all her hosts withstanding :- ' Now, for love of knightly
play,  
Yield the youth his soul's demanding; let the hosts their marchings
stay,

" 'Till the death he craves be given ; and, upon his burial stone  
Champion-praises duly graven, make his name and glory known;  
For, in speech-containing token, age to ages never gave  
Salutation better spoken, than, " Behold a hero's grave." '

"What, another and another, and he still or combat calls ?  
Ah, the lot on thee, his brother sworn in arms, Ferdia, falls;  
And the hall with wild applauses sobb'd like woman ere they wist,  
When the champions in the pauses of the deadly combat kiss'd.

"Now, for love of land and cattle, while Cuchullin in the fords  
Stays the march of Connaught's battle, ride and rouse the Northern
Lords;  
Swift as angry eagles wing them toward the plunder'd eyrie's call,  
Thronging from Dun Dealga bring them, bring them from the Red Branch
hall !

\[237\]

"Heard ye not the tramp of armies ? Hark ! amid the sudden gloom.  
'Twas the stroke of Conall's war-mace sounded through the startled room
;  
And, while still the hall grew darker, king and courtier chill'd with
dread,  
Heard the rattling of the war-car of Cuchullin overhead.

"Half in wonder, half in terror, loth to stay and loth to fly,  
Seem'd to each beglamour'd hearer shade: of kings went thronging by :  
But the troubled joy of wonder merged at last in mastering fear,  
As they heard through pealing thunder, 'FERGUS SON OF ROY IS HERE !'

"Brazen-sandall'd, vapour-shrouded, moving in an icy blast,  
Through the doorway terror-crowded,up the tables Fergus pass'd :-  
'Stay thy hand, oh harper, pardon ! cease the wild unearthly lay !  
Murgen, bear thy sire his guerdon.' Murgen sat, a shape of clay.

"'Bear him on his bier beside me never more in halls of Gort  
Shall a niggard king deride me: slaves, of Sanchan make their sport !  
But because the maiden's yearnings needs must also be condoled,  
Hers shall be the dear-bought earnings, hers the twin-bright cups of
gold.'

" 'Cups,' she cried, 'of bitter drinking, fling them far as arm can
throw !  
Let them in the ocean sinking, out of sight and memory go!  
Let the joinings of the rhythm, let the links of sense and sound  
Of the *Tain-*Bo perish with them, lost as though they'd ne'er been
found !'

"So it comes, the lay, recover'd once at such a deadly cost,  
Ere one full recital suffer'd, once again is all but lost :  
For, the maiden's malediction still with many a blemish-stain  
Clings in coarser garb of fiction round the fragments that remain."

 

The Phantom Chariot of Cuchulain

Cuchulain, however, makes an impressive reappearance in a much later
legend of Christian origin, found in the twelfth-century "Book of the
Dun Cow." He was summoned from Hell, we are told, by St. Patrick to
prove

\[238\]

the truths of Christianity and the horrors of damnation to the pagan
monarch, Laery mac Neill, King of Ireland. Laery, with St. Benen, a
companion of Patrick, are standing on the Plain of mac Indoc when a
blast of icy wind nearly takes them off their feet. It is the wind of
Hell, Benen explains, after its opening before Cuchulain. Then a dense
mist covers the plain, and anon a huge phantom chariot with galloping
horses, a grey and a black, loom up through the mist. Within it are the
famous two, Cuchulain and his charioteer, giant figures, armed with all
the splendour of the Gaelic warrior.

Cuchulain then talks to Laery, and urges him to "believe in God and in
holy Patrick, for it is not a demon that has come to thee, but Cuchulain
son of Sualtam." To prove his identity he recounts his famous deeds of
arms, and ends by a piteous description of his present state:

"What I suffered of trouble,  
O Laery, by sea and land -  
Yet more severe was a single night  
When the demon was wrathful !  
Great as was my heroism,  
Hard as was my sword,  
The devil crushed me with one finger  
Into the red charcoal ! "

He ends by beseeching Patrick that heaven may be granted to him, and the
legend tells that the prayer was granted and that Laery believed.

 

Death of Conor mac Nessa

Christian ideas have also gathered round the end of Cuchulain's lord,
King Conor of Ulster. The manner of his death was as follows: An unjust
and cruel attack had been made by him on Mesgedra, King of Leinster,

\[239\]

in which that monarch met his death at the hand of Conall of the
Victories. \[the story is told in full in the author's " High Deeds of
Finn."\] Conall took out the brains of the dead king and mingled them
with lime to make a sling-stone-such "brain balls," as they were called,
being accounted the most deadly of missiles. This ball was laid up in
the king's treasure-house at Emain Macha, where the Connacht champion,
Ket son of Maga, found it one day when prowling in disguise through
Ulster. Ket took it away and kept it always by him. Not long thereafter
the Connacht men took a spoil of cattle from Ulster, and the Ulster men)
under Conor, overtook them at a river-ford still called Athnurchar (The
Ford of the Sling-cast), in Westmeath. A battle was imminent, and many
of the ladies of Connacht came to their side of the river to view the
famous Ultonian warriors, and especially Conor, the stateliest man of
his time. Conor was willing to show himself, and seeing none hut women
on the other bank he drew near them; but Ket, who was lurking in ambush,
now rose and slung the brain-ball at Conor, striking him full in the
forehead. Conor fell, and was carried off by his routed followers. When
they got him home, still living, to Emain Macha, his physician, Fingen,
pronounced that if the ball were extracted from his head he must die; it
was accordingly sewn up with golden thread, and the king was bidden to
keep himself from horse-riding and from all vehement passion and
exertion, and he would do well.

Seven years afterwards Conor saw the sun darken at noonday, and he
summoned his Druid to tell him the cause of the portent. The Druid, in a
magic trance, tells him of a hill in a distant land on which stand three
crosses with a human form nailed to each of them, and one of them is
like the Immortals. "Is he a

\[240\]

malefactor ?" then asks Conor. " Nay," says the Druid, but the Son of
the living God," and he relates to the king the story of the death of
Christ. Conor breaks out in fury, and drawing his sword he hacks at the
oak-trees in the sacred grove, crying, "Thus would I deal with his
enemies," when with the excitement and exertion the brain-ball bursts
from his head, and he falls dead. And thus was the vengeance of Mesgedra
fulfilled. With Conor and with Cuchulain the glory of the Red Branch and
the dominance of Ulster passed away. The next, or Ossianic, cycle of
Irish legend brings upon the scene different characters, different
physical surroundings, and altogether different ideals of life.

 

Ket and the Boar of mac Datho

The Connacht champion Ket, whose main exploit was the wounding of King
Conor at Ardnurchar, figures also in a very dramatic tale entitled "The
Carving of mac Datho's Boar." The story runs as follows :

Once upon a time there dwelt in the province of Leinster a wealthy
hospitable lord named Mesroda, son of Datho. Two possessions had he ;
namely, a hound which could outrun every other hound and every wild
beast in Erin, and a boar which was the finest and greatest in size that
man had ever beheld.

Now the fame of this hound was noised all about the land, and many were
the princes and lords who longed to possess it. And it came to pass that
Conor King of Ulster and Maev Queen of Connacht sent messengers to mac
Datho to ask him to sell them the hound for a price, and both the
messengers arrived at the dun of mac Datho on the same day. Said the
Connacht messenger:

"We will give thee in exchange for the hound six hundred milch cows, and
a chariot with two horses, the best that are to be found in Connacht,
and at the end

\[241\]

of a year thou shalt have as much again." And the messenger of King
Conor said: "We will give no less than Connacht, and the friendship and
alliance of Ulster, and that will be better for thee than the friendship
of Connacht."

Then Mesroda mac Datho fell silent, and for three days he would not eat
or drink, nor could he sleep o' nights, but tossed restlessly on his
bed. His wife observed his condition, and said to him: "Thy fast hath
been long, Mesroda, though good food is by thee in plenty; and at night
thou turnest thy face to the wall, and well I know thou dost not sleep.
What is the cause of thy trouble?"

"There is a saying," replied Mac Datho, "'Trust not a thrall with money,
nor a woman with a secret.' "

"When should a man talk to a woman," said his wife, "but when something
were amiss? What thy mind cannot solve perchance another's may."

Then mac Datho told his wife of the request for his hound both from
Ulster and from Connacht at one and the same time. "And whichever of
them I deny," he said, "they will harry my cattle and slay my people."

"Then hear my counsel," said the woman. "Give it to both of them, and
bid them come and fetch it; and if there be any harrying to be done, let
them even harry each other; but in no way mayest thou keep the hound."

Mac Datho followed this wise counsel, and bade both Ulster and Connacht
to a great feast on the same day, saying to each of them that they could
have the hound."

So on the appointed day Conor of Ulster, and Maev, and their retinues of
princes and mighty men assembled at the dūn of mac Datho. There they
found a great feast set forth, and to provide the chief dish mac Datho

\[242\]

had killed his famous boar, a beast of enormous size. The question now
arose as to who should have the honourable task of carving it, and
Bricriu of the Poisoned Tongue characteristically, for the sake of the
strife which he loved, suggested that the warriors of Ulster and
Connacht should compare their principal deeds of arms, and give the
carving of the boar to him who seemed to have done best in the
border-fighting which was always going on between the provinces. After
much bandying of words and of taunts Ket son of Maga arises and stands
over the boar, knife in hand, challenging each of the Ulster lords to
match his deeds of valour. One after another they arise, Cuscrid son of
Conor, Keitchar, Moonremur, Laery the Triumphant, and others - Cuchulain
is not introduced in this story - and in each case Ket has some biting
tale to tell of an encounter in which he has come off better than they,
and one by one they sit down shamed and silenced. At last a shout of
welcome is heard at the door of the hall and the Ulster-men grow
jubilant: Conall of the Victories has appeared on the scene, He strides
up to the boar, and Ket and he greet each other with chivalrous
courtesy:

"And now welcome to thee, O Conall, thou of the iron heart and fiery
blood; keen as the glitter of ice, ever-victorious chieftain; hall,
mighty son of Finnchoom !" said Ket.

And Conall said: "Hall to thee, Ket, flower of heroes, lord of chariots,
a raging sea in battle ; a strong, majestic bull; hail,son of Maga !"

"And now," went on Conall, "rise up from the boar and give me place."

"Why so ?" replied Ket.

"Dost thou seek a contest from me ?" said Conall.

"Verily thou shalt have it. By the gods of my nation I swear that since
I first took weapons in my hand. I

\[243\]

have never passed one day that I did not slay a Connacht man, nor one
night that I did not make a foray on them, nor have I ever slept but I
had the head of a Connacht man under my knee."

"I confess," then said Ket, "that thou art a better man than I, and I
yield thee the boar. But if Anluan my brother were here, he would match
thee deed for deed, and sorrow and shame it is that he is not."

"Anluan is here," shouted Conall, and with that he drew from his girdle
the head of Anluan and dashed it in the face of Ket.

Then all sprang to their feet and a wild shouting and tumult arose, and
the swords flew out of themselves, and battle raged in the hall of mac
Datho. Soon the hosts burst out through the doors of the dūn and smote
and slew each other in the open field., until the Connacht host were put
to flight. The hound of mac Datho pursued the chariot of King Ailell of
Connacht till the charioteer smote off its head, and so the cause of
contention was won by neither party, and mac Datho lost his hound, but
saved his lands and life.

 

The Death of Ket

The death of Ket is told in Keating's "History of Ireland." Returning
from a foray in Ulster, he was over-taken by Connall at the place called
the Ford of Ket, and they fought long and desperately. At last Ket was
slain, but Conall of the Victories was in little better case, and lay
bleeding to death when another Connacht champion named Bealcu
\[pronounced "Bay-al-koo"\] found him. "Kill me," said Conall to him,
"that it be not said I fell at the hand of *one* Connacht man." But
Bealcu said : "I will not slay a man at the point of death, but I will
bring thee home and heal thee, and when thy strength is come again

\[244\]

thou shalt fight with me in single combat." Then Beilcu put Conall on a
litter and brought him home, and had him tended till his wounds were
healed.

The three sons of Bealcu, however, when they saw what the Ulster
champion was like in all his might, resolved to assassinate him before
the combat should take place. By a stratagem Conall contrived that they
slew their own father instead; and then, taking the heads of the three
sons, he went back, victoriously as he was wont, to Ulster.

 

The Death of Maev

The tale of the death of Queen Maev is also preserved by Keating. Fergus
mac Roy having been slain by Ailell with a cast of a spear as he bathed
in a lake with Maev, and Ailell having been slain by Conall, Macv
retired to an island \[Inis Clothrann, now known as Quaker's Island. The
pool no longer exists.\] on Loch Ryve, where she was wont to bathe early
every morning in a pool near to the landing place. Forbay son of Conor
mac Nessa, having discovered this habit of the queen's, found means one
day to go unperceived to the pool and to measure the distance from it to
the shore of the mainland. Then he went back to Emania,where he measured
out the distance thus obtained, and placing an apple on a pole at one
end he shot at it continually with a sling until he grew so good *a*
marksman at that distance that he never missed his aim. Then one day,
watching his opportunity by the shores of Loch Ryve, he saw Maev enter
the water, and putting a bullet in his sling he shot at her with so good
an aim that he smote her in the centre of the forehead and she fell
dead.

The great warrior queen had reigned in Connacht, it was said, for
eighty-eight years. She is a signal example

\[245\]

of the kind of women whom the Gaelic bards delighted to portray.
Gentleness and modesty were by no means their usual characteristics, but
rather a fierce overflowing life. Women-warriors like Skatha and Aifa
are frequently met with, and one is reminded of the Gaulish women, with
their mighty snow-white arms, so dangerous to provoke, of whom classical
writers tell us. The Gaelic bards, who in so many ways anticipated the
ideas of chivalric romance, did not do so in setting women in a place
apart from men. Women were judged and treated like men, neither as
drudges nor as goddesses, and we know that well into historic times they
went with men into battle, a practice only ended in the sixth century.

 

Fergus mac Leda and the Wee Folk

Of the stories of the Ultonian Cycle which do not centre on the figure
of Cuchulain, one of the most interesting is that of Fergus mac Leda and
the King of the Wee Folk. In this tale Fergus appears as King of Ulster,
but as he was contemporary with Conor mac Nessa, and in the Cattle Raid
of Quelgny is represented as following him to war, we must conclude that
he was really a sub-king, like Cuchulain or Owen of Ferney.

The tale opens in Faylinn, or the Land of the Wee Folk, a race of elves
presenting an amusing parody of human institutions on a reduced scale,
but endowed (like dwarfish people generally in the literature of
primitive races) with magical powers. Lubdan, \["Youb´dan"\] the King of
Faylinn, when flushed with wine at a feast, is bragging of the greatness
of his power and the invincibility of his armed forces - have they not
the strong man Glower, who with his axe has been known to hew down a
thistle at a stroke ? But the king's bard,

\[246\]

Eisirt*, has* heard something of a giant race oversea in a land called
Ulster, one man of whom would annihilate a whole battalion of the Wee
Folk, and he incautiously allows himself to hint as much to the boastful
monarch. He is immediately clapped into prison for his audacity, and
only gets free by promising to go immediately to the land of the mighty
men, and bring back evidence of the truth of his incredible story.

So off he goes ; and one fine day King Fergus and his lords find at the
gate of their Dūn a tiny little fellow magnificently dad in the robes of
a royal bard, who demands entrance. He is borne in upon the hand of
AEda, the king's dwarf and bard, and after charming the court by his
wise and witty sayings, and receiving a noble largesse, which he at once
distributes among the poets and other court attendants of Ulster, he
goes off home, taking with him as a guest the dwarf AEda, before whom
the Wee Folk fly as a "Fomorian giant," although, as Eisirt explains,
the average man of Ulster can carry him like a child. lubdan is now
convinced, but Eisirt puts him under *geise,* the bond of chivalry which
no Irish chieftain can repudiate without being shamed, to go himself, as
Eisirt has done, to the palace of Fergus and taste the king's porridge.
lubdan, after he has seen AEda, is much dismayed, but he prepares to go,
and bids Bebo, his wife, accompany him. "You did an ill deed," she says,
"when you condemned Eisirt to prison; but surely there is no man under
the sun that can make thee hear reason."

So off they go, and lubdan's fairy steed bears them over the sea till
they reach Ulster, and by midnight they stand before the king's palace.
"Let us taste the porridge as we were bound," says Bebo, "and make off
before daybreay" They steal in and find the

\[247\]

porridge-pot, to the rim of which lubdan can only reach by standing. on
his horse's back. In straining downwards to get at the porridge he
overbalances himself and falls in. There in the thick porridge he sticks
fast, and there Fergus's scullions find him at the break of day, with
the faithful Bebo lamenting. They bear him off to Fergus, who is amazed
at finding another wee man, with a woman too, in his palace. He treats
them hospitably, but refuses all appeals to let them go. The story now
recounts in a spirit of broad humour several Rabelaisian adventures in
which Bebo is concerned, and gives a charming poem supposed to have been
uttered by lubdan in the form of advice to Fergus's fire-gillie as to
the merits for burning of different kinds of timber. The following arc
extracts:

"Burn not the sweet apple-tree of drooping branches, of the white
blossoms, to whose gracious head each man puts forth his hand."

"Burn not the noble willow, the unfailing ornament of poems; bees drink
from its blossoms, all delight in the graceful tent."

"The delicate, airy tree of the Druids, the rowan with its berries, this
burn ; but avoid the weak tree, burn not the slender hazel."

"The ash-tree of the black buds burn not-timber that speeds the wheel,
that yields the rider his switch the ashen spear is the scale-beam of
battle."

At last the Wee Folk come in a great multitude to beg the release of
lubdan. On the king's refusal they visit the country with various
plagues, snipping off the ears of corn, letting the calves suck all the
cows dry, defiling the wells, and so forth ; but Fergus is obdurate. In
their quality as earth-gods, *dei terreni,* they promise to make the
plains before the palace of Fergus stand thick with corn every year
without ploughing or sowing,

\[248\]

but all is vain. At last, however, Fergus agrees to ransom lubdan
against the best of his fairy treasures, so lubdan recounts them-the
cauldron that can never be emptied, the harp that plays of itself; and
finally he mentions a pair of water-shoes, wearing which a man can go
over or under water as freely as on dry land. Fergus accepts the shoes,
and lubdan is released.

 

The Blemish of Fergus

But it is hard for a mortal to get the better of Fairy-land-a touch of
hidden malice lurks in magical gifts, and so it proved now. Fergus was
never tired of exploring the depths of the lakes and rivers of Ireland;
but one day, in Loch Rury, he met with a hideous monster, the
*Muirdris,* or river-horse, which inhabited that lake, and from which he
barely saved himself by flying to the shore. With the terror of this
encounter his face was twisted awry; but since a blemished man could not
hold rule in Ireland, his queen and nobles took pains, on some pretext,
to banish all mirrors from the palace, and kept the knowledge of his
condition from him. One day, however, he smote a bondmaid with a switch,
for some negligence, and the maid, indignant, cried out : "lt were
better for thee, Fergus, to avenge thyself on the river-horse that hath
twisted thy face than to do brave deeds on women !" Fergus bade fetch
him a mirror, and looked in it. " It is true," he said; "the river-horse
of Loch Rury has done this thing."

 

Death of Fergus

The conclusion may be given in the words of Sir Samuel Ferguson's fine
poem on this theme. Fergus

\[249\]

donned the magic shoes, took sword in hand, and went to Loch Rury :

"For a day and night  
Beneath the waves he rested out of sight,  
But all the Ultonians on the bank who stood  
Saw the loch boil and redden with his blood.  
When next at sunrise skies grew also red  
He rose - and in his hand the *Muirdris'* head.  
Gone was the blemish ! On his goodly face  
Each trait symmetric had resumed its place :  
And they who saw him marked in all his mien  
A king's composure, ample and serene.  
He smiled; he cast his trophy to the bank,  
Said, 'I, survivor, Ulstermen !' and sank."

This fine tale has been published in full from an Egerton MS., by Mr.
Standish Hayes O'Grady, in his "Silva Gadelica." The humorous treatment
of the fairy element in the story would mark it as belonging to a late
period of Irish legend, but the tragic and noble conclusion unmistakably
signs it *as* belonging to the Ulster bardic literature, and it falls
within the same order of ideas, if it were not composed within the same
period, as the tales of Cuchulain.

 

 

Significance of Irish Place-Names

Before leaving this great cycle of legendary literature let us notice
what has already, perhaps, attracted the attention of some readers - the
extent to which its chief characters and episodes have been commemorated
in the still surviving place-names of the country. \[Dr. P. W. Joyce's
"Irish Names of Places" is a storehouse of information on this
subject.\] This is true of Irish legend in general - it is especially so
of the Ultonian Cycle. Faithfully indeed, through many a century of
darkness and forgetting, have these names pointed to the hidden
treasures of heroic romance

\[250\]

which the labours of our own day are now restoring to light. The name of
the little town of Ardee, as we have seen, \[p.211, *note*\]
commemorates the tragic death of Ferdia at the hand of his "heart
companion," the noblest hero of the Gad. The ruins of Dūn Baruch, where
Fergus was bidden to the treacherous feast, still look over the waters
of Moyle, across which Naisi and Deirdre sailed to their doom.
Ardnurchar, the Hill of the Sling-cast, in Westmeath, \[the name is
given to the hill, *ard*, and to the ford, *atha* beneath it.\] brings
to mind the story of the stately monarch, the crowd of gazing women, and
the crouching enemy with the deadly missile which bore the vengeance of
Mesgedra. The name of Armagh, or Ard Macha, the Hill of Macha, enshrines
the memory of the Fairy Bride and her heroic sacrifice, while the grassy
rampart can still be traced where the war-goddess in the earlier legend
drew its outline with the pin of her brooch when she founded the royal
fortress of Ulster. Many pages might be filled with these instances.
Perhaps no modern country has place-names so charged with legendary
associations as are those of Ireland. Poetry and myth are there still
closely wedded to the very soil of the land-a fact in which there lies
ready to hand an agency for education, for inspiration, of the noblest
kind, if we only had the insight to see it and the art to make use of
it.

 

\[251\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Tales of the Ossianic Cycle](mlcr06)
