[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index)  [Next](mlcr01) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Preface

  
THE Past may be forgotten, but it never dies. The elements which in the
most remote times have entered into a nation's composition endure
through all its history, and help to mould that history, and to stamp
the character and genius of the people.

The examination, therefore, of these elements, and the recognition, as
far as possible, of the part they have actually contributed to the warp
and weft of a nation's life, must be a matter of no small interest and
importance to those who realise that the present is the child of the
past, and the future of the present; who will not regard themselves,
their kinsfolk, and their fellow citizens as mere transitory phantoms,
hurrying from darkness into darkness, but who know that, in them, a vast
historic stream of national life is passing from its distant and
mysterious origin towards a future which is largely conditioned by all
the past wanderings of that human stream, but which is also, in no small
degree, what they, by their courage, their patriotism, their knowledge,
and their understanding, choose to make it.

The part played by the Celtic race as a formative influence in the
history, the literature, and the art of the people inhabiting the
British Islands - a people which from that centre has spread its
dominions over so vast an area of the earth's surface - has been unduly
obscured in popular thought. For this the current use of the term
"Anglo-Saxon" applied to the British people as a designation of race is
largely responsible. Historically the term is quite misleading. There is
nothing to justify this singling out of two Low-German tribes when we
wish to indicate the race character of the British people. The use of it
leads to such absurdities as that which the writer noticed not long ago,
when the proposed elevation by the Pope of an Irish bishop to a
cardinalate was described in an English newspaper as being prompted by
the desire of the head of the Catholic Church to pay a compliment to
"the Anglo-Saxon race."

The true term for the population of these islands, and for the typical
and dominant part of the population of North America, is not
Anglo-Saxon, but Anglo-Celtic. It is precisely in this blend of Germanic
and Celtic elements that the British people are unique - it is precisely
this blend which gives to this people the fire, the *elan*, and in
literature and art the sense of style, colour, drama, which are not
common growths of German soil, while at the same time it gives the
deliberateness and depth, the reverence for ancient law and custom, and
the passion for personal freedom, which are more or less strange to the
Romance nations of the South of Europe. May they never become strange to
the British Islands ! Nor is the Celtic element in these islands to be
regarded as contributed wholly, or even very predominantly, by the
populations of the so called "Celtic Fringe." It is now well known to
ethnologists that the Saxons did not by any means exterminate the Celtic
or Celticised populations whom they found in possession of Great
Britain. Mr. E. W. B. Nicholson, librarian of the Bodleian, writes in
his important work "Keltic Researches" (1904):

*"Names which have not been purposely invented to describe race must
never be taken as proof of race, but only as proof of community of
language, or community of political organisation. We call a man who
speaks English, lives in England, and bears an obviously English name
(such as Freeman or Newton), an Englishman. Yet from the statistics of
'relative nigrescence' there is good reason to believe that lancashire,
West Yorkshire, Staffordshire, Worcester-shire, Warwickshire,
Leicestershire, Rutland, Cambridgeshire, Wiltshire, Somerset, and part
of Sussex are as Keltic as Perthshire and North Munster ; that Cheshire,
Shropshire, Herefordshire, Monmouthshire, Gloucestershire, Devon,
Dorset, Northamptonshire, Huntingdonshire, and Bedfordshire are more
so-and equal to North Wales and Leinster; while Buckinghamshire and
Hertfordshire exceed even this degree, and are on a level with South
Wales and Ulster."* \[In reference to the name "Freeman," Mr. Nicholson
adds : No one was more intensely 'English' in his sympathies than the
great historian of that name, and probably no one would have more
strenuously resisted the suggestion that he might be of Welsh descent ;
yet I have met his close physical counterpart in a Welsh farmer (named
Evans) living within a few minutes of Pwllheli."\]

It is, then, for an Anglo-Celtic, not an "Anglo-Saxon," people that this
account of the early history, the religion, and the mythical and
romantic literature of the Celtic race is written. It is hoped that that
people will find in it things worthy to be remembered as contributions
to the general stock of European culture, but worthy above all to be
borne in mind by those who have inherited more than have any other
living people of the blood, the instincts and the genius of the Celt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: The Celts in Ancient History](mlcr01)
