[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pos04)  [Next](pos06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE COMMENTATOR'S INTRODUCTION

#### Honour to that Exalted One, Arahant, Very Buddha!

N<span class="small">OW</span> is the occasion come for commenting on
the meaning of the psalms of the Sisters. The exposition of their
several poems will be made easier and more intelligible, if I first
relate the circumstances under which the Bhikkhunīs in the beginning
came to leave the world and obtain admission into the Order. Of this,
therefore, I will give an account in outline.

When the Lord of the world had combined the Eight Factors–humanity and
the rest of Buddhahood–when, having made his great resolve at the feet
of the Buddha Dīpankără,[<sup>63</sup>](pos05.htm#3-1) and mastering
equally all the Thirty Perfections, according to the prophecy of the
Four-and-Twenty Buddha in succession concerning him, he had reached the
climax in his progress towards wisdom, knowledge of the world and
Buddhahood, then he took rebirth in the Realms of Bliss (*Tusita*). And
there, when he had lived the span of life among the ten thousand gods of
the Cosmic Circles, he thereupon assented to the request of those gods
to be reborn as a man that he might become a Buddha, according to their
words:

> 'The time is now at hand when Thou,  
>   Great Hero, shouldst as man be born.  
> Bearing both gods and men across,  
>   Do Thou reveal th' Ambrosial Way!'

So he made the Five Great Considerations, and then, in the house of King
Suddhodana, of the princely clan of the Sākiyas, did he, mindful and
self-possessed, enter a mother's womb; then, mindful and self-possessed,
did he there ten months abide; then, mindful and self-possessed, did he
thence emerge and come to birth in the Lumbinī Grove.

Reared by divers nurses, surrounded ever in luxury by a great retinue,
he grew up in due course, dwelling in one of three mansions, amid divers
bands of nautch-women, and enjoying honours like a god. Then, anguish
being stirred in him at sight of an aged man, a diseased man, and a dead
man, he, from the maturity of his insight, saw the danger in the life of
the senses and the profit in renouncing it. Mounting his horse Kanthaka,
and with Channa as his companion, at midnight, through the gate set open
by spirits, he went forth on the Great Renunciation. During the
remainder of that night he traversed three kingdoms, and, coming to the
bank of the river Anomā, and taking the outward marks of an Arahant,
brought to him by the Brahmā-god Ghaṭīkāra, he left the world.
Thereupon, as though he were already an Elder with the eight requisites,
[<sup>64</sup>](pos05.htm#4-1) comely in appearance and of graceful
deportment, he came in due course to Rājagaha, and there going round for
alms, he ate his meal in the cave of Mount Paṇḍava. There the King of
Magadha offered him his kingdom. But he, refusing it, went to Bhaggava's
hermitage and learnt his system; thence to Āḷāra and Uddaka and learnt
their systems. Finding all that inadequate, he proceeded to Uruvelā, and
there for six years practised austerities. Then, discerning that this
brought no penetration of the Ariyan Norm, he said, 'This is not the
Path to Enlightenment,' and, taking solid food, he in a few days
recovered strength. So, on full-moon day in the month of May, he ate the
choice food given by Sujātā, [<sup>65</sup>](pos05.htm#4-2) and, casting
the golden dish upstream into the river, he, full of his resolve,
'To-day will I become a Buddha!' ascended at eventide the Bo-tree
seat–his praises sung by Kāla, king of the Nāgas–and there, in a
quakeless spot [<sup>66</sup>](pos05.htm#5-1) facing the eastern world,
seated him cross-legged and indomitable. There, fixing his will in four
respects, he vanquished the power of Māra ere the sun went down. In the
first watch of the night he recalled his former lives; in the middle
watch he purified the eye celestial; in the last watch he sounded the
depth of the knowledge of the Causal Law. And, grasping in direct and
reverse order the formula of causal relation, he developed insight, and
reached that perfect enlightenment reached by all Buddhas but shared by
no one else. There then abiding seven days in the Fruition which has
Nibbana as its object, and, in the same manner, abiding yet other seven
days on the Bo-tree seat, he partook of sweet food beneath the
Rājāyatana tree.[<sup>67</sup>](pos05.htm#5-2) Then, again, seated
beneath the Goatherds' Banyan, he reflected on the depth of the essence
of the Norm. [<sup>68</sup>](pos05.htm#5-3) And his mind was disinclined
for effort till he was entreated by Great Brahmā; but then he gazed upon
the world with the Buddha-Eye, and, seeing all the diverse range of
faculties in all beings, he promised Great Brahmā that he would teach
the Norm. Meditating, 'Where, now, shall I first teach the Norm?' he
discerned that Āḷāra and Uddaka had passed away; but then he thought,
'Very helpful to me were the Five who were attending on me when I broke
off from my ascetic struggles. What if I were first to preach to them?'
So, in the full moon of July, he went from the Great Bo-tree toward
Benāres. And when he had travelled eighteen leagues, he met halfway the
recluse Upaka [<sup>69</sup>](pos05.htm#5-4) and conversed with him; and
so on to Isipatana, where he convinced the Five by means of the
Discourse called Turning the Wheel of the Norm,
[<sup>70</sup>](pos05.htm#5-5) beginning:

> 'There are two extremes, O bhikkhus, which the man who has given up
> the world ought not to follow' . . .

thus giving them, beginning with Aññakondañña, together <span
id="p6"></span> with eighteen myriads of Brahma-gods, a draught of
Truth-ambrosia. Then on the first day of the next fortnight he
established also Elder Bhaddaji in the path of the Stream-winners; on
the second day, Elder Vappa; on the third day, Elder Mahānāma; on the
fourth, Elder Assaji; and on the fifth day, by preaching the sermon of
the Mark of No-Soul, he established them all in Arahantship. Thereafter
he brought over many folk into the Ariyan fold
[<sup>71</sup>](pos05.htm#6-1) –to wit, the fifty-five youths led by
Yasa, the thirty Bhaddavaggiyans in the Cotton-tree Grove, and the
thousand former ascetics on the ridge of Gayā-Head. And when he had
established eleven myriads, with Bimbisāra at their head, in the fruit
of Entering the Stream (conversion), and one myriad in the Three
Refuges, he accepted the gift of the Bamboo Grove, and there abode. Now,
when Sāriputta and Moggallāna, brought into the First Path through
Assaji, had taken leave of Sañjaya (their teacher), had joined the
Buddha with their respective followings, and had realized the topmost
Fruition, he set them, who had attained the perfection of discipleship,
over all his disciples. Then, going at the entreaty of Elder Kāḷudāyi to
Kapilavatthu, he subdued the proud stubbornness of his kinsmen by the
Twin Miracle, [<sup>72</sup>](pos05.htm#6-2) and establishing his father
in the Path of No-Return, and Great Pajāpatī
[<sup>73</sup>](pos05.htm#6-3) in the Fruition of Entering the Stream,
and causing the princes Nanda and Rāhula [<sup>74</sup>](pos05.htm#6-4)
to renounce the world, he went back to Rājagaha.

Now it came thereafter to pass, while the Master was staying at the Hall
of the Gabled House near Vesālī, that King Suddhodhana attained
Arahantship while under the white canopy, [<sup>75</sup>](pos05.htm#6-5)
and then passed away. Then in Great Pajāpatī arose the thought of
renouncing the world. Then there came to her the wives of those five
hundred young nobles who had renounced the world on hearing, on the bank
of the Rohinī river, the 'Discourse concerning Strife and Dissension,'
and they told her, saying: 'We will all renounce the world to follow the
Master.' And they wished that she should lead them to him. Now Great
Pajāpatī had once already asked the Master for admission to his Order,
and had not won his consent; wherefore she now bade her hairdresser cut
off her hair, and donning the yellow robes, she took all those Sākiya
ladies with her to Vesālī, and there entreating Him of the Tenfold Power
through Elder Ānanda, she gained his permission to leave the world and
enter the Order by accepting the Eight Rules.
[<sup>76</sup>](pos05.htm#7-1) And the others, also, were all ordained
at the same time.

This, in brief, is the story. What is here said has been handed down at
greater length here and there in the Pali Canon.

Thus ordained, Great Pajāpatī came before the Master, and, saluting him,
stood on one side. Then he taught her the Norm. She, taking up under him
the system of exercise, attained to Arahantship. The other five hundred
Bhikkhunīs attained it at the end of Nandaka's
sermon.[<sup>77</sup>](pos05.htm#7-2) Now the Order of Bhikkhunīs being
thus well established, and multiplying in divers villages, towns,
country districts, and royal residences, dames, daughters-in-law and
maidens of the clans, hearing of the great enlightenment of the Buddha,
of the very truth of the Norm, of the excellent practices of the Order,
were mightily pleased with the system, and, dreading the round of
rebirth, they sought permission of husband, parents, and kin, and taking
the system to their bosom, renounced the world. So renouncing and living
virtuously, they received instruction from the Master and the Elders,
and with toil and effort soon realized Arahantship. And the psalms which
they uttered from time to time, in bursts of enthusiasm and otherwise,
were afterwards by the Recensionists included in the Rehearsal, and
arranged together in eleven cantos. They are called the Verses of the
Elder Women (*Therī-gāthā*), and they are divided into cantos of single
verses, two verses, and so on, as follows:

<span id="3-1"></span>

> <sup>63</sup> One of the twenty-four Buddhas of later Buddhism. Early
> Buddhism reckoned only seven. For this and the following episodes in
> greater detail, *cf.* Rhys Davids, *Buddhist Birth Stories*, pp. 12 ſ.
> 27, 28; 60, 61; 87; 92.

<span id="4-1"></span>

> <sup>64</sup> *Loc. cit.*, 87.

<span id="4-2"></span>

> <sup>65</sup> *Ibid.*, 92 ſſ.

<span id="5-1"></span>

> <sup>66</sup> *Loc. cit.*, 96.

<span id="5-2"></span>

> <sup>67</sup> =King's-stead Tree.

<span id="5-3"></span>

> <sup>68</sup> See Translator's Preface.

<span id="5-4"></span>

> <sup>69</sup> See his story in Ps. [lxviii](pos18.htm#LXVIII).

<span id="5-5"></span>

> <sup>70</sup> Translated by Rhys Davids in *Buddhist Suttas*, S.B.E.
> xi., pp. 146 ſſ.

<span id="6-1"></span>

> <sup>71</sup> Lit., territory–*i.e.*, the 'true faith.' *Cf.*
> *Buddhist Birth Stories*, p. 113.

<span id="6-2"></span>

> <sup>72</sup> *Cf.* *Buddhist Birth Stories*, p. 123 ſ.

<span id="6-3"></span>

> <sup>73</sup> The sister and co-wife of the Buddha's mother. See Ps.
> [lv](pos11.htm#LV).

<span id="6-4"></span>

> <sup>74</sup> His half-brother (son of Pajāpatī), and his own son.

<span id="6-5"></span>

> <sup>75</sup> *I.e*., as King and layman, without renouncing the
> world.

<span id="7-1"></span>

> <sup>76</sup> For the oldest acoount of this, see Rhys Davids and
> Oldenberg, *Vinaya Texts*, iii., 320 ſ.

<span id="7-2"></span>

> <sup>77</sup> *Majjhima Nikāya*, iii., pp. 270 ſſ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Canto I. Psalms of Single Verses](pos06)
