<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot08) 
[Next](bot10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### CHAPTER VI

<span class="small">Egyptian Beliefs—Crux Ansata—The Menat—The Two
Plumes—The Single Plume—The Nefer—The Cartouche—The Angles and
Plummet—The God Bes—Aper—The Tat—The Heart.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Of</span> all civilisations known to us through
history, that of ancient Egypt is the most marvellous, most fascinating,
and most rich in occult significance; yet we have still much to
discover, and although we have the assurance of Herodotus that the
Egyptians were "beyond measure scrupulous in all matters appertaining to
religion," the ancient religions—or such fragments as survive—appear at
first glance confusing and even grotesque. It is necessary to remember
that there was an inner as well as an outer theology, and that the
occult mysteries were accessible only to those valiant and strenuous
initiates who had successfully passed through a prolonged purification
and course of preparation austere and difficult enough to discourage all
save the most persistent and exalted spirits.

It is only available to us to wander on the outskirts of Egyptian
mythology. The most familiar symbolic figures are those of Isis the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moon goddess,
traditional Queen of Egypt, and Osiris her husband; and when we read
that Isis was the *sister*, *wife*, and *mother* of Osiris we must seek
the inner meaning of the strange and impossible relationship. It has
been lucidly explained by Princess Karadja (in her *King Solomon: a
Mystic Drama*, 1912, pp. 130-31):

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

"Originally the dual souls are part of the same Divine Ego. They are
golden fruits upon the great Tree of Life: 'male and female He created
them.'

 Isis is the *Sister* of Osiris because she is of Divine origin like
himself, and is a spirit of equal rank.

 She is his *Wife*, because she alone can fill his highest cravings.

 She is his *Mother* because it is the mission of Woman to restore Man
unto spiritual life."

</div>

How Osiris was slain by his brother Typhon (or Set), the Spirit of Evil,
and dismembered into fourteen fragments which were scattered and hidden
by the destroyer; how Isis, widowed and broken-hearted, sought patiently
until she found each fragment, and how Horus her son when he grew to
manhood challenged and conquered Typhon,—all this is the figurative
rendering of the eternal battle between light and darkness.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

Typhon or Set symbolises autumn, decay, and destruction; Osiris
springtime, light, and the fertilising and growing powers of nature.
Isis is typified in many forms, but was especially revered as the
goddess of procreation, Universal Mother of the living, and protectress
of the spirits of the dead. Her symbol was the cow, and she is usually
depicted wearing cow's horns, and between them the orb of the moon.

But more ancient and more exalted than Osiris was Ra, the Sun god, whose
worship was blended with that of Isis and her husband and son. The
priests of Ra established a famous temple at Heliopolis, and founded a
special system of solar worship. Just as the Emperor Constantine
subsequently fixed as saints' days in the Christian Church the days
which had been dedicated to the ancient pagan gods, so the priests of Ra
adapted their cult to the tastes and notions of the people, and a whole
company of subordinate gods figured in the religions of Lower Egypt for
many centuries. Sometimes divine virtues were portrayed in very material
forms.

Between 4000 and 2000 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> the worship of
Amen, or Amen Ra, as the greatest god of the Egyptians, was established
at Thebes, which became the centre of religious teaching. The priests
grew more and more powerful until finally

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

the High Priest of Amen—whose name means the "*hidden one*"—became the
King of Upper Egypt. Amen was regarded as the Creator, with all the
power and attributes of Ra the Sun god, and as ruler of the lesser gods.

It has been asked why the Egyptians, who had no belief in a material
resurrection, took such infinite trouble to preserve the bodies of their
dead. They looked forward to a paradise in which eternal life would be
the reward of the righteous, and their creed inculcated faith in the
existence of a spiritual body to be inhabited by the soul which had
ended its earthly pilgrimage; but such beliefs do not explain the care
and attention bestowed upon the lifeless corpse. The explanation must be
sought in the famous *Book of the Dead*, representing the convictions
which prevailed throughout the whole of the Egyptian civilisation from
pre-dynastic times. Briefly, the answer to our question is this: there
was a Ka or double, in which the Heart-Soul was located; this Ka,
equivalent to the astral body of modern occultists, was believed to be
able to come into touch with material things through the preserved or
mummified body. This theory accords with the axiom that each atom of
physical substance has its relative equivalent on the astral plane. It
will therefore be understood how, in the ancient

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

religions, the image of a god was regarded as a medium through which his
powers could be manifested. "As above, so below"; every living thing
possessed some divine attribute.

Faith in prayer was an essential article of the Egyptian religion, and
the spoken word of a priest was believed to have strong potency, because
it. had been the words of Ra uttered by Thoth which brought the universe
into being. Amulets inscribed with words were consequently thought to
ensure the fulfilment of the blessing expressed, or the granting of the
bliss desired.

The *Book of the Dead* was not only a guide to the life hereafter,
wherein they would join their friends in the realms of eternal bliss,
but gave detailed particulars of the necessary knowledge, actions, and
conduct during the earthly life to ensure a future existence in the
spirit world, where everlasting life was the reward of the good and
annihilation the fate of the wicked, thus showing that the belief in the
existence of a future life was ever before them. Various qualities,
though primarily considered a manifestation of the Almighty, were
attributed each to a special god who controlled and typified one
particular virtue. This partly accounts for the multiplied numbers of
the Egyptian gods, and with the further complications that resulted from
invasions

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

and the adoption of alien beliefs, the religious philosophy of Egypt is
not easy to follow, and is often seemingly contradictory; but when we
take into consideration the vast period during which this Empire
flourished it is natural that the external manifestations of faith
should have varied as time went on.

A knowledge of the life, death, and resurrection of Osiris is assumed,
and his worship in association with Isis and Horus, although not
necessarily under these names, is continuous. Horus is frequently
alluded to as the god of the ladder, and the mystic ladder seen by Jacob
in his vision, and the ladder of seven steps known to the initiates of
Egypt, Greece, Mexico, India, and Persia will be familiar to all
students of occultism.

Throughout the whole of the Egyptian civilisation, which lasted for at
least 6000 years, the influence and potency of Amulets, and Talismans,
was recognised in the religious services, each Talisman and Amulet
having a specified virtue.

Certain Amulets not only were worn during life, but were even attached
to the dead body. They are described in the following notes:

<span class="smallcaps">The Crux Ansata</span>, or Ankh (see
Illustrations Nos. 47, 48, 49, [Plate IV](#img_pl04)), was known as the
symbol of life, the loop at the top of the Cross consisting of the
hieroglyphic Ru (O) set in an

<span id="img_pl04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 4. EGYPTIAN
TALISMANS.](tn/pl04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl04.jpg)  
PLATE 4. EGYPTIAN TALISMANS.  
</span>

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

upright form, meaning the gateway, or mouth, the creative power being
signified by the loop which represents a fish's mouth giving birth to
water as the life of the country, bringing the inundations and renewal
of the fruitfulness of the earth to those who depended upon its increase
to maintain life. It was regarded as the key of the Nile which
overflowed periodically and so fertilised the land.

It was also shown in the hands of the Egyptian kings, at whose
coronations it played an important part, and the gods are invariably
depicted holding this symbol of creative power; it was also worn to
bring knowledge, power, and abundance. Again, it had reference to the
spiritual life, for it was from the Crux Ansata, or Ankh, that the
symbol of Venus originated, the Circle over the Cross being the triumph
of Spirit, represented by the Circle, over matter, shown by the Cross.

<span class="smallcaps">The Menat</span> (Illustrations Nos. 50, 53,
[Plate IV](#img_pl04)) were specially dedicated to Hathor, who was a
type of Isis, and was worn for conjugal happiness, as it gave power and
strength to the organs of reproduction, promoting health and
fruitfulness. It frequently formed a part of a necklace, and was
elaborately ornamented; No. 50, from the British Museum, is a good
specimen, the Cow being an emblem of the maternal qualities which

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

were the attributes of the goddess, who stood for all that is good and
true in Wife, Mother, and Daughter.

<span class="smallcaps">The Two Plumes</span> (Illustration No. 51,
[Plate IV](#img_pl04)) are Sun Amulets and the symbols of Ra and Thoth,
the two feathers being typical of the two lives, spiritual and material.
This was worn to promote Uprightness in dealing, Enlightenment, and
Morality, being symbolical of the great gods of Light and Air.

<span class="smallcaps">The Single Plume</span> (Illustration No. 52,
[Plate IV](#img_pl04)) was an emblem of Maat, the female counterpart of
Thoth, who wears on her head the feather characteristic of the phonetic
value of her name; she was the personification of Integrity,
Righteousness, and Truth. Illustrations Nos. 54, 55, 56, [Plate
IV](#img_pl04), show three forms of

<span class="smallcaps">The Nefer</span>, a symbol of Good Luck, worn to
attract Success, Happiness, Vitality, and Friends.

<span class="smallcaps">The Cartouche</span>, or Name Amulet
(Illustration No. 61, [Plate IV](#img_pl04)), was worn to secure Favour,
Recognition, and Remembrance, and to prevent the name of its wearer
being blotted out in the next world. This is a very important Amulet, as
the name was believed to be an integral part of the man, without which
his soul could not come before God, so that it was most essential that
the name should be preserved, in order, as described

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

in the *Book of the Dead*, "thou shalt never perish, thou shalt never,
never come to an end," the loss of the name meaning the total
annihilation of the individual.

The Amulets of

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">The Angles</span> (see Illustrations Nos. 58, 59,
[Plate IV](#img_pl04)) and

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">The Plummet</span> (No. 60 on the [same
Plate](#img_pl04)) were symbols of the god Thoth, and were worn for
Moral Integrity, Wisdom, Knowledge, Order, and Truth.

Thoth was the personification of Law and Order, being the god who worked
out the Creation as decreed by the god Ra. He knew all the words of
power and the secrets of all hearts, and may be regarded as the chief
recording angel; he was also the inventor of all arts and sciences.

<span class="smallcaps">Bes</span>, shown in Illustration No. 57, [Plate
IV](#img_pl04), was a very popular Talisman, being the god of Laughter,
Merry-making, and Good Luck; by some authorities he is considered to be
a foreign importation from pre-dynastic times, and he has been
identified with Horus and regarded as the god who renewed youth. He was
also the patron of beauty, the protector of children, and was
undoubtedly the progenitor of the modern Billiken.

Illustrations Nos. 62, 66, [Plate V](bot10.htm#img_pl05), are examples
of

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Aper</span>, which symbolised Providence and
was worn for Steadfastness, Stability, and Alertness.

<span class="smallcaps">The Tat</span> (Illustrations Nos. 63, 64, 65,
[Plate V](bot10.htm#img_pl05)) held a very important place in the
religious services of the Egyptians, and formed the centre of the annual
ceremony of the setting-up of the Tat, a service held to commemorate the
death and resurrection of Osiris, this symbol representing the
building-up of the backbone and reconstruction of the body of Osiris. In
their services the Egyptians associated themselves with Osiris, through
whose sufferings and death they hoped to rise glorified and immortal,
and secure Everlasting Happiness. The four cross-bars symbolise the four
cardinal points, and the four elements of Earth, Air, Fire, and Water,
and were often very elaborately ornamented (see Illustration No. 64,
[Plate V](bot10.htm#img_pl05), taken from an example at the British
Museum). It was worn as a Talisman for Stability and Strength, and for
Protection from enemies; also that all doors, (or opportunities,) might
be open both in this life and the next. Moreover, a Tat of gold set in
sycamore wood, which had been steeped in the water of Ankham flowers,
was placed at the neck of the deceased on the day of interment, to
protect him on his journey through the underworld and assist him in
triumphing over

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

his foes, that he might become perfect for ever and ever.

<span class="smallcaps">The Heart</span> was believed to be the seat of
the Soul, and Illustrations Nos. 67, 68, 69, [Plate
V](bot10.htm#img_pl05), are examples of these Talismans worn to prevent
black magicians from bewitching the Soul out of the body. The importance
of these charms will be realised from the belief that if the Soul left
the Heart, the Body would quickly fade away and die. According to
Egyptian lore at the judgment of the dead the Heart is weighed, when if
found perfect, it is returned to its owner, who immediately recovers his
powers of locomotion and becomes his own master, with strength in his
limbs and everlasting felicity in his soul.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](bot10)

</div>
