<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot05.md) 
[Next](bot07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

### CHAPTER III

<span class="small">The Tau Cross—Aum Ma Ni Pad Me Hum—Indian
Talismans—Ganesa the Elephant-headed—Hangman the Monkey God—The Eight
Glorious Emblems of Buddha—The Wheel of Life—The Conch Shell—The Two
Fishes—The Lucky Diagram—The Lotus—The Frog—The Three Gems.</span>

OF the many and various Symbols and Talismans which have come down to us
through the ages, the Tau Cross is one of the most ancient, and is
undoubtedly the prototype of all modern crosses; it probably had its
origin in the double-axe hieroglyphic used by primitive man, and
symbolised the Divine attributes of rule and power appertaining to the
single axe as mentioned in the previous chapter, and is still recognised
as an emblem of authority in the form of the Gavel, or Mallet, with
which the auctioneer conducts sales of property and the chairman
controls meetings both in public and in the various lodges of secret
societies. Formerly it was also universally worn as a talisman of
powerful efficacy to protect its wearer from diseases of an inflammatory
nature and against bites of serpents and other venomous reptiles (see
Illustration No. 19, [Plate I](bot05.htm#img_pl01).md). Moses,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

who from his training in the Egyptian temples would be familiar with its
symbolic significance, also used this cross, with the brazen serpent
attached, to save the Israelites in the Wilderness when they were
afflicted by the fiery serpents. This form of cross is to be found in
all known religions of both hemispheres, and has ever been regarded as
the symbol of eternal life and of regeneration, and in relation to this,
John Dudley, writing in 1846, says: "that such deep mysterious meaning
was possibly intended by our Saviour dying upon the Cross, giving
spiritual life and immortality to all mankind." It was also the mark
mentioned in Ezekiel ix. 4 which was set in the foreheads of those
destined for exemption from Divine punishment in Jerusalem; and the Tau
is conspicuous in various old stained-glass representations of the
subject depicted as described in Scripture. A further instance of
significance is that it also figured on the roll-call of the Roman
Legions, a Tau Cross being placed against the names of all those who had
survived the battle, and a Theta against the slain.

The Tau Cross was also the sign adopted by Anthony the Copt, an Egyptian
hermit gifted in the cure of Erysipelas (a diffusive inflammatory
affection of the skin) and as an Amulet against St. Anthony's Fire, as
this disease was subsequently

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

called, this cross came into great favour, particularly among the Jews,
who used it in conjunction with various magical formulas both for
Erysipelas and Epilepsy, or the falling sickness, as stated by the Rev.
C. W. King. We also learn from Grose that a brotherhood known as the
Order of St. Anthony was instituted in 1095 by one Gaston Frank. The
friars of this order made it their object in life to minister to those
afflicted with St. Anthony's Fire, the relics of this saint being
believed to be most efficacious in the cure of this complaint. We are
also told that this fraternity wore a black habit with the letter **T**
in blue on their breasts, this symbol being known as St. Anthony's
Cross. As this saint was habitually invoked for the cure of Epilepsy as
well as Erysipelas, the Tau Cross became regarded as a Talisman against
both maladies.

In the *Archæological Journal* we note the following

"Among Stothard's effigies are those of Sir Roger de Bois and lady, each
of whom wears on the right shoulder a circular badge graven with a Tau
Cross on which appears the word ANTHON," thus testifying to the fact
that Sir Roger also belonged to the Brotherhood, whilst in Ireland to
this day St. Anthony's Cross is still used as a charm against sickness.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Aum</span>, the mystic emblem of the Deity, was
first introduced into Europe by the translation of the Gita, in which we
are told it is forbidden to be pronounced aloud, and in its complete
expression is still in universal use as a Talisman throughout Asia. It
is usually spelt <span class="smallcaps">om</span>, but being
tri-literal seems, according to most Sanskrit scholars, better expressed
by <span class="smallcaps">AUM</span>, or <span
class="smallcaps">AOM</span>, or <span class="smallcaps">AWM</span>,
being formed of the three Sanskrit letters that are best so expressed.
The date generally believed for its universal use is the thirteenth
century <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> It represents the Hindu
Triad, or triform Deity, three in one, A the Creator, U the Preserver,
and M the Destroyer, or Transformer, and is the image of the Ancient of
Days; and in the Book of the Pitris it is written: "The husband is as
ancient as the wife, and the wife is as ancient as the husband, and the
son is also as ancient as the husband and wife, and the one that
contains all these is called <span class="smallcaps">AUM</span>."

The signification of the invocation <span class="smallcaps">AUM MA NI
PAD ME HŪM</span> (<span class="smallcaps">AUM</span>! the Jewel in the
Lotus <span class="smallcaps">HŪM</span>) is therefore very important,
and accounts for the great veneration in which it is held (see
Illustration No. 12a, [Plate I](bot05.htm#img_pl01).md), and in *Buddhism
in Thibet*, by Waddell, we note that it is stated in the <span
class="smallcaps">MANI KAHBUM</span> that this charm will bring the
greatest happiness, prosperity, all knowledge, and the

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

means of deliverance from enemies and all evil on earth, whilst the
devout firmly believe that as they revolve the magical sentence within
their prayer-wheels by day and night they are preventing the series of
re-births otherwise inevitable, and that when their lives have ended
here they will pass straightway to the Paradise of Buddha, for the

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

"<span class="smallcaps">Aum</span> closes re-birth among the gods,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Ma</span> among the Titans,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Ni</span> as a man,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Pad</span> as a beast,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Me</span> as a Tantalus, and  
 <span class="smallcaps">Hum</span> as an inhabitant of Hell."

</div>

To each of these words is given the distinctive colour of these six
conditions of re-birth:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

"<span class="smallcaps">Aum</span> the godly white,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Ma</span> the Titanic blue,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Ni</span> the human yellow,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Pad</span> the animal green,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Me</span> the tantalic red,  
 <span class="smallcaps">Hum</span> hellish black."

</div>

There is also a special Rosary used for the repetition of this charm,
composed either of the Conch Shell, or crystal beads; in use, the right
hand is passed through the Rosary, which hangs down knotted end up, and
the hand with the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

thumb upward is carried to the breast and held there. On the first
syllable <span class="smallcaps">AUM</span> being pronounced, the first
bead is grasped by raising the thumb and quickly depressing the tip to
reach the bead against the outer side of the second joint of the first
finger, during the remainder of the sentence the bead, still grasped, is
gently revolved to the right, and on conclusion of the invocation is
dropped down the palm side of the string; and with another AUM, the next
bead is proceeded with until, on conclusion of each cycle of the rosary,
each of the keeper beads are touched, saying respectively,

<span class="smallcaps">Om!     Ah!     Hum!</span>

In countries where Buddhism is practised, particularly in Thibet and
India, this charm is depicted on silk flags, flown from lofty
flagstaffs, so that when the flag is blown out by the wind the sentence
may be wafted to heaven to bring down blessings to the entire district.

The prayer-wheel, which contains this mystic sentence printed on long
lengths of silk ribbon coiled on cylinders, is revolved by the Lama
priest sunwise, and he is very strict in this observance, believing that
the reversing of the prayer would also reverse the results of the
invocation.

<span class="smallcaps">Aum</span> is recognised throughout India as an
emblem of the Deity, carrying with its pronunciation

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

a thousand good things to the faithful; and a Brahmin teacher when
addressing an assembly will use this word when commencing his discourse,
and also at the close, so that he may not lose his knowledge and
understanding.

<span class="smallcaps">Indian Talismans</span>.—In India we find, as in
most countries, that Talismans very frequently have religious origins,
and representations of the Deities are in common use for the protection
of their wearers, as well as for their spiritual and material
well-being. A belief in a Trinity of gods is universal, with Brahma as
the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver and Restorer, and Siva the Destroyer
or Regenerator. In the course of the developments of the various sects
Vishnu, originally regarded as a manifestation of Solar energy, became
the supreme god, and the worshippers of Vishnu attribute to him all the
qualities of the triune gods, his image and various symbols being
amongst the most common of Indian Talismans. He is believed to have ten
Avataras, or Incarnations, in which his spirit descended in human form
to effect great reformations and to regenerate the world; the tenth
incarnation, yet to come, is for the final destruction of the wicked,
and to regenerate and purify the world.

Gotama Buddha, the founder of Buddhism, was Vishnu's ninth incarnation,
and his images and

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

symbols are extremely popular Talismans for protection and good fortune.
Buddhism, which was founded about the fifth century <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, has established itself throughout India,
China, Ceylon, Japan, Thibet, and Central Asia, inculcating a very high
system of theology, the ultimate end of which is Union with the Divine.
The Brahmins place Buddha foremost amongst the gods, as opposed to
Brahma of the Hindus.

Amongst other sects, Siva is regarded as the greatest of the gods, and
there is much overlapping amongst these beliefs, and numerous minor gods
exist, typifying various virtues and gifted with powers and attributes
which bring them into intimate relations with humanity, for which reason
their symbols and personifications are in common use as Talismans.
Talismans of Ganesa, the elephant-headed god, the son of Siva, (who is
regarded as the God of Wisdom and Prudence, and the Remover of
obstacles,) are always worn when any important undertaking is begun. He
is represented with four arms holding respectively a Lotus, a Shell, a
Goad or Club, and the Discus or Wheel, and the rotundity of his body is
symbolic of his high importance and good standing, and not, as might be
supposed, intended as evidence of good living (see Illustration No. 28,
[Plate II](#img_pl02).md).

<span class="smallcaps">Hanuman</span>, the Monkey god, is the most
popular

<span id="img_pl02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 2. INDIAN AND
THIBETAN TALISMANS.](tn/pl02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl02.jpg.md)  
PLATE 2. INDIAN AND THIBETAN TALISMANS.  
</span>

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

form of Talisman for Luck, Health, and Good Fortune amongst the Hindus,
and his wonderful exploits are a constant theme of interest from
childhood to old age.

He was unequalled in learning, knowledge of medicine, and magic, and his
skill and cunning in defeating his enemies were superhuman; he fought
for Rama, who was an incarnation of Vishnu, performing on his behalf
prodigious feats of valour. On one occasion, whilst fighting against
Ravana the King of Demons, his enemies greased his enormous tail and set
it on fire, but only to their own discomfiture, for with it Hanuman
burnt down Lankā, their capital city (see [Plate 2](#img_pl02), No. 29.md).
The eight glorious emblems of Buddha are all used as Talismans; they
consist of the Wheel of the Law, the Conch Shell, the Golden Fish, the
Lucky Diagram, the Lotus, the Umbrella, the Vase, and the Trumpet of
Victory.

Buddha at his birth had the marks of two feet upon his head and a wheel,
or disc, in his hand, by which symbols the Pandits foretold that he
would become a great ruler.

The Wheel of Life was drawn by Buddha in a rice field from grains of
rice, to illustrate his teaching that the perpetual succession of cause
and effect during life resembles the turning of a wheel; and the symbol
is worn as a wheel of fortune, so that

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

misfortunes may roll by and good fortune come uppermost. The wheel was
also used to explain the vision seen by a disciple on other spheres, the
five spokes divided the Hells, the place of Animals, Ghosts, or evil
spirits, Gods, and men (illustrated [Plate II](#img_pl02), No. 34.md).

<span class="smallcaps">The Conch Shell</span> was taken from a demon of
the sea by Krishna, who used it for a horn (see Illustration No. 35,
[Plate II](#img_pl02).md), and is prized as a Talisman for oratory and
learning, as well as a bringer of wealth, the latter being no doubt
suggested by the fact that shells were the current coin of primitive
people.

<span class="smallcaps">The Fish</span> is the symbol of the first
incarnation of Vishnu, who in this form saved Manu from the Flood to
become the progenitor of the new race. Because of its fertility it is
used as a Talisman for increase of riches, and is illustrated on [Plate
II](#img_pl02.md), No. 32.

<span class="smallcaps">The Lucky Diagram</span> is very common in
Thibet, and is worn as a Talisman for Longevity (see Illustration No.
30, [Plate II](#img_pl02).md).

<span class="smallcaps">The Lotus</span> expresses the idea of
superhuman origin, as it grows from the body of the water without
contact with the solid earth, and no matter how muddy the water may
become still preserves its purity undefiled. It is one of the symbols of
Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, who is the goddess

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of Fortune and of Beauty; it is worn as a Talisman of Good Luck and Good
Fortune, and as Lakshmi is particularly favourable for children it is
worn to avert all childish diseases and accidents, as well as to protect
from the Evil Eye (see Illustration No. 33, [Plate II](#img_pl02).md).

Frogs made of amber or gilded metal are also frequently worn as amulets
by children in Burmah, that they may not decline in health through the
evil glance. Brightly coloured ribbons are hung upon houses and attached
to the heads and tails of horses to distract the attention of the Evil
Eye, and protect the animals from harm, which probably accounts for the
origin of the gaudy decorations we frequently see in our own country
tied to the heads and tails of fine cart-horses on their way to the fair
or horse show.

<span class="smallcaps">The Three Gems</span> Talisman (Illustrated on
[Plate II](#img_pl02), No. 31.md) is to be met with wherever Buddhism is
established, and symbolises Buddha His Word, and the Church; it is worn
to promote the three virtues, Endurance, Courage, and Obedience, the
Buddhist Law.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](bot07.md)

</div>
