<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot16.md) 
[Next](bot18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

### CHAPTER II

#### TAURUS—THE BULL

<span class="small">The Constellation—Aldebaran—The Chaldeans—The
Temples—Apis Bull—Aphrodite—Characteristics of Taurus—Training—Gems of
Taurus—The Sapphire—Bishop's Ring—St. Jerome Qualities of the
Sapphire—Star Sapphire—Solomon's Seal—Charlemagne's Talisman—The
Turquoise—Bœtius de Boot—Horseman's Talisman—Qualities of the
Stone.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Sun enters the Celestial House of
Taurus, the second sign of the Zodiac, on April 21st, and remains in
occupation until May 22nd. Taurus is situated between the constellations
of Aries and Gemini, and its position is marked by a beautiful cluster
of stars named *Hyades*, from a Greek word meaning rain, because the
influence of these stars was considered to be conducive to rainfalls.
Its most brilliant star is <span class="smallcaps">Aldebaran</span>, a
star of the first magnitude; Taurus also contains the Pleiades, and it
is a generally accepted theory amongst astronomers that the motion of
the Sun, probably in a circle, has its centre in one of these stars.
According to ancient mythology, the Pleiades were the seven daughters of
Atlas and Pheione, who, because of

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

their great virtue and purity, were rewarded by a place in the heavens
as a constellation of stars.

The symbol of this House is the Bull (as illustrated
[Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front), No. 2.md), which was selected by the
early Chaldean astrologers as typifying the nature of those born under
this sign, and not from any fancied resemblance of its stars to a Bull.
Undoubtedly the Zodiac had a prehistoric origin, and one of the ancient
names given to this sign was <span class="smallcaps">Te</span>, meaning
foundation, which is interesting from the fact that it was in this sign
period that the foundations of the two Jewish temples were laid.

As Taurus is the first of the earthly signs it typifies the creative
forces of Nature; Apis, the sacred Bull of the Egyptians, was used as
its symbol and was adopted by the Greeks as typical of fecundity, and is
mentioned in Part I, Chapter VIII, on Greek Talismans. In Ancient
Greece, Venus, the ruling planet of this House, was represented by the
goddess Aphrodite, usually shown with horns on her head (not intended to
represent the goddess Isis as has been sometimes imagined, but the
planet Venus, which occasionally in the course of her revolution round
the Sun is seen in crescent form) .

The dominating characteristic of Taurus subjects

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

is their tenacity of purpose, which makes them staunch friends but
determined enemies; and although this may to some extent cause
difficulty in adapting their opinions to those of others, on the other
hand it enables them, when once they have grasped existing conditions,
to reap the benefit of their industry and application.

They possess strong mental and physical powers, and are persistent
students, their qualities of concentration making them capable of high
educational attainments. They are determined, fearless, enthusiastic,
and unyielding in carrying out their schemes; and, when not irritated,
are generous. The temper is, under normal circumstances, even, if at
times sullen, not easily provoked, but very hot and tempestuous when
aroused. They can be influenced through their enthusiasm, but will
resent to the utmost with dogged obstinacy any attempt to drive them
against their inclinations. Their memories are, as a rule, good, and
their tenacity of purpose is usually accompanied by a great deal of
patience, so that they usually accomplish aims, although not always with
a due regard to cost. Their outlook is practical, but not miserly, and
money is valued as a medium of power, and for the use that can be made
of it. Owing to their strong vitality, they generate life forces very
rapidly, which gives them the power of healing,

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

making them very helpful to people of nervous temperament lacking in
vitality which this type possesses in excess. When attracted their
friendship is sincere and trustworthy; and, although they are
undoubtedly shrewd in business matters, they are also sensitive to
psychic and emotional influences, being apt to allow their feelings and
emotions to rule, laying themselves open to deception, and the
unscrupulous, by working upon their sympathies, can prejudice their
judgment, so that as a rule it will be best for this type to make all
important decisions when alone, either in the early morning or after
retiring at night.

They do not usually suffer from lack of appetite, and their tastes are
of an epicurean nature, the masculine subjects being critical and not
easily satisfied; the gentler sex are apt to be hypercritical and with a
strong bias in favour of their own culinary theories or methods over
those of others.

Their success in life comes, as a rule, after thirty, when they have
their dispositions well in hand and are able to benefit by their
experiences.

In this sign the Moon is in exaltation, and subjects born when she is so
placed have their characters strengthened, and have more reserve and
self-control. Their ambitions become practical

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

and successful; the constitution is stronger, and there is less
liability to disease.

With Taurean subjects, the early impressions of life are vivid and
lasting, and their future career and welfare depend very largely on
their training and influences through childhood and youth, surrounding
conditions and early attachments being never forgotten.

Although producing practical business people, this sign has also its
artistic side natural to the planet Venus. Many talented musicians and
singers are born during this period, and the type as a whole, even when
personally unaccomplished, is greatly influenced by music and singing
which make a strong appeal to their emotional tendencies.

Unless following a very active vocation, their abundant vitality
predisposes them to put on flesh, and it is through this tendency that
disease attacks them and they become liable to stomach troubles, dropsy,
affections of the heart, kidneys, and generative system; they are also
prone to complaints affecting the throat, such as quinsies, diphtheria,
and laryngitis.

They will harmonise best with people whose birthdays come between August
22nd and September 22nd; December 21st and January 20th; and June 21st
and July 22nd.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

The Gems of this House are the Sapphire and Turquoise, which are
especially suitable for the expression of the Taurean qualities.

<span class="smallcaps">The Sapphire</span>.—The Sapphire, one of the
earliest gems known to man, is found in riverbeds and torrents, the
force of the water washing the stones from their matrix; and to this day
are still found under these conditions. In its finest quality the
sapphire is of a deep blue colour, and the more it resembles the dark
velvety blue of the Pansy the greater is its value.

Of coloured gems, the Sapphire has been the most venerated amongst all
nations, and particularly in the East it is the stone most frequently
consecrated to the various deities. Amongst Buddhists it is believed to
produce a desire for prayer, and is regarded as the Stone of Stones to
give Spiritual Light, and to bring Peace and Happiness as long as its
wearer leads a moral life.

In the early days of the Christian Church, the stones and metal used in
making the ring of a Bishop was left very much to the taste of the
individual, but in the twelfth century Innocent III decreed that these
rings should be made of pure gold, set with an unengraved stone, the
Sapphire being the gem selected, as possessing the virtues and qualities
essential to its dignified position as

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

the badge of Pontifical rank and "a seal of secrets," for there be many
things "that a priest conceals from the senses of the vulgar and less
intelligent; which he keeps locked up as it were under seal."

Of this gem St. Jerome writes that "it procures favours with princes,
pacifies enemies, frees from enchantment, and obtains freedom from
captivity."

The Jews also held this stone in high veneration, the seal-stone in the
ring of King Solomon being said to be a Sapphire, and in Exodus xxiv.
10, we read in the description of a manifestation of Jehovah:

"There was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone,
and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness."

This description of clearness, if taken as meaning transparency, would
indicate a familiarity with the qualities of the stone as we know it,
although in most of the ancient writings all blue stones are loosely
described as Sapphires, including the Tables of the Law, which it is
practically certain could not have been of Sapphire and in all
probability were of Lapis Lazuli.

During the Middle Ages the qualities attributed to the Sapphire were
that it preserved Chastity, discovered Fraud and Treachery, protected
from

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Poison, Plague,
Fever, and Skin Diseases, and had great power in resisting black magic
and ill-wishing; in smallpox it preserved the eyes from injury if rubbed
on them. It also gave concentration; but if worn by an intemperate or
impious person, it lost its lustre, thus indicating the presence of vice
and impurity. It is recorded that in the Church of Old St. Paul's,
London, there was a famous Sapphire given by "Richard de Preston,
Citizen and Grocer of that city, for the cure of infirmities in the eyes
of those thus afflicted who might resort to it."

Cloudy Sapphires are sometimes found which owing to a peculiarity in
their composition show six rays of light running from the top of the
stone. These are known as Asteria, or Star Stones, and this Star
Sapphire was much valued by the Ancients as a love charm; they
considered it peculiarly powerful for the procuring of favours, for
bringing good fortune and averting witchcraft. Six is the number given
to Venus, and is also the number of the true Solomon's Seal, whose
virtues and qualities (treated of under Talismans, Part I, Chapter II)
this stone represents.

The wife of the Emperor Charlemagne is reputed to have possessed a very
powerful Talisman composed of two rough Sapphires and a portion of the
Holy Cross, made by the Magi in the train of

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Haaroon Al
Raschid, Emperor of the East. This Talisman was made for the purpose of
keeping Charlemagne's affections constant to his wife, and it was so
efficacious that his love endured after her death. He would not allow
the body, on which the Talisman hung, to be interred, even when
decomposition had set in; and burial was only permitted when
Charlemagne's confessor, who knew of the Talisman and its virtue,
removed it from the body. The confessor kept the Talisman and was raised
to high honours by Charlemagne, becoming Archbishop of Mainz and
Chancellor of the Empire. It was, however, restored to the monarch on
his death-bed when he was suffering great agony, and it enabled him to
pass peacefully away.

<span class="smallcaps">The Turquoise</span>.—The Turquoise is
universally recognised as a Venus stone, though sometimes erroneously
attributed to the Zodiacal House of Capricorn, which is ruled by the
planet Saturn. It responds to the vibrations of both Venus Houses, but
seems strongest in Taurus.

This stone was, in ancient times, known as the Turkis, or Turkeystone,
as most of the specimens found in Europe in those days came from Persia
through the hands of Constantinople merchants. The best specimens still
come from Persia, although Turquoises are also mined in Arizona,

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> U.S.A.; in China
and Thibet and Russia; and in the Crown Jewels of Spain are many
Turquoises brought from New Mexico over two hundred years ago.

The Turquoise is more frequently used for Amulets than any other stone,
as much for its mystic virtues as for its beauty, particularly in the
East, where sentences from the Koran are engraved upon it and the
characters gilded.

Amongst its many virtues it was believed to warn of poison by becoming
moist and changing colour; and it is said that King John, by these
indications, detected the poison that caused his death. This gem has
always been regarded as a pledge of true affections, and is also
credited with the power of drawing upon itself the evil that threatens
its wearer; but this quality belongs only to the Turquoise that has been
given, and not purchased. Bœtius de Boot tells of a stone that had been
in the possession of a Spanish gentleman living near his father; the
stone was of exceptional beauty, but at the time of its owner's death it
had entirely lost its colour and was said to resemble Malachite more
than Turquoise. Because of this de Boot's father bought it for a very
small sum, but not liking to wear so shabby-looking a gem, he gave it to
his son, saying, "Son, as the virtues of the Turkois are said to exist
only when the stone

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

has been received as a gift, I will try its efficacy by bestowing it
upon thee." De Boot, although he did not much appreciate the gift, had
his crest engraved upon it, but had not worn it a month before it
regained its original beauty. Shortly after this the stone gave evidence
of its power, for as de Boot was riding home in the dark his horse
stumbled and fell from a bank to the road ten feet below, neither horse
nor rider being any the worse for the fall; in the morning the stone was
found to be split in two.

It is for qualities such as these that it is prized by the Turks as a
horseman's Talisman, they believing that it makes a horse sure-footed
and protects its rider from injury by falls; and Camillus Leonardus
says: "So long as a rider hath the Turquoise with him his horse will
never tire him and will preserve him from any accident, and defend him
that carries it from untoward and evil casualties."

In the Middle Ages the Turquoise was believed to appease hatred, relieve
and prevent headaches, and to change colour when its owner was in peril
or ill-health. The change of colour must not be permanent, and the stone
should recover its real hue when the illness or danger is passed.

A gentleman who is a practical business man, holding an important
position in the City, to

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

whom I supplied a Turquoise, assured me that on two occasions when he
was in personal danger the stone paled, but afterwards recovered its
natural colour. It is not, however, sensitive to the changes in his
states of health.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Gemini—The Twins](bot18.md)

</div>
