<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot18.md) 
[Next](bot20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### CANCER—THE HOUSE OF THE CRAB

<span class="small">The Dark Sign—Its Duration—Origins—Summer
Solstice—Hercules and the Crab—Characteristics—Goddess Esmeralda and the
Ancient Peruvians—The Emerald Isle—Moonstones—Blue Moon—Pearls—Cat's
Eyes—Rock Crystals—Crystal-gazing—Virtues of the Crystal.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Cancer</span>, the fourth sign of the Zodiac, is
situated in the northern celestial hemisphere; being composed of small
stars, the brightest of which are only of the third magnitude, and very
few visible to the naked eye, it was known in olden times as the dark
sign, and is shown with its symbols in No. 4 of the coloured
[Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front.md).

The Sun enters this sign on June 22nd, remaining in occupation up to and
including July 23rd, being in that part of the Ecliptic highest above
the Equator, marking midsummer.

Its name Cancer, meaning a Crab, is popularly supposed to have
originated in the resemblance of its constellation to this crustacean,
but the likeness is not at all obvious, even if it may once have
existed, so that the name probably had its origin from some other cause.

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

The earliest known illustration of this symbol is very like the Egyptian
Scarab, many antiquarians favouring this as the real symbol, it having
been used as an emblem of resurrection for over 3000 years <span
class="smallcaps">B.C.</span>, and as this sign marked the resurrection
of the earth from the Flood which ended in the preceding Zodiacal sign
Gemini, the Beetle or Scarab is sometimes shown placed in the centre of
the Crab's back. The significance of this, the new world bearing its
symbol of eternity, is not so very surprising when we remember that the
Zodiac characterised highly developed religious ideas.

The beginning of the sign ♋ is called the Tropic of Cancer, and when the
Sun arrives within this sign it has reached its utmost limit of north
declination and seems to remain stationary a few days before it begins
to decline again to the south. This stationary altitude is called the
Summer Solstice, or "Sun standing still"; and the Hindus, having derived
their knowledge of the stars principally from the Chaldeans, used the
Crab as symbolic of this House, as in order to move forward it is
compelled, as it were, to walk backwards, which illustrates the apparent
motion of the Sun when it commences to move backwards towards the
Equator.

In Ancient Mythology we are told that this constellation

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

was formed by a Crab placed in the heavens by the goddess Juno as a
reward for the sacrifice of its life which it lost in an attack on
Hercules in her service, and so earned its translation to the celestial
domains.

Cancer, being the Zodiacal House of the Moon, is much under her
influence. It is the first of the watery signs and presides over the
Ocean; subjects born during this period, because of their receptive and
plastic natures, may be said to reflect the influences of their
surroundings like the sea. Impressionable, yet tenacious, they are well
symbolised by the Crab, as their tenacity when roused is remarkable,
requiring little prompting to move them to determined action; but owing
to the changeability of their moods, alternately hopeful and depressed,
they often surprise their friends by suddenly letting opportunities slip
just when success is within their grasp. They appreciate congenial
society, but can be quite happy alone, and most intensely do they object
to having their plans or arrangements made for them.

They are keenly interested in the domestic side of life, this sign
representing the principles of home life; family ties and duties are in
consequence more keenly felt by this type than by any other, and old
friendships or associations are held sacred.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

Children born during this period are very sensitive to the physical and
mental conditions of others, and if forced to live with natures that are
inharmonious and not in sympathy with them, their vitality is readily
depleted and they become nervous, listless, and morbid. For this reason
children should never sleep with the elderly or ailing.

Strongly imaginative and reserved, they are at times mistrustful,
over-anxious, and exacting; and so great is their tendency to experience
every kind of sensation, that when badly aspected by the planets of
their horoscope their feelings amount to an obsession, and from the
overdevelopment of their intuitional faculties they become the subjects
of presentiments and delusions. When their characters are well developed
and their erratic tenacity made consistent, they become firm-willed and
reliant, with clear keen intellects and strong intuitions capable of
high accomplishments. Although generally quiet and reserved, brilliant
conversationalists are sometimes found among them. Where clans and sects
meet they will be found, and they form no small portion of the
intellectual members of secret societies and mystic and occult
communities. They greatly appreciate old customs, curios, books, and
relics of the past, their faculty of imagination placing

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

them pre-eminently above all other types in the realms of poesy and
fancy. They are keen observers of Nature in all her changing moods, and
in the solitude of woods, or by shady lane, stream, and hedgerow they
can best recover their balance when out of conceit with a practical and
unsympathetic world.

This sign has given us some of our greatest composers and writers of
romance. As a rule their work is spasmodic, but energetic whilst the fit
lasts or when spurred by approbation, but slackens when the mood has
passed or the incentive is removed.

They succeed best in professions or employments affecting the public, as
authors, artists, musicians, politicians, and clairvoyants. They also
make good naval officers and sailors, and do well in professions
connected with the sea and liquids.

They will be most in harmony with people born during the periods of
Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio, and Pisces.

The fortunate gems for this House are the Emerald, Moonstone, Pearl,
Cat's Eye, and Crystal.

<span class="smallcaps">The Emerald</span> held a very high place in the
esteem of the Ancients, and no other precious stone has probably been
the subject of so much regard and admiration, one of its principal
charms

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

being its brilliant green colour. Very curious are some of the
traditions connected with it.

In the first place, it is interesting to note that this gem being the
Zodiacal stone of Cancer, the Crab was thought to have the same healing
powers as the *Oculi Cancrorum*, or Crab's Eye ointment, prescribed in
olden days as a cure for ulcerous sores.

Emeralds are found in Siberia, India, the United States, and Mexico, and
the belief that demons and griffins guarded the mines is said to be as
strong amongst the Peruvians of the present time as in the days of the
Romans.

The origin of the word Emerald is from a Sanskrit word meaning green, it
being thought that there was nothing in Nature to equal its colour and
brilliancy, and it was an old Hebrew belief that if a serpent fixed its
eye upon the lustre of this stone it would become blind.

The cause of its beautiful green tint has been attributed by some
scientists to the presence of oxide of chromium, by others to copper,
whilst in 1848 an experimenter believed it to be derived from an organic
matter called chlorophyl, similar to the colouring substance of the
leaves of plants.

Pizarro, in his conquest of Mexico, found numerous Emeralds of
surpassing beauty; but d’Acosta, a contemporary writer, states that

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

many of the finest stones were ruined by the Spanish soldiers, who,
being informed by a priest that to test their genuineness they should be
placed upon an anvil and struck with a hammer, followed these
instructions with most disastrous results.

The Incas possessed some wonderful Emeralds; one (described by de la
Viga) as large as the egg of an ostrich, was believed to be inhabited by
Esmeralda, the chief goddess of Peru. When sacking her temples the
Spaniards discovered immense quantities of Emeralds, it being customary
for her priests to obtain them by representing to the worshippers that
these gems were esteemed by the goddess above all else, Emeralds being
her own daughters.

Emeralds were known and esteemed in most remote times of the world's
history, and are to be met with amongst even Egyptian and Etruscan
remains. Faith in its virtues and qualities exist amongst the Orientals
to the present time, representing to them hope in immortality, courage
and exalted faith, and protection from pestilence, as well as a
preserver of eyesight, its efficacy being increased by a verse from the
Koran engraved upon it.

In India it is believed to confer the gift of memory and a knowledge of
secrets and future

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

events. Frequently used in the decorations of sacred images, and is
endowed by the Indians with very high attributes.

The Romans believed that nothing evil could remain in the presence of
this gem which discovered falsehood and treachery by changing colour and
turning pale, and when powerless to avert misfortune would fall from its
setting, giving rise to the belief that the falling of this gem is a bad
omen.

This stone was also considered very beneficial to the eyes, on which
account it was worn as a seal ring; in connection with this Pliny
states: "If the sight hath been dimmed and wearied by intense poring
upon anything, the beholding of this stone doth refresh and restore it
again." It is also recorded that Nero, who was very shortsighted, used
an emerald eye-glass to watch the gladiatorial contests. Probably from
its connection with the Moon, which rules the House of Cancer (and was
the goddess of midwives), it was considered particularly fortunate for
women at childbirth, and was held to promote constancy and domestic
felicity.

Worn in a ring it strengthens the memory and protects from giddiness; it
was also said to guard sailors and fishermen from perils and mishaps at
sea if suspended round the neck so as to lie upon the

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

breast (the part of the body ruled by Cancer). It taught unknown
secrets, and bestowed eloquence and renown, and, in the words of Miss
Landon, an English poetess:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">"It is a gem which hath the power to show  
 If plighted lovers keep their faith or no.  
 If faithful, it is like the leaves of Spring.  
 If faithless, like those leaves when withering."</span>

</div>

It should, however (being a very sensitive gem), be only worn by those
whose birthdays fall between the 22nd of June and July 23rd, or by those
with the Moon in good aspect.

<span class="smallcaps">The Moonstone</span>.—The Moonstone is a variety
of Feldspar and, as its name suggests, is considered to be in close
affinity with the Moon, because its pale lustrous blue colour resembles
moonlight, which is believed by the natives of India to give the stone
its colour. Indians believe that the best variety of the blue Moonstones
are washed up by the tides when the Sun and Moon are in very harmonious
relation, at intervals of twenty-one years (three periods of the Moon
whose number is seven), and from this has arisen the saying of "Once in
a blue moon"—to express a lengthy period.

It was known to the Ancients as Selenite, and Camillus Leonardus says it
is powerful in reconciling

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

lovers, and helpful to consumptives when the Moon is increasing in
light, but when the Moon is waning, its stone will only enable its
wearer to foretell future happenings; he also tells us that if the
Moonstone be held in the mouth it will decide which affair should be
taken in hand and which left alone; if to be undertaken, the matter is

r firmly fixed on the mind; if not, it passes out and is soon forgotten.

Pliny asserted that this stone contained an image of the Moon which
waxed or waned according to the state of that luminary.

The virtues attributed to this stone were to protect from harm and
danger in travelling by sea and land; to give mental inspiration, and to
bring success and good fortune in love; also to preserve its wearer
against dropsy and other watery diseases to which the Cancer type is
liable.

<span class="smallcaps">Pearls</span>.—Amongst all nations Pearls have
ever been considered the most beautiful products of Nature, but having
their origin in a living organism cannot be called a precious stone.
Most scientists are agreed that Pearls are formed in the endeavour of
certain bivalves to obtain relief from the irritation caused by some
foreign substance which has penetrated the shell and which the Oyster,
by covering with a pearly secretion, forms into a beautiful gem.

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

The idea that Pearls are symbolic of tears arose from this fact, and
illustrates the old adage that the most noble achievements have their
origin in painful and enduring effort. Nowadays in the Pearl Fisheries,
particularly in the Bay of Ago, (Japan,) foreign matter is intentionally
introduced into the shell, but the results do not equal the Pearls found
as the outcome of natural influences, a considerable time being required
to bring them to perfection.

Pearls are extremely hard, and the well-known story of Cleopatra's Pearl
cannot be believed, unless the Pearl was first ground to powder, as any
acid sufficiently strong to dissolve a Pearl would be fatal to human
life.

Among Eastern nations this gem is credited with the power of preserving
the purity of their wearers, and as an emblem of maidenly purity. The
Romans also set a high value on Pearls, consecrating them to Isis, and
wearing them for her favours. Pearls were also made into a decoction
with distilled water and given to lunatics to restore their reason. In
China Pearls are powdered and taken as medicine for syncope and
stomachic ailments.

The occult properties of the Pearl in olden times caused them to be worn
as Amulets by divers as a protection against sharks.

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

This gem is, however, considered unfortunate for those in love, and if
worn by the married signified "torrents of tears," and for this reason
is seldom used in engagement rings, even at the present day.

<span class="smallcaps">The Cat's Eye</span>.—The Cat's Eye, a
semi-transparent stone of the Chrysoberyl family, has a distinct ray of
light running across it, which ray has been compared to a drop of water
enclosing a beam of light. It is most commonly translucent, of a
milky-white colour, but is also found in shades of yellow, red, and
brown. It has always been greatly valued in India, where it is regarded
not only as a bringer of wealth, but a Talisman to prevent its owner's
gain diminishing. The Cat's Eye is also considered powerful against the
terrors of the night; it will relieve asthma if hung round the neck,
also helps babies suffering from croup, and it is also worn for mental
balance, foresight, and general attractiveness. As a popular charm for
success in speculation, gambling, and games of chance, it is said to
have no equal.

<span class="smallcaps">The Crystal</span>.—Rock Crystal is a form of
quartz, clear and transparent, the name Crystal coming from a Greek word
signifying "frozen water" or "clear ice." The magical powers of
revealing the hidden secrets of the future supposed to exist in the ball
of Crystal is of very ancient

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

origin; and it is said that Saint Augustine believed that
Crystal-gazing, as it is called, originated in Persia.

The Moon, the ruler of the House of Cancer, has direct influence upon
the intuitive faculties of the brain, through which seers visualise
events foreshadowed in the Crystal; making it peculiarly appropriate and
sympathetic to subjects of this type, so that it is not surprising that
this sign produces some of the best seers. Pliny states that Roman
physicians also used the ball of Crystal for cauterising purposes,
holding it against the rays of the Sun; they also used them applied
externally as a remedy for diseases of the kidneys.

Those whose birthdays fall within the periods of Aries or Libra,
however, should not wear the Emerald, Moonstones, Pearls, Cat's Eyes, or
Crystal, as they would not be in harmony with these gems.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Leo—The Lion](bot20.md)

</div>
