<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot11) 
[Next](bot13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

### CHAPTER IX

<span class="small">The Bulla—The Tusk—Pine Cone—The Frog—Skull of an
Ass—Key Talismans—Grylli, or Chimeræ—Goat—The Ox—Lion—Eagle—The
Caduceus—Mercury—Health Rings—Boar's Head—Clenched Hand—Open
Hand—Figured Hands—The Lizard—The Spider—The Fish—Snails.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Bulla</span> is the name given to a gold case,
circular or heart-shaped, used in necklaces or worn separately as a
pendant, sometimes attached as an ornament to a belt or badge which was
placed over one shoulder and under the opposite arm. Macrobius says it
was the special decoration of the victorious general in the triumphant
processions, having enclosed within it such remedies as were esteemed
most efficacious against the evil glance of envy.

Introduced into Rome by the Etruscans, it became very popular and was
adopted as the badge of free-born boys; it usually contained an
invocation to one or more of the gods. Among the poorer classes the
golden case was replaced by a leathern pouch, with contents of similar
virtue.

It was a common practice to wear on the Bulla some grotesque object (see
Illustration No. 106, [Plate VIII](#img_pl08))

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

which added to its efficacy as a Talisman, and in particular averted the
evil glance; to save its wearer from the Evil Eye a tusk in the form of
a pendant was frequently added to accentuate its efficacy.

<span class="smallcaps">The Pine Cone</span>, the symbol of Cybele the
goddess of abundant benefits, was worn by her votaries for Health,
Wealth, and Power, and all good and necessary things which flow in
abundance without ceasing from her influence. She had many names, and
was called by the Greeks, Pasithea, signifying Mother, as she was the
great mother of all the gods. Her priests were famous for their magical
powers, and it was customary to fix her symbol, the Pine Cone, on a pole
in the vineyards, to protect them from blight and witchcraft, a practice
still to be seen in Italy at the present time, and presumably this was
the origin of the Pine Cones which surmount the gateways at the
entrances of some of the carriage drives of old country seats (see
Illustration No. 117, [Plate VIII](#img_pl08)); it also survives as an
ornament to the spikes of iron railings enclosing the grounds of
old-fashioned houses on the outskirts of many of our provincial towns.

<span class="smallcaps">The Frog</span> (Illustration No. 119, [Plate
VIII](#img_pl08)) is a symbol of Aphrodite, the goddess of love born
from the foam of the sea. In Rome a special

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

temple was dedicated to her worship. Her symbol, the frog, was worn for
fertility and abundance. Pliny attributes to it the power of keeping the
affections true and constant, and of promoting harmonious relations
between lovers and friends.

It is a very popular Talisman amongst the Italians, Greeks, and Turks at
the present day and is worn not only against the Evil Eye but is
particularly valued as a Health Amulet, especially when cut in Amber.

<span class="smallcaps">The Skull of an Ass</span>, set up on a pole in
the midst of a cornfield, was considered a potent charm against blight,
and in Greece and Rome was placed in vineyards for the same purpose; it
was sacred to Priapus, the god of the gardens, which he was thought to
protect from thieves, wild beasts, and mischievous birds. There is a
legend that the Ass was held in high estimation, as by gnawing the
branches of the vine it taught the art of pruning.

<span class="smallcaps">The Key</span> Talisman was a very important one
with both Greeks and Romans. It is the joint symbol of Janus (or Apollo)
and Jana, his wife (Diana, or the Moon), and was worn for Prudence, and
for Remembrance of things past, and foresight of things to come, Janus
being represented as the God with two faces, typifying the prudent

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

man who with sagacity and ripe judgment observes things past and future
possibilities, and so discerns the causes and effects of all happenings.
Janus was also the inventor of locks, doors, and gates, and was the
Janitor of the year, for which reason twelve cities were dedicated to
him, according to the months; and he held the Key of the. Door through
which the prayers of the faithful had access to the gods.

Diana, or Jana, his wife, presided over doors and thresholds and was the
special protectress of childbirth, and as keeper of the Gate of Heaven
held the key of light and life.

Some of these ancient key Amulets were made in silver (Diana's own
metal) and have heart-shaped handles, implying, it is thought by some
writers, that the affections must be prudently guarded. The key was also
attributed to Hecate Proserpine, who was the guardian of the underworld
and could release the spirits of the departed. The key (Illustration No.
110, [Plate VIII](#img_pl08)) is shown attached to a finger ring, which
was a very popular form of its use.

<span class="smallcaps">Grylli</span>, or Chimeræ, were grotesque
figures belonging to an early period of Roman art, and not, as sometimes
asserted, characteristic of Gnostic remains. They consist of strange
combinations of various animal forms, representing

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

some strange, ludicrous, impossible monster such as a Goat, Ox, Lion,
and Eagle united into one. They were used as Talismans and Amulets
according to the ideas they portrayed, being sometimes Astrological in
their significance and at other times representative of some form of
Grecian or Roman religion. Plutarch writes that these composite objects
were fixed up to ward off witchcraft and the evil effects of the first
glance of the Evil Eye, it being thought that if the mischief-working
eye could be diverted from the object to be protected on to the strange
and ridiculous figures represented by the "<span
class="smallcaps">GRYLLI</span>" the glance would be absorbed and its
effects destroyed. "Grylli" is derived from the modern Italian word
"grillo," meaning caprice. The Rev. C. W. King in his interesting book
on engraved gems instances a Talisman of this kind intended to attract
Sunshine and Abundance, also designed as a protection against dangers on
land or sea. It was made up as follows:—

"A Ram with a Cornucopia on his head, holding a Rabbit by its tail
(signifying fruitfulness and plenty) and a Cock bestride a Dolphin (the
Cock being a symbol of the Sun, the Rabbit the Land, and the Dolphin the
Sea). These Chimeræ often encircled a portrait of the owner, thus
unmistakably conveying to him their protective virtues."

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Caduceus</span>, the wand of Mercury
(Illustration No. 105, [Plate VIII](#img_pl08)), was considered an
extremely efficient Talisman, being worn to render its possessor wise
and persuasive, to attract Health and Youthfulness, as well as to
protect from the Evil Eye.

<span class="smallcaps">The Rod</span> was given to Mercury by Apollo,
and had the wonderful faculty of deciding all controversies and
conferring irresistible eloquence on its owner. Its efficacy was proved,
when one day whilst travelling Mercury came upon two serpents fighting,
and by placing his rod between them and exercising his eloquence, he
immediately reconciled the combatants. Mutually embracing they became
attached to the rod, thus forming the Caduceus. Mercury received his
name from his shrewd understanding of merchandise; he was the inventor
of contracts, weights and measures, and of the arts of buying and
selling; for this reason he was regarded as the patron of Merchants and
Traders.

He invented letters, excelled in eloquence, and was so skilful in making
peace, that he is said to have pacified not only men but the immortal
gods of Heaven and Hell, whose quarrels he adjusted; for this reason he
was known by the Greeks as Hermes. In its composition the Pine Cone,
which surmounts the staff, was credited with great

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

health-giving powers; is a symbol of Apollo, or the Sun; the wings are
emblematic of the flight of thoughts in the minds of men, the two
serpents in amity signifying love prototypes of Æsculapius and Hygiea
who influence the health-giving attributes of the Sun and Moon
respectively, both deities being associated with serpents because by
their aid maladies are sloughed off and vigour renewed, just as serpents
were believed to renew their lives each year by casting their skins.

With the Romans the Serpent was a household god, and Livy records that,
by the advice of the Delphic Oracle, the bringing of a sacred serpent
from the temple of Æsculapius to Rome immediately stayed the pestilence
then raging. The wearing of a ring in the form of a serpent coiled round
the finger, signified an invocation to the God of Health for
preservation from sickness. Health rings were much in vogue amongst the
Ancient Romans, who frequently presented their friends with such tokens
on their birthdays, these anniversaries being considered the most
important festivals. A favourite device was an intaglio cut in the ring
itself, portraying the head of a youth, and the word "Vivas" (Mayst thou
live). It was also believed that a Boar's Head engraved upon a ring
conferred perpetual health and preservation from danger (the Boar being

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

sacred to Demeter); whilst a ring engraved with three Ravens was worn
for conjugal fidelity. Another device was that of a human head attached
to an elephant's trunk, holding a trident (the symbol of Neptune), which
was worn as a protective charm against peril by sea. Charmed rings have
also been much in favour with many nations, the Greeks being very
partial to enchanted rings, which were made according to the favourable
positions of the planets, their power being strengthened when the head
and neck of the owner was cut in green jasper and set in a ring engraved
with the letters B.B.P.P.N.E.N.A., which signified "Wear this and thou
shalt in no wise perish." Whether hallowed in the name of God or
consecrated by the touch of the Pope, or of Royal personages, the ring
has ever been the chosen Talisman through which Health, Wealth, and Love
was transmitted to its wearer.

<span class="smallcaps">The Hand</span>, aptly described by Aristotle as
the "Tool of Tools," was used in many forms as a Talisman against
fascination, and similar specimens to Illustration No. 109, [Plate
VIII](#img_pl08) have been found in early Etruscan tombs, dating back
about 800 <span class="smallcaps">B.C.</span> This particular form, the
thumb placed between the first and second fingers with the hand clenched
and pointing downwards, was considered an infallible protection against
all

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

evil influences, particularly against the Evil Eye. Another form was to
close the second and third fingers with the thumb and to hold the hand
pointing downward with the first and fourth fingers extended, a form
which is known in Italy at the present time as making the Devil's Horns.
The position of the hand in these ancient Amulets was very important;
the open hand denoting Justice and Victory, and in this form sometimes
surrounded by a wreath of laurel was used by the Romans as a finial to
their standards, and carried in triumphal processions. In the British
Museum may be seen a life-sized hand in bronze in the form assumed in
the Benediction of the Christian Church, the third and fourth fingers
being closed, with thumb and first two fingers extended; this form has
its efficacy as a Talisman against the Evil Eye increased by numerous
other symbols (already dealt with), a pine cone being balanced on the
finger-tips, a serpent running along the whole length of the back of the
hand and towering above the third finger; and, amongst others, the Asp,
Lizard, Caduceus, Frog, and Scales may be seen, all probably connected
with the worship of Isis and Serapis. This form, known as *Mano Pantea*,
and the life-sized hands were kept in the house as Talismans to protect
it against every evil influence of magic

<span id="img_pl08"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 8. ETRUSCAN,
GREEK, ROMAN, AND ORIENTAL TALISMANS.](tn/pl08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl08.jpg)  
PLATE 8. ETRUSCAN, GREEK, ROMAN, AND ORIENTAL TALISMANS.  
</span>

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and of the Evil Eye, whilst small replicas were worn as Amulets for
personal protection.

<span class="smallcaps">The Lizard</span> and the Tortoise were symbols
of Mercury, and the Caduceus is frequently depicted placed between them
on ancient Talismans. The Lizard is also to be found engraved on many of
the old Roman rings, and was used as

charm against weak eyesight, the brilliant green of its body, like the
Emerald, causing it to be held in high esteem, both spiritually and
physically. It was a type of the *Logos*, or "Divine Wisdom," and was
placed upon the breast of Minerva, as frequently seen on ancient
engraved gems. It is also found in Portugal made of painted porcelain
and affixed to the walls of houses to attract Good Fortune.

<span class="smallcaps">The Spider</span>, like the Lizard, was sacred
to Mercury and was considered a most fortunate symbol engraved on
precious stones, its remarkable quickness of sight recommending it as a
Talisman for shrewdness in business matters and foresight generally; and
according to an old writer, prognostications were made from the manner
of weaving spiders' webs, and it was deemed a sign that a man would
receive money if a little spider fell upon his clothes.

<span class="smallcaps">The Eagle</span> was typical of Jupiter because
it predominates over birds of highest flight, and it

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

was worn as a Talisman for Dignity, quickness of Perception, and the
Favour of those who sit in high places.

Marcellus Empiricus prescribes the wearing of a ring as a preservative
from Colic and Watery Diseases. This Talisman was made of gold thread
melted down and engraved with the figure of a fish; such a ring exists
in the Florentine Cabinet and may be seen at the present day.

<span class="smallcaps">Snails</span> were also used in love divinations
by the Ancient Romans; they were set to crawl upon the hearth and were
thought to trace in the ashes the initials of the lover's name.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](bot13)

</div>
