<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot10.md) 
[Next](bot12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

<span class="small">Gnosticism—Abraxas—Sacred Names—Khnoubis—The Seven
Vowels—The Magic Symbols—The Archangels—Lion-headed Serpent—Aum—The
Ineffable Name—Horus—Osiris—Isis—Etruscan, Greek, and Roman—The Crescent
Symbol—The Horseshoe—Tusk, or Horn—Stable Keys—Amalthæa's Horn, or
Cornucopia—Serapis—Bull's
Head—Diana—Harpokrates—Anubis—Bellerophon—Salus Ring—Hygiea.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Gnosticism</span> is the name given to a system
of religion which carne into existence in the Roman Empire about the
time Christianity was established; it was founded on a philosophy known
in Asia Minor centuries previously and apparently based upon the
Egyptian beliefs, the Zendavesta, Buddhism, and the Kabala, with their
conception of the perpetual conflict between good and evil.

The name is derived from the Greek *Gnosis*, meaning knowledge, and, in
brief, the Gnostics’ belief was that the intellectual world, with its
Spirits, Intelligences, and various Orders of Angels were created by the
Almighty, and that the visible matter of creation was an emanation from
these powers and forces.

The attributes of the Supreme Being were those of Kabala: Wisdom—Jeh,
Prudence—Jehovah,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Magnificence—El,
Severity—Elohim, Victory and Glory—Zaboath, Empire—Adonai; the Gnostics
also took from the Talmud the Planetary Princes and the Angels under
them.

Basilides, the Gnostic Priest, taught that God first created (1) *Nous*,
or mind, from this emanated (2) *Logos*, the Word, from this (3)
*Phronesis*, Intelligence, and from this (4) *Sophia*, Wisdom, and from
this last (5) *Dynamis*, Strength. The Almighty was known as Abraxas,
which signifies in Coptic "the Blessed Name," and was symbolised by a
figure, the head of which is that of a Cock, the body that of a man,
with serpents forming the legs; in his right hand he holds a whip, and
on his left arm is a shield. This Talisman (see Illustrations Nos. 102,
103, [Plate VII](#img_pl07).md) is a combination of the five emanations
mentioned above: *Nous* and *Logos* are expressed by the two serpents,
symbols of the inner sense and understanding, the head of the Cock
representing *Phronesis*, for foresight and vigilance; the two arms hold
the symbols of *Sophia* and *Dynamis*, the Shield of Wisdom and the Whip
of Power, worn for protection from moral and physical ill.

The Gnostics had great faith in the efficacy of sacred names and sigils
when engraved on stones as Talismans; also in magical symbols derived
principally from the Kabala.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

One of the most popular inscriptions was <span
class="smallcaps">IAW</span> (Jehovah), and in Illustration No. 99,
[Plate VII](#img_pl07.md), this is shown surrounded by the Serpent <span
class="smallcaps">KHNOUBIS</span>, taken from the Egyptian philosophy,
representing the Creative principles, and was worn for Vitality,
Understanding, and Protection. The Seven Greek Vowels (Illustration No.
100, [Plate VII](#img_pl07).md) symbolised the seven heavens, or Planets,
whose harmony keeps the Universe in existence, each vowel having seven
different methods of expression corresponding with a certain Force, the
correct utterance of these letters and comprehension of the forces
typified being believed to confer supreme power, bringing success in all
enterprises and giving complete control over all the powers of darkness.

Illustration No. 101, [Plate VII](#img_pl07.md), is an example of the use
of the Magic Symbols, the meaning of which has been lost. It is probably
a composition of the initial letters of some mystical sigil, enclosed by
a serpent and the names of the Archangels Gabriel, Paniel, Ragauel,
Thureiel, Souriel, and Michael. It was worn for Health and Success; also
for Protection from all evils, and it is cut in an agate and set in a
gold mount.

A figure of a serpent with a lion's head, usually surrounded with a
halo, was worn to protect its wearer from heart and chest complaints and
to drive away demons.

<span id="img_pl07"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 7. EGYPTIAN
AND GNOSTIC TALISMANS.](tn/pl07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl07.jpg.md)  
PLATE 7. EGYPTIAN AND GNOSTIC TALISMANS.  
</span>

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

The mystic Aum, already described in the chapter on Indian Talismans,
was also a favourite with the Gnostics, and equally popular was a
Talisman composed of the vowels Ι Α Ω, repeated to make twelve, this
number representing the Ineffable Name of God, which, according to the
Talmud, was only communicated to the most pious of the priesthood. They
also adopted from the Egyptians the following symbols: *Horus*, usually
represented seated on a Lotus, for fertility; *Osiris*, usually in the
form of a mummified figure, for spiritual attainment; and *Isis* for the
qualities mentioned in the previous chapter.

<span class="smallcaps">Etruscan, Greek, and Roman</span>. The
Etruscans, Greeks, and Romans were all familiar with and great believers
in the virtues of Talismans and Amulets, a belief based not only on the
symbols of their own faith but largely influenced by the beliefs of the
surrounding nations, that of the Egyptians being particularly
noticeable. Amongst the earliest and most popular Talismans are many
Scarab rings with inscriptions cut in the under sides; these were
frequently used as seals.

In the course of the amalgamation of beliefs which took place under the
Ptolemies, Isis and Osiris were associated with all kinds of Asiatic and
Greek gods; but, as time went on, Isis became

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

the most universal goddess, ruling heaven and earth and all Mankind, her
worship quickly spreading throughout all the Roman dominions. Her name
is usually understood to mean Wisdom, and upon the pavement of her
temple was inscribed, "I am everything that has been, and is, and shall
be, nor hath any mortal opened my veil."

The most common symbol of Isis was a Crescent Moon, which was worn by
Roman women upon their shoes as a safeguard from witchcraft and to
prevent the evil spirits of the moon from afflicting them with
delusions, hysteria, or lunacy; also to attract the good-will of Isis
that they might be successful in love, happy in motherhood, and
fortunate in life. From this Crescent symbol (Illustration No. 113,
[Plate VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08).md) the Horseshoe undoubtedly became
regarded as a Talisman, and as such was used by the Greeks and Romans,
who nailed it with the horns upward as a charm against the Plague. In an
old publication of 1618 we are instructed that the horseshoe should be
nailed upon the threshold to keep Luck within the house and to keep out
witches and nullify their evil powers; but in order to obtain the best
results the horseshoe must be found by the owner of the house or by a
member of the household. In the Middle Ages horseshoes were frequently
buried amongst the roots of an Ash tree, which imparted

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

such virtue to the Ash that a twig from it stroked upward over cattle
that had been overlooked, charmed away the evil. In Suffolk the
fishermen still believe that a horseshoe nailed to the mast of a smack
will protect it against bad weather, and their Newfoundland brothers use
the horseshoe as a specific against many dangers, especially as a charm
to keep away the Devil. In this superstition they resemble the miners of
Devon and Cornwall who fix a horseshoe to the mine with the horns
upward, it being common knowledge that the Devil travels in a circle and
is consequently frustrated in his evil course when he arrives at either
of the horns and is obliged to take a retrograde course. To this day, it
is still regarded by the country-folk as essential to the well-being of
the finder of this charm to suspend it horns upward over the door of his
dwelling to hold the luck in, it being thought to run out at each end of
the horseshoe if reversed. In Gay's fable of the Old Woman and Her Cats
the witch complains:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">      "Crowds of boys  
Worry me with eternal noise.  
Straws laid across my path retards,  
The Horse shoes nailed each threshold guards.  
The stunted broom the Wenches hide  
In fear that I should up and ride."</span>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">The Single Horn</span>, or <span
class="smallcaps">Tusk</span>, both singly, or as

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

a pendant to another Talisman, as Illustration No. 106, [Plate
VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08.md), in all probability had its origin in the
double horns, or Crescent, of Isis. It was worn to protect from harm,
danger, and the evil influences of enemies, and also as a powerful charm
to attract good fortune and success.

It is frequently mentioned in the Old and New Testaments, and in 2
Samuel xxii, 3, and Psalm xviii, 2 the Almighty is described as the
"Horn of my Salvation"; and St. Luke in the first chapter, 69th and 71st
verses, writes:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

"Hath raised up an horn of Salvation." "That we should be saved from our
enemies and from the hands of all that hate us."

</div>

The Horn, being a symbol of Isis, was considered a powerful charm to
which to attach the keys of stables and cowsheds, ensuring the safety of
the cattle and their protection from the evil spirits of the night, a
practice that has been followed from remote ages to the present day,
although its origin is not generally known amongst its modern users.

In India it is also a common belief amongst the natives that a Tiger's
tooth will ensure protection from the ghosts of men and animals, making
its wearer formidable to his foes and respected by his friends.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

According to Pliny, the tooth of a Wolf was thought by the Romans to be
a powerful Talisman for children, it being hung horizontally or
suspended round the neck. It assisted them in cutting their teeth, and
preserved them from maladies in connection with dentition.

<span class="smallcaps">The Cornucopia</span>, or Amalthæa's Horn of
Plenty, is the symbol of Abundance, Fruitfulness, and Prosperity, and is
represented by a horn filled to overflowing with fruits and flowers, as
Illustration No. 118, [Plate VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08.md). Amalthæa was the
daughter of Melissus (the King of Crete) who nursed the infant Jupiter,
feeding him with the milk of a goat. Jupiter afterwards gave the goat's
horn to his nurse, endowing it with magical properties, so that
whosoever possessed it should immediately obtain in abundance all he
desired and find it a veritable "horn of plenty." It is also a symbol of
the goddess Fortuna, and was worn as an Amulet to attract good fortune
in abundance.

With the introduction of Isis came also that of Osiris-Apis with whom
the Greeks identified their god of the under-world Hades under the name
of Serapis. His symbol is the Bull Apis, which was of divine origin and
known by special markings, being black in colour and having a white
triangle upon its forehead, the figure of a Vulture on its

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

back, double hairs in its tail, and a scarab under its tongue.

The symbol of the Bull's Head (see Illustration No. 108, [Plate
VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08).md) was commonly worn as earrings, for success in
love and friendship, and as the god of Hades could lengthen or shorten
men's lives as he thought fit, the Bull's Head was also worn by men for
Strength and Long Life.

To gain favour and protection small images of the Deities were worn as
ornaments, such as Diana of Ephesus, Mithras, and especially Harpokrates
and Anubis (Illustrations Nos. 104, 107, [Plate
VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08).md).

<span class="smallcaps">Harpokrates</span>, the god of eternal youth and
fecundity, was typified by the figure of a boy holding his tongue,
representing all that is ever fresh and young; he is the type of the
Vernal Sun, bringing fertility to the land, enabling it to produce both
food and drink. He is also frequently represented seated on a Lotus, the
symbol of the Sun and fecundity.

<span class="smallcaps">Anubis</span> is symbolised as a Jackal-headed
god who, in the Egyptian religion, is depicted in the Judgment as
weighing the souls of the dead; he is the Guardian of Souls in the
under-world.

Gems bearing the figure of Bellerophon mounted on the winged steed
Pegasus were believed to confer courage and were much prized by the
Greek and Roman soldiers, Bellerophon being reputed to

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

have first taught the art of governing horses with a bridle; this
service to mankind and the valour he displayed when he slew the Chimæra,
made him a fitting prototype to adorn a warrior's device.

Another engraved Talisman in great favour was the figure of Andromeda,
heroine of one of the most romantic and popular of ancient myths. The
sea-nymphs, jealous of her beauty, chained her to a rock in mid-ocean,
that she might be at the mercy of a vile monster of the deep. But the
warrior Perseus slew the monster, and married Andromeda. Her image was
thought to promote harmony between lovers and peace between man and
wife.

<span class="smallcaps">The Salus Ring</span> (Illustration No. 112,
[Plate VIII](bot12.htm#img_pl08).md) was worn by the devotees of Salus, or
Hygiea, daughter of Æsculapius, who was worshipped as the goddess of
Health. Several holy days were appointed in her honour and worship, and
she was publicly invoked for the welfare of the rulers and for the
general peace and prosperity of the community; also for an abundant
harvest. She is usually represented with a serpent as a tribute to her
attainments in the art of medicine, and her symbol was worn for Health
and Success in all undertakings, as well as for general Good Fortune.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](bot12.md)

</div>
