<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot19.md) 
[Next](bot21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

### CHAPTER V

#### LEO—THE HOUSE OF THE LION

<span class="small">Period—Constellation—The Fiery Sign—Hercules and the
Lion—Characteristics—Personal Magnetism of the
Type—Disposition—Money-makers—Entertainers—Health Defects—Marriage and
Love Affairs—Artistic Tendencies—Gems of the House—The
Sardonyx—Qualities of the Stone—The Chrysolite and the Romans—The
Tourmaline—Peculiarities of the Stone—Amber—Virtues and Medicinal
Uses—The Topaz.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Sun enters the Zodiacal House of Leo
on the 23rd of July and remains in occupation until the 23rd of August.
Leo is the fifth sign in the order of the Zodiac, and is marked by the
constellation of stars bearing this name, situated in the Northern
Celestial Hemisphere, just below the Great Bear or Plough, and contains
over seventy stars visible to the naked eye, the principal star of which
being designated Cor Leonis, or the Lion's Heart. This star is also
known as Regulus, and is useful to navigators for ascertaining their
longitude at sea. The constellation is easily identified by a group of
stars forming a well-shaped sickle on the west side of the cluster. Leo
and Cancer, being the most northerly of the twelve signs, are the
nearest to

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

the zenith of the earth, causing the greatest warmth and heat, and are
consequently assigned to the Houses of the two luminaries, Cancer, as
being feminine, to the Moon, and Leo, as masculine, to the Sun. Leo,
coming in the centre of the fiery signs, is specially suited for the
Sun's manifestations, and it is said that the symbol of this house, the
Lion, was given because, when the Sun, the Ruler of this House, is in
occupation, his heat resembles that of a raging lion; and it is a
well-known fact that the Sun was worshipped as a Lion by the Ancients,
the Egyptians keeping the month of July sacred to him and holding the
Ludi Apollinares in his honour.

In Greek Mythology the Lion is said to represent the monster who was the
terror of travellers in the forests of Nemæa; it was slain by Hercules
in battle, and to commemorate the great combat Jupiter gave it a place
amongst the stars.

As a symbol of this sign it is, however, much older than the Greeks,
being represented in both the Egyptian and Indian Zodiacs.

(The symbols of the House of Leo are illustrated in No. 5 of the
coloured [Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front)..md)

Astrologically, Leo is known as a fixed sign, and fixity of aims and
ideas is a marked characteristic of this type, for when they believe
themselves right in their views or opinions on any subject in

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

which they are interested, they are immovable although never aggressive,
deeming it not worth while to argue or explain unless their hearers are
sympathetic or reasonable.

In religious matters they have unbounded zeal and enthusiasm, often
believing they have a special mission in life which they are persistent
in fulfilling, no matter at what cost, personal sacrifice, or
inconvenience. They formulate ideas quickly, possessing a marvellous
faculty of presenting well-known facts in a new light and also of
adapting a thought or suggestion from a sermon or lecture and enlarging
and developing its meaning and purpose without reference to the literal
words of the speaker, astonishing their listeners by their apparent
mastery of the subject under discussion. Possessing a clear brain, they
invariably consider matters from a practical point of view, scorning
petty actions, and, for this reason, those with whom they come in
contact are more often ready to forward their interests than to oppose
them, so that they succeed from force of circumstances, and are often
helped by these means into advantageous positions. It is not, therefore,
surprising that in the majority of cases where phenomenal good fortune
has elevated the ordinary tradesman into the wealthy magnate they have
belonged to the Leo type. Under ordinary circumstances these

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

subjects are of bright sunny disposition, high-spirited and
large-hearted, with a pleasant, affable temperament free from envy or
malice. Although liable to quick flashes of temper they harbour no
grudge, having the ability to win even their worst enemy into seeming
friendliness. They are frequently great money-makers, although not being
economical by nature they do not save, yet, luxurious and inclined to be
extravagant in their tastes, their proverbial good luck seems to carry
them ever on the crest of the wave, no matter how profuse their
expenditure, In social entertainments they come to the fore, and are
good raconteurs, able to tell a story well, the point (although always
in good taste) losing nothing in their hands, making them often the
objects of envy among their less-favoured fellows.

The constitution is usually healthy and vigorous, but they are subject
to affections of the heart which is apt from overstrain to become
irregular in its action, and the cause of palpitation and fainting fits;
they are also liable to sunstroke and diseases of the eye, and in every
case that has come under the writer's notice, where the Sun in Leo was
in opposition to the Moon at the time of birth, the subject has been
afflicted with a squint.

In marriage and love affairs they are often unfortunate, their high
standard of excellence

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

with their idealistic emotional natures causing them to endow the
objects of their affections with attributes of their own imagining. In
consequence they are frequently disappointed and mistaken in their
judgments; but fortunately great sympathy, tolerance, and forbearance to
the feelings of others is so natural to this type that, in many cases of
inharmonious marriage they have adapted themselves to circumstances and
conditions almost impossible of endurance. When undeveloped, or badly
aspected by other planets, however, Leo subjects will degenerate
greatly, becoming empty-headed boasters and reckless investors, stopping
at no folly in their efforts to become popular and conspicuous; taking
risky chances, and through careless speculation losing heavily, yet even
so they are often successful in escaping the consequences of their
imprudence. Being versatile and brilliant, subjects of the Leo type
succeed best as Artists, Actors, Authors, Commanders, Officers,
Stockbrokers, Inventors, Goldsmiths, Jewellers, Fancy Dealers, etc. It
is usual to attribute artistic talent to this type, but this is not
always correct, for although they invariably possess a keen appreciation
of Art and are fond of beautiful and harmonious surroundings, the
executive ability is not frequently noticeable, although when present
the artist excels in producing

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

pictures of golden sunlight effects of late afternoon and sunset
colourings.

In matters of friendship, partnership, or marriage they will be most in
harmony with those born during the Aries, Sagittarius, Libra, and Gemini
periods.

The gems of the House are the Sardonyx, Chrysolite, Tourmaline, and
Amber.

<span class="smallcaps">The Sardonyx</span>.—The Sardonyx is a rich
red-brown stone, the top part of which is formed of a layer of white
Chalcedony, or Sard, through which the lower part of the stone shows as
a pale flesh colour; when found without the Sard the stone becomes the
Cornelian.

The Sard derives its name from a Greek word meaning flesh, and is the
Sardius of the Ancients.

The finest Sardonyx come from India and Arabia, but it is also found in
Germany and the Tyrol. It is especially good for engraving upon, having
a hard smooth surface capable of taking a high polish, and in ancient
cameos the under-stone is generally used to form the ground, the lighter
top layer being carved into figures, the different depths of the carving
affording variety to the effect. These qualities made it a favourite
with the Romans, who believed that the virtue of stones could be
increased if suitably engraved, so that the Sardonyx was frequently
carved with a

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

figure representing Mars or Hercules to render its wearer fearless and
courageous.

It was also believed that in common with Agates this stone had the
property of preserving its wearers from infectious complaints and the
bites of venomous creatures, particularly from the sting of the
scorpion; and that if hung round the neck it would allay pain, give
self-control, attract friends, ensure conjugal happiness, and success in
legal matters. Also, Camillus Leonardus says, it puts restraint upon
those inclined to dissipation and makes a man agreeable as a companion.

<span class="smallcaps">The Chrysolite</span>.—The Chrysolite is a very
beautiful yellow-green gem which derives its name from two Greek words
meaning "golden stone," by which name it is referred to by Pliny. It
varies in colour, and although exactly the same stone it bears different
names; when of a deep bright green, it is known as Peridot, and when of
an olive-green it is called the Olivine. It is one of the softest of the
hard stones, being easily scratched by quartz.

The stones are found in Egypt, Ceylon, and Brazil, and specimens have
been found in meteorites and the lava of Vesuvius.

The Peridot was much valued by the Ancients, the name signifying in
Arabic precious stone, and it was at one time considered of more value
than the

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

diamond. These were the only gems set in transparent form by the Romans
who wore them for protection from enchantment and against melancholy and
illusion. Marbodus says they should be set in gold (gold being the metal
of the Sun) to dispel the vague terrors of the night.

During the Middle Ages these stones were worn for foresight with regard
to future events, and for Divine inspiration and eloquence.

<span class="smallcaps">The Tourmaline</span>.—The Tourmaline is of
comparatively modern origin in Europe as far as its use as a precious
stone is concerned. It is very remarkable because of its electrical
qualities, for when heated one end will become positive and attract
straws or ashes, whilst the other end will be negative and
non-attractive.

It is transparent in one direction, but if looked at from another it may
be found quite opaque.

It is found in India, Siberia, Brazil, and America, and of all colours
and shadings of red, pink, yellow, green, and white; two colours may
also exist on the same crystal, which may be green at one end and red at
the other. This is probably the stone Pliny describes as the Lychnis,
which, being very susceptible to solar influences, attracted small
particles of chaff when heated by the sun, and had the power of
"dispersing fears and melancholic passions." It was also worn to procure

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

inspiration, to attract favours, and to secure friends.

<span class="smallcaps">Amber</span>.—Amber has from the most remote
ages been familiar to humanity, ornaments in this material having come
down to us, shaped by men of the Stone Age, thus proving its antiquity.
Many fanciful theories were given in bygone days with regard to its
origin, amongst others the historian Nicias stating that the heat of the
Sun was so great in some regions as to set up intense perspiration in
the earth, from which Amber resulted; whilst among the Greeks a legend
existed that it originated in the tears of the sisters of Phaethon, who,
in their sorrow at his death, were turned into poplar trees, and whose
perpetual tears congealed into Amber. Pliny asserted it to be the
overflowing sap of certain trees, hence the name *Succinum*, from a word
signifying "juice"; and modern research confirms this idea of a
vegetable origin, for Amber is now known to be the fossil resin of an
extinct species of pine of the Tertiary Period.

Amber is found in large quantities on the coast of the Baltic, washed up
after storms, and the German Government exercises a strict monopoly over
the trade. It is also found round the coasts of Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
and parts of Asia and the United States; and in Essex, Suffolk, and
Norfolk. It is very light and soft, possessing

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

remarkable electric properties when heated. That it was once in a liquid
state is shown by the insects and plants sometimes found in it, a good
many of the insects belonging to species that no longer exist. These
specimens specially attracted the attention of the Romans and doubtless
gave Pliny his idea of its origin.

Great quantities were introduced into Rome during the reign of the
Emperor Nero, who in verse described the hair of his wife as
amber-coloured, causing much emulation amongst the ladies of his court
in their endeavours to secure the fashionable colour. The name
*Amuletum* was given to Amber as well as to the flower Cyclamen (see
Chapter I, Part I), both having the power to protect from poisonous
drugs, necklaces being worn specially by children for this purpose, and
also as a counter-charm against witchcraft and sorcery.

Its range of medicinal virtues is very extensive, Callistratus asserting
it to be of great service at any period of life against insanity, either
taken as a powder, or worn round the neck; the golden-yellow variety
known as the Chryselutum being specially used to ward off ague. The Rev.
C. W. King says that "the wearing of an Amber necklace has been known to
prevent the attacks of erysipelas in a person subject to them, which has

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

been proved by repeated experiments beyond all possibility of doubt. Its
action here cannot be explained, but its efficacy as a defender of the
throat against chills is evidently due to its extreme warmth when in
contact with the skin, and the circle of electricity so maintained,
which latter may account for its remedial agency in the instance quoted
above." He also says: "In Pliny's time Amber was universally worn as
necklaces by the Transpadane females of Lombardy and Piedmont, partly as
an ornament and partly as a prophylactic against goitres, to which they
were subject in consequence of the hard quality of the water they
drank."

Amber was also worn to protect from deafness, digestive troubles,
catarrh, jaundice, loss of teeth from looseness, and as a child's Amulet
against convulsions when teething.

Its popularity as mouth-pieces to pipes, cigar-and cigarette-holders
arose from a belief in the East that Amber will not transmit infection.
It has ever been in vogue throughout China, Japan, India, and the East,
and retains its favour to the present day.

The Chinese use it extensively in incense, and it is also used in the
manufacture of various perfumes and medical compounds.

<span class="smallcaps">Topaz</span>.—The Yellow Topaz is also a stone
of this

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> House, but being
more particularly a stone of Sagittarius it will be found dealt with
under that sign.

All yellow stones are, more or less, under the influence of the Sun,
who, as already mentioned, rules the House of the Lion.

Those whose birthdays fall in the Taurus or Scorpio periods should not,
however, wear the Sardonyx, Chrysolite, Tourmaline, Amber, or Yellow
Topaz.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Virgo—The Virgin](bot21.md)

</div>
