<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index.md) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot21.md) 
[Next](bot23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### LIBRA—THE HOUSE OF THE BALANCE

<span class="small">Period—Constellation—Origin of, the Sign—The
Yoke—The Altar—Characteristics of the Type—Influence of
Saturn—Inclination for
Companionship—Marriage—Moods—Partnership—Professions—Health Defects of
the Type—Gems of the House—The Opal—Coral—Lapis Lazuli—The Modern
Ill-luck of the Opal—Its Ancient Virtues—Sensitiveness of the Opal—Its
Virtues as a Libra Gem—Coral—Virtues—As Infant's Talisman—Lapis
Lazuli—Egyptian Talisman—Qualities of the Stone.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Sun enters Libra, the Seventh House
of the Zodiac, about September 23rd, marking the commencement of the
autumnal equinox, and completes its stay on October 24th approximately.

This House is ruled by the planet Venus and is symbolised by a pair of
Scales, as illustrated in No. 7 of the coloured
[Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front.md). As a Constellation it is very
difficult to distinguish, appearing on the meridian about midnight in
June, and is situated between the constellation of Virgo on the West and
Scorpio on the East.

It is the first of the Autumnal signs, and, as with the Sun's entry into
Libra the balance is

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

reached, the days and nights then being of equal length, this would
afford a practical reason for its name, although there exists no
authority for this assumption.

As mentioned in the previous chapter, Libra the Balance was not included
in the earliest Zodiacs, and how its predecessor was named and when it
was lost does not seem ascertainable, although in some Archaic records a
seventh month is indicated as occupying that part of the heavens marked
by the claws of the Scorpion.

It is believed to have been known to the Egyptians as Zugon, or the
Yoke, the beam only of the scales being represented, typifying the
Nileometer, the instrument by which the inundations of the Nile were
measured. According to some Akkadian writings the name of the seventh
month was Tul-ku, meaning Holy Altar, and it is interesting to note that
both the Altars of the first and second temples were dedicated in the
seventh month, which has afforded ground for the assumption that the
symbol for this period originally took the form of an Altar. It is also
remarkable that this is the only Zodiacal House the symbol of which is
not based on some living prototype.

Those born under the influence of Libra are remarkable for their powers
of comparison, being

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

able to mentally weigh and balance all things in a way that none of the
other types seem capable of doing; and owing to extraordinary intuitive
and perceptive qualities, Libra subjects are very susceptible to the
thoughts of others, often unconsciously sensing their feelings and
intentions before a word is spoken.

In matters appertaining to religion they claim an individual liberty of
thought and are the least exclusive and most tolerant of all classes and
creeds, seeming to act as connecting links between the various sects and
faiths which without their mediation would be constantly at variance,
drawing men together in the bond of brotherhood, although never forcing
their convictions or opinions upon others unasked.

Although apt in all intellectual pursuits and having many interests,
subjects of this type seldom make a success of their lives until after
middle age, seeming constantly retarded by indecision, a failing to
which they are inclined, living on from day to day, contemplating
changes but submitting to the yoke of circumstances and environment for
years, until some event occurs to break up the groove and force them
into new conditions.

The planet Saturn, which has its exaltation in this House, and curiously
enough is often afflicted

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

in the horoscope of this type, diminishes the influence of its natural
ruler Venus, giving a tinge of moodiness and dissatisfaction detrimental
to advancement. When unhampered by adverse Saturnian influences, and
armed with an education adapted to the development of the profession or
calling they are best suited for, they attain to the front rank and,
having once made up their minds, do not change easily.

They are impartial and painstaking, but, although they can and do labour
strenuously for others, they rarely distinguish themselves when their
efforts are merely on their own behalf or to their own personal
advantage; and there is an inclination to accept fate as it comes.

Having a strong inclination for companionship and congenial sympathy,
the Librans above all the Zodiacal Houses are best suited to run in
double harness, the selflessness of these subjects taking the form of
being happiest when confirmed in their habits and tastes by those of
whom they are fond. They are the least suited of any to live alone,
although they enjoy themselves best in quiet surroundings far from the
noise and conflict of towns, being partial to hillsides and sunny
heaths, with ample leisure at command for study and reading when
inclined. They are also interested

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

in Botany and the growing of old-world flowers and plants. Even in old
age they never lose their interests although disliking social
conventionalities and emotional excitement at all times.

In love and marriage relations they are attached and devoted, those born
during this period being able to live amicably with any other sign,
although most in harmony with those born in Gemini, Leo, and Sagittarius
periods, Cancer and Capricorn being the least harmonious. As a rule this
type is courteous and affable in disposition, always granting a favour
gracefully although keenly resenting any attempt to impose upon their
good nature, and in connection with this trait we may mention that China
and Japan, the two countries so typical of courtesy, come under the sign
of Libra.

The temper of this type is as a rule even, and they are usually lenient
to the faults of others, but when aggravated they are cutting and sharp
in speech, leaving nothing they feel unexpressed, although never
malicious.

Inclined to be fastidious over small things, yet they have a tendency to
lose and mislay their belongings; but having much adaptability and'
resource in emergency, they seldom feel any inconvenience from this
failing.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

To be successful they should be in partnership, or engaged in a
profession or business that is neither monotonous nor arduous, as they
work best in accordance with their moods; and when in harmony with their
associates and surroundings, make good Musicians, Artists, Singers,
Poets, Lawyers, Composers, Designers, Botanists, Librarians, Landscape
Gardeners and Florists; they are also adapted for mechanical and
commercial business, and to deal in goods that can be purchased and sold
again quickly; and it is interesting to note that as a general rule this
type is unfortunate in gambling and affairs of chance, although lucky in
speculation, and as long as they follow their natural foresight will
rarely be cheated.

The health defects of these subjects are kidney trouble, pains in the
back, afflictions of the reproductive organs, varicose veins,
indigestion, headaches, and depression of spirits; also loin trouble.

Quiet and plenty of fresh air are their best medicines.

The gems of this House are the Opal, Coral, and Lapis Lazuli.

<span class="smallcaps">The Opal</span>.—The Opal is the most beautiful
and mysterious of all gems, containing as it does all the colours of the
rainbow, which flash and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

glow in sparks and minute flames as the light plays over the surface,
causing it to be aptly described as combining in itself the beauties of
all the other stones. It is a species of soft quartz, and the wonderful
play of colour is believed to be caused by extremely minute particles of
air enclosed in its fissures.

The finest variety is known as Harlequin Opal, in which the colourings
are distributed in numerous very small flakes throughout the stone.
Mexican Opals are more transparent, with the colouring less definite,
and arranged in much larger patches; from Mexico we also get fire Opals
which are of one colour, the deep red "fire-like" stones being the best,
though they vary in colour to a warm yellow.

Opals are very soft when first taken from the mine, but harden by
exposure. Great care is necessary in cutting and also in setting them,
as they are very brittle and liable to chip.

In the fourteenth century the Opal was known as the Ophthalmius, or Eye
Stone, because it was believed to sharpen and strengthen the eyesight;
also that its flashes of coloured fire were especially efficacious in
arresting the glance of envy. In India, the passing of an Opal across
the brow is believed to clear the brain and strengthen the memory.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

The idea of its being an unlucky stone had its origin in the misfortunes
that befell Anne of Geierstein in Sir Walter Scott's novel, her
principal jewel consisting of a large Opal; they are not, in reality,
more unlucky than other stones, though being a Libra gem and essentially
a pledge of friendship, they are not fortunate for any one having Venus
afflicted in their horoscope. In the East it is regarded as a sacred
stone which contains the Spirit of Truth, and in Ancient Greece the Opal
was supposed to possess the power of giving foresight and the light of
prophecy to its owner, provided it was not used for selfish ends; its
misuse bringing ill-luck in love (which probably accounts for its being
unlucky when used in an engagement ring) and disappointment and
misfortune in all enterprises.

Pliny tells, as an illustration of its high value, that Nonnius, a Roman
Senator, endured outlawry and exile at the hands of Marcus Antonius
rather than part with an Opal he possessed.

All Opals are very sensitive to atmospheric conditions, varying in
brilliancy according to the temperature, their colouring being at its
best when worn and kept warm and dry. This sensitiveness was believed by
the ancients to make them susceptible to influences of an occult nature,
so that when the colour of an Opal was bright and

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

lively it indicated success and good fortune to enterprises or travel,
and when dull and lifeless it warned of failure and disappointments. It
also indicated to its wearer whether it was favourable or otherwise,
being full of colour and brilliancy when in sympathy with its owner's
interests and lacking in colour and lustre when adverse in its
influence.

<span class="smallcaps">Coral</span>.—Coral has been classed amongst
gems from time immemorial by all nations, although, as is well known, it
is the product of a marine insect.

It is found in various colours, the pink, red, and white, however, being
the only kinds generally used as gems. It is produced in enormous
quantities in the Southern Seas, where it forms huge reefs and even
islands; but practically the whole of the Coral used for ornamental
purposes is obtained in the Mediterranean off the African coasts, the
Greeks maintaining an extensive fleet solely engaged in this trade. It
is exported in very large quantities to China, Japan, India, and Persia,
where it is used not only for its talismanic virtues, but also for its
medicinal qualities. Amongst the Ancient Greeks and Romans it was highly
valued, being used in many ways for various ailments. Orpheus
recommended that it should be powdered and scattered amongst

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

growing crops to safeguard them from locusts, blight, caterpillars, and
thunderstorms. Dioscorides considered it efficacious against the
delusions of the devil; and the Romans believed it specially favourable
for the prevention of childish ailments, Coral in various forms being
worn as charms against Whooping-cough, Colic, and Teething troubles;
also for the prevention of fits. The Coral rattle of bells used in
modern nurseries is a survival from this period when Coral was worn for
health purposes, and the bells to drive away evil spirits. They also
used powdered Coral, taking it internally in water for pains in the
stomach; and, after burning the powder, used it as an important
ingredient in ointments for ulcers and sore eyes because of its soothing
and healing qualities. The Roman ladies wore small branches of Coral
suspended from the neck as charms against sterility.

In India, China, and Japan, it is extensively used in Rosaries, and is
very popular, being regarded as a sovereign remedy against cholera and
all epidemics, and invaluable in indicating to its wearer the presence
of poison, or the danger of illness, by changing colour. In Southern
Europe necklaces of Coral beads are worn to avert the Evil Eye.

Camillus Leonardus recommends it to keep evil

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

spirits from the house, prevent mental delusions and nightmare, give
relief in intestinal trouble, and to avert diseases of the spleen. It is
still extensively used in Italy for the numerous carved charms worn to
avert the Evil Eye.

<span class="smallcaps">Lapis Lazuli</span>.—Lapis Lazuli is a deep blue
stone well known to all ancient nations, and is most probably the stone
mentioned in early writings as the Sapphire, the Tables of the Law
stated in the Bible as being of the latter, although there is not much
doubt that Lapis Lazuli is the stone meant.

It is an opaque stone, and is frequently flecked with gold owing to the
presence of iron pyrites in its composition.

The best qualities come from China, Persia, and Siberia; whilst the
lighter-coloured and less valuable is found in Germany and South
America. Its name is derived from *Lapis*, meaning "a stone," and the
Arabic word *Azul*, meaning "blue."

It was very popular with the Egyptians, several of their Talismans being
made of this gem, particularly the Eye and Heart, specimens of which may
be seen in the fourth Egyptian Room at the British Museum. On account of
its beautiful deep blue colour it has always been dedicated to Venus,
and in Christian religions is regarded as

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

the stone of the Virgin Mary. It was freely used by the Greeks and
Romans both for ornamental purposes and for the cure of Apoplexy,
Epilepsy, diseases of the Spleen, and all skin ailments and blood
disorders. Also a necklace of Lapis Lazuli beads was considered
beneficial to inspire courage in timid children, cure depression of
spirits and melancholia, whilst it strengthened the affections, ensured
fidelity in friends, and brought success in love.

The Opal, Coral, and Lapis Lazuli should not, however, be worn by those
whose birthdays fall in the Cancer or Capricorn periods.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Scorpio—The Scorpion](bot23.md)

</div>
