<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot26) 
[Next](bot28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

### CHAPTER XII

#### PISCES—THE HOUSE OF THE FISHES

<span class="small">Period—Constellation—Precession of the
Equinoxes—Icthyes, the Fishes—Mythology—Symbol—The Rulers of the
House—Characteristics—Ailments of the Type—Professions—Friendship and
Marriage—Harmonious and Inharmonious Types—The Gem of the House—The
Amethyst—Virtues of the Stone—Talisman against Inebriety—Its Calming
Influence—The Stone of St. Valentine—As a Lovers’ Talisman—The Effect of
Purple Rays—The Amethyst Beneficent to all Types—Real and Artificial
Gems and how to select them.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Sun enters the Zodiacal House of
Pisces, the Fishes, on February 19th, remaining in occupation until
March 10th.

The constellation of Pisces is situated in the Southern Celestial
Hemisphere between Aquarius and Aries, occupying a large space near the
Equator which the Sun crosses at the Vernal Equinox when entering the
Zodiacal House of Aries.

At one time the constellations marked the actual Zodiacal Houses of the
same name, but owing to the precession of the Equinoxes the
constellations have moved forward, and Pisces occupies the space
originally allotted to Aries; and this forward movement applies to all
the Zodiacal

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Houses previously
dealt with. The constellation can be seen best during the latter part of
October and through November between 8 and 10 p.m., but owing to the
absence of any important stars it is not easily traced.

It was known to the Greeks as Ichthyes, the Fishes, and as illustrating
the connection of the Zodiac with religious teachings, it is interesting
to note that the early Christians chose the Fish as the symbol of their
faith because the Greek word ΙΧΘΥΣ, Fish, formed the initials of five
words meaning Jesus Christ, Son of God, Saviour. In Ancient Grecian
Mythology it is recorded that the two fishes were placed in the heavens
by the goddess Minerva to commemorate the escape of Venus and her son
Cupid who, whilst walking on the banks of the Euphrates, were attacked
by the demon Typhon, described by Homer and Virgil as having a hundred
dragon heads upon his shoulders, with devouring flames belching from the
mouths and eyes, and with snakes issuing from his fingers. To escape
this monster, Venus and Cupid transformed themselves into fishes and
plunged into the river which afforded them safety.

This House is generally symbolised by two fishes connected with a band,
as illustrated in No. 12 of the [Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front).
Jupiter is usually considered to be the ruling planet of this House, or
in the case

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

of highly developed subjects the planet Neptune takes the rule.

The symbol of the two fishes attached yet turning in contrary directions
seems an apt symbol of the characteristics of this type who are the most
dual-natured of all signs, being liable to act on the impressions of
their surroundings, showing at one moment extreme persistence and at
another a want of determination. Like the two fishes represented back to
back, their thoughts and actions are frequently at variance, and,
although outwardly placid and docile, this sensitive, changeable
disposition is soon ruffled by sudden impulse, resembling the shimmering
water which is the native element of the fishes. Being receptive to the
conditions around them Pisces subjects adapt themselves readily to any
change of environment or circumstances fate may bring, but have a great
dislike to anything that tends to ruffle their calm and placid
temperaments. Hating suspense, uncertainty, or anxiety, and many-sided
in their failings and weaknesses, they often appear to be a mass of
contradictions.

The general characteristic of those born under the influence of Pisces
is a strongly emotional, contemplative, facile nature with much artistic
appreciation for beautiful scenery and surroundings. The pleasures of
life have a great attraction

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

for them, but from an inherent consideration of the possible demands of
the future their expenditure in this direction is coupled with much
prudence. Being susceptible to outside influences they are apt to rely
too much on the advice and experiences of those with whom they come into
contact, and are by turns too apprehensive and too venturesome. The mind
is imaginative, philosophical, and acquisitive, and as a rule mechanical
and accurate, although liable to become indolent and self-centred unless
spurred on by those they are fond of, when they will persevere in their
efforts towards a desired end with astonishing persistency. In spite of
this spasmodic determination they are often lacking in self-confidence
and fail to make the best of opportunities for their own interests and
benefit. Very much appreciating any confidence in their ability to carry
out work entrusted to them by others, which they perform with the utmost
punctuality and precision; and having a liking for positions of
responsibility and management, they frequently run two occupations at
the same time. As children they are of a very observant and enquiring
nature, continually asking questions, so that every advantage as regards
education should be given them, a wrong start in life being more serious
in its results to this type than to any other. They seldom change the
profession

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

or occupation on their own initiative, and although easily persuaded
become obstinate when driven. Hating discord and strife, the temper is
slow to anger but rebellious when roused, and although naturally of a
peace-loving disposition they do not easily recover from its effects.

When adversely aspected they become selfish, secretive, discontented,
and extravagant, and in business tricky and dishonest, and with a
general want of balance and a tendency to intemperance.

This House ruling the feet, those born during the Pisces period are
subject to ailments and injuries affecting these members, and are also
liable to contract colds and serious illnesses from damp feet; they are
also inclined to weakness of the back, abscesses and disorders of the
blood, and irregularities of the general system, torpidity of the liver,
and nervous breakdown, but they should never be encouraged to make much
of any illness; being so susceptible, that suggestion alone will
frequently cause its development.

In professions and occupations they are successful as actors, novelists,
artists, teachers, travellers, musicians, examiners, and make good
disciplinarians, also, being very resourceful in emergencies, they are
extremely successful in the care and management of young people,
interesting them and gaining their confidence and enthusiasm by

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

original methods, yet exacting obedience without harshness or
fault-finding. Illustrating the possibilities of this type when well
developed, we may cite General Baden-Powell.

Being naturally fond of the water, they are successful as Captains,
Sailors, and Fishermen; also in all businesses connected with liquids,
such as hotel-keepers and caterers.

In friendship and marriage they are overcautious in some respects whilst
imprudent in others, and being apprehensive of consequences they
frequently weigh and consider before making any voluntary change in
their lives and habits; so that although impressionable and
affectionate, they are apt to drift aimlessly into circumstances, and,
in many instances, marry late, although naturally inclined and fitted
for home and family life. They will be found most in harmony with those
born during the Cancer, Scorpio, Taurus, and Capricorn periods, and
least in sympathy with those of the Gemini and Sagittarius periods.

The gem of this House is the Amethyst, a semiprecious stone in varying
shades of purple which belongs to the quartz family and owes its colour
to oxide of manganese and iron which forms part of its composition. The
best variety comes from Siberia, Ceylon, Brazil, and Persia, and the

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Amethyst was
originally regarded as a very precious stone, until the immense
quantities received from Brazil reduced its value generally.

From the earliest dawn of history the occult properties of this stone as
an antidote to inebriety have been recognised, by all writers, the name
originating from a Greek word meaning "without intoxication," and
according to Aristotle it was also the name of a beautiful nymph who
invoked the aid of Diana to protect her from the attentions of Bacchus,
which the goddess did by converting her into a precious gem, upon which
Bacchus, in remembrance of his love, gave the stone its colour and the
quality of preserving its wearers from the noxious influence of wine.

The Egyptians used these stones freely for Talismans, their soldiers
wearing them as Amulets for success in their exploits and calmness in
danger. Pliny says the Magi believed that if the symbols of the Sun and
Moon were engraved upon the Amethyst it made a powerful charm against
witchcraft, and procured for its wearers success to their petitions,
good luck, and the favour of those in authority. Camillus Leonardus,
confirming its efficacy in restraining intoxication, says:

"It also represses evil thoughts and all excesses, prevents contagion,
and gives good understanding

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

of hidden things, making a man vigilant and expert in business."

The Amethyst has always been associated with ecclesiastical decorations,
its frequent use in episcopal rings giving rise to its description as
"the Bishop's Stone," and rosaries of Amethyst beads were much in
request in olden times to attract soothing influences in times of stress
and to confer a pious calm on their wearers.

In religious art it was regarded as emblematic of resignation under
earthly sufferings, patience in sorrow, and trust unto death, which
Marbodus (translated by the Rev. C. W. King) expresses in verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">"On high the Amethyst is set  
 In colour like the violet,  
 With flames as if of gold it glows  
 And far its purple radiance throws;  
 The humble heart it signifies  
 Of him who in the Saviour dies."</span>

</div>

During the Middle Ages the qualities attributed to it were many: it
indicated the presence of poison by becoming dim, also personal danger
and ill-health by changing colour; it was, moreover, considered to give
vigilance to business men, and to sportsmen and soldiers calmness in
danger.

The Amethyst is the stone of St. Valentine, who is said to have always
worn it; and in the days

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

of romance and chivalry, if presented by a lady to her knight, or a
bride to her husband in the shape of a heart set in silver, it was said
to confer the greatest possible earthly happiness on the pair who would
be blessed with good fortune for the remainder of their lives.

In connection with the soothing influence of this gem, it is interesting
to note that according to modern research purple light rays have been
found to exercise a calming effect upon nervous and hysterical patients
and a consequent improvement in the vitality. Cases of neuralgia and
sleeplessness have been relieved by an Amethyst rubbed gently over the
temples. It is one of the very few gems that may universally be worn
without adverse results.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Real and Artificial Gems and How to Test and Select Them](bot28)

</div>
