<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Symbolism](../index) 
[Astrology](../../astro/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](bot22) 
[Next](bot24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564594610/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0030IM7KK/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Talismans, Amulets and Zodiacal Gems*, by William Thomas
and Kate Pavitt, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### SCORPIO—THE HOUSE OF THE SCORPION

<span class="small">Period—Ruling
Planet—Mythology—Symbology—Characteristics of the Type—Effect of the
Malefic Aspects—Health Defects—Professions—Religion—Marriage—The Gems of
the House—The Beryl and Aquamarine differing only in Colour—Qualities of
the Beryl—Clairvoyant Properties—The Carbuncle as Transmitter of
Light—Noah's Lamp—Talisman against Infection—The Lodestone—Magnetic
Qualities as an Amulet against Shipwreck and Gout.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Scorpio</span> forms the eighth sign of the
Zodiac and is situated very low down on the Southern horizon, being seen
at its best late at night during the months of July and August, and it
is occupied by the Sun from the 24th October until November 23rd.

The House of the Scorpion is ruled by the planet Mars, and its largest
star is Antares, so named by the Greeks to signify that it was equal in
brilliancy to Mars, which, however, does not coincide with modern
observation, as Mars when at his nearest to the Earth far exceeds in
splendour and ruddiness the star Antares.

In very ancient records this sign has been called "The Oldest"; but no
reason can be found for

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

this, although it has been suggested that the title refers to "that old
serpent" originally responsible for the Fall of Mankind, which,
according to ancient writers, is visible in the heavens and may be
followed by taking diagrammatic representation of the constellations,
where Hercules is shown trampling on the head of the Serpent, or
Scorpion. As the Serpent, it typifies the temptation of Eve, who won
wisdom and knowledge at the price of bitter sorrow and suffering.
According to Greek Mythology the Scorpion was placed in the heavens by
Juno the Queen of Gods (and wife of Jupiter), because it carried out her
wishes by stinging Orion, who had offended the goddess by boasting that
he could outrun and subdue the wildest and fiercest of beasts. Orion
died from the effects of the sting and, with the Scorpion, was
translated to the heavens, forming different constellations so placed
that as one sets the other rises; and amongst mariners, when Orion is
obscured it is considered to indicate storm and tempest, or when he is
visible, fair weather.

The symbol and stone of the House are shown in No. 8 of the
[Frontispiece](bot00.htm#img_front).

Scorpio has been described as the sign accursed, because during this
period unfavourable weather is usually experienced, bringing gales and
storms, the wind being stinging and bitterly cold, whilst

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

diseases such as cholera and digestive disorders incidental to the fruit
season are rife, aptly expressed by the symbol of this House.

The leading characteristics of those born under the influence of Scorpio
are intensity of purpose, indomitable will, and unflinching
determination, as shown by the thoroughness and persistency with which
they carry out their plans and desires, whether for good or evil.
Although this type includes many extremes of temperament, from the
highest and best natures down to the lowest and most degraded, whatever
their stage of development may be, weak natures are seldom if ever found
amongst them, all possessing the same positive methodical mentality with
unflagging and powerful energy, in whichever sphere they are found.
Having naturally a strong magnetic personality and dominant will-power,
they exercise a strange psychological influence over others, and,
although most convincing and powerful speakers, can frequently make
themselves felt and understood without a word being spoken. They are
invaluable when in positions of authority, which enables them to
exercise this force, being persistent in seeing that those working under
their direction shall carry out duties with precision, and although
affable to those of an inferior social status they are always ready to
resent familiarity

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

and stand upon their dignity when necessary, which enables them to
insist on the observance of rules and laws even by the most refractory.
These Scorpio subjects are also endowed with a strong perception of
right and wrong, their sense of justice making them endeavour as far as
possible to give due reward or otherwise for value received, even, to
the extent of observing the ancient doctrine of an eye for an eye and a
tooth for a tooth. Although apparently matter-of-fact they are more or
less psychic according to the stage of their development, but often fail
to realise this power, attributing their experiences in this direction
to keen perception and quick and accurate deduction, for they always
discredit all they cannot personally feel or understand, looking upon
the limits of their understanding as the limit of nature. One of their
strongest traits of character is their wonderful power of resistance,
for even when the chances of success are *nil* they are never
discouraged, rising again and again after reverses seemingly unaware of
defeat, also rarely showing emotion or feeling by any change of
expression. This faculty of resistance makes them very popular as
champions of the weak or oppressed, for they will face any personal
danger or unpleasantness to help others, although they are often annoyed
at the mental

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

deficiencies and lack of self-reliance and moral courage of the weaker
types.

When badly aspected the subjects of Scorpio are, however, most
destructive, domineering, malicious, and restless, developing into
scolds and unreasonable characters, with a taste for a wandering and
unsettled life. When unafflicted by malefic planets the nature -is
expansive, and their surroundings should be such that they may work off
superfluous energy in some way beneficial both to mind acid body.
Outdoor life is most necessary and beneficial, and those of this type
forced by circumstances to sedentary occupations should take walking,
riding, or gymnastic exercises whenever possible.

Their energetic, discerning, and powerful personalities are felt in
every walk of life, whether in State, professional, or business
capacities; as humanitarians or leaders of democratic circles their
phenomenal and retrospective memories and inexhaustible argument and
suggestion act as an energy of destruction or as a motive power to
uplift humanity. Other professions for which they are suited are
Magistrates, Detectives, Analysts, Principals of Schools and
Institutions, Disciplinarians, Organisers, Engineers generally, and
Marine Engineers in particular; they also make splendid surgeons and
medical practitioners, usually in

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

favour of drastic treatment for refractory patients. As authors they
analyse and bring to the surface all the darkest corners in human life;
they are also interested in handicrafts and intellectual progress,
whilst their business capacity in driving a bargain or in buying and
selling is remarkable.

The health defects of this House are generally of an uncommon nature,
such as suppressed gout and rheumatism, painful and inflammatory
ailments of the lower organs (which are governed by Scorpio);
hæmorrhoids, malaria, typhoid, angina pectoris, insomnia, and severe
sick headaches. In temper they are electric and impulsive and inclined
to take offence; but although an angry type have often great
self-control, but when badly aspected their strong passions predominate,
and like the Scorpion they sting with the tongue, and their expressions
are sarcastic, lurid, and cruel.

In religion they believe in Divine justice being meted out to
wrongdoers, and find no difficulty in administering punishment to
transgressors according to their deserts.

In love and friendship they are very exclusive, having strong and
intense affections for those to whom they are attracted, but are subject
to sudden revulsions of feeling and are for this reason frequently
unfortunate in marriage relations, being inclined to be exacting,
mistrustful,

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

and difficult to please, yet they always command respect, even from
those who are unable to understand them. They will harmonise best with
those of the Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn, and Virgo types, while those
least in sympathy will be the Aquarian and Leo types.

The gems of this House are the Beryl, Aquamarine, Carbuncle, and
Lodestone.

<span class="smallcaps">The Beryl</span>.—The Beryl and Aquamarine are
practically the same stone, differing only in colour, the Beryl varying
from a bright blue to white, and the Aquamarine, as its name implies,
coinciding with Pliny's description of "the gem green as the sea"; like
the sea its colour varies from a pale cool green to a deep green. In
quite recent years it has become common amongst jewellers and dealers in
precious stones to describe all kinds generally as Aquamarines, and
therefore it is not unusual to find one merchant describing the green
stone as the Beryl, whilst his neighbour gives this name to the blue.

In their compositions these stones are almost exactly the same as the
Emerald, and are found in India, Siberia, and Brazil. It has always been
revered in the East as the stone of purity, and was considered to be
particularly sensitive to personal influence, so that it is frequently
given to brides at weddings that the auras of the newly-wedded

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

may blend in the Beryl, preserving and increasing their mutual love.
This belief was held by the Romans, and confirmed by Camillus Leonardus
who says, "it renders the bearer cheerful and increases and preserves
married love"; also, "it cures distempers of the throat and jaws, and is
good for indispositions of the liver and disorders of the stomach."

It is appropriately regarded as the Stone of the Seer and Mystic, nearly
all of whom will be found to have Scorpio strong in their horoscopes. It
is mentioned by Aubrey as particularly favourable for clairvoyants
because "it hath a weak tincture of red wherein magicians see visions."
This effect, sometimes seen under the influence of changing light, is
also noted by Rossetti in his ballad "Rose Mary," where, writing on the
powers of the spirits of the Beryl, he describes the stone as—

<div style="margin-left: 32px; margin-right: 32px;">

<span class="small">"Rainbow hued through a misty pall,  
 Like the middle light of a waterfall."</span>

</div>

All varieties of this stone were considered beneficial to married people
in keeping the affections true and constant and protecting from slander;
and it was also regarded as a sovereign remedy against idleness, a
sharpener of the intellect, and as being specially good for mariners and
adventurers, preserving them from danger and sickness

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

on sea and land, and efficacious in the discovery of all hidden things.

<span class="smallcaps">The Carbuncle</span>.—The Carbuncle belongs to
the same species of stone as the Garnet, the latter being cut with
facets, while the former is cut en cabochon, or with a rounded surface.
It is found in India, Ceylon, Brazil, and the Cape, and has been
described by mediæval writers (including Chaucer and Mandeville) as
giving forth light in darkness, whilst in old legends a large Carbuncle
is said to have served Noah as a lamp.

Shakespeare also refers to the light that comes from this stone, and
these descriptions may have arisen from the fact that many very
sensitive or psychic people are able to see a certain luminous effect
surrounding the gem. It was a very popular stone with the Ancient
Hebrews, who knew it as Baraketh, or flashing stone, which is derived
from *Barak*, meaning lightning. Camillus Leonardus recommends it as a
safeguard from poison, and in infectious illnesses, for repressing
extravagance, and for mightily increasing the popularity and prosperity
of its wearer.

During the Middle Ages it was believed to protect its owners from the
plague, also to banish sadness, dispel evil thoughts, repress
sensuality, reconcile differences between friends, and attract success
to all undertakings, as well as to cure

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

indigestion and sore throat if suspended round the neck.

According to Pliny there are male and female stones, the deep red being
masculine and the lighter-coloured feminine, a belief also held with
regard to other gems.

Amongst the tribes of Northern India and Africa it was believed to
protect from wounds in battle, an idea also common amongst the Arabs.

<span class="smallcaps">The Lodestone</span>.—The Lodestone is composed
of proto-oxide and peroxide of iron, and from its magnetic qualities is
known as Magnetite. This quality induced Dinocrates, a celebrated
architect in the employ of Ptolemy Philadelphus, to plan a temple the
roof of which was to be of Lodestone, so that the statue of Arsinoe, to
whom the temple was dedicated, might remain in suspension, a plan which
never materialised owing to the death of the architect and his patron.
Claudius, a Roman poet who lived some 600 years later, mentions a statue
of Venus made of Lodestone and one of Mars in Iron, placed in the same
temple that they might be attracted together at the marriage ceremonies,
the Romans believing that this stone kept husband and wife faithful and
their love secure.

Orpheus attributes to the Lodestone the power of attracting the love of
gods and men, and it was

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

frequently set in wedding-rings for this purpose. In India it is
believed to give vitality and health to those who wear it, and it is
very popular amongst Mohammedans as a Talisman against evil spirits. In
Elizabethan days mariners had great faith in this stone as a
preservative from shipwreck, and also as an Amulet against gout if worn
next the skin.

The Beryl, Aquamarine, Carbuncle, and Lodestone should not, however, be
worn by those born in the Aquarius or Leo periods.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Sagittarius—The Archer](bot24)

</div>
