[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov13)  [Next](hlov15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# IX

### PELE AND THE SNOW-GODDESS

THERE were four maidens with white mantles in the mythology of the
Hawaiians. They were all queens of beauty, full of wit and wisdom,
lovers of adventure, and enemies of Pele. They were the goddesses of the
snow-covered mountains. They embodied the mythical ideas of spirits
carrying on eternal warfare between heat and cold, fire and frost,
burning lava and stony ice. They ruled the mountains north of Kilauea
and dwelt in the cloud-capped summits. They clothed themselves against
the bitter cold with snow-mantles. They all had the power of laying
aside the white garment and taking in its place clothes made from the
golden sunshine. Their stories are nature-myths derived from the power
of snow and cold to check volcanic action and sometimes clothe the
mountain tops and upper slopes with white, which melted as the maidens
came down closer to the sea through lands made fertile by flowing
streams and blessed sunshine.

It is easy to see how the story arose of Pele and Poliahu, the
snow-goddess of Mauna Kea,

{p. 56}

but it is not easy to understand the different forms which the legend
takes while the legends concerning the other three maidens of the white
mantle are very obscure indeed.

Lilinoe was sometimes known as the goddess of the mountain Haleakala. In
her hands lay the power to hold in check the eruptions which might break
forth through the old cinder cones in the floor of the great crater. She
was the goddess of dead fires and desolation. She sometimes clothed the
long summit of the mountain with a glorious garment of snow several
miles in length. Some legends give her a place as the wife of the
great-flood survivor, Nana-Nuu, recorded by Fornander as having a
cave-dwelling on the slope of Mauna Kea. Therefore she is also known as
one of the goddesses of Mauna Kea.

Waiau was another snow-maiden of Mauna Kea, whose record in the legends
has been almost entirely forgotten. There is a beautiful lake glistening
in one of the crater-cones on the summit of the mountain. This was
sometimes called "The Bottomless Lake," and was supposed to go down deep
into the heart of the mountain. It is really forty feet in its greatest
depth--deep enough for the bath of the goddess. The name Wai-au means
water of sufficient depth to bathe.

Somewhere, buried in the memory of some old

{p. 57}

Hawaiian, is a legend worth exhuming, probably connecting Waiau, the
maiden, with Waiau, the lake.

Kahoupokane was possibly the goddess of the mountain Hualalai,
controlling the snows which after long intervals fall on its desolate
summits. At present but little more than the name is known about this
maiden of the snow-garment.

Poliahu, the best-known among the maidens of the mountains, loved the
eastern cliffs of the great island Hawaii,--the precipices which rise
from the raging surf which beats against the coast known now as the
Hamakua district. Here she sported among mortals, meeting the chiefs in
their many and curious games of chance and skill. Sometimes she wore a
mantle of pure white kapa and rested on the ledge of rock overhanging
the torrents of water which in various places fell into the sea.

There is a legend of Kauai woven into the fairy-tale of the maiden of
the mist--Laieikawai--and in this story Poliahu for a short time visits
Kauai as the bride of one of the high chiefs who bore the name
Aiwohikupua. The story of the betrothal and marriage suggests the cold
of the snow-mantle and shows the inconstancy of human hearts.

Aiwohikupua, passing near the cliffs of Hamakua, saw a beautiful woman
resting on the rocks

{p. 58}

above the sea. She beckoned with most graceful gestures for him to
approach the beach. Her white mantle lay on the rocks beside her. He
landed and proposed marriage, but she made a betrothal with him by the
exchange of the cloaks which they were wearing. Aiwohikupua went away to
Kauai, but he soon returned clad in the white cloak and wearing a
beautiful helmet of red feathers. A large retinue of canoes attended
him, filled with musicians and singers and his intimate companions. The
three mountains belonging to the snow-goddesses were clothed with snow
almost down to the seashore.

Poliahu and the three other maidens of the white robe came down to meet
the guests from Kauai. Cold winds swayed their garments as they drew
near to the sea. The blood of the people of Kauai chilled in their
veins. Then the maidens threw off their white mantles and called for the
sunshine. The snow went back to the mountain tops, and the maidens, in
the beauty of their golden sun-garments, gave hearty greeting to t heir
friends. After the days of the marriage festival Poliahu and her chief
went to Kauai.

A queen of the island Maui had also a promise given by Aiwohikupua. In
her anger she hastened to Kauai and in the midst of the Kauai
festivities revealed herself and charged the

{p. 59}

chief with his perfidy. Poliahu turned against her husband and forsook
him.

The chief's friends made reconciliation between the Maui chiefess and
Aiwohikupua, but when the day of marriage came the chiefess found
herself surrounded by an invisible atmosphere of awful cold. This grew
more and more intense as she sought aid from the chief.

At last he called to her: "This cold is the snow mantle of Poliahu. Flee
to the place of fire!" But down by the fire the sun-mantle belonging to
Poliahu was thrown around her and she cried out, "He wela e, he wela!"
("The heat! Oh, the heat!") Then the chief answered, "This heat is the
anger of Poliahu." So the Maui chiefess hastened away from Kauai to her
own home.

Then Poliahu and her friends of the white mantle threw their cold-wave
over the chief and his friends and, while they shivered and were chilled
almost to the verge of death, appeared before all the people standing in
their shining robes of snow, glittering in the glory of the sun; then,
casting once more their cold breath upon the multitude, disappeared
forever from Kauai, returning to their own home on the great mountains
of the southern islands.

It may have been before or after this strange legendary courtship that
the snow-maiden met

{p. 60}

Pele, the maiden of volcanic fires. Pele loved the holua-coasting--the
race of sleds, long and narrow, down sloping, grassy hillsides. She
usually appeared as a woman of wonderfully beautiful countenance and
form-a stranger unknown to any of the different companies entering into
the sport. The chiefs of the different districts of the various islands
had their favorite meeting-places for any sport in which they desired to
engage.

There were sheltered places where gambling reigned, or open glades where
boxing and spear-throwing could best be practised, or coasts where the
splendid surf made riding the waves on surf-boards a scene of
intoxicating delight. There were hillsides where sled-riders had
opportunity for the exercise of every atom of skill and strength.

Poliahu and her friends had come down Mauna Kea to a sloping hillside
south of Hamakua. Suddenly in their midst appeared a stranger of
surpassing beauty. Poliahu welcomed her and the races were continued.
Some of the legend-tellers think that Pele was angered by the
superiority, real or fancied, of Poliahu. The ground began to grow warm
and Poliahu knew her enemy.

Pele threw off all disguise and called for the forces of fire to burst
open the doors of the subterranean caverns of Mauna Kea. Up toward

{p. 61}

the mountain she marshalled her fire-fountains. Poliahu fled toward the
summit. The snow-mantle was seized by the outbursting lava and began to
burn up. Poliahu grasped the robe, dragging it away and carrying it with
her. Soon she regained strength and threw the mantle over the mountain.

There were earthquakes upon earthquakes, shaking the great island from
sea to sea. The mountains trembled while the tossing waves of the
conflict between fire and snow passed through and over them. Great rock
precipices staggered and fell down the sides of the mountains. Clouds
gathered over the mountain summit at the call of the snow-goddess. Each
cloud was gray with frozen moisture and the snows fell deep and fast on
the mountain. Farther and farther down the sides the snow-mantle
unfolded until it dropped on the very fountains of fire. The lava
chilled and hardened and choked the flowing, burning rivers.

Pele's servants became her enemies. The lava, becoming stone, filled up
the holes out of which the red melted mass was trying to force itself.
Checked and chilled, the lava streams were beaten back into the depths
of Mauna Loa and Kilauea. The fire-rivers, already rushing to the sea,
were narrowed and driven downward so rapidly that they leaped out from
the land,

{p. 62}

becoming immediately the prey of the remorseless ocean.

Thus the ragged mass of Laupahoe-hoe formed, and the great ledge of the
arch of Onomea, and the different sharp and torn lavas in the edge of
the sea which mark the various eruptions of centuries past.

Poliahu in legendary battles has met Pele many times. She has kept the
upper part of the mountain desolate under her mantle of snow and ice,
but down toward the sea most fertile and luxuriant valleys and hillside
slopes attest the gifts of the goddess to the beauty of the island and
thc welfare of men.

Out of Mauna Loa, Pele has stepped forth again and again, and has hurled
eruptions of mighty force and great extent against the maiden of the
snow-mantle, but the natives say that in this battle Pele has been and
always will be defeated. Pele's kingdom has been limited to the southern
half of the island Hawaii, while the snow-maidens rule the territory to
the north.

{p. 63}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. Genealogy of the Pele Family](hlov15.md)
