[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov24)  [Next](hlov26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XX

### KAPIOLANI AND PELE

THE story of the high chiefess Kapiolani and her conflict with Pele, the
goddess of Kilauea, in December, 1824, is historic. It belongs, however,
to the volcanoes of the Hawaiian Islands, and is more important than any
myth.

Kapiolani was the daughter of Keawe-mau-hili, who was the high chief of
the district of Hilo. He was the uncle of Kiwalao, the young king of the
island Hawaii, who was killed by Kamehameha's warriors when Kamehameha
became king of that island.

Kapiolani as a little child was in the camp with her father at the time
of the battle. She was in danger of death, but some men carried her over

{p. 153}

the mountains through a multitude of difficulties back to Hilo. She
became a tall, portly woman, with keen black eyes and an engaging
countenance, a queen in appearance when with other chiefs or chiefesses.
She was not a queen, nor was she even a princess, although by blood
relationship she belonged to the royal family. She was the wife of
Na-ihe, who was the high chief of the district of Kona on the western
side of the island Hawaii.

Na-ihe (The spears) was said to be the national orator or best speaker
on government affairs among the chiefs. Kapiolani
(The-bending-arch-of-heaven) was very intelligent, quick-witted, and
fearless. They were both so influential that they were chosen by the
great Kamehameha, as members of his council of chiefs and were retained
by his son Liholiho, or Kamehameha II.

When the missionaries of the American Board from Boston arrived, April
4, 1820, at Kailua Bay on the western coast of Hawaii, they landed in
territory nominally controlled by Na-ihe and Kapiolani, although at that
particular time the young king, Liholiho, and his court were in Kona,
and were the real rulers.

However, when the missionaries had reduced the language to writing and
had begun to print leaflets for spelling and reading, in 1822, Na-ihe
and Kapiolani were among the first chiefs to

{p. 154}

welcome instruction and accept Christianity as far as they could
understand it.

In 1823 a delegation of missionaries went around the island Hawaii. They
visited the volcano Kilauea and wrote the first really good description
of the crater and its activity. The natives were astonished to see the
perfect safety of the missionaries, although the worship and tabus of
Pele were absolutely ignored. Ohelo\[1\] berries and strawberries
growing on the brink of the crater were freely eaten and the lake of
fire explored without even a thought of fear of the goddess.

In the course of their journey the missionaries met a priestess of Pele.
The priestess, assuming a haughty air, said: "I am Pele, I shall never
die. Those who follow me, if part of their bones are taken to Kilauea,
will live in the bright fire there." A missionary said, "Are you Pele?"
She said, "Yes, I am Pele," then proceeded to state her powers. A chief
of low rank who had been a royal messenger under Kamehameha, and who was
making the journey with the missionaries, interrupted the woman, saying:
"Then it is true, you are Pele, and have destroyed the land, killed the
people, and have spoiled the fishing-grounds. If I were the king I would
throw you into the sea." The priestess was quick-witted

\[1. Vaccinium penduliformis--var. reticulatum.\]

{p. 155}

and said that truly she had done some harm, but the rum of the
foreigners was far more destructive.

All this prepared the way for Kapiolani to attempt to break down the
worship of the fire-goddess. It must be remembered that Kapiolani had
been under the influence of thoughtful civilization only about three
years when she decided that she would attack the idolatry which, of all
idol worship, was the most firmly entrenched in the hearts of her people
because it was founded on the mysterious forces of nature. She accepted
implicitly the word of the missionaries, that their God was the one god
of nature. Therefore she had rejected the fire-goddess with all the
other deities formerly worshipped in Hawaii. She was, however,
practically alone in her determination to strike a blow against the
worship of Pele.

Priests of Pele were numerous on the island Hawaii. Women were among
those of highest rank in that priesthood. Many of the personal followers
of Kapiolani were worshippers. Even Na-ihe, her husband, had not been
able to free himself from superstitious fears. When Kapiolani said that
she was going to prove the falsity of the worship of Pele, there was a
storm of heartfelt opposition. The priests and worshippers of Pele
honestly believed that divine

{p. 156}

punishment would fall on her. Those who were Christians were afraid that
some awful explosion might overwhelm the company, as a large body of
warriors had been destroyed thirty-four years before.

Na-ihe, still strongly under the influence of superstition, urged her
not to go. All this opposition arose from her warm friends. When her
determination was seen to be immovable, some of the priests of Pele
became bitterly angry and in their rage prophesied most awful results.

When Kapiolani left her home in Kona her people, with great wailing,
again attempted to persuade her to stay with them. The grief, stimulated
by fear of things supernatural, was uncontrollable. The people followed
their chiefess some distance with prayers and tears.

For more than a hundred miles she journeyed, usually walking, sometimes
having a smooth path, but again having to cross miles of the roughest,
most rugged and sharp-edged lava on the island Hawaii. At last the party
came to the vicinity of the volcano. This was not by the present road,
but along the smoother, better way, used for centuries on the south side
of the crater toward the ocean.

Toward the close of the day they crossed steaming cracks and chasms and
drew nearer

{p. 157}

to the foul-smelling, gaseous clouds of smoke which blew toward them
from the great crater. Here a priestess of Pele of the highest rank came
to meet the party and turn them away from the dominions of the
fire-goddess unless they would offer appropriate sacrifices. She knew
Kapiolani's purpose, and determined to frustrate it.

Formerly there had been a temple near the brink of the crater on the
southeast side. This, according to Ellis, bore the name Oala-laua. He
says, "It was a temple of Pele, of which Ka-maka-a-ke-akua
(The-eye-of-God), a distinguished soothsayer who died in the reign of
Kamehameha, was many years priest." The temple was apparently deserted
at the time of the overthrow of the tabu in 1819, and the priests had
gone to the lower and better cultivated lands of Puna, where they had
their headquarters. However, they still worshipped Pele and sacrificed
to her.

This priestess who faced Kapiolani was very haughty and bold. She
forbade her to approach any nearer to the volcano on pain of death at
the hands of the furious goddess Pele.

"Who are you?" asked Kapiolani.

"I am one in whom the God dwells."

"If God dwells in you, then you are wise and can teach me. Come and sit
down."

The priestess had seen printed pages or heard

{p. 158}

about them, so she drew out a piece of kapa, or paper made from the bark
of trees,\[1\] and saying that this was a letter from Pele began to read
or rather mumble an awful curse.

The people with Kapiolani were hushed into a terrified silence, but she
listened quietly until the priestess, carried beyond her depth, read a
confused mass of jumbled words, and unintelligible noises, which she
called "The dialect of the ancient Pele."

Then Kapiolani took her spelling-book, and a little book of a few
printed hymns, and said: "You have pretended to deliver a message from
your god, but we have not understood it. Now I will read you a message
which you can understand, for I, too, have a letter." Then she read
clearly the Biblical sentences printed in the spelling-book and some of
the hymns. The priestess was silenced.

Meanwhile, the missionaries at Hilo, a hundred and fifty miles from
Kona, heard that Kapiolani had started on this strenuous undertaking.
They felt that some one of the Christian teachers should be with her.
Mr. Ruggles had been without shoes for several months and could not go.
Mr. Goodrich, the other missionary stationed at Hilo, was almost as
badly off, but was more accustomed

\[1. Plants used for kapa were wauke, olona, mamaki, poulu, akala, hau,
maaloa, and the mulberry.\]

{p. 159}

to travelling barefoot. So he went up through the tangled masses of
sharp-edged lava, grass, strong-leaved ferns, and thick woods to meet
the chiefess as she came to the crater.

Kapiolani passed the priestess, went on to the crater, met Mr. Goodrich,
and was much affected by the effort he had made to aid her in her
attempt to break down the worship of Pele. It was now evening, and a hut
was built to shelter her until the next day came, when she could have
the opportunity of descending into the crater.

Mr. Richards, a missionary, later wrote as follows: "Along the way to
the volcano she was accosted by multitudes and entreated not to proceed.
She answered, 'If I am destroyed, then you may all believe in Pele, but
if I am not, you must all turn to the true writings.'"

The great crater at that time had a black ledge or shelf, below which
the active lakes and fountains of fire, in many places, broke through
and kept turbulent a continually changing mass over five miles in
circumference. Here in the large cones built up by leaping lava, the
natives said, were the homes of the family of Pele. Here the deities
amused themselves in games. The roaring of the furnaces and crackling of
flames was the music of drums beaten for the accompaniment of the
household dances. The red flaming surge was the surf wherein they
played.

{p. 160}

As the morning light brought a wonderful view of the Lua Pele
(The-pit-of-Pele) with its great masses of steam and smoke rising from
the immense field of volcanic activity below, and as the rush of mighty
waves of lava broke again and again against the black ledge with a roar
exceeding that of a storm-driven surf beating upon rocky shores, and as
fierce explosions of gases bursting from the underworld in a continual
cannonade, deafened the ears of the company, Kapiolani prepared to go
down to defy Pele.

This must have been one of the few grand scenes of history. There was
the strong, brave convert to Christianity standing above the open lake
of fire, the red glowing lava rolling in waves below, with rough blocks
of hardened lava on every side, the locks (Pele's hair) of the
fire-goddess, torn out and whirling around in the air, the timid fearful
faces of the people and their attitude of terror and anxiety showing the
half-hope that the tabu might be broken and the half-dread lest the evil
spirit might breathe fire upon them and destroy them at once.

Mr. Richards says: "A man whose duty it was to feed Pele, by throwing
berries and the like into the volcano, entreated her to go no farther.
'And what,' said she, 'will be the harm?' The man replied, 'You will die
by

{p. 161}

Pele.' Kapiolani answered, 'I shall not die by your god. That fire was
kindled by my God.' The man was silent and she went onward, descending
several hundred feet, and there joined in a prayer to Jehovah. She also
ate the berries consecrated to Pele, and threw stones into the volcano."

Bingham in his "Sandwich Islands" says: "Then with the terrific
bellowing and whizzing of the volcanic gases they mingled their voices
in a solemn hymn of praise to the true God, and at the instance of the
chiefess, Alapai, one of Kapiolani's attendants, led them in prayer."

The party returned to the brink of the crater, and journeyed down to
Hilo.

Alexander in the "History of the Hawaiian People" says, "This has justly
been called one of the greatest acts of moral courage ever performed."

Richards states that the leader of Kapiolani's party said to him: "All
the people of the district saw that she was not injured and have
pronounced Pele to be powerless."

The influence of Kapiolani against this most influential form of
idolatrous worship was felt throughout the whole nation.

In 1836, twelve years later, Rev. Titus Coan wrote about the coming of
many natives into a Christian life. He says: "In 1836, twelve

{p. 162}

years after the visit of Kapiolani, among these converts was the High
Priest of the volcano, He was more than six feet tall, and was of lofty
bearing. He had been an idolater, a drunkard, an adulterer, a robber,
and a murderer. His sister was more haughty and stubborn. She, too, was
tall and majestic in her bearing. At length she yielded and with her
brother became a docile member of the church."

But it was Lord Tennyson who set down for posterity the heroic deed of
the great queen in the following beautiful poem:

{p. 163}

KAPIOLANI.

I.

When from the terrors of Nature a people have fashion'd and worship a
Spirit of Evil  
Blest be the Voice of the Teacher who calls to them,  
"Set yourselves free!"

II

Noble the Saxon who hurled at his Idol a valorous weapon in olden
England!  
Great, and greater, and greatest of women, island heroine Kapiolani  
Clomb the mountain, and flung the berries and dared the Goddess, and
freed the people  
Of Hawa-i-ee!

III

A people believing that Peelè the Goddess would wallow in fiery riot and
revel  
On Kilauea,  
Dance in a fountain of flame with her devils or shake with her thunders
and shatter her island,  
Rolling her anger  
Thro' blasted valley and flowing forest in blood-red cataracts down to
the sea!

{p. 164}

IV\.

Long as the lava-light  
    Glares from the lava-take,  
    Dazing the starlight;  
Long as the silvery vapor in daylight,  
    Over the mountain  
Floats, will the glory of Kapiolani be mingled with either on Hawa-i-ee.

V.

What said her Priesthood?  
"Woe to this island if ever a woman should handle or gather the berries
of Peelè  
Accursed were she!  
And woe to this island if ever a woman should climb to the dwelling of
Peelè the Goddess!  
Accursed were she!"

VI\.

One from the Sunrise  
Dawned on His people and slowly before him  
    Vanished shadow-like  
    Gods and Goddesses,  
None but the terrible Peelè remaining as Kapiolani  
    Ascended her mountain,  
Baffled her priesthood,  
    Broke the Taboo,  
    Dipt to the crater,  
Called on the Power adored by the Christian and crying, "I dare her, let
Peelè avenge herself!"  
Into the flame-billows dashed the berries, and drove the demon from
Hawa-i-ee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: PART II. Geological Facts](hlov26)
