[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov11)  [Next](hlov13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# VII

### PELE AND KAHA-WALI

FOR a long, long time the Hawaiians have had the proverb "Never abuse an
old woman; she might be Pele."

This saying was applied to several legends, but it belonged especially
to the story of her punishment of Kaha-wali. Kaha-wali was a chief born
and brought up on the island Kauai. This island was one of the first on
which volcanic fires were extinct. It became "The Garden Island." It was
the most luxuriant in vegetation. Its hillsides were covered with grass
which afforded the very best facilities for sliding down hill.

Hee-nalu meant "surf-riding," *Heeholua* meant "sled-riding," or sliding
down grassy hillsides. The sleds were usually made of hard, dark
kauila\[1\] wood. Runners made from this wood became very smooth and
highly polished. They were seven, twelve, or even eighteen feet long.
They were turned up a little at the front end, where they were two to
four inches apart. They were fastened together with a number of

\[1. Columbrina oppositifolia.\]

{p. 38}

crosspieces almost the full length of the runners. At the rear end the
runners were about six inches apart. There were long side-pieces almost
the full length of the sled. Sometimes a narrow piece of matting was
fastened over the whole length of the sled, although usually only a
small piece was provided for the chest to rest upon. The person using
the sled grasped the right-hand side stick with his right hand, then,
running swiftly to the brow of the hill, caught the stick of the left
side and, throwing himself on the sled, hurled it over the edge and down
the hill, sometimes sliding one hundred to two hundred yards or more.
The sled was so narrow and the difficulty of staying on it so great,
that it became one of the most interesting contests in which chiefs and
people delighted. Much practice was necessary before the rider could
maintain his or her balance, guide the sled, and gain a velocity which
would carry them far beyond any competitor. Sometimes when the holua
track was worn close down to the earth, grass, rushes, and even leaves,
were carefully strewn over the ground to make easy gliding for the
polished runners.

{p. 39}

Kaha-wali excelled all the Kauai chiefs in this sport, so he determined
to test his skill on the other islands. He had heard of a beautiful
young chiefess on the distant island Hawaii who was a wonderful holua
rider. His first great contest should be with Pele. He prepared for a
long journey, and a stay of many months or even years. Some authorities
have placed the time of this visit to Hawaii as about the year 1350.

Kaha-wali filled his canoes with choice sleds, mats, cloaks, calabashes,
spears, in fact, all the property needed for use during the visit he had
in mind. He took his wife, Kanaka-wahine, his two children, his sister
Koai, his younger brother, and Ahua, one of the young chiefs who was his
aikane (intimate friend), and also his necessary retainers and their
baggage, and among the most cherished of all, his favorite pig,
Aloi-puaa. This pig was so important that its name has been made
prominent in all the Kaha-wali legends.

They journeyed from island to island. Evidently his father,
O-lono-hai-laau, and others of the family came as far as the island Oahu
and there remained.

Kaha-wali passed on to Hawaii and landed at Kapoho in the district of
Puna. Apparently the chiefs of this part of the island made Kaha-wali
welcome, for he built houses for himself and

{p. 40}

his retainers and settled down as if he belonged to the country.

The visitors from Kauai entered heartily into the sports of the people
and after a time climbed some lava hills and began holua races. These
hills were composed of lava, which easily turned into rich soil when
subdued by alternate rain and sunshine. Grass and ferns soon clothed
them with abundant verdure. Holua courses were laid out, and the chiefs
had splendid sport. Crowds came to watch and applaud. Musicians,
dancers, wrestlers, and boxers added to the interest.

Kaha-wali and Ahua were frequently racing with each other. After each
race there were dancing and games among the people. One day while racing
Kaha-wali stuck his spear, which was peculiarly broad and long, into the
ground at the end of the race course, then climbed the hill which bore
the name Ka-hale-o-ka-mahina (The-house-of-the-moon). Ellis, who wrote
the story of the missionary tour of 1823, said that the race course was
pointed out to him as Ka-holua-ana-o-Kaha-vari
(The-sliding-place-of-Kaha-vari). He thus describes the hill: "It was a
black frowning crater about one hundred feet high, with a deep gap in
the rim on the eastern side from which the course of a current of lava
could be distinctly traced."

{p. 41}

A woman of ordinary appearance came to the hilltop as Kaha-wali and Ahua
prepared for a race. She said: "I wish to ride. Let me take your holua."
The chief replied: "What does an old woman like you want with a holua?
You do not belong to my family, that I should let you take mine." Then
she turned to Ahua and asked for his holua. He kindly gave it to her.
Together the chief and the woman dashed to the brow of the hill, threw
themselves on their holuas and went headlong down the steep course. The
woman soon lost her balance. The holua rolled over and hurled her some
distance down the hill. She challenged the chief to another start, and
when they were on the hilltop asked him for his papa-holua. She knew
that a high chief's property was very sacred and could not be used by
those without rank.

Kaha-wali thought this was a common native and roughly refused her
request, saying: "Are you my wife \[*i.e.*, my equal in rank\], that you
should have my holua?" Then he ran swiftly, started his holua, and sped
toward the bottom of the hill.

Anger flashed in the face of the woman, for she had been spurned and
deserted. Her eyes were red like hot coals of fire. She stamped on the
ground. The hill opened beneath her and a flood of lava burst forth and
began to pour

{p. 42}

down into the valley, following and devastating the holua course, and
spreading out over the whole plain.

Assuming her supernatural form as the goddess of fire, Pele rode down
the hill on her own papa-holua on the foremost wave of the river of
fire. She was no longer the common native, but was the beautiful young
chiefess in her fire-body, eyes flaming and hair floating back in clouds
of smoke. There she stood leaning forward to catch her antagonist, and
urging her fire-waves to the swiftest possible action, Explosions of
bursting lava resounded like thunder all around her. Kaha-wali leaped
from his holua as it came to the foot of the hill, threw off his kihei
(cloak), caught his spear, and, calling Ahua to follow, ran toward the
sea,

The valley quickly filled with lava, the people were speedily swallowed
up. Kaha-wali rushed past his home. Ellis says: "He saw his mother who
lived at Ku-kii, saluted her by touching noses, and said, 'Aloha ino oe
eia ihonei paha oe e make ai, ke ai manei Pele' \[Compassion rest on
you. Close here perhaps is your death. Pele comes devouring\].

"Then he met his wife. The fire-torrent was near at hand. She said:
'Stay with me here, and let us die together.' He said: 'No, I go! I
go!'"

{p. 43}

So he left his wife and his children. Then he met his pet hog,
Aloi-puaa, and stopped for a moment to salute it by rubbing noses. The
hog was caught by Pele in a few moments and changed into a great black
stone in the heart of the channel and left, as the centre of the river
of fire flowed on to destroy the two fleeing chiefs.-Rocks scattered
along the banks of this old channel are pointed out as the individuals
and the remnants of houses destroyed by Pele.

The chiefs came to a deep chasm in the earth. They could not leap over
it. Kaha-wali crossed on his spear and pulled his friend over after him.
On the beach he found a canoe left by his younger brother who had just
landed and hastened inland to try to save his family. Kaha-wali and Ahua
leaped into the boat and pushed out into the ocean.

Pele soon stood on the beach hurling red-hot rocks at him which the
natives say can still be seen lying on the bottom of the sea. Thus did
Kaha-wali learn that he must not abuse an old woman, for she might be
Pele.

--The story often ends with the statement that Kaha-wali joined his
father on the island Oahu and there remained. Other legends say he went
to Kauai and there gathered a company of the

{p. 44}

most powerful priests to return to Hawaii for the destruction of Pele
and her volcanic fires.

Six of these priests, according to Mrs. Rufus Lyman, who owned the land
of this adventure and whose descendants still hold the same, came to
Hawaii with the defeated Kaha-wali. These were Hale-mau-mau, Ka-au-ea,
Uwe-kahuna, Ka-ua-nohu-nohu, Ka-lani-ua-ula, and Ka-pu-e-uli.

They took their positions near Kilauea and challenged Pele, crying out:
"Where is that strange and wonderful woman?" Ka-au-ea (The fiery
current) and Uwe-kahuna (priest weeping) and Hale-mau-mau (House of
ferns) were kahunas, or priests of wonderful power. They were the only
ones who left their names to localities in the neighborhood of Kilauea.

Hale-mau-mau had his house of ferns for a long time upon a precipice,
back of the present Volcano House. From there the Dame has been changed
both in meaning and location to the lava pit, the pit of Pele, in the
living lake of fire, where it is called Hale-mau-mau
(the-enduring-house). Ka-au-ea was the name given to a precipice in the
walls of the crater. Uwe-kahuna was a high hill on the northwestern side
of the crater, overlooking the fire-pit and the region around Kilauea.
These priests who were also of the rank of chiefs were all killed by
Pele except Kaha-wali, who escaped to Oahu.--

{p. 45}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Pele and Kama-puaa](hlov13)
