[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov18)  [Next](hlov20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# XIV

### HOW HIIAKA FOUND WAHINE-OMAO

THE story of the journey, of the youngest sister of Pele, the goddess of
volcanic fires, when seeking a husband for her oldest sister, has a
simple and yet exceedingly human element in the incidents which cluster
around the finding of a faithful follower and friend. It is a story of
two girls attracted to each other by lovable qualities. Hiiaka was a
goddess with an attendant from the old Hawaiian fairyland--the Guardian
of Ferns. Then there was added the human helper, Wahine-omao, or "the
light-colored woman."

While Hiiaka was journeying through the lower part of the forest which
she had freed from (lemons, the Guardian of Ferns said: "I hear the
grunting of a pig, but cannot tell whether it is before us or on one
side. Where is it--from the sea or inland?"

Hiiaka said: "This is a pig from the sea. It

{p. 105}

is the Humuhumu-nukunuku-a-puaa. It is the grunting, angular pigfish.
There is also a pig from the land. There are two pigs. They are before
us. They belong to a woman and are for a gift--a sacrifice to the sister
goddess who is over us two. This is Wahine-omao."

They walked on through the restful shadows of the forest and soon met a
beautiful woman carrying a little black pig and a striped, angular fish.
Humuhumu means "grunting." Nukunuku means "cornered." Puaa means "pig."
The Humuhumu-nukunuku-a-puaa was a fish with a sharp-pointed back,
grunting like a pig. It was the fish into which the fabled demi-god
Kama-puaa changed himself when fleeing from the destructive fires of
Pele.

Hiiaka greeted the stranger, "Love to you, O Wahine-omao."

The woman replied: "It is strange that you two have my name while your
eyes are unknown to me. What are your names and where do you go?"

The sister of Pele concealed their names. "I am Ku and Ka is the name of
my friend. A troublesome journey is before us beyond the waters of Hilo
and the kupuas \[demons\] dwelling there and along the hard paths over
the cliffs of the seacoast even to the steady blowing winds of Kohala."

{p. 106}

The newcomer looked longingly into the eyes of the young chiefess and
said: "I have a great desire for that troublesome journey, but this pig
is a sacrifice for the goddess of the crater. Shall I throw away the pig
and go with you?"

Hiiaka told her to hurry on, saying: "If your purpose is strong to go
with us, take your sacrifice pig to the woman of the pit. Then come
quickly after us. You will find us. While you go say continually, 'O Ku!
O Ka! O Ku! O Ka!' When you arrive at the pit throw the pig down into
the fire and return quickly, saying, 'O Ku! O Ka!' until you find us."

The woman said: "I will surely remember your words, but you are so
beautiful and have such power that 1 think you are Pele. Take my pig now
and end my trouble." Then she started to throw herself and her offerings
on the ground before Hiiaka.

Hiiaka forbade this and explained that the offering must be taken as had
been vowed.

Then the woman took her sacred gifts and went up through the woods to
the crater, saying over and over, "O Ku! O Ka!" all the time realizing
that new activity and life were coming to her and that she was moving as
swiftly as the wind. In a little while she stood on the high point above
the crater called Kolea--the place where birds rested. Before her lay a
great

{p. 107}

circular plain, black-walled, full of burning lava leaping up in
wonderful fire-dances and boiling violently around a group of beautiful
women. She called to Pele:

"E Pele e! Here is my sacrifice--a pig.  
E Pele e! Here is my gift--a pig.  
Here is a pig for you,  
O goddess of the burning stones.  
Life for me. Life for you.  
The flowers of fire wave gently.  
Here is your pig."--*Amama*.

The woman threw the pig and the fish over the edge into the mystic fires
beneath and leaned over, looking down into the deadliness of the fire
and smoke which received the sacrifice. Flaming hands leaped up, caught
the gifts and drew them down under the red surface. But in a moment
there was a rush upward of a fountain of lava and hurled up with it she
saw the body of the little black pig tossing in the changing jets of
fire.

Down it went again into the whirling, groaning fires of the underworld.
Then she knew that the sacrifice had been accepted and that she was free
from her vow of service to Pele. Every tabu upon her free action had
been removed and she was free--free to do according to her own wish.
Then she saw one of the women of the pit slowly changing into an old
woman lying on

{p. 108}

a mat of fire apart from the others. It was Pele who was always growing
more and more jealous and angry with Hiiaka.

Pele called from the pit of fire, "O woman! have you seen two
travellers?"

When she learned that they had been seen going on their journey she
charged her new worshipper to go with Hiiaka and always spy upon her
movements.

Wahine-omao became angry and cried out: "When I came here I thought you
were beautiful with the glory of fire resting on you. Your sisters are
beautiful, but you are a harsh old woman. Your eyes are red. Your
eyebrows and hair are burned. You are the woman with scorched eyelids."
Then she ran from the crater, saying, "O Ku! O Ka!" Her feet seemed to
be placed on a swift-moving cloud and in a few moments she was dropped
by the side of Hiiaka.

The three women, Hiiaka, the powerful, Pau-o-palae, the fairy of the
ferns, and Wahine-omao, the brave and beautiful young woman of the
forest, went on toward Hilo. They came to a grove of ohia, or native
apple, trees, and the new friend begged them to rest for a little while
in this place, for it was her father's home.

Hiiaka hesitated, saying: "I am afraid that you would entangle me, O
friend! Some one

{p. 109}

is waiting below whom I must see. Our journey cannot end."

"Oh," said the woman, "I intend not to stay. Stepping sideways was my
thought to see my family dwelling in this house--then journey on."

They turned aside through the red-fruited tall ohia trees to a
resting-place called Papa-lau-ahi, or the fire-leaf of lava spread out
flat like a board. This has always been a resting-place for travellers
coming across the island to Hilo Bay. There they greeted friends and
rested, but Hiiaka thought lovingly of another friend, Hopoe, far dearer
to her than any one else. Tears rolled down her cheeks.

Wahine-omao said, "Why do you weep, O friend?" The reply came: "Because
of my friend who lives over by that sea far below us. The smoke of the
fire-anger of our sister-lord is falling over toward my friend Hopoe."

Wahine-omao said: "One of our people truly lives over there. We know and
love her well, but her name is Nana-huki. The name is given because when
looking at you her eyes are like a cord pulling you to her."

"Yes," said Hiiaka, "that is her name, but for me she had the
sweet-scented hala wreaths and the beautiful wreaths of the red blossoms
of the lehua and baskets of the most delicious treasures of the sea. So
my name for her is Hopoe."

{p. 110}

The name Hopoe may mean "one encircled," as with leis, or wreaths, or as
with loving arms, or possibly it might convey the idea of one set apart
in a special class or company. Both thoughts might well be included in
the deep love of the young goddess for a human friend.

The time came for the three women to hasten on their way. The final
alohas were said. The friends rubbed noses in the old Hawaiian way and
went down to Hilo.

Hiiaka looked again from the upland over to the distant seacoast and
wailed:

My journey opens to Kauai.  
Loving is my thought for my aikane,  
My bosom friend--  
Hopoe---my sweet-scented hala.  
Far will we go;  
Broad is the land;  
Perhaps Kauai is the end."

Thus Hiiaka sent her loving thoughts over forest and rugged lava plains
to her dearest friend even while she opened her heart to another friend
who served her with the utmost faithfulness and love all the rest of her
eventful journey.

{p. 111}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Hiiaka Catching a Ghost](hlov20.md)
