[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hlov05)  [Next](hlov07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# I

### AI LAAU, THE FOREST EATER

WHEN Pele came to the island Hawaii, seeking a permanent home, she found
another god of fire already in possession of the territory. Ai-laau was
known and feared by all the people. Ai means the "one who eats or
devours." Laau means "tree" or a "forest." Ai-laau was, therefore, the
fire-god devouring forests. Time and again he laid the districts of
South Hawaii desolate by the lava he poured out from his fire-pits.

He was the god of the insatiable appetite, the continual eater of trees,
whose path through forests was covered with black smoke fragrant with
burning wood, and sometimes burdened with the smell of human flesh
charred into cinders in the lava flow.

Ai-laau seemed to be destructive and was so named by the people, but his
fires were a part of the forces of creation. He built up the

{p. 2}

islands for future life. The process of creation demanded volcanic
activity. The flowing lava made land. The lava disintegrating made earth
deposits and soil. Upon this land storms fell and through it multitudes
of streams found their way to the sea. Flowing rivers came from the
cloud-capped mountains. Fruitful fields and savage homes made this
miniature world-building complete.

Ai-laau still poured out his fire. It spread over the fertile fields,
and the natives feared him as the destroyer giving no thought to the
final good.

He lived, the legends say, for a long time in a very ancient part of
Kilauea, on the large island of Hawaii, now separated by a narrow ledge
from the great crater and called Kilauea-iki (Little Kilauea). This
seems to be the first and greatest of number of craters extending in a
line from the great lake of fire in Kilauea to the seacoast many miles
away. They are called "The Pit Craters" because they are not hills of
lava, but a series of sunken pits going deep down into the earth, some
of them still having blowholes of sputtering steam and smoke.

After a time, Ai-laau left these pit craters and went into the great
crater and was said to be living there when Pele came to the seashore
far below.

In one of the Pele stories is the following

{p. 3}

literal translation of the account of her taking Kilauea:

"When Pele came to the island Hawaii, she first stopped at a place
called Ke-ahi-a-laka in the district of Puna. From this place she began
her inland journey toward the mountains. As she passed on her way there
grew within her an intense desire to go at once and see Ai-laau, the god
to whom Kilauea belonged, and find a resting-place with him as the end
of her journey. She came up, but Ai-laau was not in his house. Of a
truth he had made himself thoroughly lost. He had vanished because he
knew that this one coming toward him was Pele. He had seen her toiling
down by the sea at Ke-ahi-a-laka. Trembling dread and heavy fear
overpowered him. He ran away and was entirely lost. When he came to that
pit she laid out the plan for her abiding home, beginning at once to dig
up the foundations. She dug day and night and found that this place
fulfilled all her desires. Therefore, she fastened herself tight to
Hawaii for all time."

These are the words in which the legend disposes of this ancient god of
volcanic fires. He disappears from Hawaiian thought and Pele from a
foreign land finds a satisfactory crater in which her spirit power can
always dig up everlastingly overflowing fountains of raging lava.

{p. 4}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. How Pele Came to Hawaii](hlov07.md)
