[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb05)  [Next](sb07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

# SOLAR BIOLOGY.

### CHAPTER I.

#### PRELIMINARY PHILOSOPHY.

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> system is the philosophy of life, in
its relations to the physical, or earthly existence, as governed by the
solar fluid of the solar system.

First, we consider man in his animal relation to the physical world;
second, in his mental relation to the physical world and the solar
system; third, in his spiritual nature, and its relation to this world
and to the universe.

Between man's physical and his spiritual nature there is a perfect line
of gradation, from the grosser physical to the higher spiritual, so that
the mental and spiritual are wholly dependent upon the physical for
their conscious relations to this world, as a house is dependent upon
its foundations.

We consider the physical body as a chemical laboratory. The food we take
into the stomach passes through various stages of transmutation in the
process of digestion: first becoming chyle, then blood, when it is
thrown into the generative functions and becomes seed; then the seed,
through the action of the same functions, is changed to lymph—a
transparent, colorless

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

fluid. The word *lymph* is derived from *nymph* (spirit), and this fluid
is therefore quite properly called spirit-water, or water of life.

After passing through these stages it then begins to affect the mental
conditions, and as it is carried by the lymphatic system through all
parts of the body, it causes a pleasurable sensation in all the organs.

The more the seed and fluids are retained in the body without waste, the
greater fulness of life, health, and power is experienced by the person.
If it were possible to discharge all this fluid, the body would soon die
from blood-poisoning.

An abundance of this lymph gives a feeling of rest, happiness, and
satisfaction under all circumstances, also physical strength and love of
activity. This fluid aids in forming the bright red corpuscles of the
blood, and also assists the lungs in their work of purification. A
portion of this regenerated blood passes into the spleen, where the pure
white corpuscles are formed; from thence the most refined elements are
taken up through the nerve system into the brain, and there changed into
the subtle element of thought-potency, giving power to mental action.

There are three ways of spending the life forces first, through the
physical and muscular energies; second, through the mental energies;
third, through the sex function.

To whatever extent there is expenditure in either of these three
channels, there will be so much less force in reserve for the others.

Persons have mental energy or lack mental as well as physical power in
proportion as they are chaste or

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

licentious in their habits, and in delineating character, the most
important thing to be noticed is their habit sexually; for if persons
are inclined to be indulgent, and waste their life forces and elements,
so will they lack mental and physical power, and in proportion as they
conserve these potencies and life fluids, will they have mental and
physical ability. Many times, however, persons of unrestrained habits
draw their physical power from others; but, while they may thus be
possessed of physical strength, they will lack mental clearness,
accuracy, and the disposition to intellectual pursuits.

There is no such thing as a lazy person in the usual sense of the word;
life is activity itself, and, according to the quantity of life, will be
the degree of the disposition to act. If the life is concentrated in the
sexual function, and used up or wasted there, then the activity will be
nearly all in that direction, and there will be lack of power in other
channels, in proportion as it is overactive there. Young persons are
often thought to be lazy, when the activity is centred in that function.
Children addicted to self-abuse, being abnormally active in that
respect, are indolent in other directions, and this waste of vital force
produces an excessive desire to sleep. Sleep is the condition most
conducive to recuperation and generation of new life in the body.

In early morning there is the greatest danger, with children, of
acquiring the habit of self-abuse; therefore parents should have their
children form the habit of rising as soon as they waken in the morning.
The waste of this force in childhood is one of the main causes of the
dwarfed condition of the many persons who are physically and mentally
undeveloped.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

It will be observed that those persons who when young were required by
their parents to rise early and attend to some physical labor, are the
ones who make the highest attainments in life. We also find that men
whose brains are kept so active as to suppress all sexual inclinations
have abundance of life force in brain and body, thus becoming physically
and mentally strong. This will also perfect the intuitive nature, which
is. spiritual, and relates us to the earthly and solar mind, so that we
are enabled to know things that are to come.

This intuitive faculty is the master and guide of the intellect, while
the latter is the servant, the mechanic, the mathematician.

Men and women who live chaste lives are successful in whatever pursuits
they undertake, unless previously bound by circumstances, because, as we
stated, this is the method by which the intuitive function is perfected.

It is with man, as with the little spider, whose chemical nature
attracts the mental elements of the solar fluid; and, by means of this
element, he is enabled to build that fine mechanical structure, the web.
The mental power is not in him, but acts through him; so man, when he
has charged the body with this element of life, attracts the mental
principle of the solar fluid, unites it with his intelligence, and is
thus enabled to know many things, but cannot always explain *how* he
knows them,—this is intuition.

It is the same wonderful principle which informs the birds when the cold
storms of winter are approaching, and instructs them to go south for
self-preservation. Birds and beasts live in complete harmony with
nature. They do not waste their sexual forces, and therefore display

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the wonderful sagacity noticed in the animate world below us.

Man alone abuses this function, and to the extent that he does so, is he
deprived of that Divine guidance possessed by the whole animal world.
The author has made it his business to examine with care the mental and
physical condition of men and women who have had great success in life,
and has found it an invariable rule that all such persons have been
guided wholly by their intuitions, their reasoning faculties having been
subordinate to this higher teacher.

There are some persons who make great attainments and who have fine
intuitions, while living a licentious life, but the secret of their fine
intuitions lies in the fact that their parents were chaste, thereby
endowing them with a superior physical organism and mental intuitive
faculties, and also that these same persons maintained chaste habits
during childhood; yet their powers are far inferior to what they *might*
be, did they observe the law of chastity.

The business world is controlled by two principles: first, love between
man and man; second, psychic, or will power, man over man.

The intuitive powers when properly developed enable man to feel and
understand what is in others; thus, when two men meet on a business
plane they are apt to feel each other's conditions, and are thereby
either attracted or repelled, or even moved to love or hate. Let us
illustrate. A man calls on another, desiring some financial favor. As
soon as they meet they feel that they can put confidence in each other,
simply because their honesty of purpose is intuitively recognized.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sometimes men are
entrusted with large sums of money by strangers, through this principle
of confidence or love, as they intuitively feel the ability and honesty
of the party thus entrusted.

Young men just starting in life who make the principles of industry,
honesty, and equity their guide, though they may have no capital
whatever, will find little difficulty in obtaining credit and help in
any business direction; for capitalists, being intuitive, readily
discover in a young man the disposition to do justly by others, and to
be honest and upright under all circumstances, and willingly trust them
to any desired extent: whereas, if the young man has any disposition to
take advantage of others, or get all he can without rendering an
equivalent, it is immediately perceived, and confidence in him is lost
or withheld.

The real motives and feelings of a person's heart are perceived by those
who have developed the intuitive faculties through a chaste life; and
they always love those of like morality and chastity; and as far as
these conditions exist among business men, love is the controlling
principle.

The second ruling principle in business—the psychic power—is the force
that has been conserved to the use of the brain, and concentrated, and
sent out by the will, with a combative, subduing, or controlling intent.

A man with a strong mind, having this psychological power well
developed, is enabled to control those having less mental power, so that
he actually projects into the other's mind his own feelings, thoughts,
and desires, to the suspension of the other person's power to control
themselves by their own will.

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

This second stage of business life is one of combat, man against man,
and the weapons used are the psychic or will powers. The one who has the
most of this power will conquer and cause his fellow-man to do that
which he wills him to do. Thus men are often caused to do things in
business, and even in social and domestic life, that their most ordinary
reason would tell them was erroneous or injurious; yet, under the
powerful will of others, they do it without thought.

Thus the world is ruled by these two principles, love and psychic force,
and those persons who have this sublimated life essence are enabled to
rule their fellows by the solar inspirations, or drawing in of the solar
mind force, and sending it out, clothed with their own conserved life
and controlling mental energy. See Isaiah lv. 8-16, and Hebrews xi. 3.

A perfectly celibate or chaste life enables a person to create thought
forms and send them out by his will to persons near or far so as to
bring about desired results in controlling mental faculties, or even
physical conditions; thus a person conserving all the energies generated
by the sexual function in his own body will soon be able to know, from
his intuitions, how to heal diseased conditions in his fellows, by
projecting his own life or soul essence into the part affected, to
remove the difficulty, or to set in order the derangement.

To accomplish this, one must subject the appetites, feelings, and
emotions entirely to the reason and the intuitions. St. Paul gave some
good advice on this subject, as follows (Romans xii. 1, 2): "I beseech
you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

your bodies a living sacrifice; holy, acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world (or age), but be
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is
that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God." Again (Romans viii.
6): "For, to be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded
is life and peace."

It is necessary to conquer all abnormal excitement caused by stimulants
or narcotics in order to establish an equilibrium between the supply and
exhaust, and to bring about an harmonious condition between the person
and God (or the Cause world); and as soon as persons begin to really
conquer these conditions, they will find, on closing their eyes to go to
sleep, that consciousness will continue on during their slumbering hours
in whatever sphere their sympathies had been engaged while awake; and
unless this harmony between themselves and the Cause world is secured,
restlessness and unpleasant dreams will annoy them during sleeping
hours.

Many persons undertaking to conquer their passional nature, so as to
retain all the sexual fluids in their own bodies, will find, at first,
great difficulty in doing so. . . Some have pronounced the task
impossible, but it is not. All who <span class="smallcaps">will</span>,
<span class="smallcaps">can</span> do so by constant persistency of
purpose; having a fixed determination that they will not, under any
circumstances, allow themselves to lose the vital fluid; charging the
mind on going to sleep, as if expecting an enemy; and thus continuing
night and day. With some it may take years, but others can. conquer in a
short time; and when they begin to accomplish this, it should affect the
appetite; for at least.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

seven-eighths of all the food consumed by man is wasted through the
sexual channels; therefore, when that waste is shut off, a less amount
of food is necessary to support the body, in proportion to the previous
expenditure in that direction. We have known many persons who, after
conquering this passion, only found it necessary to eat one meal a day,
and that of pure vegetables, abstaining entirely from animal food; but
hard labor would increase the demand for food.

Persons living this life must study carefully to adjust the supply to
the demand; in a word, must establish an equilibrium. This balance
attained will produce a feeling of satisfaction, rest, and harmony, such
as is. necessary to produce the best intellectual and spiritual results
and to harmonize the soul with God, or the *cause* world. Without this
union there will be darkness. and confusion, which is the primary cause
of all mental, moral, and physical disease.

#### INVOLUTION AND EVOLUTION.

Involution is that law of thought formation operating through the
movements of the planets of our solar system, whose activities descend
into earth conditions and find their expression in the forms of all
life,—animal, vegetable, and mineral; thus we come to know the nature of
the incarnate thought by its form and quality; we determine the
character of persons, we judge of the physical characteristics by means
of the hair, the eyes, the finger-nails, the skin, and the organic
structure of the body and brain.

If we find the body coarse, bones large, animal functions

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

of brain dominant, and reason low, we determine that the organic quality
is coarse and on a low plane.

The general mental characteristics may also be determined by the
finger-nails and the hair. If the nails are thick and strong, we know
that the mental functions are rather coarse, and strong, and allied
mainly to the physical; and, on the contrary, if the nails are thin and
pliable, it indicates fine and sensitive nerve structure, with mental
functions equally fine and active.

The hair when coarse implies general thought, materialistic tendencies,
and rather coarse sensibilities; yet there are many belonging to the
realm of fine art that have coarse hair. In this case, their
sensibilities relate to the cognizance of physical nature. Very fine
hair indicates very fine sensibilities and fine discriminative quality
of mind and mental consciousness.

All these characteristics must be graded and their qualities decided by
their relation to the two extremes. Straight hair indicates directness
of character and habit and evenness of temper. Curly hair indicates
changefulness, indirectness of character, uncertainty in thought and
feeling, and frequently great excitability.

All thought formations interact one upon another, reproducing their
kind, under the law of generation, which is a method of creation.

These thought principles are being evolved and refined until they come
to a state of maturity; which, in the *highest order of humanity*,
raises them <span class="smallcaps">above</span> the law of carnal
creation. Then the intuitive nature begins to govern and instruct such
advanced souls, in the necessity of controlling and conquering natural

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

generation, and through this process the spiritual nature becomes allied
to the cause world, and they are thus elevated above the necessity of
being again involved in matter.

When any person is able to conquer the passional nature, he is lifted
into and becomes conjoined to the immortal state, to which Jesus in his
teachings so often referred. But this will only apply to the most mature
persons on our planet; for, while water continues to course through the
brooks and streams of earth, generation will continue, and in every
stage or gradation of unfoldment, this law of generation will be the
controlling power of all, except the few who are able to conquer its
influence; as Jesus said, when questioned, "He that is able to receive
it, let him receive it."

#### MAN'S TRIUNE NATURE.

Man in his organic nature is a trinity: first, Spirit; second, Body; and
third, Soul, which is the outgrowth of the body, through the agency of
the spirit.

Spirit, which is the pure emanation from God, or the cause realm,
gathers to itself material elements, thus forming a body through the
medium of the life essences of the parents. This body is composed of
thought crystallizations, active in the minds of the parents, at, and
just previous to, conception; so that the incarnate thought of the
parents at the time is expressed in the child's nature; so much so, that
the zodiacal sign in which the earth was, and the polarity, or sign in
which the moon was, at the date of birth, expresses the condition

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

of the mind of the most positive parent; while the planetary positions
express the mental conditions of the most negative parent, whether
father or mother. Sometimes we find these two conditions antagonistic to
each other. If the child is a male, the external of its nature will
embody the most positive mental condition at conception, and the
interior the most negative. If the child is a female, the order is
reversed.

The external comprises the thought arising through the medium of the
five senses, while the interior nature comprises the loves, aspirations,
and intuitions. Thus the soul life of the child consists of the thought
formations arising from external and internal sources, the body being a
chemical laboratory used by the spirit to transmute or generate thought
or soul life; for all that makes us conscious individuals is the thought
formations arising from the experience and mental conditions of the
past. Either of these three entities, spirit, body, or soul, is capable
of becoming the dominant actor, subjugating the others to it.

The exterior body of the child may be termed thought crystallization,
and, being the crystallized thought of the parents, it frequently
controls the nature and mental condition of the mother during the term
of gestation; so much so, that in the particulars wherein the child
would be like the father, the thoughts, feelings, and even the
appetites, are often moulded like those of the father, or his ancestral
lineage, of whose nature the child partakes.

In judging of character, we must first determine which of these three
natures is the leading one. The spirit leads in taking cognizance of
invisible causes;

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the body, in the sphere of the physical senses, or material world. The
mental formations, or soul, is characterized by the dominance of one or
the other of these.

The spirit was anciently symbolized by Osiris, the Father, Isis, the
Mother, or body, with the infant child, Horns, in the arms, born from
the contact of spirit with matter. This infant child represents the
mental formation or soul.

#### THE LAW OF SOUL MARRIAGE.

Man's interior nature is feminine. Woman's interior nature is masculine.
The magnetic and electric emanations of men and women are inverse to
each other, like the positive and negative poles of a magnet; therefore,
when the trinity of being is in harmony between a man and a woman, they
are drawn together, and inter-blend, forming a perfect unity of spirit,
body, and soul, which was anciently symbolized by the double triangle,
forming a six-pointed star (see [Diagram No. 1](sb04.htm#img_diag01)).

But these conjunctions cannot be made promiscuously. Nature has a
perfect mechanical order; a place for everything, and everything in its
place; therefore one man and one woman belong together from the order of
creation. Any deviation from this order creates inharmony, and inharmony
is productive of adversity.

When the man and woman meet who really belong to each other, from this
law of order, if they are living in harmony with the triune nature, they
will certainly recognize each other, and love each other from that
moment.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

The present materialistic tendency of our age is constantly instructing
children to follow their physical senses, and even their licentious,
inclinations; and, by reason of this, men and women are not apt to
recognize their true companions, but are drawn together purely from
their sex-sensational nature; so they can only meet physically, there
being no union either of spirit or soul.

In such cases, as soon as the fires of passion are cooled, there arises
a repulsion between the two, resulting in a life of inharmony and
misery, which does not end with them, but is transmitted to their
offspring, and reflected upon all who come in social contact with them,
and, as all mankind are members of one great body, it brings suffering
upon the whole body of humanity.

Frequently, in delineating the character of persons, we find the
antagonism which existed between parents embodied in the nature of the
children. Many men and women are made worthless, and even vicious and
criminal, through the antagonistic conditions existing in their own
persons from parental causes. This can be easily determined by this
system of Solar Biology, if we observe what points are inharmonious.

#### THE SELECTION OF PARTNERS IN MARRIAGE.

The question of how to find the true. conjugal mate is one of the
greatest importance.

The first requisite is to bring unity of action between *spirit*,
*body*, and *soul;* and the most important means in bringing this about
is habitual chastity; but we

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

must also observe carefully the nature and functions of these three
entities in ourselves.

If these three could be perfected, there would be no danger, provided
men and women were left free to make their own choice; but the cases are
very few where these natures are perfected: however, it more frequently
occurs with women than with men, from the fact that girls are taught,
from their childhood, to control their passional nature, through which
control the intuitions are largely matured. But taking men and women in
the present conditions of life, we shall be enabled to judge correctly
from the following indications: When a young man and woman are in each
other's society, they should watch their sensations carefully, and where
they feel a strong magnetic attraction, sometimes amounting to a passion
for each other which ceases soon after they are separated (unless,
perhaps, it should continue to affect the sexual nature), they may rest
assured that this arises wholly from mere physical attraction, or from
the animal nature.

When two marry on that plane, it is certain to result in inharmony.

Second, if, while in such association, the two find great intellectual
enjoyment, without any particular sacredness of the spiritual nature,
the results of marriage would be varied, but are not usually good in
such cases; for, while there is mental harmony, there may not be
adaptability in the chemical combinations of their physical bodies, or
unity in their spiritual natures; though sometimes they get along fairly
by living as brother and sister; yet, in the main, the results are more
evil than good.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

These attractions sometimes result from being born in an adjoining
*sign* or *polarity*, and sometimes from harmonious planetary
combinations, which will be more fully explained hereafter.

The third, and perfect relation, will be observed in a feeling of
harmony and peace, a deep, quiet rest, or enjoyment in sitting in
silence in each other's company, with a feeling of the sacredness of
each other's presence. Even when separated, the thought of each other
produces similar results.

Frequently, where true soul union exists between the two, there will be
a realization of actual presence, and the sacredness of that presence,
though their bodies are miles apart. When this condition exists, they
may rest assured that perfect harmony and interblending will result from
their triune relations. Such marriages as these are few, very few
indeed.

We find often, in giving delineations of character, men and women who
have met these true soul companions, but from some cause have been led
away from them, and married to others.

Such can never be separated in spirit, for the image of this companion
will always be present in their memory and sacred to their thought. The
door of the inner temple of their existence will be forever bolted
against all others, and a deep soul sadness will characterize all their
private life, though they try to avoid any expression of it.

Frequently the children of parents that are in this condition will be
the very image of the absent one, so dear to memory. Though their
companion may furnish the material germ, or the ground in which to

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

bring forth the child, yet this ideal one, though absent, will furnish
the inner essences of the child's being. Thus is the seventh commandment
being constantly broken by the majority of humanity: "Thou shalt not
commit adultery."

Frequently the interference of parents with the marriage of children
will separate two that God had joined together; and man can only put
asunder the bodies, for "What God doeth is forever."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Mechanism of Solar Biology](sb07)
