[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb13)  [Next](sb15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF CANCER.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> comes from a very determined
condition in the parental mind, which gives to the child a very
determined will and indomitable persistency in whatever is undertaken,
and a disposition to be head and controller in the sphere of his
activity. The person will be apt to go to extremes, so much so, that it
will be difficult to change, even under the dictates of reason. Will
have an innate hatred of being controlled by the mind or will of
another, which will make them liable to many mistakes and losses through
life. Children of this polarity ought to be very carefully drilled, that
they may gradually suppress this inclination and bring it under the
control of their reason. Will be apt to deal with general principles, to
the neglect of the minutiæ. A silent, stubborn persistency often
characterizes this nature.

This polarity would give liability to headaches, and sometimes to
insanity.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This makes a character almost abnormally sensitive, and the mind will be
very quick to perceive mental and physical influences and conditions;
will be inclined to follow the sensations; will love the wonderful and

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

the sublime in nature. If the person is unhappily balanced in other
directions, will be apt to take on conditions resembling obsession, and
may think they are possessed by evil spirits. If this is allowed to
continue, insanity will speedily result. To avoid this, it is necessary
that they cultivate in themselves a positive self-control, and suppress
all fear of other influences, that they may be able to face the most
unpleasant conditions with a determination to be superior to them.
Parents should try to cultivate in such children the idea that they can
be superior to the influence of others, and that they have in themselves
power to make conditions; but yet it will be necessary, especially with
girls, to be very careful about their nurses. It will be noticed that
such children will cry and scream as if hurt when certain persons take
hold of them, or perhaps when they only come into their presence. This
comes from the fact that their fine nerve sense is so unfavorably
affected by these persons, that if their psychological influence
continues for some length of time, it may produce disease or even death
in the child.

Old or diseased persons will absorb all the finer essences of such
children, and cause their death. Licentious or gross nurses frequently
obsess and destroy such children. Parents will notice that if they are
worried, cross, or fretful, the child will feel the same; and if these
conditions are kept up in the household, they will be apt to cause
indisposition, and bring on disease and perhaps death.

It is only by the most careful guarding and nursing that such children
can be reared. Such persons should

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

never sit in the circles of spiritualists, or in any way submit their
will to the psychological control of others. They have natural
intuitions, and should study the laws of mind. Such persons are well
calculated for agricultural pursuits.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This arises from a strong love of educational and artistic pursuits on
the part of the parents, and gives the child a thirst for knowledge in
all directions, with great activity and energy. Such will have
utilitarian ideas, and be allied to the realm of art, education, and
general knowledge, with some inclination toward public life, speaking,
writing, etc. Such children ought to have every advantage of school
education; but careful instruction should be given them concerning the
uses and abuses of the sex nature.

This polarity somewhat increases the liability to diseases peculiar to
the sign Cancer.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This nature springs from a bright, active, satisfied mental condition on
the part of the parents, with an inclination to enjoy all that life
affords. It gives the child a clear, keen intellect, with intuitions
clear and free from vague imaginings, unless the sex nature becomes
excited: then they are inclined to go to extremes. They have good, clear
business minds, but more disposed to deal with general principles than
minutiæ. Should have a full college education, and can then enter upon
almost any sphere of life they

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

may choose. Are opposed to being subject to laws and rules of others,
are apt to have irregular ideas of domestic life, and are very
independent, self-sufficient characters.

This somewhat decreases the general liability to diseases common to
Cancer.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This nature is produced by a parental desire for the reciprocal
expressions and emotions of love, and gives the child a restless desire
and activity of the love nature, and subjects them to extremes, making
them somewhat unreliable, because they are so sensitive to the
conditions of other minds that it affects directly their own affectional
nature.

We may say that in this case the maternal principle expresses itself
through the .heart; and if we turn our attention to the animal world, we
find there the expression of the mother-nature, in its many phases,
corresponding to the real condition of such a person; and we are thrown
upon planetary influence for a solution of the character and course of
this mind.

The polarity gives liability to weakness of the circulatory system, and
general debility.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This is produced by an ideal of grandeur in the direction of sensational
pleasures on the part of the parents, which creates in the child an
insatiable desire for pleasurable emotions, with a keen, critical,
discriminating nature in emotional matters, which will tend to

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

produce a changeableness in the mind and disposition of the person. They
have inclination towards the study of anatomy and physiology, also
towards authorship. They are very critical; also very passional in the
love nature, which, if under the control of an inverted idealty, through
a morbid yielding to sensual practices, is apt to lead them to great
extremes; but with proper training in early life, especially in regard
to the uses and abuses of the sexual function, these powers would become
grand factors in the realm of parental uses; but the most careful
training and education is necessary for such children.

We must bear in mind that the greatest good in the world, if inverted,
becomes the greatest evil, and also that the greatest good lies in the
mean between two great extremes.

This polarity increases the liability to diseases of the stomach.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This nature is produced by the parents’ intense desire to know the
future of certain persons or domestic conditions. These children will
have fine intuitions, keen perceptions in all matters relating to
domestic, and often to social life, if the activity of the passions does
not destroy them; for in this polarity all the forces of the mind and
body are directed towards the reins or fountains of the sexual nature;
therefore they must be controlled by a strong and well-disciplined will
in order to call them up to the uses of the brain; and when they are, it
gives a fine, well-balanced, and intuitive

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

mind, capable of perceiving not only the . conditions of the present,
whether pertaining to things near or distant, but also events yet to
come. Their nature makes them apt watchmen in all that relates to
associates or domestic life. They are often idealistic writers.

This polarity gives liability to difficulties of the liver and reins.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This nature is produced by a strong, determined mind directed towards
the combat of business life, usually on the paternal side, and gives the
child much self-control in the passional nature. It serves to harden the
sensitiveness of Cancer, and gives adaptation to public uses and
money-getting; gives conventionality, and in many cases severity, toward
opponents, and often great vindictiveness, which is not common to
Cancer, and fits the Cancer character for a more external and public
life.

This polarity increases liability to tumors and similar diseases of the
abdominal region.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This nature results from a hurried, active condition on the parts of the
parents, and endows the child with an over-active nature; gives good
mechanical ability; industry, and energy. Few children of this polarity
live long, on account of their over-activity, which induces diseases of
the digestive organs and other ailments of a varied and perplexing
character, all of which originate in the chest and stomach.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

Frequently these persons seem unable to rest under any conditions. The
necessity of muscular action seems imperative, and if surrounded by
restless conditions, they will be entirely incapable of turning their
energies away from the muscles until disease or death comes to their
relief: but it must be remembered that this extreme activity may be
counteracted to a great extent by planetary conditions so as to take the
phase of great executive ability, industry, and some tendency toward
public speaking; but the person will always maintain the characteristic
of being too quick to act and speak.

This polarity sometimes increases liability to diseases of the motor
nerves.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This nature is produced by the minds of the parents being much occupied
with ideas of business success, and endows the child with thorough,
practical business tendencies, which will doubtless engage the whole
thought of the person. Ideals of beauty, grandeur, and excellence will
be ever present with them, which may tend toward religious zeal or find
expression in societary channels, and though causality may be deficient,
there will be a keen perception of conventionalities.

There will be some opposition between the innate nature and its
outworkings, which might be styled self-opposition, resulting in a
peculiar feeling of uncertainty, differing entirely from that produced
by the opposition of the planets to the innate nature, being entirely in
the external; while the latter is between

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

the external and internal. If planetary conditions do not change this,
the person will be eccentric in some things, because you cannot judge
correctly by their sayings or actions what they intend to do, as they
are uncertain themselves. We frequently find such persons quiet,
inexpressive, their minds engaged in thought; yet they cannot express
the thought, but are ready at any time for a business enterprise where
success is certain.

Ladies of this polarity are not apt to be good housewives, but are
first-class business women. It gives some musical abilities—planetary
conditions may add or diminish. It does not change the diseases to which
the innate nature is liable, other than that it might find expression in
the joints and lower limbs.

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This nature results from desires on the part of the parents to please
the public in some way, and gives the child adaptation for public
life,—as travelling agents, salesmen, merchants, etc. They love city
life; have good business qualifications; are quick to perceive what will
please or displease the public; careful in their sayings and doings;
rather shrinking and silent under harsh and reproving language; disposed
to self-justification, but lacking in language to express it at the
time.

They are shrewd and careful in bargains, and seldom give a decisive yes
or no, but always have qualifications, as, "I think so"; "I will try."
They desire truthfulness, and hate prevarication, but are apt to be
deceptive rather than lose money or be blamed. This polarity gives some
tendency to rheumatic difficulties.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

♋ (*Cancer*), *with the Moon in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This polarity is produced by a strong love of scientific and mechanical
knowledge, together with obstacles which have hindered such attainments,
and gives to the child a bright, active mind, with a keen sense of the
meaning of words, and quick comprehension of the thoughts of a speaker.
Will be industrious and studious, having an intense hungering for
knowledge. There is generally a peculiar dissatisfied state of mind, and
if Uranus exerts a controlling influence, the person will be liable to
obsession or to hysterical and imaginary diseases. When these conditions
begin to come upon the person, they are difficult to avert. They should
at once be induced to mingle in society, let their minds be intently
engaged in all possible ways, in suitable enjoyments and diversions.
They have fine qualities, and so long as their minds are kept active,
have useful thoughts. Are usually disposed to embody their ideals
practically, and, when thwarted, will imagine that they have adversaries
in or out of the body. All this may be counteracted and averted by
planetary conditions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Twelve Polarities of Leo](sb15)
