[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb16)  [Next](sb18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF LIBRA.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> nature is produced by a condition of
intensified and determined will on the part of the parents, and produces
in the child a strong will and remarkable power of self-control under
all circumstances, superior ability to conceal their thoughts, feelings,
and emotions, and great psychological power, enabling them to control
others by a single word, and to put great intensity into their speech.

While not practically inclined to be head and controller, yet they are
firm and reliable in all positions. The mental faculties of Libra are
somewhat increased and illuminated by this polarity, and all its powers
are enlarged and intensified.

It somewhat increases the liability to the diseases common to Libra,
with a tendency to uterine displacements in women. It slightly militates
against conjugality.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This nature results from peculiar mental conditions existing in the mind
of the father in the way of a satisfied feeling at the natural order of
things.

The child will be quiet, harmonious, and persistent in business. This
intensifies the continuity of Libra, and gives carefulness, patience,
and perseverance, with great tenacity in whatever they judge to be
right. It increases

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the sensitiveness of Libra, and makes one more susceptible to the mental
and moral influence of others; gives love of honor, integrity of
purpose, and aids them in adapting themselves to surrounding conditions;
gives a desire to be alone in the communion of nature, and some
qualification for the medical profession, and the natural sciences, for
it turns the intuitive nature of Libra more toward philosophy and
science.

Children of this polarity need little restraint, but should be most
liberally educated in every department of life. The polarity gives a
disposition to hygienic habits; there is, however, a necessity that they
should be careful in maintaining their own selfhood, and controlling
their natural sensitiveness as much as possible.

The polarity indicates liability to diseases of the lymphatic system.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This polarity is produced by unsatisfactory conditions or surroundings,
with obstacles in the way of the prosperity of the parents. It gives to
the child a restless, active mind, and adapts it to intellectual and
educational spheres of usefulness; tends toward high aspirations; gives
ability in the arts and mechanics, also in mathematics, and some
inclination toward public speaking, with good language. These persons
are apt to be an encyclopædia of knowledge.

It turns the mind somewhat away from domestic inclinations, and
increases the imitativeness of Libra; also the liability of going to
extremes, and a weakness of the reins.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This polarity results from a degree of anxiety on the part of the
parents relative to their domestic and family life. It gives the child a
nature anxious about the welfare of home and family. It increases
conjugality and continuity of purpose and disinclination to change of
pursuits. Such persons will prosecute the business of their employers
with the same zeal and care as if it were their own.

It increases the inclination of Libra to embark in trade, and disposes
them to deal in domestic commodities. It adds greatly to the
sensitiveness of Libra, and increases the liability to sexual
indulgence.

This polarity indicates a tendency to weakness of the chest and lungs.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This nature results from the absorption of one of the parents in the
sensations and emotions of love, and such children. are governed almost
wholly by their intuitions and feelings, reason being subordinate.

Their conjugal love is controlled largely by their passional nature, yet
they possess the strongest love nature of any except Leo.

Their parental love is so strong that the loss of children sometimes
unbalances their mind. It gives great inclination toward spiritualism,
and opens the spiritual vision, so that these visions and their
intuitions are the controlling powers. It is hard for them to take
cognizance of the realities of this world,

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

for, being governed by .the love nature, pushed on by strong passional
tendencies, their mind opens out into an ideal world, characterized by
these two natures: first in power, love; second, passion. These children
need great care and education in the practical uses of life. Parents
should be very watchful concerning secret vices, and should begin to
educate them early, and throw around them a rigid law of usefulness in.
everything they do, thus keeping the intellectual faculties active.

This polarity gives liability to weakness and diseases of the heart.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This nature is frequently produced by the father's mind being intensely
active on mathematical problems, and gives to the child an intensely
active, critical mind, accurate in all the pursuits of Libra's nature;
gives love for music, but weakens the tendency to chastity, inclining
them to follow their feelings in such matters, and especially if
planetary conditions indicate strong passions. It is not well to
encourage this nature in the study of music unless of a religious or
church character, as it tends in their case to unduly increase the ideal
and sensational nature.

This polarity has a tendency to diminish conjugality, continuity, and
sometimes reason, and with the reasoning faculties deficient they are
easily led into gambling and low habits and ideas of morality. It
intensifies the perceptions and intuitions of Libra, and qualifies for
speculation and trade, in which they often have

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

marked success, especially where the buying and selling can be effected
quickly with but a moderate investment of capital. They are quite
peculiar in their nature.

This polarity intensifies the liabilities to diseases of the kidneys and
reins, and sometimes to indigestion.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This is produced by the father's mind being active and satisfied in his
business and intellectual pursuits, and gives balance and harmony to all
the peculiarities and eccentricities of Libra's nature, so that there is
less liability of being misled or controlled by other minds: will have
clear, bright intellect, and practical business qualities. The
conjugality of Libra is increased and the liability to sexual indulgence
lessened, as well as the imitative quality.

They are not much inclined to seek the society of others, as they dwell
largely within their own selfhood, being best satisfied within the
circle of their own home and business and being usually successful
therein.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This polarity results from a condition of pride and self-approbativeness
on the part of the parents. The child will be ambitious, proud of its
abilities, but desirous of pleasing others, rather from a love of
approbation than from genuine kindness.

They will incline to the materialistic sciences, with some adaptation to
periodical literature; selfishness and combativeness large; rather
hard-hearted, high-tempered,

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

but quick to get over it. While they make a show of combativeness, they
do not feel as courageous as they would make it appear, yet they often
win high positions in the competitive struggles of life, as appearances
go farther than realities as the world is, especially if they are not
put to the test of a collision with courage of a more substantial type.
Should be educated for a literary or legal career unless planetary
conditions are specially unfavorable. They have considerable
self-control over the sex nature.

This polarity indicates a tendency to difficulties of the heart.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This polarity comes from an excited, active, and combative condition in
the parents, and the child's tendencies will depend on whether they were
intellectual and reasoning or otherwise.

There are two natures in this polarity: one with the reflectives small
and perceptives large, with large conscientiousness (which is really the
law nature and the driving power in the individual). This nature is the
incarnation of activity and excitability. They are natural speculators,
but are in danger of being led into bad company and profligate habits,
gambling, etc. They have inordinate love of excitement, and, unless
carefully trained to usefulness, will be sure to die a premature death.
Only by the greatest care on the part of the parents can such children
be made useful members of society. Education alone will not suffice, but
they should have *careful drill* in ethics and the practice of morals,
and useful but moderate exercise, with a time

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

for rest and recreation, in which they should be trained to hold all
their faculties in a restful quiet, which is for them a difficult thing
to do; but this course should be faithfully pursued, that they may be
made useful members of society and saved from a destructive and
dangerous career.

The other class in this polarity have large reasoning powers and
intensely active brains; are quick to learn and readily commit to
memory. They should have a good education in all directions. They are
strongly inclined to public speaking, but as every faculty of their
nature is active, great care in their education and training is
absolutely necessary, for according as they are trained so will they go.

This polarity greatly increases the tendency to diseases common to Libra
and gives some tendency to paralysis.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This polarity comes from a well-balanced business mind on the part of
the parents, and gives to the child strong business tendencies and
professional adaptations. They have good, clear general ideas in all
directions, are governed by intuition, and have the ability to be
successful in almost any pursuit. Have musical talent and strong
feelings of sympathy and kindness. They have more tendency to mental
than physical pleasures, and are more adapted to a general than to a
special business or profession. Sexual proclivities not affected other
than by the usual tendencies of downward polarizations in lessening
self-control.

This polarity would indicate diseases of joints and limbs.

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This indicates that the mind of one or both parents was active in
thoughts of public service, and endows the child with fine adaptation
for the generalities as well as the minutiæ of such service, with fine
intuitions in trade. They would be good teachers and make high
attainments as professors in colleges. They have fine mechanical talent,
considerable pride of person, and abilities, with large approbativeness.
Such children should have the best possible opportunities for education
in all directions.

This polarity tends to external pleasures, appearances, and
conventionality, and such persons are usually inclined to church
membership. They have great power to read character at first sight, and
if they are finely organized, are remarkable in this direction, and can
determine the thoughts of others, and even the words they are about to
utter.

They are adapted to public service in general. This polarity indicates a
strong tendency to paralysis and nerve difficulties.

♎ (*Libra*), *with the Moon in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This polarity comes from a very studious condition on the part of the
parents, and endows the child with a greater aptitude for the
acquisition of knowledge than for its practical use. It gives some
restlessness of character, yet with an inclination to be industrious in
all directions.

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

If the forehead is broad, they will have remarkable ability in the
languages; if narrow, perseverance in mercantile pursuits. This polarity
sometimes has a receding forehead, and when that is the case, they will
have a tendency to physical labor in mechanical branches. They are
somewhat disposed to agriculture.

This polarity gives morbid feelings of despondency, lack of courage from
reduced vitativeness, with periods of despondency (as set forth under
the sign of Libra) greatly increased, often producing hypochondria.

Parents should try and stimulate their appreciation of life and the good
things of the world, leading them to see and feel that it is full of
opportunities for sunshine and happiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Twelve Polarities of Scorpio](sb18)
