[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb17)  [Next](sb19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

#### THE TWELVE POLARITIES OF SCORPIO.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♈ (*Aries*).

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> polarity comes from a stubborn
opposition on the part of the parents to something of a business,
social, or political character. It makes the child very hard and
positive, and liable to great extremes of anger and hatred, and physical
and mental combativeness.

It intensifies the imaginative nature of Scorpio, and makes their
jealousies and hatreds more dangerous, and adapts them to a business
where they control others by their will; they make good superintendents,
provided they keep their will under the control of reason. These
persons, if ignorant and illiterate, would be capable of much depravity,
unless dignified by planetary conditions; but with education and social
refinement, they become highly useful, but are disposed to boss things
with much absoluteness in whatever sphere they may be. As husbands and
wives they are bound to rule, whether their ideas are reasonable or
otherwise. Such children should have the best possible education, and be
especially drilled in doing as they would be done by.

Parents should use great care in suppressing every manifestation of
jealousy or hatred. This can be done by making it appear ridiculous to
them. It will be very useful for parents to talk before them, but *not
to* 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

*them*, about the folly and terrible evils that arise from jealousy and
vindictiveness. Parents should do all in their power to suppress this
passion; yet it is usually at best a dominant characteristic through
life, and therefore there is the greater need of doing all that can be
done to subjugate it to reason. They are disposed to gratify their own
feelings and passions in almost any way, regardless of consequences.
There is not much liability to self-abuse, as the passional nature is
under control of the will; though very intense in manifestation.

This polarity gives the liability to diseases of the brain.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This comes from the father's condition of positiveness and combativeness
in the outer world, which is relaxed by a harmonious condition in
domestic life. This forms in the child a paradox between this polarity
and the innate nature, softening the hard and positive character of
Scorpio, making them more kind, more sympathetic, and more sensitive. It
increases conjugality, and allies them to the study of nature and the
love of music, order, and harmony; and, other things being equal, adapts
them to the medical profession. They are generally quiet, good-natured,
thoughtful about the feelings of others; careful about providing for the
welfare of the family; having a studious and intellectual mind that
reaches out in the direction of pure nature.

They have a tendency to follow their natural inclinations in the love
life, and dislike legal and other restraints in that direction; but this
polarity, more than

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

any of the others, tends to bring the Scorpio nature into submission to
laws and customs, but leaves them imbued with strong selfish tendencies.
They dread to be blamed, and have approbativeness sufficient to bind
them to its demands.

This polarity indicates a tendency to derangements of the lymphatic
system.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This polarity comes from the minds of the parents being active and
executive, and aspiring after the educational and artistic.

It endows the child with a mind very active in all directions, but
having a special love of art and science, and an admiration of public
speakers and of people occupying high positions.

It increases the pride innate in Scorpio, and makes them vigilant
students. They love to teach, and aspire towards high attainments in
that direction. They are indisposed to accept or follow any system of
thought or education which is unpopular, and are circumspect in all
their external life and habits. It is hard for them to submit to
conditions of poverty, or to work at physical labor; and if they are
forced to do it, are apt to go to the other extreme, and become careless
of personal appearance and habits.

They are liable to contract habits of licentiousness which tend to
self-destruction, and to be led by associates in any direction. They
have good mechanical abilities, and are adapted also to the legal
profession, to architectural, and sometimes to art pursuits.

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

In females, it gives great pride of personal appearance, good public
address, and great delight in talking with or about persons in high
life; also a love of places of popular resort. They will have ardent,
and perhaps abnormal, admiration of men in high and honorable positions;
and it is hard to satisfy their love of grandeur, elegance, and display.
Many times they are only happy when in company that is fashionable and
lively.

If poor and necessitated to work for a living, it would give them large
hope, energy, and industry in their aspirations for a better condition,
but is liable to lead to eccentricities of character.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This polarity springs from the parents’ great desire for elegance in
home and family life, and gives the child strong domestic tendencies,
and energy and activity in financial matters, though sometimes it may
take the direction of ideal dreaming and lack practicality. It leads the
intense nature of Scorpio into sensationalism, and weakens their sexual
control, but endows them with more harmony in domestic life, and gives
diligence and care in financial pursuits; also a clear, logical mind. It
creates a desire for sympathy and love from the opposite sex, arising
from a feeling of dependence upon them, which may be led into various
paths by planetary conditions.

The innate tendency to jealousy which characterizes Scorpio, is not
changed by this polarity, but susceptibility of being led or misled by
others is increased. In

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

business, they will incline toward generalizing. It makes a more
faithful wife or mother than Scorpio otherwise would.

This polarity increases the liability to tumorous affections, and
requires mothers to take extra care of their breasts while nursing.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This polarity comes from the parents’ intense love of the opposite sex,
controlled by the passional nature, and produces an ardent and intense
nature in the child, who will act from and be governed by the feelings
and emotions, which are very intense.

This gives liability to infidelity in the marriage covenant, and very
strong sexual passions, and if there are any unfavorable conditions in
the positions of the planets, liability to self-abuse in children, and
an intense, morbid ideal of sex relations; and once started in this
wrong direction, it is very difficult to turn them from it; thus their
health and happiness may be ruined thereby.

The mind is apt to get into an ideal, dreamy condition; therefore it is
very necessary for the preservation of such children, that the parents
train them carefully to diligence in business, and give them practical
experience, in providing for family and personal wants; and impress upon
their minds the evils resulting from unfaithfulness in the marriage
relations. When properly trained and harmonized, they will have talent
for the ministry, and some for the medical profession.

This polarity greatly increases the liability to diseases

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

of the heart. Such persons should limit their diet to the absolute
necessities of the body, and abstain from all stimulants and narcotics,
which will obviate their tendency to heart affections.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This nature comes from an active, critical mind on the part of one or
both parents, and indicates a satisfied mood regarding their own
discriminative and critical abilities. It makes the child active,
positive, and critical, with a disposition to self-sufficiency and
faultfinding, and also inclines to be unfeeling and hard. It gives great
love of news and newspaper reading, with a tendency toward literary
pursuits. They do not like to serve, but desire to be in positions of
control. They are prone to pride and ostentation, with intense passional
natures, and a great deal of fury when their anger is aroused.

They have mechanical ability, but are not disposed to labor with their
hands; also some inclination towards the study and practice of law, and
occasionally of medicine.

This polarity indicates a tendency to dyspeptic and asthmatic
affections.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This polarity comes from an intense active condition in the mind of one
or both parents, but somewhat subdued or suppressed by disappointments,
and creates in the child a strong inclination to doubt, scan, and
interrogate the future, which develops the intuitions and

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

sometimes clairvoyant vision. It gives them business perception and
predisposition to business success. They have a tendency to the blending
of reason. with the intuitions, which promotes manly and womanly dignity
of character, with considerable nobility of feeling and disposition,
especially with favoring planetary conditions; but in other planetary
relations there would be danger of sexual excesses.

They have literary ability, love of the sciences, both physical and
metaphysical; general maturity of spirit and good judgment in all
directions.

This polarity indicates a tendency to affections of the liver, kidneys,
and weakness of the back.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This polarity indicates that the parent mind was greatly absorbed in
some special pursuit of life, and the child will be disposed to
independence and self-reliance, standing much alone in the world and
seeking few intimate friends. They are very materialistic in thought and
feeling, and seldom get beyond the realm of the five senses, but on that
plane are clear and logical. They are interested in subjects of
business, government, and education.

Unless planetary conditions overrule, it will be difficult to form more
than a business acquaintance with such persons.

They are naturally opposed to any departure from accepted customs and
ideas, but strong in support of institutions venerated for their
antiquity. This polarity adds pride and self-sufficiency to the Scorpio
nature,

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

and gives less liability of being led by others, as it shuts them up in
the fires of their own life, giving them great power over their sex
nature.

It increases the tendency to flesh, and also to heart difficulties.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This polarity shows that there was a condition of mental excitement and
physical activity in the parents, associated with combativeness, and the
child will love law and order, and incline to be very hard, positive,
sarcastic and cutting in language, and be liable to speak just what
comes first into the mind, with little thought of consequences, unless
in the presence of those they recognize as superiors. The activity and
expression of Scorpio's nature is intensified by this polarity.

They will incline to public life, and perhaps to oratory; but it will be
difficult to give such children sufficient education, as they are apt to
be hasty and reckless, with liability to sexual excesses and abuses.
They will incline to a military career, and have high aspirations in
that direction. Careful education and culture is absolutely necessary to
such children, in order to bring their intense nature into subjection;
otherwise their strong impulses would incline them to recklessness, and
possibly make of them worthless persons, and will probably die
prematurely. They are apt to be very jealous, and sometimes almost
insane with anger and excitement from the control of this passion.

This polarity indicates some tendency to diseases of the muscular
system.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This shows that the parent's mind was active in the generalities of
business life, with little thought of family or home, except so far as
needful.

This gives to the child a nature well suited to government employ, where
plans and arrangements governing employees are necessary.

They have much pride, love of grandeur and external display and
demonstrations, and are inclined to lasciviousness, and buy only the
richest and best of everything, and patronize only the most expensive
and aristocratic places. They are careful of their words and not very
talkative. They study hard so as to be thoroughly proficient in whatever
they engage, following out rigidly set rules and customs. They love
music, but usually lack power in its expression. Are not very well
suited to the domestic sphere.

This polarity indicates liability to pains in the limbs and joints, and
diseases of the muscular system.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This comes from the parent's mind being fully allied to enjoyments
arising from public associations or business habits, and gives to the
child judgment of human nature, and great adaptation to public or
political life, and inclination to seek office. They are conservative,
proud of personal appearance, and love theatres and public gatherings,
especially those patronized by the wealthy and aristocratic classes.
They have an extreme regard for public opinion, yet an active, practical

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

mind in general. They are faithful in service and adapted to commercial
life, but there is danger of their overdoing and failing, by reason of
their desire to excel every one else in display.

Ladies of this polarity are apt to be proud and regard public opinion
more than home and family. Are inclined to value external appearance
more than real worth, and prize an article more for its cost than for
its intrinsic value. Such persons will be apt to marry more for wealth
and position than for love, thus causing great inharmony in married
life, for these two thoughts will dominate, viz., self-gratification and
public display.

This polarity indicates tendency to derangement of the digestive organs
and of the nervous system, also gives some tendency to rheumatism.

♏ (*Scorpio*), *with the Moon in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This comes from a condition of great anxiety about personal
accomplishments in the parents’ mind.

It produces in the child a restless, studious nature, with much anxiety
about success in life. It stirs to activity the Scorpio nature beyond
its normal state; intensifies its excitability, and turns its veneration
for people in high standing more toward people of high educational, and
literary attainments. It gives desire and ability for acquiring such
attainments. It gives some tendency to nervousness and diseases of the
nerves, and inclines to paralysis, in place of the usual heart
difficulties of Scorpio.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. The Twelve Polarities of Sagittarius](sb19)
