[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Star Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sb26)  [Next](sb28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1417908904/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Solar Biology*, by Hiram E. Butler, \[1887\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

### CHAPTER XXII.

#### THE TWELVE POSITIONS OF JUPITER.

♃ (*Jupiter*)*: its Function*.

<span class="smallcaps">Jupiter's</span> prominent characteristics are
size and strength, as it is the largest planet in the solar system
(being fourteen hundred times larger than the earth). It imparts love of
grandeur, harmony, art, music, beauty, and physical excellence. It also
contributes refining and spiritualizing qualities and lofty and grand
aspirations.

In reading character, these principles are added and combined with the
innate principles of the sign in which the planet is found at birth; so
the planet's nature will be manifested in that part of the body which
this sign represents, and be dependent on the uses of that function for
means of expression: therefore we must consider that special part of the
body as *controlling*, and the principles of Jupiter as *serving;* so
that the above results obtain only under favorable conditions. But when
these conditions are strongly opposed by the innate nature, the
polarity, and the other planetary conditions, it may so restrain the
influence of Jupiter, as to prevent its manifesting itself to any great
extent.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♈ (*Aries*).

In this position Jupiter contributes its nature to the intellectual
faculties, imparting an appreciation of the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

sublime, the imposing, the magnificent, and stately, elegance, beauty,
and symmetry being sought and appreciated. These qualities may readily
blend with, and be modified by, other conditions, but they are pretty
sure to have a feeling of pride and self-importance; and if not properly
balanced in other directions, their exalted ideas may lead into various
forms of extravagance. Should they take the direction of mental
aspiration, it might lead them to great heights; but it requires very
harmonious conditions in other directions, or a very careful education,
for a person to become a wholly useful member of society, with Jupiter
in Aries.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♉ (*Taurus*).

This intensifies the sensational nature, making a person quiet and
inexpressive, feeling more than they say; though they may have clear,
well-defined language. It strengthens the sexual powers, giving great
vitality to the physical body, fine sensations, great love of the
physical organism, fear of death or pain, and impatience under
suffering. It contributes love of personal abilities, and of excellence
and purity in life, yet gives some inclination to self-gratification.

It enters into all the inner feelings, sensations, and intuitions, but
its whole nature is very easily controlled by a leading tendency of
character, so that all that has been said above may assume one phase or
another, according to the control of some leading characteristic. If a
person is born in Scorpio, it will give pride, self-esteem, and dignity,
which are leading features of that sign. If in Gemini or Sagittarius, it
imparts quiet energy and

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

high aspirations: thus to each sign it will contribute of its nature,
though often dominated by other leading planetary conditions.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♊ (*Gemini*).

This gives high aspirations after knowledge of all kinds, receptivity of
new thought, and illumination and exaltation of the mind, especially in
the direction of great undertakings and attainments in life. It gives
energy and perseverance in surmounting difficulties, even to the extent
of feeling that nothing is impossible of accomplishment. In the active,
intellectual mind it develops images of greatness and grandeur
apparently original with them, toward which they aspire and labor. It
often gives abundance and elegance in language, and is a strong
incentive to public speaking.

Where this is the only business tendency appearing, and the innate
nature is also adapted, we may safely say that such persons are natural
orators. This position of Jupiter gives breadth to the chest and
strength, to the voice, and being in its natural home position, it
controls the interior characteristics, and may be considered the
controlling planet.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♋ (*Cancer*).

This characterizes the love of home, with all the greatness and
grandeur, elegance and beauty, of Jupiter's great nature.

It often creates dissatisfaction in the home life, from the fact that
they will never be able to make it sufficiently magnificent to suit
their ideal. It gives great

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

love of refinement, adds faithfulness and love in the conjugal
relations, and strong attachment to children.

It frequently gives suavity, also activity, to the desire to amass
wealth, and strengthens the lungs and chest. It sometimes, however,
overpowers the vitativeness, and gives tendency to consumption.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♌ (*Leo*).

This gives pride of person, reputation, or position in life, and dignity
and harmony of action to the whole body; frequently producing an easy,
gliding motion in walking.

It gives love of elegant and harmonious surroundings, making it very
difficult for such an one to live in poverty. It expresses the fact that
such persons belong to a natural aristocracy. It gives very great love
of music, frequently making one an intuitive musician. It spiritualizes
the mental tendencies; makes one very sensitive to surroundings;
contributes strong lung powers, and a desire for large, spacious rooms
in their dwellings, open, airy surroundings, with plenty of sunlight,
and imparts health and vitality to the body.

This position obviates all liability to diseases of the respiratory and
circulatory system. In cases of vital exhaustion, however, the heart
would be affected; but this would be due to other causes. With persons
born in signs giving liability to paralysis, if they have an over-supply
of vitality, might produce sudden stroke, and would also increase the
liability of those born in Scorpio to heart disease.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♍ (*Virgo*).

This position of Jupiter gives powerful digestion, also a love of rich
and highly seasoned food in great abundance and variety. It would also
give the qualifications of a first-class cook. It aids in building up a
strong body, giving great endurance and tenacity of life, and a love and
appreciation of all its good things. It gives activity and power to the
sex nature, and unless otherwise balanced would incline to excesses in
that direction. It gives to the intuitions mechanical order and
discrimination, and therefore fitness for any branch of art or
mechanics; also aptitude to refined educational pursuits.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♎ (*Libra*).

This position usually gives a strong physical body, and especially a
strong back, and great sex power. It controls the perceptions in the
direction of art, order, harmony, and executive ability, and is apt to
create too high an ideal of the sex life in the minds of children. In
females it obviates liability to the many local weaknesses peculiar to
the sex, save to exhaustion from over-activity, from which cause
derangement would be induced.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♏ (*Scorpio*).

This gives strength to the sex function; contributes to pride and
conventionality; adapts the person for public life; creates in the mind
an exalted ideal of the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

sex function, and sometimes disregard for the marriage covenant. Being
in the source of physical life, it elevates and dignifies that function.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♐ (*Sagittarius*).

This gives extreme executive ability, and tendency to overdo, and lay
out more work for themselves and others than it is possible to
accomplish. Such persons are usually found with a rather weak
constitution, because of this over-executive tendency.

As Sagittarius has mechanical and ideal characteristics, Jupiter tends
to increase their mechanical, ideal, poetic, and artistic qualities. It
gives grace and beauty to the muscular action, and a special tendency to
sculpture.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♑ (*Capricorn*).

This position of Jupiter enlarges business ideals, and gives a person
conceptions of a new and grander order of things relative to social and
domestic life. It creates a dissatisfaction with the old business and
social conditions, and tends toward eccentricities; but when properly
balanced and governed, it inclines the business life in the direction of
music and art; but is apt to lead to larger business undertakings than
they can successfully manage.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♒ (*Aquarius*).

This creates an ideal of great business organizations and undertakings
with and among the people. It gives strong love of public life and
associations and inclination

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

to politics. In the physical, it inclines one to be active on the feet,
and imparts strength to the muscles of the lower limbs.

♃ (*Jupiter*) *in* ♓ (*Pisces*).

This gives a person strong feet, with a disposition for their active
use. It lessens one's love of home, and gives a great desire to travel,
and love of new places and scenes; also qualifications for a travelling
or business solicitor, circus or theatrical agent; or position where
enterprise, grandeur, and display are called for; also gives
qualification for dealing in lands, foreign securities, or to occupy the
position of foreign consul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII. The Twelve Positions of Saturn](sb28)
