[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp074)  [Next](gfp076) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXV

AFTER YOU have advanced thus far, and truly comprehended that God exists

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

without having the attribute of existence, and that He is One, without
having the attribute of unity, I do not think that I need explain to you
the inadmissibility of the attribute of speech in reference to God,
especially since our people generally believe that the Law, i.e., the
word ascribed to Him, was created. Speech is attributed to Him, in so
far as the word which Moses heard, was produced and brought to existence
by God in the same manner as He produced all His other works and
creations. As we shall have to speak more fully on prophecy, we shall
here merely show that speech is attributed to God in the same way as all
other actions, which are similar to our own. When we are told that God
addressed the Prophets and spoke to them, our minds are merely to
receive a notion that there is a Divine knowledge to which the Prophets
attain; we are to be impressed with the idea that the things which the
Prophets communicate to us come from the Lord, and are not altogether
the products of their own conceptions and ideas. This subject, which we
have already mentioned above, will receive further explanation. It is
the object of this chapter to show that the words "speaking" and
"saying" are synonymous terms denoting (*a*) "Speech"; as, e.g., "Moses
shall speak (*yedabber*)" (Exod. xix. 19); "And Pharaoh said
(*va-yomer*)" (*ib*. v. 5); (*b*) "Thought" as formed in the mind
without being expressed in words; e.g., "And I thought (*ve-amarti*) in
my heart" (Eccles. ii. 15); "And I thought (*vedibbarti*) in my heart"
(*ib*.); "And thy heart will imagine (*yedabber*)" (Prov. xxiii. 33);
"Concerning Thee my heart thought (*amar*)" (Ps. xxvii. 8); "And Esau
thought (*va-yomer*) in his heart" (Gen. xxvii. 41); examples of this
kind are numerous; (*c*) Will; e.g., "And he said (*va-yomer*) to slay
David" (2 Sam. xxi. 16), that is to say, he wished or he intended to
slay him; "Dost thou desire (*omer*) to slay me" (Exod. ii. 14); "And
the whole congregation intended (*va-yomeru*) to stone them" (Num. xiv.
10). Instances of this kind are likewise numerous.

The two terms, when applied to God, can only have one of the two
last-mentioned significations, viz., he wills and he desires, or he
thinks, and there is no difference whether the divine thought became
known to man by means of an actual voice, or by one of those kinds of
inspiration which I shall explain further on (II. chap. xxxviii.). We
must not suppose that in speaking God employed voice or sound. or that
He has a soul in which the thoughts reside, and that these thoughts are
things superadded to His essence; but we ascribe and attribute to Him
thoughts in the same manner as we ascribe to Him any other attributes.
The use of these words in the sense of will and desire, is based, as I
have explained, on the homonymity of these terms. In addition they are
figures borrowed from our common practices, as has been already pointed
out. For we cannot, at a first glance, see how anything can be produced
by a mere desire: we think that he who wishes to produce a thing, must
perform a certain act, or command some one else to perform it. Therefore
the command is figuratively ascribed to God when that takes place which
He wishes, and we then say that He commanded that a certain thing should
be accomplished. All this has its origin in our comparing the acts of
God to our own acts, and also in the use of the term *amar* in the sense
of "He desired," as we have already explained. The words "And He said,"
occurring in the account of the creation, signify "He wished," or "He
desired." This has already been stated by other authors, and is well

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

known. A proof for this, namely that the phrase "God said," in the first
chapter of Genesis, must be taken in a figurative sense "He willed," and
not in its literal meaning, is found in the circumstance that a command
can only be given to a being which exists and is capable of receiving
the command. Comp. "By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and
all the host of them by the breath of his mouth" (Ps. xxxiii. 6). "His
mouth," and "the breath of his mouth," are undoubtedly figurative
expressions, and the same is the case with "His word" and "His speech."
The meaning of the verse is therefore that they \[the heavens and all
their host\] exist through His will and desire. All our eminent
authorities are cognisant of this; and, I need not explain that in
Hebrew *amar* and *dibber* have the same meaning, as is proved by the
passage, "For it has heard all the words (*imre*) of the Lord which he
spake (*dibber*) unto us" (Josh. xxiv. 27).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVI](gfp076)
