[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp026)  [Next](gfp028) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

Do not imagine that only Metaphysics should be taught with reserve to
the common people and to the uninitiated: for the same is also the case
with the greater part of Natural Science. In this sense we have
repeatedly made use of the expression of the Sages, "Do not expound the
chapter on the Creation in the presence of two" \[*vide* Introd. page
[2](gfp008.htm#page_2)\]. This principle was not peculiar to our Sages:
ancient philosophers and scholars of other nations were likewise wont to
treat of the *principia rerum* obscurely, and to use figurative language
in discussing such subjects. Thus Plato and his predecessors called
Substance the female, and Form the male. (You are aware that the
*principia* of all existing transient things are three, viz., Substance,
Form, and Absence of a particular form; the last-named principle is
always inherent in the substance, for otherwise the substance would be
incapable of receiving a new form: and it is from this point of view
that absence \[of a particular form\] is included among the *principia*.
As soon, then, as a substance has received a certain form, the privation
of that form, namely, of that which has just been received, has ceased,
and is replaced by the privation of another form, and so on with all
possible forms, as is explained in treatises on natural
philosophy.)--Now, if those philosophers who have nothing to fear from a
lucid explanation of these metaphysical subjects still were in the habit
of discussing them in figures and metaphors, how much more should we,
having the interest of religion at heart, refrain from elucidating to
the mass any subject that is beyond their comprehension, or that might
be taken in a sense directly opposite to the one intended. This also
deserves attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](gfp028)
