[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp076)  [Next](gfp078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXVII

SINCE the verb "to say" has been figuratively used to express the will
of the Creator, and the phrase "And he said has repeatedly been employed
in the account of all the things created in the six days of the
beginning," the expression "to rest" has likewise been figuratively
applied to God in reference to the Sabbath-day, on which there was no
creation; it is therefore said, "And he rested (*va-yishbot*) on the
seventh day" (Gen. ii. 2). For "to leave off speaking" is, in Hebrew,
likewise expressed by the same verb, as, e.g., "So these three men
ceased (*va-yishbetu*) to answer Job" (Job xxxii. 1) also by *nuaḥ*, as,
in "They spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of
David, and ceased (*va-yanuḥu*)" (1 Sam. xxv. 9). In my opinion,
(*va-yanuḥu*) means "they ceased to speak," and waited for the answer;
for no allusion to exertion whatever having previously been mentioned,
the words, "and they rested," in its primary signification, would have
been entirely out of place in that narrative, even if the young men who
spoke had really used some exertion. The author relates that having
delivered that whole speech, which, as you find, consisted of gentle
expressions, they were silent, that is to say, they did not add any word
or act by which the reply of Nabal could be justified: it being the
object of the entire passage to represent Nabal's conduct as extremely
reprehensible. In that sense \[viz., "to cease," or "to leave off"\] the
verb *nuaḥ* is used in the phrase "And he left off (*va-yanaḥ*) on the
seventh day."

Our Sages, and some of the Commentators, took, however, *nuaḥ* in its
primary sense "to rest," but as a transitive form (hiphil), explaining
the phrase thus: "and he gave rest to the world on the seventh day,"
i.e., no further act of creation took place on that day.

It is possible that the word *va-yanaḥ* is derived either from *yanaḥ*,
a verb of the class *pe-yod*, or *naḥah*, a verb of the class
*lamed-he*, and has this meaning: "he established" or "he governed" the
Universe in accordance with the properties it possessed on the seventh
day"; that is to say, while on each of the six days events took place
contrary to the natural laws now in operation throughout the Universe,
on the seventh day the Universe was merely upheld and left in the
condition in which it continues to exist. Our explanation is not
impaired by the fact that the form of the word deviates from the rules
of verbs of these two classes: for there are frequent exceptions to the
rules of conjugations, and especially of the weak verbs: and any
interpretation which removes such a source of error must not be
abandoned because of certain grammatical rules. We know that we are
ignorant of the sacred language, and that grammatical rules only apply
to the majority of cases.--The same root is also found as a verb
‘ayin-*vav* in the sense "to place" and

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "to set," as e.g.,
"and it shall be established and she shall be placed (*ve-hunniḥah*)
there upon her own base" (Zech. v. 11), and "she suffered neither the
birds of the air to settle (*la-nuaḥ*) on them" (2 Sam. xxi. 10).
According to my opinion, the verb has the same signification in Hab. in.
16, "that I might remain firm (*anuaḥ*) in the day of trouble."

The word (*va-yinnafash*) is a verb derived from nefesh, the homonymity
of which we have already explained (chap. xli.), namely, that it has the
signification of intention or will: (*va-yinnafash*) accordingly means:
"that which he desired was accomplished, and what he wished had come
into existence."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXVIII](gfp078)
