[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp057)  [Next](gfp059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVIII

WHENEVER in the Pentateuch the term "to hear" is applied to God,
Onkelos, the Proselyte, does not translate it literally, but paraphrases
it, merely expressing that a certain speech reached Him, i.e., He
perceived it, or that He accepted it or did not accept, when it refers
to supplication and prayer as its object. The words "God heard" are
therefore paraphrased by him regularly either, "It was heard before the
Lord," or "He accepted" when employed in reference to supplication and
prayer; \[e.g.\] "I will surely accept," lit. "I will surely hear"
(Exod. xxii. 22). This principle is followed by Onkelos in his
translation of the Pentateuch without any exception. But as regards the
verb "to see," (*raah*), his renderings vary in a remarkable manner, and
I was unable to discern his principle or method. In some instances he
translates literally, "and God saw"; in others he paraphrases "it was
revealed before the Lord." The use of the phrase *va-ḥaza adonai* by
Onkelos is sufficient evidence that the term *ḥaza* in Chaldee is
homonymous, and that it denotes mental perception as well as the
sensation of sight. This being the case, I am surprised that, in some
instances avoiding the literal rendering, he substituted for it "And it
was revealed before the Lord." When I, however, examined the various
readings in the version of Onkelos, which I either saw myself or heard
from others during the time of my studies, I found that the term "to
see" when connected with wrong, injury, or violence, was paraphrased,
"It was manifest before the Lord."

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is no doubt
that the term *ḥaza* in Chaldee denotes complete apprehension and
reception of the object in the state in which it has been perceived.
When Onkelos, therefore, found the verb "to see" connected with the
object "wrong," he did not render it literally, but paraphrased it, "It
was revealed before the Lord." Now, I noticed that in all instances of
the Pentateuch where seeing is ascribed to God, he translated it
literally, except those instances which I will mention to you: "For my
affliction was revealed before the Lord" (Gen. xxix. 32); "For all that
Laban doeth unto thee is revealed before me" (*ib*. xxxi. 12);--although
the first person in the sentence refers to the angel \[and not to God\],
Onkelos does not ascribe to him that perception which implies complete
comprehension of the object, because the object is "iniquity"--"The
oppression of the children of Israel was known to the Lord" (Exod. ii.
25); "The oppression of my people was surely known to me" (*ib*. iii.
7); "The affliction is known to me" (*ib*. 9); "Their oppression is
known to me" (*ib*. iv. 31); "This people is known to me" (*ib*. xxxii.
9), i.e., their rebellion is known to me--comp. the Targum of the
passage, "And God saw the children of Israel (*ib*. ii. 25), which is
equal to "He saw their affliction and their trouble"--"And it was known
to the Lord, and he abhorred them" (Deut. xxxii. 19); "It was known to
him that their power was gone" (*ib*. 36); in this instance the object
of the perception is likewise the wrong done to the Israelites, and the
increasing power of the enemy. In all these examples Onkelos is
consistent, following the maxim expressed in the words, "Thou canst not
look on iniquity" (Hab. i. 13); wherefore he renders the verb "to see,"
when referring to oppression or rebellion, It is revealed before him,
etc. This appropriate and satisfactory explanation, the correctness of
which I do not doubt, is weakened by three passages, in which, according
to this view, I expected to find the verb "to see" paraphrased "to be
revealed before him," but found instead the literal rendering" to see in
the various copies of the Targum. The following are the three passages
"And God saw that the wickedness of man was great upon the earth" (Gen.
vi. 6); "And the Lord saw the earth, and behold it was corrupt" (*ib*.
vi. 12); "and God saw that Leah was hated" (*ib*. xxx. 3). It appears to
me that in these passages there is a mistake, which has crept into the
copies of the Targum, since we do not possess the Targum in the original
manuscript of Onkelos, for in that case we should have assumed that he
had a satisfactory explanation of it.

In rendering Genesis xxii. 8, "the lamb is known to the Lord," he either
wished to indicate that the Lord was not expected to seek and to bring
it, or he considered it inappropriate, in Chaldee to connect the divine
perception with one of the lower animals.

However, the various copies of the Targum must be carefully examined
with regard to this point, and if you still find those passages the same
as I quoted them, I cannot explain what he meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIX](gfp059)
