[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp088)  [Next](gfp090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

THE fifth essence, i.e., the heavenly spheres, must either be transient,
and in this case motion would likewise be temporary, or, as our opponent
assumes, it must be eternal. If the spheres are transient, then God is
their Creator: for if anything comes into existence after a period of
non-existence, it is self-evident that an agent exists which has
effected this result. It would be absurd to contend that the thing
itself effected it. If, on the other hand, the heavenly spheres be
eternal, with a regular perpetual motion, the cause of this perpetual
motion, according to the Propositions enumerated in the Introduction,
must be something that is neither a body, nor a force residing in a
body, and that is God, praised be His name! We have thus shown that

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

whether we believe in the *Creatio ex Nihilo*, or in the Eternity of the
Universe, we can prove by demonstrative arguments the existence of God,
i.e., an absolute Being, whose existence cannot be attributed to any
cause, or admit in itself any potentiality. The theory that God is One
and Incorporeal has likewise been established by proof without any
reference to the theory of the Creation or the Eternity of the Universe.
This has been explained by us in the third philosophical argument \[in
support of the Existence of God\], and also in our subsequent
description of the methods of the philosophers in proving the
Incorporeality and the Unity of God.

We deem it now convenient to continue with the theory of the
philosophers, and to give their proofs for the existence of
Intelligences. We will then show that their theory in this regard is in
harmony with the teaching of Scripture concerning the existence of
angels. After the full treatment of angels this subject we shall return
to our task and discuss the theory of *creatio ex nihilo*. For the best
arguments in favour of this theory cannot be fully comprehended unless
the theory of the existence of Intelligences be well understood, and
also the method which I adopt in proving their existence. We must,
however, first give the following note, which will introduce you into
the secrets of this whole subject, both of that which we have already
given and of what will yet be given.

*Note*.--It was not my intention when writing this treatise to expound
natural science or discuss metaphysical systems; it was not my object to
prove truths which have already been demonstrated, or describe the
number and the properties of the spheres: for the books written on these
subjects serve their purpose, and if in some points they are not
satisfactory, I do not think that what I could say would be better than
what has already been explained by others. But my intention was, as has
been stated in the Introduction, to expound Biblical passages which have
been impugned, and to elucidate their hidden and true sense, which is
above the comprehension of the multitude. When you therefore notice that
I prove the existence and number of Intelligences or the number of the
spheres, with the causes of their motion, or discuss the true relation
of matter and form, the meaning of Divine manifestation, or similar
subjects, you must not think that I intend merely to establish a certain
philosophical proposition; for these subjects have been discussed in
many books, and most of them have been demonstrated by proof. I only
desire to mention that which might, when well understood, serve as a
means of removing some of the doubts concerning anything taught in
Scripture: and indeed many difficulties will disappear when that which I
am about to explain is taken into consideration. From the Introduction
to this treatise you may learn that its principal object is to expound,
as far as can be done, the account of the Creation (Gen. i.-iii.), and
of the Divine Chariot (Ezek. i.), and to answer questions raised in
respect to Prophecy and to the knowledge of God. You will sometimes
notice that I am rather explicit on truths already ascertained: some of
them Natural Philosophy has established as facts: others Metaphysics has
either fully demonstrated, or at least shown to be worthy of belief:
others Mathematics have made plain. But you will invariably find that my
exposition includes the key for the understanding of some allegorical
passage of Holy Writ and its esoteric interpretation, and that I have
mentioned, explained, and demonstrated the subject only because it

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

furthers the knowledge of the "Divine Chariot," or "the Creation," or
explains some principle with respect to Prophecy, or to the belief in
any of the truths taught in Scripture. Now, having made this statement,
we return to the subject of which we began to treat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](gfp090)
