[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp048)  [Next](gfp050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIX

THE Hebrew *leb* (heart) is a homonymous noun, signifying that organ
which is the source of life to all beings possessing a heart. Comp. "And
thrust them through the heart of Absalom" (1 Sam. xviii. 14).

This organ being in the middle of the body, the word has been
figuratively applied to express "the middle part of a thing." Comp.
"unto the midst (*leb*) of heaven" (Deut. iv. 11); "the midst
(*labbath*) of fire" (Exod. iii. 2).

It further denotes "thought." Comp. "Went not mine heart with thee?" (2
Kings v. 26), i.e., I was with thee in my thought when a certain event
happened. Similarly must be explained, "And that ye seek not after your
own heart" (Num. xv. 39), i.e., after your own thoughts: "Whose heart
(i.e., whose thought), turneth away this day" (Deut. xxix. is).

The word further signifies "counsel." Comp. "All the rest of Israel were
of one heart (i.e., had one plan) to make David king" (1 Chron. xii.
38); "but fools die for want of heart," i.e., of counsel; "My heart
(i.e., my counsel) shall not turn away from this so long as I live" (Job
xxvii. 6); for this sentence is preceded by the words, "My righteousness
I hold fast, and will not let it go"; and then follows, "my heart shall
never turn away from this."--As regards the expression *yeḥeraf*, I
think that it may be compared with the same verb in the form *neḥrefet*,
"a handmaid betrothed (*neḥrefet*) to a man" (Lev. xix. 20), where
*neḥerfetḥ* is similar in meaning to the Arabic *munḥarifat*, "turning
away," and signifies "turning from the state of slavery to that of
marriage."

*Leb* (heart) denotes also "will"; comp. "And I shall give you pastors
according to my will (*libbi*)" (Jer. iii. 15), "Is thine heart right as
my heart is?" (2 Kings x. 15), i.e., is thy will right as my will is? In
this sense the word has been figuratively applied to God. Comp. "That
shall do according to that which is in mine heart and in my soul" (1
Sam. ii. 35), i.e., according to My will; "And mine eyes and mine heart
(i.e., My providence and My will) shall be there perpetually" (1 Kings
ix. 3).

The word is also used in the sense of "understanding." Comp. "For vain
man will be endowed with a heart" (Job. xi. 12), i.e., will be wise; "A
wise man's heart is at his right hand" (Eccles. x. 2), i.e., his
understanding is engaged in perfect thoughts, the highest problems.
Instances of this kind are numerous. It is in this sense, namely, that
of understanding, that the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

word is used whenever figuratively applied to God; but exceptionally it
is also used in the sense of "will." It must, in each passage, be
explained in accordance with the context. Also, in the following and
similar passages, it signifies "understanding"; "Consider it in thine
heart" (Deut. iv. 39); "And none considereth in his heart" (Isa. xliv.
19). Thus, also, "Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive,"
is identical in its meaning with "Unto thee it was shown that thou
mightest know" (Deut. iv. 35).

As to the passage, "And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart" (Ib. vi. 5), I explain "with all thine heart" to mean "with all
the powers of thine heart," that is, with all the powers of the body,
for they all have their origin in the heart: and the sense of the entire
passage is: make the knowledge of God the aim of all thy actions, as we
have stated in our Commentary on the Mishnah (Aboth, *Eight Chapters*,
v.), and in our Mishneh Torah, yesode hatorah, chap. ii. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](gfp050)
