[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp077)  [Next](gfp079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXVIII

You are acquainted with the well-known principle of the philosophers
that God is the *intellectus*, the *ens intelligens*, and the *ens
intelligibile*. These three things are in God one and the same, and do
not in any way constitute a plurality. We have also mentioned it in our
larger work, "*Mishneh Torah*," and we have explained there that it is a
fundamental principle of our religion, namely, that He is absolutely
one, that nothing combines with Him; that is to say, there is no Eternal
thing besides Him. On that account we say *ḥai adonay*, "the Lord
liveth" (Ruth iii. 13), and not *ḥe adonay*, "the life of the Lord," for
His life is not a thing distinct from His essence, as we have explained
in treating of the inadmissibility of the attributes. There is no doubt
that he who has not studied any works on mental philosophy, who has not
comprehended the nature of the mind, who has no knowledge of its
essence, and considers it in no other way than he would consider the
nature of whiteness and of blackness, will find this subject extremely
difficult, and to him our principle that the *intellectus*, the
*intelligens*, and the *intelligibile*, are in God one and the same
thing, will appear as unintelligible as if we said that the whiteness,
the whitening substance, and the material which is whitened are one and
the same thing. And, indeed, many ignorant people refute at once our
principle by using such comparisons[.](errata.htm#8) Even amongst those
who imagine that they are wise, many find this subject difficult, and
are of opinion that it is impossible for the mind to grasp the truth of
this proposition, although it is a demonstrated truth, as has been shown
by Metaphysicians. I will tell you now what has been proved. Man, before
comprehending a thing, comprehends it in potentia (δυνάμει) when,
however, he comprehends a thing, e.g., the form of a certain tree which
is pointed out to him, when he abstracts its form from its substance,
and reproduces the abstract form, an act performed by the intellect, he
comprehends in reality (ἐνεργείᾳ), and the intellect which he has
acquired in actuality, is the abstract form of the tree in man's mind.
For in such a case the intellect is not a thing distinct from the thing
comprehended. It is therefore clear to you that the thing comprehended
is the abstract form of the tree, and at the same time it is the
intellect in action: and that the intellect and the abstract form of the
tree are not two different things, for the intellect in action is
nothing but the thing comprehended, and that agent by which the form of
the tree has been turned into an intellectual and abstract object,
namely, that which comprehends, is undoubtedly the intellect in action.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> All intellect is
identical with its action: the intellect in action is not a thing
different from its action, for the true nature and assence of the
intellect is comprehension, and you must not think that the intellect in
action is a thing existing by itself, separate from comprehension, and
that comprehension is a different thing connected with it: for the very
essence of the intellect is comprehension. In assuming an intellect in
action you assume the comprehension of the thing comprehended. This is
quite clear to all who have made themselves familiar with the figurative
language common to this discipline. You therefore accept it as proved
that the intellect consists in its action, which is its true nature and
essence. Consequently the very thing by which the form of that tree has
been made abstract and intelligible, viz., the intellect, is at the same
time the *intelligens*, for the intellect is itself the *agens* which
abstracts the form and comprehends it, and that is the action, on
account of which it is called the *intelligens*; but itself and its
action are identical: and that which is called intellect in action
consists \[in the abovementioned instance\] of nothing else but of the
form of the tree. It must now be obvious to you that whenever the
intellect is found in action, the intellect and the thing comprehended
are one and the same thing; and also that the function of all intellect,
namely, the act of comprehending, is its essence. The intellect, that
which comprehends and that which is comprehended, are therefore the
same, whenever a real comprehension takes place. But, when we speak of
the power of comprehension, we necessarily distinguish two things: the
power itself, and the thing which can be comprehended: e.g., that hylic
intellect of Zaid is the power of comprehension, and this tree is, in
like manner, a thing which is capable of being comprehended; these,
undoubtedly, are two different things. When, however, the potential is
replaced by the actual, and when the form of the tree has really been
comprehended, the form comprehended is the intellect, and it is by that
same intellect, by the intellect in action, that the tree has been
converted into an abstract idea, and has been comprehended. For
everything in which a real action takes place exists in reality. On the
other hand, the power of comprehension, and the object capable of
comprehension are two things; but that which is only potential cannot be
imagined otherwise than in connexion with an object possessing that
capacity, as, e.g., man, and thus we have three things: the man who
possesses the power, and is capable of comprehending; that power itself,
namely, the power of comprehension, and the object which presents itself
as an object of comprehension, and is capable of being comprehended; to
use the foregoing example, the man, the hylic intellect, and the
abstract form of the tree, are three different things. They become one
and the same thing when the intellect is in action, and you will never
find the intellect different from the comprehensible object, unless the
power of comprehending and the power of being comprehended be referred
to. Now, it has been proved, that God is an intellect which always is in
action, and that--as has been stated, and as will be proved
hereafter--there is in Him at no time a mere potentiality, that He does
not comprehend at one time, and is without comprehension at another
time, but He comprehends constantly; consequently, He and the things
comprehended are one and the same thing, that is to say, His essence:
and the act of comprehending because of which it is said that He
comprehends,

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

is the intellect itself, which is likewise His essence, God is therefore
always the *intellectus*, the *intelligens*, and the *intelligibile*.

We have thus shown that the identity of the intellect, the *intelligens*
and the *intelligibile*, is not only a fact as regards the Creator, but
as regards all intellect, when in action. There is, however, this
difference, that from time to time our intellect passes over from mere
potentiality to reality, and that the pure intellect, i.e., the active
intellect, finds sometimes obstacles, though not in itself, but
accidentally in some external cause. It is not our present intention to
explain this subject, but we will merely show that God alone, and none
besides Him, is an intellect constantly in action, and there is, neither
in Himself nor in anything beside Him, any obstacle whereby His
comprehension would be hindered. Therefore He always includes the
*intelligens*, the *intellectus*, and the *intelligibile*, and His
essence is at the same time the *intelligens*, the *intelligibile*, and
the *intellectus*, as is necessarily the case with all intellect in
action.

We have reiterated this idea in the present chapter because it is
exceedingly abstruse, and I do not apprehend that the reader will
confound intellectual comprehension with the representative
faculty--with the reproduction of the material image in our imagination,
since this work is designed only for those who have studied philosophy,
and who know what has already been said on the soul and its faculties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIX](gfp079)
