[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp042)  [Next](gfp044) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXIII

You must know that it is very injurious to begin with this branch of
philosophy, viz., Metaphysics: or to explain \[at first\] the sense of
the similes occurring in prophecies, and interpret the metaphors which
are employed in historical accounts and which abound in the writings of
the Prophets. On the contrary, it is necessary to initiate the young and
to instruct the less intelligent according to their comprehension: those
who

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

appear to be talented and to have capacity for the higher method of
study, i.e., that based on proof and on true logical argument, should be
gradually advanced towards perfection, either by tuition or by
self-instruction. He, however, who begins with Metaphysics, will not
only become confused in matters of religion, but will fall into complete
infidelity. I compare such a person to an infant fed with wheaten bread,
meat and wine; it will undoubtedly die, not because such food is
naturally unfit for the human body, but because of the weakness of the
child, who is unable to digest the food, and cannot derive benefit from
it. The same is the case with the true principles of science. They were
presented in enigmas, dad in riddles, and taught by an wise men in the
most mysterious way that could be devised, not because they contain some
secret evil, or are contrary to the fundamental principles of the Law
(as fools think who are only philosophers in their own eyes), but
because of the incapacity of man to comprehend them at the beginning of
his studies: only slight allusions have been made to them to serve for
the guidance of those who are capable of understanding them. These
sciences were, therefore, called Mysteries (*sodoth*), and Secrets of
the Law (*sitre torah*), as we shall explain.

This also is the reason why "the Torah speaks the language of man," as
we have explained, for it is the object of the Torah to serve as a guide
for the instruction of the young, of women, and of the common people;
and as all of them are incapable to comprehend the true sense of the
words, tradition was considered sufficient to convey all truths which
were to be established; and as regards ideals, only such remarks were
made as would lead towards a knowledge of their existence, though not to
a comprehension of their true essence. When a man attains to perfection,
and arrives at a knowledge of the "Secrets of the Law," either through
the assistance of a teacher or by self-instruction, being led by the
understanding of one part to the study of the other, he will belong to
those who faithfully believe in the true principles, either because of
conclusive proof, where proof is possible, or by forcible arguments,
where argument is admissible; he will have a true notion of those things
which he previously received in similes and metaphors, and he will fully
understand their sense. We have frequently mentioned in this treatise
the principle of our Sages "not to discuss the *Ma‘aseh Mercabah* even
in the presence of one pupil, except he be wise and intelligent; and
then only the headings of the chapters are to be given to him." We must,
therefore, begin with teaching these subjects according to the capacity
of the pupil, and on two conditions, first, that he be wise, i.e., that
he should have successfully gone through the preliminary studies, and
secondly that he be intelligent, talented, clear-headed, and of quick
perception, that is, "have a mind of his own" (*mebin midda‘ato*), as
our Sages termed it.

I will now proceed to explain the reasons why we should not instruct the
multitude in pure metaphysics, or begin with describing to them the true
essence of things, or with showing them that a thing must be as it is,
and cannot be otherwise. This will form the subject of the next chapter;
and I proceed to say

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIV](gfp044)
