[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp091)  [Next](gfp093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

### CHAPTER V

SCRIPTURE supports the theory that the spheres are animate and
intellectual, i.e., capable of comprehending things: that they are not,
as ignorant persons believe, inanimate masses like fire and earth, but
are, as the philosophers assert, endowed with life, and serve their
Lord, whom they mightily praise and glorify; comp. "The heavens declare
the glory of God," etc. (Ps. xix. 2). It is a great error to think that
this is a mere figure of speech: for the verbs "to declare" and "to
relate," when joined together, are, in Hebrew, only used of intellectual
beings. That the Psalmist really means to describe the heavens' own
doing, in other words, what the spheres actually do, and not what man
thinks of them, may be best inferred from the words, "There is no
speech, nor language, their voice is not heard" (ver. 4). Here he
clearly shows that he describes the heavens themselves as in reality
praising God, and declaring His wonders without words of lip and tongue.
When man praises God in words actually uttered, he only relates the
ideas which he has conceived, but these ideas form the real praise. The
reason why he gives expression to these ideas is to be found in his
desire to communicate them to others, or to make himself sure that he
has truly conceived them. Therefore it is said, "Commune with your own
heart upon your bed, and be still" (Ps. iv. 5). Only ignorant or
obstinate persons would refuse to admit this proof taken from Scripture.

As to the opinion of our Sages, I do not see any necessity for
expounding or demonstrating it. Consider only the form they gave to the
blessing recited on seeing the new moon, the ideas repeatedly occurring
in the prayers and the remarks in the Midrash on the following and
similar passages:--"And the host of heaven worshippeth thee" (Neh. ix.
6); "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy" (Job xxxviii. 7). In *Bereshit Rabba*, on the
passage--"And the earth was empty and formless" (Gen. i. 2), our Sages
remark as follows: "The words *tohu* and *bohu* mean mourning and
crying; the earth mourned and cried on account of her evil lot, saying,
'I and the heavens were created together, and yet the beings above live
for ever, and we are mortal.'" Our Sages, by this remark, indicate their
belief that the spheres are animated beings, and not inanimate matter
like the elements.

The opinion of Aristotle, that the spheres are capable of comprehension
and conception, is in accordance with the words of our prophets and our
theologians or Sages. The philosophers further agree that this world
below is governed by influences emanating from the spheres, and that the
latter comprehend and have knowledge of the things which they influence.
This theory is also met with in Scripture: comp. \[the stars and all the
host of heaven\] "which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations"
(Deut. iv. 19), that is to say, the stars, which God appointed to be the
means of governing His creatures, and not the objects of man's worship.
It has therefore been stated clearly: "And to rule over the day and over
the night" (Gen. i. 18). The term "ruling" here refers to the power
which the spheres possess of governing the earth, in addition to the
property of giving light and darkness. The latter property is the direct
cause of genesis and destruction; it is described in the words, "And to
divide the light from the darkness (*ibid*.). It is impossible to assume
that those who rule a thing are ignorant

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

of that very thing which they rule, if we take "to rule" in its proper
sense. We will add another chapter on this subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](gfp093)
