[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp020)  [Next](gfp022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XI

THE primary meaning of the Hebrew *yashab* is "he was seated," as "Now
Eli the priest sat (*yashab*) upon a seat" (1 Sam. i. 9); but, since a
person can best remain motionless and at rest when sitting, the term was
applied to everything that is permanent and unchanging; thus, in the
promise that Jerusalem should remain constantly and permanently in an
exalted condition, it is stated," She will rise and sit in her place"
(Zech. xiv. 10); further," He maketh the woman who was childless to sit
as a joyful mother of children" (Ps. cxiii. 9); i.e., He makes her happy
condition to be permanent and enduring.

When applied to God, the verb is to be taken in that latter sense: "Thou
O Lord, remainest (*tesheb*) for ever" (Lam. v. 19); "O thou who sittest
(*ha-yoshebi*) in the heavens" (Ps. cxxiii. 1); "He who sitteth in the
heavens" (ii. 4), i.e., He who is everlasting, constant, and in no way
subject to change; immutable in His Essence, and as He consists of
nought but His Essence, He is mutable in no way whatever; not mutable in
His relation to other things: for there is no relation whatever existing
between Him and any other being, as will be explained below, and
therefore no change as regard; such relations can take place in Him.
Hence He is immutable in every respect, as He expressly declares, "I,
the Lord, do not change" (Mal. iii. 6); i.e., in Me there is not any
change whatever. This idea is expressed by the term *yashab* when
referring to God.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

The verb, when employed of God, is frequently complemented by "the
Heavens," inasmuch as the heavens are without change or mutation, that
is to say, they do not individually change, as the individual beings on
earth, by transition from existence into non-existence.

The verb is also employed in descriptions of God's relation (the term
"relation" is here used as a homonym) to existing species of evanescent
things: for those *species* are as constant, well organized, and
unvarying as the individuals of the heavenly hosts. Thus we find, "Who
sitteth over the circle of the earth" (Isa. xl. 22), Who remains
constantly and unremittingly over the sphere of the earth; that is to
say, over the things that come into existence within that sphere.

Again, "The Lord sitteth upon the flood" (Ps. xxix. 10), i.e., despite
the change and variation of earthly objects, no change takes place with
respect to God's relation (to the earth): His relation to each of the
things which come into existence and perish again is stable and
constant, for it concerns only the existing species and not the
individuals. It should therefore be borne in mind, that whenever the
term" sitting" is applied to God, it is used in this sense.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](gfp022)
