[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp072)  [Next](gfp074) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER LXIII

BEFORE approaching the subject of this chapter, we will first consider
the words of Moses, "And they shall say unto me, What is His name? what
shall I say unto them" (Exod. iii. 13)[.](errata.htm#6) How far was this
question, anticipated by Moses, appropriate, and how far was he
justified in seeking to be prepared with the answer? Moses was correct
in declaring, "But, behold, they will not believe me, for they will say,
The Lord hath not appeared unto thee" (*ib*. iv. 1); for any man
claiming the authority of a prophet must expect to meet with such an
objection so long as he has not given a proof of his mission. Again, if
the question, as appears at first sight, referred only to the name, as a
mere utterance of the lips, the following dilemma would present itself:
either the Israelites knew the name, or they had never heard it: if the
name was known to them, they would perceive in it no argument in favour
of the mission of Moses, his knowledge and their knowledge of the divine
name

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

being the same. If, on the other hand, they had never heard it
mentioned, and if the knowledge of it was to prove the mission of Moses,
what evidence would they have that this was really the name of God?
Moreover, after God had made known that name to Moses, and had told him,
"Go and gather the elders of Israel. . . . and they shall hearken to thy
voice" (*ib*. xvi. 18), he replied, "Behold, they will not believe me
nor hearken unto my voice," although God had told him, "And they will
hearken to thy voice"; whereupon God answered, "What is that in thine
hand?" and he said, "A rod" (*ib*. iv. 2). In order to obviate this
dilemma, you must understand what I am about to tell you. You know how
widespread were in those days the opinions of the Sabeans: all men,
except a few individuals, were idolaters, that is to say, they believed
in spirits, in man's power to direct the influences of the heavenly
bodies, and in the effect of talismans. Any one who in those days laid
claim to authority, based it either, like Abraham, on the fact that, by
reasoning and by proof he had been convinced of the existence of a Being
who rules the whole Universe, or that some spiritual power was conferred
upon him by a star, by an angel, or by a similar agency; but no one
could establish his claim on prophecy, that is to say, on the fact that
God had spoken to him, or had entrusted a mission to him: before the
days of Moses no such assertion had ever been made. You must not be
misled by the statements that God spoke to the Patriarchs, or that He
had appeared to them. For you do not find any mention of a prophecy
which appealed to others, or which directed them. Abraham, Isaac, or
Jacob, or any other person before them did not tell the people, "God
said unto me, you shall do this thing, or you shall not do that thing."
or "God has sent me to you." Far from it! for God spoke to them on
nothing but of what especially concerned them, i.e., He communicated to
them things relating to their perfection, directed them in what they
should do, and foretold them what the condition of their descendants
would be; nothing beyond this. They guided their fellow-men by means of
argument and instruction, as is implied, according to the interpretation
generally received amongst us, in the words "and the souls that they had
gotten in Haran" (Gen. xii. 5). When God appeared to our Teacher Moses,
and commanded him to address the people and to bring them the message,
Moses replied that he might first be asked to prove the existence of God
in the Universe, and that only after doing so he would be able to
announce to them that God had sent him. For all men, with few
exceptions, were ignorant of the existence of God; their highest
thoughts did not extend beyond the heavenly sphere, its forms or its
influences. They could not yet emancipate themselves from sensation, and
had not yet attained to any intellectual perfection. Then God taught
Moses how to teach them, and how to establish amongst them the belief in
the existence of Himself, namely, by saying *Ehyeh asher Ehyeh*, a name
derived from the verb *hayah* in the sense of "existing," for the verb
*hayah* denotes "to be," and in Hebrew no difference is made between the
verbs "to be" and "to exist." The principal point in this phrase is that
the same word which denotes "existence," is repeated as an attribute.
The word *asher*, "that," corresponds to the Arabic *illadi* and
*illati*, and is an incomplete noun that must be completed by another
noun; it may be considered as the subject of the predicate which
follows. The first noun which is to be described

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

is *ehyeh*; the second, by which the first is described, is likewise
*ehyeh*, the identical word, as if to show that the object which is to
be described and the attribute by which it is described are in this case
necessarily identical. This is, therefore, the expression of the idea
that God exists, but not in the ordinary sense of the term; or, in other
words, He is "the existing Being which is [the](errata.htm#7) existing
Being," that is to say, the Being whose existence is absolute. The proof
which he was to give consisted in demonstrating that there is a Being of
absolute existence, that has never been and never win be without
existence. This I will clearly prove (II. Introd. Prop. 20 and chap.
i.).

God thus showed Moses the proofs by which His existence would be firmly
established among the wise men of His people. Therefore the explanation
of the name is followed by the words, "Go, gather the elders of Israel,"
and by the assurance that the elders would understand what God had shown
to him, and would accept it, as is stated in the words, "And they will
hearken to thy voice." Then Moses replied as follows: They will accept
the doctrine that God exists convinced by these intelligible proofs.
But, said Moses, by what means shall I be able to show that this
existing God has sent me? Thereupon God gave him the sign. We have thus
shown that the question, "What is His name" means "Who is that Being,
which according to thy belief has sent thee?" The sentence, "What is his
name" (instead of, Who is He), has here been used as a tribute of praise
and homage, as though it had been said, Nobody can be ignorant of Thy
essence and of Thy real existence; if, nevertheless, I ask what is Thy
name, I mean, What idea is to be expressed by the name? (Moses
considered it inappropriate to say to God that any person was ignorant
of God's existence, and therefore described the Israelites as ignorant
of God's name, not as ignorant of Him who was called by that name.)--The
name *Jah* likewise implies eternal existence. *Shadday*, however, is
derived from *day*, "enough"; comp. "for the stuff they had was
sufficient" (*dayyam*, Exod. xxxvi. 7) the *shin* is equal to *asher*,
"which," as in *she-kebar*, "which already" (Eccles. ii. 16). The name
*Shadday*, therefore, signifies "he who is sufficient"; that is to say,
He does not require any other being for effecting the existence of what
He created, or its conservation: His existence is sufficient for that.
Ina similar manner the name *ḥasin* implies "strength"; comp. "he was
strong (*ḥason*) as the oaks" (Amos ii. 9). The same is the case with
"rock," which is a homonym, as we have explained (chap. xvi.). It is,
therefore, clear that all these names of God are appellatives, or are
applied to God by way of homonymy, like *ẓur* and others, the only
exception being the tetragrammaton, the *Shem ha-meforash* (the *nomen
proprium* of God), which is not an appellative; it does not denote any
attribute of God, nor does it imply anything except His existence.
Absolute existence includes the idea of eternity, i.e., the necessity of
existence. Note well the result at which we have arrived in this
chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter LXIV](gfp074)
