[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp011)  [Next](gfp013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER II

Some years ago a learned man asked me a question of great importance;
the problem and the solution which we gave in our reply deserve the
closest attention. Before, however, entering upon this problem and its
solution I must premise that every Hebrew knows that the term *Elohim*
is a homonym, and denotes God, angels, judges, and the rulers of
countries, and that Onkelos the proselyte explained it in the true and
correct manner by taking *Elohim* in the sentence, "and ye shall be like
*Elohim*" (Gen. iii. 5) in the last-mentioned meaning, and rendering the
sentence "and ye shall be like princes." Having pointed out the
homonymity of the term "*Elohim*" we return to the question under
consideration. "It would at first sight," said the objector, "appear
from Scripture that man was originally intended to be perfectly equal to
the rest of the animal creation, which is not endowed with intellect,
reason, or power of distinguishing between good and evil: but that
Adam's disobedience to the command of God procured him that great
perfection

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

which is the peculiarity of man, viz., the power of distinguishing
between good and evil-the noblest of all the faculties of our nature,
the essential characteristic of the human race. It thus appears strange
that the punishment for rebelliousness should be the means of elevating
man to a pinnacle of perfection to which he had not attained previously.
This is equivalent to saying that a certain man was rebellious and
extremely wicked, wherefore his nature was changed for the better, and
he was made to shine as a star in the heavens." Such was the purport and
subject of the question, though not in the exact words of the inquirer.
Now mark our reply, which was as follows:--"You appear to have studied
the matter superficially, and nevertheless you imagine that you can
understand a book which has been the guide of past and present
generations, when you for a moment withdraw from your lusts and
appetites, and glance over its contents as if you were reading a
historical work or some poetical composition. Collect your thoughts and
examine the matter carefully, for it is not to be understood as you at
first sight think, but as you will find after due deliberation; namely,
the intellect which was granted to man as the highest endowment, was
bestowed on him before his disobedience. With reference to this gift the
Bible states that "man was created in the form and likeness of God." On
account of this gift of intellect man was addressed by God, and received
His commandments, as it is said: "And the Lord God commanded Adam" (Gen.
ii. 16)--for no commandments are given to the brute creation or to those
who are devoid of understanding. Through the intellect man distinguishes
between the true and the false. This faculty Adam possessed perfectly
and completely. The right and the wrong are terms employed in the
science of apparent truths (morals), not in that of necessary truths,
as, e.g., it is not correct to say, in reference to the proposition "the
heavens are spherical," it is "good" or to declare the assertion that
"the earth is flat" to be "bad": but we say of the one it is true, of
the other it is false. Similarly our language expresses the idea of true
and false by the terms *emet* and *sheker*, of the morally right and the
morally wrong, by *tob* and *ra’*. Thus it is the function of the
intellect to discriminate between the true and the false--a distinction
which is applicable to all objects of intellectual perception. When Adam
was yet in a state of innocence, and was guided solely by reflection and
reason--on account of which it is said: "Thou hast made him (man) little
lower than the angels" (Ps. viii. 6)--he was not at all able to follow
or to understand the principles of apparent truths; the most manifest
impropriety, viz., to appear in a state of nudity, was nothing
unbecoming according to his idea: he could not comprehend why it should
be so. After man's disobedience, however, when he began to give way to
desires which had their source in his imagination and to the
gratification of his bodily appetites, as it is said, "And the wife saw
that the tree was good for food and delightful to the eyes" (Gen. iii.
6), he was punished by the loss of part of that intellectual faculty
which he had previously possessed. He therefore transgressed a command
with which he had been charged on the score of his reason; and having
obtained a knowledge of the apparent truths, he was wholly absorbed in
the study of what is proper and what improper. Then he fully understood
the magnitude of the loss he had sustained, what he had forfeited, and
in what situation he was thereby placed. Hence we read, "And ye shall be
like

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

*elohim*, knowing good and evil," and not "knowing" or "discerning the
true and the false": while in necessary truths we can only apply the
words "true and false," not "good and evil." Further observe the
passage, "And the eyes of both were opened, and they knew they were
naked" (Gen. iii. 7): it is not said, "And the eyes of both were opened,
and they *saw*"; for what the man had seen previously and what he saw
after this circumstance was precisely the same: there had been no
blindness which was now removed, but he received a new faculty whereby
he found things wrong which previously he had not regarded as wrong.
Besides, you must know that the Hebrew word *pakaḥ* used in this passage
is exclusively employed in the figurative sense of receiving new sources
of knowledge, not in that of regaining the sense of sight. Comp., "God
opened her eyes" (Gen. xxi. 19). "Then shall the eyes of the blind be
opened" (Isaiah xxxviii. 8). "Open ears, he heareth not" (*ibid*. Xlii.
20), similar in sense to the verse, "Which have eyes to see, and see
not" (Ezek. xii. 2). When, however, Scripture says of Adam, "He changed
his face (*panav*) and thou sentest him forth" Job xiv. 20), it must be
understood in the following way: On account of the change of his
original aim he was sent away. For *panim*, the Hebrew equivalent of
face, is derived from the verb *panah*, "he turned," and signifies also
"aim," because man generally turns his face towards the thing he
desires. In accordance with this interpretation, our text suggests that
Adam, as he altered his intention and directed his thoughts to the
acquisition of what he was forbidden, he was banished from Paradise:
this was his punishment; it was measure for measure. At first he had the
privilege of tasting pleasure and happiness, and of enjoying repose and
security; but as his appetites grew stronger, and he followed his
desires and impulses, (as we have already stated above), and partook of
the food he was forbidden to taste, he was deprived of everything, was
doomed to subsist on the meanest kind of food, such as he never tasted
before, and this even only after exertion and labour, as it is said,
"Thorns and thistles shall grow up for thee" (Gen. iii. 18), "By the
sweat of thy brow," etc., and in explanation of this the text continues,
"And the Lord God drove him from the Garden of Eden, to till the ground
whence he was taken." He was now with respect to food and many other
requirements brought to the level of the lower animals: comp., "Thou
shalt eat the grass of the field" (Gen. iii. 18). Reflecting on his
condition, the Psalmist says, "Adam unable to dwell in dignity, was
brought to the level of the dumb beast" (Ps. xlix. 13)." May the
Almighty be praised, whose design and wisdom cannot be fathomed."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](gfp013)
