[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp151)  [Next](gfp153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVI

THE philosophers have uttered very perverse ideas as regards God's
Omniscience of everything beside Himself; they have stumbled in such a
manner that they cannot rise again, nor can those who adopt their views.
I will further on tell you the doubts that led them to these perverse
utterances on this question; and I will also tell you the opinion which
is taught by our religion, and which differs from the evil and wrong
principles of the philosophers as regards God's Omniscience.

The principal reason that first induced the philosophers to adopt their
theory is this: at first thought we notice an absence of system in human
affairs. Some pious men live a miserable and painful life, whilst some
wicked people enjoy a happy and pleasant life. On this account the
philosophers assumed as possible the cases which you will now hear. They
said that only one of two things is possible, either God is ignorant of
the individual or particular things on earth, and does not perceive
them, or He perceives and knows them. These are all the cases possible.
They then continued thus: If He perceives and knows all individual
things, one of the following three cases must take place: (1) God
arranges and manages human affairs well, perfectly and faultlessly; (2)
He is overcome by obstacles, and is too weak and powerless to manage
human affairs; (3) He knows \[all things\] and can arrange and manage
them, but leaves and abandons them, as too base, low, and vile, or from
jealousy; as we may also notice among ourselves some who are able to
make another person happy, well knowing what he wants for his happiness,
and still in consequence of their evil disposition, their wickedness and
jealousy against him, they do not help him to his happiness.--This is
likewise a complete enumeration of all possible cases. For those who
have a knowledge of a certain thing necessarily either (1) take care of
the thing which they know, and manage it, or (2) neglect it (as we,
e.g., neglect and forget the cats in our house, or things of less
importance); or (3) while taking care of it, have not sufficient power
and strength for its management, although they have the will to do so.
Having enumerated these different cases, the philosophers emphatically
decided that of the three cases possible \[as regards the management of
a thing\] by one who knows that thing\], two are inadmissible in
reference to God viz., want of power, or absence of will; because they
imply either evil disposition or weakness, neither of which can by any
means be attributed to

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Him. Consequently
there remains only the alternative that God is altogether ignorant of
human affairs, or that He knows them and manages them well. Since we,
however, notice that events do not follow a certain order, that they
cannot be determined by analogy, and are not in accordance with what is
wanted, we conclude that God has no knowledge of them in any way or for
any reason. This is the argument which led the philosophers to speak
such blasphemous words. In the treatise *On Providence*, by Alexander
Aphrodisiensis, you will find the same as I have said about the
different views of the philosophers, and as I have stated as to the
source of their error.

You must notice with surprise that the evil into which these
philosophers have fallen is greater than that from which they sought to
escape, and that they ignore the very thing which they constantly
pointed out and explained to us. They have fallen into a greater evil
than that from which they sought to escape, because they refuse to say
that God neglects or forgets a thing, and yet they maintain that His
knowledge is imperfect, that He is ignorant of what is going on here on
earth, that He does not perceive it. They also ignore, what they
constantly point out to us, in as much as they judge the whole universe
by that which befalls individual men, although, according to their own
view, frequently stated and explained, the evils of man originate in
himself, or form part of his material nature. We have already discussed
this sufficiently. After having laid this foundation, which is the ruin
of all good principles, and destroys the majesty of all true knowledge,
they sought to remove the opprobrium by declaring that for many reasons
it is impossible that God should have a knowledge of earthly things, for
the individual members of a species can only be perceived by the senses,
and not by reason: but God does not perceive by means of any of the
senses. Again, the individuals are infinite, but knowledge comprehends
and circumscribes the object of its action, and the infinite cannot be
comprehended or circumscribed: furthermore, knowledge of individual
beings, that are subject to change, necessitates some change in him who
possesses it, because this knowledge itself changes constantly. They
have also raised the following two objections against those who hold, in
accordance with the teaching of Scripture, that God knows things before
they come into existence. First, this theory implies that there can be
knowledge of a thing that does not exist at all; secondly, it leads to
the conclusion that the knowledge of an object *in potentia* is
identical with the knowledge of that same object in reality. They have
indeed come to very evil conclusions, and some of them assumed that God
only knows the species, not the individual beings, whilst others went as
far as to contend that God knows nothing beside Himself, because they
believe that God cannot have more than one knowledge.

Some of the great philosophers who lived before Aristotle agree with us,
that God knows everything, and that nothing is hidden from Him.
Alexander also refers to them in the above-mentioned treatise; he
differs from them, and says that the principal objection against this
theory is based on the fact that we clearly see evils befalling good
men, and wicked men enjoying happiness.

In short, you see that if these philosophers would find human affairs
managed according to rules laid down by the common people, they would
not venture or presume to speak on this subject. They are only led to
this

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

speculation because they examine the affairs of the good and the wicked,
and consider them as being contrary to all rule, and say in the words of
the foolish in our nation, "The way of the Lord is not right" (Ezek.
xxxiii. 17).

After having shown that knowledge and Providence are connected with each
other, I will now proceed to expound the opinions of thinkers on
Providence, and then I shall attempt to remove their doubts as to God's
know-ledge of individual beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](gfp153)
