[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp103)  [Next](gfp105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XVII

EVERYTHING produced comes into existence from non-existence; even when
the substance of a thing has been in existence, and has only changed its
form, the thing itself, which has gone through the process of genesis
and development, and has arrived at its final state, has now different
properties from those which it possessed at the commencement of the
transition from potentiality to reality, or before that time. Take,
e.g., the human ovum as

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

contained in the female's blood when still included in its vessels: its
nature is different from what it was in the moment of conception, when
it is met by the semen of the male and begins to develop: the properties
of the semen in that moment are different from the properties of the
living being after its birth when fully developed. It is therefore quite
impossible to infer from the nature which a thing possesses after having
passed through all stages of its development, what the condition of the
thing has been in the moment when this process commenced; nor does the
condition of a thing in this moment show what its previous condition has
been. If you make this mistake, and attempt to prove the nature of a
thing in potential existence by its properties when actually existing,
you will fall into great confusion: you win reject evident truths and
admit false opinions. Let us assume, in our above instance, that a man
born without defect had after his birth been nursed by his mother only a
few months; the mother then died, and the father alone brought him up in
a lonely island, till he grew up, became wise, and acquired knowledge.
Suppose this man has never seen a woman or any female being; he asks
some person how man has come into existence, and how he has developed,
and receives the following answer: "Man begins his existence in the womb
of an individual of his own class, namely, in the womb of a female,
which has a certain form. While in the womb he is very small; yet he has
life, moves, receives nourishment, and gradually grows, till he arrives
at a certain stage of development. He then leaves the womb and continues
to grow till he is in the condition in which you see him." The orphan
will naturally ask: "Did this person, when he lived, moved, and grew in
the womb, eat and drink, and breathe with his mouth and his nostrils?
Did he excrete any substance?" The answer will be, "No." Undoubtedly he
will then attempt to refute the statements of that person, and to prove
their impossibility, by referring to the properties of a fully developed
person, in the following manner: "When any one of us is deprived of
breath for a short time he dies, and cannot move any longer: how then
can we imagine that any one of us has been inclosed in a bag in the
midst of a body for several months and remained alive, able to move? If
any one of us would swallow a living bird, the bird would die
immediately when it reached the stomach, much more so when it came to
the lower part of the belly; if we should not take food or drink with
our mouth, in a few days we should undoubtedly be dead: how then can man
remain alive for months without taking food? If any person would take
food and would not be able to excrete it, great pains and death would
follow in a short time, and yet I am to believe that man has lived for
months without that function! Suppose by accident a hole were formed in
the belly of a person, it would prove fatal, and yet we are to believe
that the navel of the fœtus has been open! Why should the fœtus not open
the eyes, spread forth the bands and stretch out the legs, if, as you
think, the limbs are all whole and perfect." This mode of reasoning
would lead to the conclusion that man cannot come into existence and
develop in the manner described.

If philosophers would consider this example well and reflect on it, they
would find that it represents exactly the dispute between Aristotle and
ourselves. We, the followers of Moses, our Teacher, and of Abraham, our
Father, believe that the Universe has been produced and has developed in
a

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

certain manner, and that it has been created in a certain order. The
Aristotelians oppose us, and found their objections on the properties
which the things in the Universe possess when in actual existence and
fully developed. We admit the existence of these properties, but hold
that they are by no means the same as those which the things possessed
in the moment of their production; and we hold that these properties
themselves have come into existence from absolute non-existence. Their
arguments are therefore no objection whatever to our theory: they have
demonstrative force only against those who hold that the nature of
things as at present in existence proves the Creation. But this is not
my opinion.

I will now return to our theme, viz., to the description of the
principal proofs of Aristotle, and show that they prove nothing whatever
against us, since we hold that God brought the entire Universe into
existence from absolute non-existence, and that He caused it to develop
into the present state. Aristotle says that the *materia prima* is
eternal, and by referring to the properties of transient beings he
attempts to prove this statement, and to show that the *materia prima*
could not possibly have been produced. He is right; we do not maintain
that the *materia prima* has been produced in the same manner as man is
produced from the ovum, and that it can be destroyed in the same manner
as man is reduced to dust. But we believe that God created it from
nothing, and that since its creation it has its own properties, viz.,
that all things are produced of it and again reduced to it, when they
cease to exist; that it does not exist without Form; and that it is the
source of all genesis and destruction. Its genesis is not like that of
the things produced from it, nor its destruction like theirs: for it has
been created from nothing, and if it should please the Creator, He might
reduce it to absolutely nothing. The same applies to motion. Aristotle
founds some of his proofs on the fact that motion is not subject to
genesis or destruction. This is correct; if we consider motion as it
exists at present, we cannot imagine that in its totality it should be
subject, like individual motions, to genesis and destruction. In like
manner Aristotle is correct in saying that circular motion is without
beginning, in so far as seeing the rotating spherical body in actual
existence, we cannot conceive the idea that that rotation has ever been
absent. The same argument we employ as regards the law that a state of
potentiality precedes all actual genesis. This law applies to the
Universe as it exists at present, when everything produced originates in
another thing; but nothing perceived with our senses or comprehended in
our mind can prove that a thing created from nothing must have been
previously in a state of potentiality. Again, as regards the theory that
the heavens contain no opposites \[and are therefore indestructible\],
we admit its correctness; but we do not maintain that the production of
the heavens has taken place in the same way as that of a horse or ass,
and we do not say that they are like plants and animals, which are
destructible on account of the opposite elements they contain. In short,
the properties of things when fully developed contain no clue as to what
have been the properties of the things before their perfection. We
therefore do not reject as impossible the opinion of those who say that
the heavens were produced before the earth, or the reverse, or that the
heavens have existed without stars, or that certain species of animals
have been in existence, and others not. For the state of the whole
Universe

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

when it came into existence may be compared with that of animals when
their existence begins; the heart evidently precedes the testicles, the
veins are in existence before the bones; although, when the animal is
fully developed, none of the parts is missing which is essential to its
existence. This remark is not superfluous, if the Scriptural account of
the Creation be taken literally; in reality, it cannot be taken
literally, as will be shown when we shall treat of this subject.

The principle laid down in the foregoing must be well understood; it is
a high rampart erected round the Law, and able to resist all missiles
directed against it. Aristotle, or rather his followers, may perhaps ask
us how we know that the Universe has been created: and that other forces
than those it has at present were acting in its Creation, since we hold
that the properties of the Universe, as it exists at present, prove
nothing as regards its creation? We reply, there is no necessity for
this according to our plan; for we do not desire to prove the Creation,
but only its possibility: and this possibility is not refuted by
arguments based on the nature of the present Universe, which we do not
dispute. When we have established the admissibility of our theory, we
shall then show its superiority. In attempting to prove the
inadmissibility of *Creatio ex nihilo*, the Aristotelians can therefore
not derive any support from the nature of the Universe; they must resort
to the notion our mind has formed of God. Their proofs include the three
methods which I have mentioned above, and which are based on the notion
conceived of God. In the next chapter I will expose the weak points of
these arguments, and show that they really prove nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](gfp105)
