[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp132)  [Next](gfp134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLVI

ONE individual may be taken as an illustration of the individuals of the
whole species. From its properties we learn those of each individual of
the species. I mean to say that the form of one account of a prophecy
illustrates all accounts of the same class. After this remark you will
understand that a person may sometimes dream that he has gone to a
certain country, married there, stayed there for some time, and had a
son, whom he gave a certain name, and who was in a certain condition
\[though nothing of all this has really taken place\]; so also in
prophetic allegories certain objects are seen, acts performed--if the
style of the allegory demands it--things are done by the prophet, the
intervals between one act and another determined, and journeys
undertaken from one place to another; but all these things are only
processes of a prophetic vision, and not real things that could be
perceived by the senses of the body. Some of the accounts simply relate
these incidents \[without premising that they are part of a vision\],
because it is a well-known fact that all these accounts refer to
prophetic visions, and it was not necessary to repeat in each case a
statement to this effect.

Thus the prophet relates: "And the Lord said unto me," and need not

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

add the explanation that it was in a dream. The ordinary reader believes
that the acts, journeys, questions, and answers of the prophets really
took place, and were perceived by the senses, and did not merely form
part of a prophetic vision. I will mention here an instance concerning
which no person will entertain the least doubt. I will add a few more of
the same kind, and these will show you how those passages must be
understood which I do not cite. The following passage in Ezekiel (viii.
1, 3) is clear, and admits of no doubt: "I sat in mine house, and the
elders of Judah sat before me, etc., and a spirit lifted me up between
the earth and the heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to
Jerusalem," etc.: also the passage, "Thus I arose and went into the
plain" (iii. 2, 3), refers to a prophetic vision: just as the words,
"And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven and
tell the stars, if thou be able to number them" (Gen. xv. 5) describe a
vision. The same is the case with the words of Ezekiel (xxxvii. 1), "And
set me down in the midst of the valley." In the description of the
vision in which Ezekiel is brought to Jerusalem, we read as follows:
"And when I looked, behold a hole in the wall. Then said he unto me, Son
of man, dig now in the wall; and when I had digged in the wall, behold a
door" (*ibid*. viii. 7-8), etc. It was thus in a vision that he was
commanded to dig in the wall, to enter and to see what people were doing
there, and it was in the same vision that he digged, entered through the
hole, and saw certain things, as is related. just as all this forms part
of a vision, the same may be said of the following passages: "And thou
take unto thee a tile," etc., "and lie thou also on thy left side,"
etc.; "Take thou also wheat and barley," etc., "and cause it to pass
over thine head and upon thy beard" (chaps. iv. and v.) It was in a
prophetic vision that he saw that he did all these actions which he was
commanded to do. God forbid to assume that God would make his prophets
appear an object of ridicule and sport in the eyes of the ignorant, and
order them to perform foolish acts. We must also bear in mind that the
command given to Ezekiel implied disobedience to the Law, for he, being
a priest, would, in causing the razor to pass over every corner of the
beard and of the head, have been guilty of transgressing two
prohibitions in each case. But it was only done in a prophetic vision.
Again, when it is said, "As my servant Isaiah went naked and barefoot"
(Isa. xx. 3), the prophet did so in a prophetic vision. Weak-minded
persons believe that the prophet relates here what he was commanded to
do, and what he actually did, and that he describes how he was commanded
to dig in a wan on the Temple mount although he was in Babylon, and
relates how he obeyed the command, for he says, "And I digged in the
wall." But it is distinctly stated that all this took place in a vision.

It is analogous to the description of the vision of Abraham which
begins, "The word of the Lord came to Abram in a vision, saying" (Gen.
xv. 1); and contains at the same time the passage, "He brought him forth
abroad, and said, Look now to the heaven and count the stars" (*ibid*.
ver. 6). It is evident that it was in a vision that Abraham saw himself
brought forth from his place looking towards the heavens and being told
to count the stars. This is related \[without repeating the statement
that it was in a vision\]. The same I say in reference to the command
given to Jeremiah, to conceal the girdle in the Euphrates, and the
statement that he concealed it, examined

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

it after a long time, and found it rotten and spoiled (Jer. xiii. 4-7).
An this was allegorically shown in a vision; Jeremiah did not go from
Palestine to Babylon, and did not see the Euphrates. The same applies to
the account of the commandment given to Hosea (i.-iii.): "Take unto thee
a wife of whoredom, and children of whoredom," to the birth of the
children and to the giving of names to them. All this passed in a
prophetic vision. When once stated that these are allegories, there is
left no doubt that the events related had no real existence, except in
the minds of those of whom the prophet says" And the vision of every one
was unto them like the words of a sealed book (Isa. xxix. 11). I believe
that the trial of Gideon (Judges vi. 21, 27) with the fleece and other
things was a vision. I do not call it a prophetic vision, as Gideon had
not reached the degree of prophets, much less that height which would
enable him to do wonders. He only rose to the height of the judges of
Israel, and he has even been counted by our Sages among persons of
little importance, as has been pointed out by us.

The same can be said of the passage in Zechariah (xi. 7), "And I fed the
flock of slaughter," and all the incidents that are subsequently
described: the graceful asking for wages, the acceptance of the wages,
the wanting of the money, and the casting of the same into the house of
the treasure; all these incidents form part of the vision. He received
the commandment and carried it out in a prophetic vision or dream.

The correctness of this theory cannot be doubted, and only those do not
comprehend it who do not know to distinguish between that which is
possible, and that which is impossible. The instances quoted may serve
as an illustration of other similar Scriptural passages not quoted by
me. They are all of the same kind, and in the same style. Whatever is
said in the account of a vision, that the prophet heard, went forth,
came out, said, was told, stood, sat, went up, went down, journeyed,
asked, or was asked, all is part of the prophetic vision; even when
there is a lengthened account, the details of which are well connected
as regards the time, the persons referred to, and the place. After it
has once been stated that the event described is to be understood
figuratively, it must be assumed for certain that the whole is a
prophetic vision.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVII](gfp134)
