[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp107)  [Next](gfp109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXI

SOME of the recent philosophers who adhere to the theory of the Eternity
of

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

the Universe hold that God produces the Universe, that He by His will
designs and determines its existence and form: they reject, however, the
theory that this act took place at one certain time, and assume that
this always has been the case, and will always be so. The circumstance
that we cannot imagine an agent otherwise than preceding the result of
its action, they explain by the fact that this is invariably the case in
all that *we* produce; because for agents of the same kind as we are,
there are some moments in which they are not active, and are only agents
*in potentia*; they become agents when they act. But as regards God
there are no moments of non-action, or of potentiality in any respect;
He is not before His work, He is always an actual agent. And as there is
a great difference between His essence and ours, so is also a great
difference between the relation of His work to Him and the relation of
our work to us. They apply the same argument to will and determination;
for there is no difference in this respect whether we say He acts,
wills, designs, or determines. They further assume that change in His
action or will is inadmissible. It is therefore clear that these
philosophers abandoned the term "necessary result," but retained the
theory of it: they perhaps sought to use a better expression, or to
remove an objectionable term. For it is the same thing, whether we say
in accordance with the view of Aristotle that the Universe is the result
of the Prime Cause, and must be eternal as that Cause is eternal, or in
accordance with these philosophers that the Universe is the result of
the act, design, will, selection, and determination of God, but it has
always been so, and will always be so; in the same manner as the rising
of the sun undoubtedly produces the day, and yet it does not precede it.
But when we speak of design we do not mean it in this sense; we mean to
express by it that the Universe is not the "necessary result" of God's
existence, as the effect is the necessary result of the efficient cause;
in the latter case the effect cannot be separated from the cause; it
cannot change unless the cause changes entirely, or at least in some
respect. If we accept this explanation we easily see how absurd it is to
say that the Universe is in the same relation to God as the effect is to
the efficient cause, and to assume at the same time that the Universe is
the result of the action and determination of God.

Having fully explained this subject, we come to the question whether the
cause, which must be assumed for the variety of properties noticed in
the heavenly beings, is merely an efficient cause, that must necessarily
produce that variety as its effect, or whether that variety is due to a
determining agent, such as we believe, in accordance with the theory of
Moses our Teacher. Before I discuss this question I will first explain
fully what Aristotle means by "necessary result"; after that I will show
by such philosophical arguments as are free from every fallacy why I
prefer the theory of *Creatio ex nihilo*. It is clear that when he says
that the first Intelligence is the necessary result of the existence of
God, the second Intelligence the result of the existence of the first,
the third of the second \[and so on\], and that the spheres are the
necessary result of the existence of the Intelligences, and so forth, in
the well-known order which you learnt from passages dealing with it, and
of which we have given a *résumé* in this part (ch. iv.)--he does not
mean that the one thing was first in existence, and then the second came
as the necessary result of the first; he denies that

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

any one of these beings has had a beginning. By "necessary result" he
merely refers to the causal relation: he means to say that the first
Intelligence is the cause of the existence of the second: the second of
the third, and so on to the last of the Intelligences: and the same is
also the case as regards the spheres and the *materia prima*: none of
these preceded another, or has been in existence without the existence
of that other. We say, e.g., that the necessary result of the primary
qualities are roughness \[and\] smoothness, hardness \[and\] softness,
porosity and solidity; and no person doubts that heat, cold, moisture,
and dryness are the causes of smoothness and roughness, of hardness and
softness, porosity and solidity, and similar qualities, and that the
latter are the necessary result of those four primary qualities. And yet
it is impossible that a body should exist with the primary qualities
without the secondary ones; for the relation between the two sets of
qualities is that of causality, not that of agent and its product. just
in the same way the term "necessary result" is used by Aristotle in
reference to the whole Universe, when he says that one portion is the
result of the other, and continues the series up to the First Cause as
he calls it, or first Intellect, if you prefer this term. For we all
mean the same, only with this difference, that according to Aristotle
everything besides that Being is the necessary result of the latter, as
I have already mentioned: whilst, according to our opinion, that Being
created the whole Universe with design and will, so that the Universe
which had not been in existence before, has by His will come into
existence. I will now begin in the following chapters my proofs for the
superiority of our theory, that of *Creatio ex nihilo*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII](gfp109)
