[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp163)  [Next](gfp165) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVIII

IT is necessary to bear in mind that Scripture only teaches the chief
points of those true principles which lead to the true perfection of
man, and only demands in general terms faith in them. Thus Scripture
teaches the Existence, the Unity, the Omniscience, the Omnipotence, the
Win, and the Eternity of God. All this is given in the form of final
results, but they

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

cannot be understood fully and accurately except after the acquisition
of many kinds of knowledge. Scripture further demands belief in certain
truths, the belief in which is indispensable in regulating our social
relations: such is the belief that God is angry with those who disobey
Him, for it leads us to the fear and dread of disobedience \[to the will
of God\]. There are other truths in reference to the whole of the
Universe which form the substance of the various and many kinds of
speculative sciences, and afford the means of verifying the
above-mentioned principles as their final result. But Scripture does not
so distinctly prescribe the belief in them as it does in the first case;
it is implied in the commandment, "to love the Lord" (Deut. xi. 13). It
may be inferred from the words, "And thou shalt love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might"
(*ibid*. vi. 5), what stress is laid on this commandment to love God. We
have already shown in the Mishneh-torah (*Yes. ha-torah* ii. 2) that
this love is only possible when we comprehend the real nature of things,
and understand the divine wisdom displayed therein. We have likewise
mentioned there what our Sages remark on this subject.

The result of all these preliminary remarks is this: The reason of a
commandment, whether positive or negative, is clear, and its usefulness
evident, if it directly tends to remove injustice, or to teach good
conduct that furthers the well-being of society, or to impart a truth
which ought to be believed either on its own merit or as being
indispensable for facilitating the removal of injustice or the teaching
of good morals. There is no occasion to ask for the object of such
commandments: for no one can, e.g., be in doubt as to the reason why we
have been commanded to believe that God is one; why we are forbidden to
murder, to steal, and to take vengeance, or to retaliate, or why we are
commanded to love one another. But there are precepts concerning which
people are in doubt, and of divided opinions, some believing that they
are mere commands, and serve no purpose whatever, whilst others believe
that they serve a certain purpose, which, however, is unknown to man.
Such are those precepts which in their literal meaning do not seem to
further any of the three above-named results: to impart some truth, to
teach some moral, or to remove injustice. They do not seem to have any
influence upon the well-being of the soul by imparting any truth, or
upon the well-being of the body by suggesting such ways and rules as are
useful in the government of a state, or in the management of a
household. Such are the prohibitions of wearing garments containing wool
and linen; of sowing divers seeds, or of boiling meat and milk together;
the commandment of covering the blood \[of slaughtered beasts and
birds\], the ceremony of breaking the neck of a calf \[in case of a
person being found slain, and the murderer being unknown\]; the law
concerning the first-born of an ass, and the like. I am prepared to tell
you my explanation of all these commandments, and to assign for them a
true reason supported by proof, with the exception of some minor rules,
and of a few commandments, as I have mentioned above. I will show that
all these and similar laws must have some bearing upon one of the
following three things, viz., the regulation of our opinions, or the
improvement of our social relations, which implies two things, the
removal of injustice, and the teaching of good morals. Consider what we
said of the opinions \[implied in the laws\]; in some cases the law
contains a truth which is itself the only

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

object of that law, as e.g., the truth of the Unity, Eternity, and
Incorporeality of God; in other cases, that truth is only the means of
securing the removal of injustice, or the acquisition of good morals;
such is the belief that God is angry with those who oppress their
fellow-men, as it is said, "Mine anger will be kindled, and I will
slay," etc. (Exod. xxii. 23); or the belief that God hears the crying of
the oppressed and vexed, to deliver them out of the hands of the
oppressor and tyrant, as it is written, "And it shall come to pass, when
he will cry unto me, that I will hear, for I am gracious" (Exod. xxii.
25).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX](gfp165)
