[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp174)  [Next](gfp176) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX

THE precepts in the fourth class include the laws which in our work are
contained in the section Zera'im, excepting the laws on the mixture of
species: the rules about things to be "valued" and things "devoted"
(*Hilkot ‘erekin va-haramim*), and those concerning lender and borrower
(*Hilkot malveh ve-loveh*) and slaves (*Hilkot ‘abadim*). When you
examine these precepts you will clearly see the use of every one of
them: they teach us to have sympathy with the poor and infirm, to assist
the needy in various ways; not to hurt the feelings of those who are in
want, and not to vex those who are in a helpless condition \[viz., the
widow, the orphan, and the like\]. The purpose of the laws concerning
the portions which are to be given to the poor is likewise obvious; the
reason of the laws concerning the heave-offerings and the tithe is
distinctly stated: "for he hath no portion and inheritance with thee"
(Deut. xiv. 29). You certainly know that the Levites had no portion,
because their whole tribe was to be exclusively engaged in the service
of God and the study of the Law. They shall not plow or cut the corn,
but shall only minister to God." They shall teach Jacob thy judgments
and Israel thy law: they shall put incense before thee" (Deut. xxxiii.
10). In the Law we meet frequently with the phrase, "the Levite, the
stranger, and the orphan and the widow"; for the Levite is reckoned
among the poor because he had no property. The second tithe was
commanded to be spent on food in Jerusalem: in this way the owner was
compelled to give part of it away as charity. As he was not able to use
it otherwise than by way of eating and drinking, he must have easily
been induced to give it gradually away. This rule brought multitudes
together in one place, and strengthened the bond of love and brotherhood
among the children of men. The law concerning the fruit of a tree in its
fourth year has some relation to idolatrous customs, as has been stated
by us (chap. xxxvii.), and is connected with the law concerning the
fruit of a tree in its first three years. But it has in addition the
same object as the law concerning the heave-offering (Deut. xviii. 4),
the dough-offering (*ḥallah*) (Num. xv. 20), the first-fruit (Exod.
xxiii. 19), and the first of the shearing (Deut. xviii. 4). For the
first of everything is to be devoted to the Lord; and by doing so man
accustoms himself to be liberal, and to limit his appetite for eating
and his desire for property. The same is the reason why the priest took
the shoulder, the two cheeks, and the maw (Deut. xviii. 3); the cheek
being the first part of the body of animals, the right shoulder the
first of the extremities of the body, and the maw the first of all
inwards.

The reciting of a certain portion of the Law when the first-fruits are
brought to the temple, tends also to create humility. For he who brings
the first-fruits takes the basket upon his shoulders and proclaims the
kindness and goodness of God. This ceremony teaches man that it is
essential in the service of God to remember the times of trouble and the
history of past distress, in days of comfort. The Law lays stress on
this duty in several places; comp. "And thou shalt remember that thou
hast been a slave," etc. (Deut. v. 15). For it is to be feared that
those who become great in riches and comfort might, as is generally the
case, fall into the vices of insolence and haughtiness, and abandon all
good principles. Comp. "Lest thou eat and

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

be full, etc., and thine heart be lifted up and thou forget the Lord"
(*ibid*. viii. 12-14); "And Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked" (*ibid*. xxx.
15). On account of this fear the Law commanded us to read each year a
certain portion before the Lord and His glory, when we offer the
first-fruit. You know how much the Law insists that we shall always
remember the plagues that have befallen the Egyptians; comp. "That thou
mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt
all the days of thy life" (*ibid*. xvi. 3); "That thou mayest tell in
the ears of thy son what things I have wrought in Egypt" (Exod. x. 2).
Such a law was necessary in order to perpetuate the memory of the
departure from Egypt; because such events verify prophecy and the
doctrine of reward and punishment. The benefit of every commandment that
serves to keep certain miracles in remembrance, or to perpetuate true
faith, is therefore obvious.

In reference to the law concerning the first-born of man and cattle it
Is distinctly said, "And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let
us go, that the Lord slew all the first-born in the land of Egypt, etc.,
therefore I sacrifice to the Lord," etc. (Exod. xiii. 15). But it can
easily be explained why only cattle, sheep, and asses are mentioned in
this law; these are kept as domestic animals, and are found in most
places, especially in Palestine, where the Israelites were shepherds,
they, their fathers, and forefathers; comp. "Thy servants are shepherds,
both we and also our fathers" (Gen. xlvii. 3). Horses and camels,
however, are not wanted by shepherds, and are not found in all places;
thus in the booty of Midian (Num. xxxi.) no other animals are mentioned
but oxen, sheep, and asses. But asses alone are indispensable to all
people, especially to those who are engaged in the field or in the
forest. Thus Jacob says, "I have oxen and asses" (Gen. xxxii. 5). Camels
and horses are not possessed by many people, but only by a few, and are
only found in a few places. The law that the first-born of an ass was to
have its neck broken \[in case it is not redeemed\], will only ensure
the redemption of the ass. It has, therefore, been said that the act of
redeeming the ass is to be preferred to that of breaking its neck.

As to the precepts enumerated in the laws concerning the year of release
and the jubilee (*Hilkot shemittah ve-yohel*) some of them imply
sympathy with our fellow-men, and promote the well-being of mankind; for
in reference to these Precepts it is stated in the Law, "That the poor
of thy people may eat" (Exod. xxiii. 11); and besides, the land will
also increase its produce and improve when it remains fallow for some
time. Other precepts of this class prescribe kindness to servants and to
the poor, by renouncing an claims to debts \[in the year of release\]
and relieving the slaves of their bondage \[in the seventh year\]. There
are some precepts in this class that serve to secure for the people a
permanent source of maintenance and support by providing that the land
should remain the permanent property of its owners, and that it could
not be sold." And the land shall not be sold for ever" (Lev. xxv. 23).
In this way the property of a person remains intact for him and his
heirs, and he can only enjoy the produce thereof. I have thus explained
the reason of all precepts contained in our work in the Section
*Zera‘im*, with the exception of the laws concerning the intermixture of
different species of beasts the reason of which will be given (chap.
xlix.).

In the same manner we find that all the precepts comprised in "the laws

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

on valuations," and on "things devoted" are based on the principle of
charity: some of them prescribe what should be given to the priests;
others tell us what must be devoted to the repairs of the temple. The
practice of all these things accustoms man to act liberally and to spend
money unhesitatingly to the glory of God. For it is in the nature of man
to strive to gain money and to increase it; and his great desire to add
to his wealth and honour is the chief source of misery for man. Also the
precepts contained in "the laws concerning the relation between lender
and borrower" (*Hilkot malveh veloveh*) will be found, on being
carefully examined, to be nothing but commands to be lenient, merciful
and kind to the needy, not to deprive them of the use of anything
indispensable in the preparation of food. "No man shall take the nether
or the upper millstone to pledge: for he taketh a man's life to pledge"
(Deut. xxiv. 6).

The precepts contained in "the laws concerning slaves" (*Hilkot
‘abadim*), likewise prescribe only acts of pity, mercy and kindness to
the poor. It is an act of mercy to give liberty to a Canaanite servant
for the loss of one of his limbs (Exod. xxi. 26, 27), in order that he
should not suffer from slavery and illness at the same time. The law
applies even to the case that a tooth of a slave has been knocked out,
much more to the mutilation of other limbs. He could only be corrected
with a rod or reed or the like, as we have stated in Mishneh-torah.
Besides, if the master strikes the slave too hard and kills him, he is
punished with death as for ordinary murder. Mercy is also the object of
the law, "Thou shalt not deliver unto his master the servant that is
escaped from his master" (Deut. xxiii. 15); but it teaches besides a
very useful lesson, namely, that we must always practise this virtue,
help and protect those who seek our help, and not deliver them unto
those from whom they flee; and it is not sufficient to give assistance
to those who are in need of our help; we must look after their
interests, be kind to them, and not hurt their feeling by words. Thus
the Law says: "He shall dwell with thee, even among you, in that place
which he shall choose in one of thy gates, where it liketh him best:
thou shalt not vex him" (*ibid*. ver. 16). This we owe to the lowest
among men, to the slave; how much more must we do our duty to the
freeborn, when they seek our assistance? But, on the other hand, when
sinners and evildoers seek our help, it must not be granted; no mercy
must be shown to them, and the course of justice must not be interfered
with, even if they claim the protection of that which is noblest and
highest; for "Thou shalt take him from mine altar that he may die"
(Exod. xxi. 14). Here a person comes to seek the help of God, and claims
the protection of that which is devoted to his name; God, however, does
not help him, and commands that he be delivered up to the prosecutor,
from whom he fled. Much less need any one of us help or pity his
fellow-men \[under such circumstances\]; because mercy on sinners is
cruelty to all creatures. These are undoubtedly the right ways
designated "righteous statutes and judgments" (Deut. iv. 8), and
different from the ways of the fools, who consider a person praiseworthy
when he helps and protects his fellow-men, without discriminating
between the oppressor and the oppressed. This is well known from their
words and songs.

The reason and usefulness of every precept of this class has thus been
clearly demonstrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](gfp176)
