[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp128)  [Next](gfp130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XLII

WE have already shown that the appearance or speech of an angel
mentioned in Scripture took place in a vision or dream; it makes no
difference whether this is expressly stated or not, as we have explained
above. This is a point of considerable importance. In some cases the
account begins by stating that the prophet saw an angel; in others, the
account apparently introduces

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

a human being, who ultimately is shown to be an angel; but it makes no
difference, for if the fact that an angel has been heard is only
mentioned at the end, you may rest satisfied that the whole account from
the beginning describes a prophetic vision. In such visions, a prophet
either sees God who speaks to him, as will be explained by us, or he
sees an angel who speaks to him, or he hears some one speaking to him
without seeing the speaker, or he sees a man who speaks to him, and
learns afterwards that the speaker was an angel. In this latter kind of
prophecies, the prophet relates that he saw a man who was doing or
saying something, and that he learnt afterwards that it was an angel.

This important principle was adopted by one of our Sages, one of the
most distinguished among them, R. Ḥiya the Great (*Bereshit Rabba*,
xlviii.), in the exposition of the Scriptural passage commencing, "And
the Lord appeared unto him in the plain of Mamre" (Gen. xviii.). The
general statement that the Lord appeared to Abraham is followed by the
description in what manner that appearance of the Lord took place;
namely, Abraham saw first three men; he ran and spoke to them. R. Hiya,
the author of the explanation, holds that the words of Abraham, "My
Lord, if now I have found grace in thy sight, do not, I pray thee, pass
from thy servant," were spoken by him in a prophetic vision to one of
the men; for he says that Abraham addressed these words to the chief of
these men. Note this well, for it is one of the great mysteries \[of the
Law\]. The same, I hold, is the case when it is said in reference to
Jacob, "And a man wrestled with him" (Gen. xxxii. 25); this took place
in a prophetic vision, since it is expressly stated in the end (ver. 31)
that it was an angel. The circumstances are here exactly the same as
those in the vision of Abraham, where the general statement, "And the
Lord appeared to him," etc., is followed by a detailed description.
Similarly the account of the vision of Jacob begins, "And the angels of
God met him" (Gen. xxxii. 2); then follows a detailed description how it
came to pass that they met him; namely, Jacob sent messengers, and after
having prepared and done certain things, "he was left alone," etc., "and
a man wrestled with him" (*ibid*. ver. 24). By this term "*man*" \[one
of\] the angels of God is meant, mentioned in the phrase, "And angels of
God met him"; the wrestling and speaking was entirely a prophetic
vision. That which happened to Balaam on the way, and the speaking of
the ass, took place in a prophetic vision, since further on, in the same
account, an angel of God is introduced as speaking to Balaam. I also
think that what Joshua perceived, when "he lifted up his eyes and saw,
and behold a man stood before him" (Josh. v. 13) was a prophetic vision,
since it is stated afterwards (ver. 14) that it was "the prince of the
host of the Lord." But in the passages, "And an angel of the Lord came
up from *Gilgal*" (Judges ii. 1); "And it came to pass that the angel of
the Lord spake these words to all Israel" (*ibid*. ver. 2); the "angel"
is, according to the explanation of our Sages, Phineas. They say, The
angel is Phineas, for, when the Divine Glory rested upon him, he was
"like an angel." We have already shown (chap. vi.) that the term "angel"
is homonymous, and denotes also "prophet," as is the case in the
following passages:--"And He sent an angel, and He hath brought us up
out of Egypt" (Num. xx. 16); "Then spake Haggai, the angel of the Lord,
in the Lords message" (Hagg. i. 13); "But they mocked the angels of

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God" (2 Chron.
xxxvi. 16). Comp. also the words of Daniel, "And the man Gabriel, whom I
had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly,
touched me about the time of the evening oblation" (Dan. ix. 11). All
this passed in a prophetic vision. Do not imagine that an angel is seen
or his word heard otherwise than in a prophetic vision or prophetic
dream, according to the principle laid down:--"I make myself known unto
him in a vision, and speak unto him in a dream" (Num. xii. 6). The
instances quoted may serve as an illustration of those passages which I
do not mention. From the rule laid down by us that prophecy requires
preparation, and from our interpretation of the homonym "angel," you
will infer that Hagar, the Egyptian woman, was not a prophetess; also
Manoah and his wife were no prophets: for the speech they heard, or
imagined they heard, was like the *bat-kol* (prophetic echo), which is
so frequently mentioned by our Sages, and is something that may be
experienced by men not prepared for prophecy. The homonymity of the word
"angel" misleads in this matter. This is the principal method by which
most of the difficult passages in the Bible can be explained. Consider
the words, "And an angel of the Lord found her by the well of water"
(Gen. xvi. 7), which are similar to the words referring to Joseph--"And
a man found him, and behold, he was erring in the field" (*ibid*.
xxxvii. 15). All the Midrashim assume that by *man* in this passage an
angel is meant.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII](gfp130)
