[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp145)  [Next](gfp147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER X

THE Mutakallemim, as I have already told you, apply the term
non-existence only to absolute non-existence, and not to the absence of
properties. A property and the absence of that property are considered
by them as two opposites, they treat, e.g., blindness and sight, death
and life, in the same way as heat and cold. Therefore they say, without
any qualification, nonexistence does not require any agent, an agent is
required when something is produced. From a certain point of view this
is correct. Although they hold that non-existence does not require an
agent, they say in accordance with their principle that God causes
blindness and deafness, and gives rest to anything that moves, for they
consider these negative conditions as positive properties. We must now
state our opinion in accordance with the results of philosophical
research. You know that he who removes the obstacle of motion is to some
extent the cause of the motion, e.g., if one removes the pillar which
supports the beam he causes the beam to move, as has been stated by
Aristotle in his *Physics* (VIII., chap. iv.); in this sense we say of
him who removed a certain property that he produced the absence of that
property, although absence of a property is nothing positive. Just as we
say of him who puts out the light at night that he has produced
darkness, so we say of him who destroyed the sight of any being that he
produced blindness, although darkness and blindness are negative
properties, and require no agent.

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In accordance with
this view we explain the following passage of Isaiah: "I form the light
and create (bore) darkness: I make peace, and create (*bore*) evil"
(Isa. xlv. 7), for darkness and evil are non-existing things. Consider
that the prophet does not say, I make (*‘oseh*) darkness, I make
(*‘oseh*) evil, because darkness and evil are not things in positive
existence to which the verb "to make" would apply; the verb *bara* "he
created" is used, because in Hebrew this verb is applied to non-existing
things e.g., "In the beginning God created" (*bara*), etc.; here the
creation took place from nothing. Only in this sense can non-existence
be said to be produced by a certain action of an agent. In the same way
we must explain the following passage: "Who hath made man's mouth? or
who maketh the dumb, or the deaf, or the seeing," etc. (Exod. iv. 11).
The passage can also be explained as follows: Who has made man able to
speak? or can create him without the capacity of speaking, i.e., create
a substance that is incapable of acquiring this property? for he who
produces a substance that cannot acquire a certain property may be
called the producer of that privation. Thus we say, if any one abstains
from delivering a fellow-man from death, although he is able to do so,
that he killed him. It is now clear that according to an these different
views the action of an agent cannot be directly connected with a thing
that does not exist: only indirectly is non-existence described as the
result of the action of an agent, whilst in a direct manner an action
can only influence a thing really in existence; accordingly, whoever the
agent may be, he can only act upon an existing thing.

After this explanation you must recall to memory that, as has been
proved, the \[so-called\] evils are evils only in relation to a certain
thing, and that which is evil in reference to a certain existing thing,
either includes the nonexistence of that thing or the non-existence of
some of its good conditions. The proposition has therefore been laid
down in the most general terms, "All evils are negations." Thus for man
death is evil: death is his non-existence. Illness, poverty, and
ignorance are evils for man: all these are privations of properties. If
you examine all single cases to which this general proposition applies,
you will find that there is not one case in which the proposition is
wrong except in the opinion of those who do not make any distinction
between negative and positive properties, or between two opposites, or
do not know the nature of things,--who, e.g., do not know that health in
general denotes a certain equilibrium, and is a relative term. The
absence of that relation is illness in general, and death is the absence
of life in the case of any animal. The destruction of other things; is
likewise nothing but the absence of their form.

After these propositions, it must be admitted as a fact that it cannot
be said of God that He directly creates evil, or He has the direct
intention to produce evil: this is impossible. His works are all
perfectly good. He only produces existence, and all existence is good:
whilst evils are of a negative character, and cannot be acted upon. Evil
can only he attributed to Him in the way we have mentioned. He creates
evil only in so far as He produces the corporeal element such as it
actually is: it is always connected with negatives, and is on that
account the source of all destruction and all evil. Those beings that do
not possess this corporeal element are not subject to destruction or
evil: consequently the true work of God is all good, since it

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

is existence. The book which enlightened the darkness of the world says
therefore, "And God saw everything that He had made, and, behold, it was
very good" (Gen. i. 31). Even the existence of this corporeal element,
low as it in reality is, because it is the source of death and all
evils, is likewise good for the permanence of the Universe and the
continuation of the order of things, so that one thing departs and the
other succeeds. Rabbi Meir therefore explains the words "and behold it
was very good" (*tob me’od*); that even death was good in accordance
with what we have observed in this chapter. Remember what I said in this
chapter, consider it, and you will understand all that the prophets and
our Sages remarked about the perfect goodness of all the direct works of
God. In *Bereshit Rabba* (chap. i.) the same idea is expressed thus: "No
evil comes down from above."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](gfp147)
