[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp162)  [Next](gfp164) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXVII

THE general object of the Law is twofold: the well-being of the soul,
and the well-being of the body. The well-being of the soul is promoted
by correct opinions communicated to the people according to their
capacity. Some of these opinions are therefore imparted in a plain form,
others allegorically: because certain opinions are in their plain form
too strong for the capacity of the common people. The well-being of the
body is established by a proper management of the relations in which we
live one to another. This we can attain in two ways: first by removing
all violence from our midst: that is to say, that we do not do every one
as he pleases, desires, and is able to do; but every one of us does that
which contributes towards the common welfare. Secondly, by teaching
every one of us such good morals as must produce a good social state. Of
these two objects, the one, the well-being of the soul, or the
communication of correct opinions, comes undoubtedly first in rank, but
the other, the well-being of the body, the government of the state, and
the establishment of the best possible relations among men, is anterior
in nature and time. The latter object is required first; it is also
treated \[in the Law\] most carefully and most minutely, because the
well-being of the soul can only be obtained after that of the body has
been secured. For it has already been found that man has a double
perfection: the first perfection is that of the body, and the second
perfection is that of

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

the soul. The first consists in the most healthy condition of his
material relations, and this is only possible when man has all his wants
supplied, as they arise; if he has his food, and other things needful
for his body, e.g., shelter, bath, and the like. But one man alone
cannot procure all this; it is impossible for a single man to obtain
this comfort; it is only possible in society, since man, as is well
known, is by nature social.

The second perfection of man consists in his becoming an actually
intelligent being; i.e., he knows about the things in existence all that
a person perfectly developed is capable of knowing. This second
perfection certainly does not include any action or good conduct, but
only knowledge, which is arrived at by speculation, or established by
research.

It is clear that the second and superior kind of perfection can only be
attained when the first perfection has been acquired; for a person that
is suffering from great hunger, thirst, heat, or cold, cannot grasp an
idea even if communicated by others, much less can he arrive at it by
his own reasoning. But when a person is in possession of the first
perfection, then he may possibly acquire the second perfection, which is
undoubtedly of a superior kind, and is alone the source of eternal life.
The true Law, which as we said is one, and beside which there is no
other Law, viz., the Law of our teacher Moses, has for its purpose to
give us the twofold perfection. It aims first at the establishment of
good mutual relations among men by removing injustice and creating the
noblest feelings. In this way the people in every land are enabled to
stay and continue in one condition, and every one can acquire his first
perfection. Secondly, it seeks to train us in faith, and to impart
correct and true opinions when the intellect is sufficiently developed.
Scripture clearly mentions the twofold perfection, and tells us that its
acquisition is the object of all the divine commandments. Comp. "And the
Lord commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the Lord our God,
for our good always, that he might preserve us alive as it is this day"
(Deut. vi. 24). Here the second perfection is first mentioned because it
is of greater importance, being, as we have shown, the ultimate aim of
man's existence. This perfection is expressed in the phrase, "for our
good always." You know the interpretation of our Sages, "'that it may be
well with thee' (*ibid*. xxii. 7), namely, in the world that is all
good, 'and that thou mayest prolong thy days' (*ibid*.), i.e., in the
world that is all eternal." In the same sense I explain the words, "for
our good always," to mean that we may come into the world that is all
good and eternal, where we may live permanently; and the words, "that he
might preserve us alive as it is this day, "I explain as referring to
our first and temporal existence, to that of our body, which cannot be
in a perfect and good condition except by the co-operation of society,
as has been shown by us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](gfp164)
