[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp125)  [Next](gfp127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

### CHAPTER XXXIX

WE have given the definition of prophecy, stated its true
characteristics, and shown that the prophecy of Moses our Teacher was
distinguished from that of other prophets; we will now explain that this
distinction alone qualified him for the office of proclaiming the Law, a
mission without a parallel in the history from Adam to Moses, or among
the prophets who came after him; it is a principle in our faith that
there will never be revealed another Law. Consequently we hold that
there has never been, nor will there ever be, any other divine Law but
that of Moses our Teacher. According to what is written in Scripture and
handed down by tradition, the fact may be explained in the following
way: There were prophets before Moses, as the patriarchs Shem, Eber,
Noah, Methushelah, and Enoch, but of these none said to any portion of
mankind that God sent him to them and commanded him to convey to them a
certain message or to prohibit or to command a certain thing. Such a
thing is not related in Scripture, or in authentic tradition. Divine
prophecy reached them as we have explained. Men like Abraham, who
received a large measure of prophetic inspiration, called their
fellow-men together and led them by training and instruction to the
truth which they had perceived. Thus Abraham taught, and showed by
philosophical arguments that there is one God, that He has created
everything that exists beside Him, and that neither the constellations
nor anything in the air ought to be worshipped; he trained his
fellow-men in this belief, and won their attention by pleasant words as
well as by acts of kindness. Abraham did not tell the people that God
had sent him to them with the command concerning certain things which
should or should not be done. Even when it was commanded that he, his
sons, and his servants should be circumcised, he fulfilled that
commandment, but he did not address his fellow-men prophetically on this
subject. That Abraham induced his fellow-men to do what is right,
telling them only his own will \[and not that of God\], may be learnt
from the following passage of Scripture: "For I know him, because he
commands his sons and his house after him, to practise righteousness and
judgment" (Gen. xix. 19). Also Isaac, Jacob, Levi, Kohath, and Amram
influenced their fellow-men in the same way. Our Sages, when speaking of
prophets before Moses, used expressions like the following: The
*bet-din* (court of justice) of Eber, the *bet-din* of Methushelah, and
in the college of Methushelah; although all these were prophets, yet
they taught their fellow-men in the manner of preachers, teachers, and
pedagogues, but did not use such phrases as the following: "And God said
to me, Speak to certain people so and so." This was the state of
prophecy before Moses. But as regards Moses, you know what \[God\] said
to him, what he said \[to the people\], and the words addressed to him
by the whole nation: "This day we have seen that God doth talk with man,
and that he liveth"(Deut. v. 21). The history of all our prophets that
lived after Moses is well known to you; they performed, as it were, the
function of warning the people and exhorting them to keep the Law of
Moses, threatening evil to those who would neglect it, and announcing
blessings to those who would submit to its guidance. This we believe
will always be the case. Comp. "It is not in the heavens that one might
say," etc. (*ibid*. xxx. 12); "For

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

us and for our children for ever" (*ibid*. xxix. 28). It is but natural
that it should be so. For if one individual of a class has reached the
highest perfection possible in that class, every other individual must
necessarily be less perfect, and deviate from the perfect measure either
by surplus or deficiency. Take, e.g., the normal constitution of a
being, it is the most proper composition possible in that class; any
constitution that deviates from that norm contains something too much or
too little. The same is the case with the Law. It is clear that the Law
is normal in this sense; for it contains "Just statutes and judgments"
(Deut. iv. 8); but "just" is here identical with "equibalanced." The
statutes of the Law do not impose burdens or excesses as are implied in
the service of a hermit or pilgrim, and the like; but, on the other
hand, they are not so deficient as to lead to gluttony or lewdness, or
to prevent, as the religious laws of the heathen nations do, the
development of man's moral and intellectual faculties. We intend to
discuss in this treatise the reasons of the commandments, and we shall
then show, as far as necessary, the justice and wisdom of the Law, on
account of which it is said: "The Law of God is perfect, refreshing the
heart" (Ps. xix. 8). There are persons who believe that the Law commands
much exertion and great pain, but due consideration will show them their
error. Later on I will show how easy it is for the perfect to obey the
Law. Comp. "What does the Lord thy God ask of thee?" etc. (Deut. x. 12);
"Have I been a wilderness to Israel?" (Jer. ii. 31). But this applies
only to the noble ones; whilst wicked, violent, and pugnacious persons
find it most injurious and hard that there should be any divine
authority tending to subdue their passion. To low-minded, wanton, and
passionate persons it appears most cruel that there should be an
obstacle in their way to satisfy their carnal appetite, or that a
punishment should be inflicted for their doings. Similarly every godless
person imagines that it is too hard to abstain from the evil he has
chosen in accordance with his inclination. We must not consider the Law
easy or hard according as it appears to any wicked, low-minded, and
immoral person, but as it appears to the judgment of the most perfect,
who, according to the Law, are fit to be the example for all mankind.
This Law alone is called divine; other laws, such as the political
legislations among the Greeks, or the follies of the Sabeans, are the
works of human leaders, but not of prophets, as I have explained several
times.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XL](gfp127)
