[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp167)  [Next](gfp169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXII

ON considering the Divine acts, or the processes of Nature, we get an
insight into the prudence and wisdom of God as displayed in the creation
of animals, with the gradual development of the movements of their limbs
and the relative positions of the latter, and we perceive also His
wisdom and plan in the successive and gradual development of the whole
condition of each individual. The gradual development of the animals'
movements and the relative position of the limbs may be illustrated by
the brain. The front part is very soft, the back part is a little hard,
the spinal marrow is still harder, and the farther it extends the harder
it becomes. The nerves are the organs of sensation and motion. Some
nerves are only required for sensation, or for slight movements, as,
e.g., the movement of the eyelids or of the jaws; these nerves originate
in the brain. The nerves which are required for the movements of the
limbs come from the spinal marrow. But nerves, even those that come
directly from the spinal cord, are too soft to set the joints in motion;
therefore God made the following arrangement: the nerves branch out into
fibres which are covered with flesh, and become muscles: the nerves that
come forth at the extremities of the muscles and have already commenced
to harden, and to combine with hard pieces of ligaments, are the sinews
which are joined and attached to the limbs. By this gradual development
the nerves are enabled to set the limbs in motion. I quote this one
instance because it is the most evident of the wonders described in the
book On the use of the limbs; but the use of the limbs is clearly
perceived by all who examine them with a sharp eye. In a similar manner
did God provide for each individual animal of the class of mammalia.
When such an animal is born it is extremely tender, and cannot be fed
with dry food. Therefore breasts were provided which yield milk, and the
young can be fed with moist food which corresponds to the condition of
the limbs of the animal, until the latter have gradually become dry and
hard.

Many precepts in our Law are the result of a similar course adopted by
the same Supreme Being. It is, namely, impossible to go suddenly from
one extreme to the other: it is therefore according to the nature of man
impossible for him suddenly to discontinue everything to which he has
been accustomed. Now God sent Moses to make \[the Israelites\] a kingdom
of priests and a holy nation (Exod. xix. 6) by means of the knowledge of
God.

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Comp. "Unto thee
it was showed that thou mightest know that the Lord is God (Deut. iv.
35); "Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart, that the
Lord is God" (*ibid*. v. 39). The Israelites were commanded to devote
themselves to His service; comp. "and to serve him with all your heart"
(*ibid*. xi. 13); "and you shall serve the Lord your God" (Exod. xxiii.
25); "and ye shall serve him" (Deut. xiii. 5). But the custom which was
in those days general among all men, and the general mode of worship in
which the Israelites were brought up, consisted in sacrificing animals
in those temples which contained certain images, to bow down to those
images, and to bum incense before them; religious and ascetic persons
were in those days the persons that were devoted to the service in the
temples erected to the stars, as has been explained by us. It was in
accordance with the wisdom and plan of God, as displayed in the whole
Creation, that He did not command us to give up and to discontinue all
these manners of service; for to obey such a commandment it would have
been contrary to the nature of man, who generally cleaves to that to
which he is used; it would in those days have made the same impression
as a prophet would make at present if he called us to the service of God
and told us in His name, that we should not pray to Him, not fast, not
seek His help in time of trouble; that we should serve Him in thought,
and not by any action. For this reason God allowed these kinds of
service to continue; He transferred to His service that which had
formerly served as a worship of created beings, and of things imaginary
and unreal, and commanded us to serve Him in the same manner; viz., to
build unto Him a temple; comp. "And they shall make unto me a sanctuary"
(Exod. xxv. 8); to have the altar erected to His name; comp. "An altar
of earth thou shalt make unto me" (*ibid*. xx. 21); to offer the
sacrifices to Him; comp. "If any man of you bring an offering unto the
Lord" (Lev. i. 2), to bow down to Him and to bum incense before Him. He
has forbidden to do any of these things to any other being; comp. "He
who sacrificeth unto any God, save the Lord only, he shall be utterly
destroyed" (Exod. xxii. 19); "For thou shalt bow down to no other God"
(*ibid*. xxxiv. 14). He selected priests for the service in the temple;
comp. "And they shall minister unto me in the priest's office" (*ibid*.
xxviii. 41). He made it obligatory that certain gifts, called the gifts
of the Levites and the priests, should be assigned to them for their
maintenance while they are engaged in the service of the temple and its
sacrifices. By this Divine plan it was effected that the traces of
idolatry were blotted out, and the truly great principle of our faith,
the Existence and Unity of God, was firmly established; this result was
thus obtained without deterring or confusing the minds of the people by
the abolition of the service to which they were accustomed and which
alone was familiar to them. I know that you will at first thought reject
this idea and find it strange; you will put the following question to me
in your heart: How can we suppose that Divine commandments,
prohibitions, and important acts, which are fully explained, and for
which certain seasons are fixed, should not have been commanded for
their own sake, but only for the sake of some other thing: as if they
were only the means which He employed for His primary object? What
prevented Him from making His primary object a direct commandment to us,
and to give us the capacity of obeying it? Those precepts which in your
opinion are only the means and not the

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

object would then have been unnecessary. Hear my answer, which win cure
your heart of this disease and will show you the truth of that which I
have pointed out to you. There occurs in the Law a passage which
contains exactly the same idea; it is the following: "God led them not
through the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near;
for God said, Lest peradventure the people repent when they see war, and
they return to Egypt; but God led the people about, through the way of
the wilderness of the Red Sea," etc. (Exod. xiii. 17). Here God led the
people about, away from the direct road which He originally intended,
because He feared they might meet on that way with hardships too great
for their ordinary strength; He took them by another road in order to
obtain thereby His original object. In the same manner God refrained
from prescribing what the people by their natural disposition would be
incapable of obeying, and gave the above-mentioned commandments as a
means of securing His chief object, viz., to spread a knowledge of Him
\[among the people\], and to cause them to reject idolatry. It is
contrary to man's nature that he should suddenly abandon all the
different kinds of Divine service and the different customs in which he
has been brought up, and which have been so general, that they were
considered as a matter of course; it would be just as if a person
trained to work as a slave with mortar and bricks, or similar things,
should interrupt his work, clean his hands, and at once fight with real
giants. It was the result of God's wisdom that the Israelites were led
about in the wilderness till they acquired courage. For it is a
well-known fact that travelling in the wilderness, and privation of
bodily enjoyments, such as bathing, produce courage, whilst the reverse
is the source of faint-heartedness: besides, another generation rose
during the wanderings that had not been accustomed to degradation and
slavery. All the travelling in the wilderness was regulated by Divine
commands through Moses; comp. "At the commandment of the Lord they
rested, and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed; they kept the
charge of the Lord and the commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses"
(Num. ix. 23). In the same way the portion of the Law under discussion
is the result of divine wisdom, according to which people are allowed to
continue the kind of worship to which they have been accustomed, in
order that they might acquire the true faith, which is the chief object
\[of God's commandments\]. You ask, What could have prevented God from
commanding us directly, that which is the chief object, and from giving
us the capacity of obeying it? This would lead to a second question,
What prevented God from leading the Israelites through the way of the
land of the Philistines, and endowing them with strength for fighting?
The leading about by a pillar of cloud by day and a pillar of fire by
night would then not have been necessary. A third question would then be
asked in reference to the good promised as reward for the keeping of the
commandments, and the evil foretold as a punishment for sins. It is the
following question: As it is the chief object and purpose of God that we
should believe in the Law, and act according to that which is written
therein, why has He not given us the capacity of continually believing
in it, and following its guidance, instead of holding out to us reward
for obedience, and punishment for disobedience, or of actually giving
all the predicted reward and punishment? For \[the promises and the
threats\] are

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

but the means of leading to this chief object. What prevented Him from
giving us, as part of our nature, the will to do that which He desires
us to do, and to abandon the kind of worship which He rejects? There is
one general answer to these three questions, and to all questions of the
same character: it is this: Although in every one of the signs \[related
in Scripture\] the natural property of some individual being is changed,
the nature of man is never changed by God by way of miracle. It is in
accordance with this important principle that God said, "O that there
were such an heart in them, that they would fear me," etc. (Deut. v.
26). It is also for this reason that He distinctly stated the
commandments and the prohibitions, the reward and the punishment. This
principle as regards miracles has been frequently explained by us in our
works: I do not say this because I believe that it is difficult for God
to change the nature of every individual person; on the contrary, it is
possible, and it is in His power, according to the principles taught in
Scripture; but it has never been His will to do it, and it never will
be. If it were part of His will to change \[at His desire\] the nature
of any person, the mission of prophets and the giving of the Law would
have been altogether superfluous.

I now return to my theme. As the sacrificial service is not the primary
object \[of the commandments about sacrifice\], whilst supplications,
prayers, and similar kinds of worship are nearer to the primary object,
and indispensable for obtaining it, a great difference was made in the
Law between these two kinds of service. The one kind, which consists in
offering sacrifices, although the sacrifices are offered to the name of
God, has not been made obligatory for us to the same extent as it had
been before. We were not commanded to sacrifice in every place, and in
every time, or to build a temple in every place, or to permit any one
who desires to become priest and to sacrifice. On the contrary, all this
is prohibited unto us. Only one temple has been appointed, "in the place
which the Lord shall choose" (Deut. xii. 26); in no other place is it
allowed to sacrifice: comp. "Take heed to thyself, that thou offer not
thy burnt-offerings in every place that thou seest" (*ibid*. v. 13); and
only the members of a particular family were allowed to officiate as
priests. All these restrictions served to limit this kind of worship,
and keep it within those bounds within which God did not think it
necessary to abolish sacrificial service altogether. But prayer and
supplication can be offered everywhere and by every person. The same is
the case with the commandment of *ẓiẓit* (Num. xv. 38); *mezuzah* (Deut.
vi. 9; xi. 20); *tefillin* (Exod. xiii. 9, 16); and similar kinds of
divine service.

Because of this principle which I explained to you, the Prophets in
their books are frequently found to rebuke their fellow-men for being
over-zealous and exerting themselves too much in bringing sacrifices:
the prophets thus distinctly declared that the object of the sacrifices
is not very essential, and that God does not require them. Samuel
therefore said, "Hath the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and
sacrifices as in obeying the voice of the Lord" (1 Sam. xv. 22)? Isaiah
exclaimed, "To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me?
saith the Lord" (Isa. i. 11); Jeremiah declared: "For I spake not unto
your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of
the land of Egypt, concerning burnt-offering or sacrifices. But this
thing commanded I them, saying, Obey my, voice, and

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I will be your
God, and ye shall be my people" (Jer. vii. 22, 23). This passage has
been found difficult in the opinion of all those whose words I read or
heard; they ask, How can Jeremiah say that God did not command us about
burnt-offering and sacrifice, seeing so many precepts refer to
sacrifice? The sense of the passage agrees with what I explained to you.
Jeremiah says \[in the name of God\] the primary object of the precepts
is this, Know me, and serve no other being; "I will be your God, and ye
shall be my people" (Lev. xxvi. 12). But the commandment that sacrifices
shall be brought and that the temple shall be visited has for its object
the success of that principle among you; and for its sake I have
transferred these modes of worship to my name; idolatry shall thereby be
utterly destroyed, and Jewish faith firmly established. You, however,
have ignored this object, and taken hold of that which is only the means
of obtaining it; you have doubted my existence, "ye have denied the
Lord, and said he is not" (Jer. v. 12); ye served idols; "burnt incense
unto Baal, and walked after other gods whom ye know not. And come and
stand before me in this house" (*ibid*. vii. 9-10); i.e., you do not go
beyond attending the temple of the Lord, and offering sacrifices: but
this is not the chief object.--I have another way of explaining this
passage with exactly the same result. For it is distinctly stated in
Scripture, and handed down by tradition, that the first commandments
communicated to us did not include any law at an about burnt-offering
and sacrifice. You must not see any difficulty in the Passover which was
commanded in Egypt; there was a particular and evident reason for that,
as will be explained by me (chap. xlvi.). Besides it was revealed in the
land of Egypt; whilst the laws to which Jeremiah alludes in the above
passage are those which were revealed after the departure from Egypt.
For this reason it is distinctly added, "in the day that I brought them
out from the land of Egypt." The first commandment after the departure
from Egypt was given at Marah, in the following words, "If thou wilt
diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, and wilt do that
which is right in His sight, and wilt give ear to His commandments"
(Exod. xv. 26)." There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and
there he proved them" (*ibid*. ver. 25). According to the true
traditional explanation, Sabbath and civil laws were revealed at Marah:
"statute" alludes to Sabbath, and "ordinance" to civil laws, which are
the means of removing injustice. The chief object of the Law, as has
been shown by us, is the teaching of truths; to which the truth of the
*creatio ex nihilo* belongs. It is known that the object of the law of
Sabbath is to confirm and to establish this principle, as we have shown
in this treatise (Part. II. chap. xxxi.). In addition to the teaching of
truths the Law aims at the removal of injustice from mankind. We have
thus proved that the first laws do not refer to burnt-offering and
sacrifice, which are of secondary importance. The same idea which is
contained in the above passage from Jeremiah is also expressed in the
Psalms, where the people are rebuked that they ignore the chief object,
and make no distinction between chief and subsidiary lessons. The
Psalmist says: "Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I
will testify against thee: I am God, even thy God. I will not reprove
thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt-offerings, they have been
continually before me. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor
he-goats out of thy folds" (Ps. l. 29).--

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Wherever this
subject is mentioned, this is its meaning. Consider it well, and reflect
on it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXIII](gfp169)
