[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp121)  [Next](gfp123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XXXV

I HAVE already described the four points in which the prophecy of Moses
our Teacher was distinguished from that of other prophets, in books
accessible to every one, in the Commentary on the Mishnah (Sanhedrin x.
1) and in Mishneh-torah (S. Madd‘a I. vii. 6); I have also adduced
evidence for my explanation, and shown the correctness thereof. I need
not repeat the subject here, nor is it included in the theme of this
work. For I must tell you that whatever I say here of prophecy refers
exclusively to the form of the prophecy of all prophets before and after

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses. But as to
the prophecy of Moses I will not discuss it in this work with one single
word, whether directly or indirectly, because, in my opinion, the term
prophet is applied to Moses and other men homonymously. A similar
distinction, I think, must be made between the miracles wrought by Moses
and those wrought by other prophets, for his signs are not of the same
class as the miracles of other prophets. That his prophecy was
distinguished from that of all his predecessors is proved by the
passage, "And I appeared to Abraham, etc., but by my name, the Lord, I
was not known unto them" (Exod. vi. 3). We thus learn that his prophetic
perception was different from that of the Patriarchs, and excelled it;
*a fortiori* it must have excelled that of other prophets before Moses.
As to the distinction of Moses' prophecy from that of succeeding
prophets, it is stated as a fact, "And there arose not a prophet since
in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face" (Deut.
xxxiv. 10). It is thus clear that his prophetic perception was above
that of later prophets in Israel, who are "a kingdom of priests and a
holy nation," and "in whose midst is the Lord"; much more is it above
that of prophets among other nations.

The general distinction between the wonders of Moses and those of other
prophets is this: The wonders wrought by prophets, or for them, are
witnessed by a few individuals, e.g., the wonders wrought by Elijah and
Elisha; the king of Israel is therefore surprised, and asked Gehazi to
describe to him the miracles wrought by Elisha: "Tell me, I pray thee,
all the great things that Elisha hath done. And it came to pass as he
was telling, etc. And Gehazi said: 'My lord, O king, this is the woman,
and this is her son, whom Elisha restored to life'" (2 Kings viii. 4,
5). The same is the case with the signs of every other prophet, except
Moses our Teacher. Scripture, therefore, declares that no prophet will
ever, like Moses, do signs publicly in the presence of friend and enemy,
of his followers and his opponents; this is the meaning of the words:
"And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, etc., in
all the signs and the wonders, etc., in the sight of all Israel." Two
things are here mentioned together; namely, that there will not arise a
prophet that will perceive as Moses perceived, or a prophet that will do
as he did; then it is pointed out that the signs were made in the
presence of Pharaoh, all his servants and all his land, the opponents of
Moses, and also in the presence of all the Israelites, his followers.
Comp. "In the sight of all Israel." This is a distinction not possessed
by any prophet before Moses; nor, as is correctly foretold, will it ever
be possessed by another prophet. We must not be misled by the account
that the light of the sun stood still certain hours for Joshua, when "he
said in the sight of Israel," etc. (Josh. x. 12); for it is not said
there "in the sight of *all* Israel," as is said in reference to Moses.
So also the miracle of Elijah, at Mount Carmel, was witnessed only by a
few people. When I said above that the sun stood still *certain hours*,
I explain the words "*ka-jom tamim*" to mean "the longest possible day,"
because tamim means "perfect," and indicates that that day appeared to
the people at Gibeon as their longest day in the summer. Your mind must
comprehend the distinction of the prophecy and the wonders of Moses, and
understand that his greatness in prophetic perception was the same as
his power of producing miracles. If you further assume that we are
unable fully to comprehend the nature of this greatness, you will
understand

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

that when I speak, in the chapters which follow this, on prophecy and
the different classes of prophets, I only refer to the prophets which
have not attained the high degree that Moses attained. This is what I
desired to explain in this chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](gfp123)
