[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gfp106)  [Next](gfp108) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029ZA4W8/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Guide for the Perplexed*, by Moses Maimonides, Friedländer tr.
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER XX

ACCORDING to Aristotle, none of the products of Nature are due to
chance. His proof is this: That which is due to chance does not reappear
constantly nor frequently, but all products of Nature reappear either
constantly or at least frequently. The heavens, with all that they
contain, are constant; they never change, as has been explained, neither
as regards their essence nor as regards their place. But in the
sublunary world we find both things which are constant and things which
reappear frequently \[though not constantly\]. Thus, e.g., the heat of
fire and the downward tendency of a stone are constant properties,
whilst the form and life of the individuals in each species are the same
in most cases. All this is clear. If the parts of the Universe are not
accidental, how can the whole Universe be considered as the result of
chance? Therefore the existence of the Universe is not due to chance.
The following is, in short, the objection which Aristotle raises against
one of the earlier philosophers who assumed that the Universe is the
result of chance, and that it came into existence by itself, without any
cause. Some assume that the heavens and the whole Universe came into
existence spontaneously, as well as the rotation and motion \[of the
spheres\], which has produced the variety of things and established
their present order. This opinion implies a great
[absurdity](errata.htm#12). They admit that animals and plants do not
owe their existence or production to chance, but to a certain cause, be
that cause Nature, or reason, or the like: e.g., they do not assume that
everything might be formed by chance of a certain seed or semen, but
that of a certain seed only an olive-tree is produced, and of a certain
semen only

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

a human being is developed. And yet they think that the heavens, and
those bodies which appear divine among the rest of bodies, came into
existence spontaneously, without the action of any such cause as
produces plants and animals. Having thus examined this theory, Aristotle
then proceeds to refute it at greater length. It is therefore clear that
Aristotle believes and proves that things in real existence are not
accidental; they cannot be accidental, because they are essential, i.e.,
there is a cause which necessitates that they should be in their actual
condition, and on account of that cause they are just as they in reality
are. This has been proved, and it is the opinion of Aristotle. But I do
not think that, according to Aristotle, the rejection of the spontaneous
origin of things implies the admission of Design and Will. For as it is
impossible to reconcile two opposites, so it is impossible to reconcile
the two theories, that of necessary existence by causality, and that of
Creation by the desire and will of a Creator. For the necessary
existence assumed by Aristotle must be understood in this sense, that
for everything that is not the product of work there must be a certain
cause that produces it with its properties; for this cause there is
another cause, and for the second a third, and so on. The series of
causes ends with the Prime Cause, from which everything derives
existence, since it is impossible that the series should continue *ad
infinitum*. He nevertheless does not mean to say that the existence of
the Universe is the necessary product of the Creator, i.e., the Prime
Cause, in the same manner as the shadow is caused by a body, or heat by
fire, or light by the sun. Only those who do not comprehend his words
attribute such ideas to him. He uses here the term necessary in the same
sense as we use the term when we say that the existence of the
*intellectus* necessarily implies that of the *intellectum*, for the
former is the efficient cause of the latter in so far as *intellectum*.
Even Aristotle holds that the Prime Cause is the highest and most
perfect Intellect; he therefore says that the First Cause is pleased,
satisfied, and delighted with that which necessarily derives existence
from Him, and it is impossible that He should wish it to be different.
But we do not call this "design," and it has nothing in common with
design. E.g., man is pleased, satisfied, and delighted that he is
endowed with eyes and hands, and it is impossible that he should desire
it to be otherwise, and yet the eyes and hands which a man has are not
the result of his design, and it is not by his own determination that he
has certain properties and is able to perform certain actions. The
notion of design and determination applies only to things not yet in
existence, when there is still the possibility of their being in
accordance with the design or not. I do not know whether the modern
Aristotelians understood his words to imply that the existence of the
Universe presupposes some cause in the sense of design and
determination, or whether, in opposition to him, they assumed design and
determination, in the belief that this does not conflict with the theory
of the Eternity of the Universe.

Having explained this, I will now proceed to examine the opinions of the
modern philosophers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](gfp108)
