[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm08) [Next](cm10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 7. (The Visit of the Ke´let.)

 Once a small house stood alone in the wilderness. The ke´let were going
to visit it. Only a woman and her children were at home. The man, her
<span id="page_52">p. 52</span> husband was with the herd. On the rear
side of the house was a funeral-place,<span
id="page_52_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_52_note_2) and there lay a corpse.
One time the woman showed herself to the middle from the
sleeping-room,<span id="page_52_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_52_note_1) and
saw the dead one. In the evening the woman saw him. "Ah, ah! where are
you from?" — "No. I am your neighbor. I came to see you. Oh, enough! You
do not know. Ke´let are going to visit you, and they are already near
by."

 A little dog was there, a tiny one, somewhere in the sleeping-room or
in the outer tent. "Oh, there is no need of (grudging) this little dog.
Now, then, I am going back. Come out and go with me, along my road."

 She dressed herself, carried out the little dog and slaughtered it
behind the house. Then she drew a line with blood all around the house,
"Now, enter! They are coming yonder."

 "Oh, how is it, it stays on the other shore? What, now on the island?
From what point must I begin? Let it be from there. Oh, it seems to be
<span id="page_53">p. 53</span> deep!" He (the ke´lẹ) thrust down his
spear-shaft,<span id="page_53_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_53_note_1) but
could not touch the ground. "Oh, it is deep! Let us leave it! Indeed,
what shall we do?"

 They left them. The next day the husband came, and saw the slaughtered
dog lying by the entrance. He said, "Oh, good gracious! I left all of my
house-mates quite safe, but what may have happened to them? He gave a
start and forced an entrance. The woman appeared (from under the cover
of the sleeping-room). "Halloo! What is the matter with you?" —
"Nothing. We are all right." Only when in the sleeping-room did she tell
him. Ended.

<span class="small">Told by Aqa´ñña, A Maritime Chukchee woman, at
Mariinsky Post. October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm10)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_52">p. 52</span>

<span id="page_52_note_1"></span>[1](#page_52_fr_1) She showed herself,
evidently in answer to some call or in looking for the cause of some
noise.

<span id="page_52_note_2"></span>[2](#page_52_fr_2) Compare Vol. VII of
this series, p. 526.

<span id="footnotes_page_53">p. 53</span>

<span id="page_53_note_1"></span>[1](#page_53_fr_1) He thought the blood
of the dog was a deep river.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
