[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm09) [Next](cm11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 8. (The Child-Monster.)

 One time some people lived in an underground house. It had three
sleeping-rooms. That of the son was on the eastern side; that of the
father was on the western side; the third one was in the middle, on the
rear side of the house. This last was another man's. They lived in
group-marriage, and their habitations stood quite close to one another.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

 The woman of the sleeping-room to the east was with child. Her husband,
however, had gone far away for a visit to the people, and remained with
the people quite a long time. In his absence the woman bore a child.
They awoke the next morning, after they had slept one night. They awoke
at dawn, and the young mother had to go out and walk around the house
(as is required by the ceremonial). Still, after they awoke, the woman
did not go out, and did not carry the infant out of the sleeping-room.

 "Oh, come out! Bring out the infant!" Still the woman does not go out,
(acting) as if she had not heard.

 The next day it grew dark again, but the woman did not go out, "Oh, oh!
you with the child! why do you not come out nor bring out the infant?
Notwithstanding everything, you do not listen, nor do you want to obey."

 Once more it grew dark. They went to sleep again. All the people of
that place, the whole house, went to sleep. Two men from the neighboring
<span id="page_55">p. 55</span> camps, who were serving there as
suitors, — they also went to sleep. The old man had a single unmarried
daughter. Both of (the suitors) were serving there with the desire of
having her for a wife.

 The little infant awoke and began to cry, "Aña´, aña´, aña´!" The
mother and her female companions were sleeping quite soundly. So from
the outside, from the side of the outer tent,<span
id="page_55_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_55_note_1) the ke´lẹ answered, "Aña´,
aña´, aña´!" Once more the infant cried, "Aña´, aña´, aña´!" and from
the entrance-room was answered, "Aña´, aña´, aña´!" And still before the
ke´lẹ reached the entrance-room, the infant crept out from under the
pillow, then rose and strode over to the sleeping-room on the rear side.

 Before he could reach the rear-side sleeping-room, a boy who was there
awoke, and uttered a cry. Then the infant dropped down. All the people
awoke. "See there! the little infant has appeared (out of the
sleeping-room)!" and from under the pillow it still continued, "Aña´,
aña´, aña´!"

 The people awoke, "How strange it is! Think of them! The mother and her
female companions are still sleeping." The old man, even, began to <span
id="page_56">p. 56</span> mutter, "Only think of it! The infant has
appeared from under the pillow. Let them carry it back." No answer. They
do not hear.

 "Oh, oh! There, now, rouse them!" One woman went out and walked over to
that sleeping-room. She lifted the cover of the sleeping-room; but there
was nothing at all there, only plenty of blood on the bed-skins. Indeed,
the infant has eaten up the mother and her companions! "Oh, there is
nothing here, only the bed-skins full of blood!" The women did not take
care of the child when it cried. So the ke´lẹ did so (in their place).

 "Oh, oh! Let us go away quickly! No need of this child." That very
night they left the house before dawn. They pitched their tent some ways
up the hill near by. They left the little one in the old house, quite
alive.

 All of a sudden the old man said, "Oh, we have left a knife, a big
knife, carried on a shoulder-strap! It is hanging down (in the
sleeping-room) on the western side in the corner. Alas!" One of the
suitors heard this, and <span id="page_57">p. 57</span> spoke thus: "Oh,
truly, I want to show myself a true suitor! I will fetch the knife. I am
able to do it. \[The other one did not utter a sound.\] I say to you
quite openly, I came for a wife. I want to marry her straightway."

 He took off his outer clothes, then tied his trousers tightly above the
ankles. The old man said, "No, indeed! Be quiet! No need of this! Even
of the knife there is no need at all." — "Nay, certainly I shall fetch
it." He ran to the jaw-bone house, heeding not the night-time or the
darkness.

 When he approached it, the same ominous crying was heard from it
uninterruptedly: "Aña´, aña´, aña´!" He walked around the jaw-bone house
and entered it. Then he walked around the crying one close to the
sleeping-room. As soon as the man entered, the infant gave pursuit. In
the outer tent, through the darkness, from that corner the infant
pursued him, crying all the time. As soon as it scented him, it gave
pursuit. The man stretched out his hand and found the big knife. He
caught it and rushed out. The <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> infant
followed, still crying. He rushed out and ran away, but before that he
made a tour around the house. Then the crying one entered again.

 He came to the tent and rested for some time. The old man was muttering
still, "What noise is there?" Then he would stop \[his voice\] and
listen for a while. "Oh, I wish we had not sent him! We have brought a
stranger to peril."

 He rested awhile and entered the tent. "There, there, take your knife!"
— "Oh, oh! this is the knife I was so sorry about." And presently he
cried to the girl, "There, you woman! Hurry up and arrange the
sleeping-room! He will get a chill in his back. Bring him in. Let him
warm himself. His back will be cold." — "Now, then, come in!" — So the
man married and took the girl. At that time he married. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_55">p. 55</span>

<span id="page_55_note_1"></span>[1](#page_55_fr_1) Čot-ta´ġịn
(literally, "pillow's edge") is used to designate the outer tent. The
pillows of the sleeping-room form its outer border. Beyond that border
the outer tent begins (cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 171).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
