[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm11) [Next](cm12a)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 10. (U´mqäqäi's Adventure.)

 This, indeed, is not a story, it is actual fact concerning somewhat
ancient times. A certain man lived in the olden time. In those days the
ke´lẹ evil spirits were going around visible, just like our own people,
quite openly.

 Then in the Telqä´p land one U´mqäqäi and his companions were going
somewhere, driving reindeer. There were three of them, all
reindeer-drivers. So many they were. Then they saw a herd, and passed by
on the outside of it. They also passed by houses. There were three
houses, but nobody noticed them. They were quite invisible, were not
seen at all by the ke´let, just as at present an evil spirit is
invisible to us.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

 After that they passed by a pile of household things,<span
id="page_62_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_62_note_1) past some luggage and
loaded sledges. Some had their reindeer tied up there. Then U´mqäqäi
untied his own thong, one of young-walrus hide. He discovered a grassy
hummock on the ground. To this hummock on the ground he tied the thong.

 Then he tied his reindeer to the end of this long thong, and let them
go. Only the end of the thong remained fastened to the hummock. So,
then, U´mqäqäi's reindeer are tied to the end of a long thong of
young-walrus hide, let out to its full length.

 After that U´mqäqäi and his three companions sat down, with their faces
toward the entrance of one of the houses. The ke´let in the house were
cooking food. They hung up a kettle. One ke´lẹ-man was working on the
curve of a sledge-runner. He was bending it quite a little. A
ke´lẹ-woman was cooking food. She was very pretty.

 She went out and looked around. Then she entered, and said, "Oh, <span
id="page_63">p. 63</span> oh! as compared with yesterday, we feel
ashamed.<span id="page_63_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_63_note_1) Oh, my! we
are terrified!" (We call superstitious terror also shame.<span
id="page_63_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_63_note_1)) The woman entered, and
said, "Oh, we feel ashamed, we are terrified!" — "Oh, how strange you
are! Wherefore this shame? Good gracious! what is oppressing us so?" And
it was only the men who came, "Oh, how strange you are! You feel
terrified. But what is oppressing us so?" Then U´mqäqäi pointed with his
finger at the woman. Immediately she felt a stinging pain, and could not
breathe freely, "Oh, oh, oh!" — "Oh, how strange you are! What is
oppressing us so again? Then let us make haste! Oh, something is
oppressing us!"

 Then U´mqäqäi and his companions fled far away. (We call such a
departure to a distant point a "flight"<span
id="page_63_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_63_note_2)). The others quickly
untied their reindeer; but U´mqäqäi's reindeer tightened the noose, so
that he could not <span id="page_64">p. 64</span> untie them. Then he
pulled the noose over the grassy hummock, and thus loosened his
reindeer. They fled, all of them. The ground became soft, like water.
Nevertheless they came to their house. The end.

<span class="small">Told by Qo´tirġịn, a Maritime Chukchee man, in the
village of Mi´s·qẹn, November, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm12a)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_62">p. 62</span>

<span id="page_62_note_1"></span>[1](#page_62_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII of
this senes, p. 177.

<span id="footnotes_page_63">p. 63</span>

<span id="page_63_note_1"></span>[1](#page_63_fr_1) Ñịrkịla´arkịn ("thou
art ashamed") is also used as a synonym of yimġumġe´erkịn ("thou feelest
superstitious fear"); cf. also [p. 29](cm05.htm#page_29_fr_3).

<span id="page_63_note_2"></span>[2](#page_63_fr_2) Remark of the
narrator.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
