[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm17) [Next](cm19)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 17. (Battle with the Ta´n·ñịt.)

 In the olden times, in some (part of the country,) people were at war.
There were a "set of brothers" with a sister. The girl was quite nimble
(from constant exercise). They were attacked by Ta´n·ñịt. There were
probably three \[of them\] (of the Chukchee).<span
id="page_97_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_97_note_1) The girl had a spear
(made) of walrus-tusk. Four <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> Ta´n·ñịt
warriors, (also) nimble, fought with spears. All four of them wanted to
attack the girl. Her brothers (meanwhile) were all killed by the
Ta´n·ñịt.

 The other Ta´n·ñịt were also killed at the same time. The girl, the
nimble one, was spoken to by the remaining Ta´n·ñịn warrior, (who said,)
"I do not want it. You are a woman. Let us stop this!" The girl said,
"(Nay,) it is all right." The Ta´n·ñịn warrior said, "No, you are weak."
The girl said, "Well, now, try me first, (and see) whether you can do
anything to me."

 Then she gathered up her tresses, and girt her body about the middle,
also (arranged) her broad sleeves. Her spear was a short one. Oh, the
Ta´n·ñịn warrior said, "It is to no purpose. You are a woman." — "You
are too self-assured. Try me first!"

 The girl stood on the defensive, holding up her spear made of
walrus-tusk. They fought with spears the whole day long, until the sun
(went down) \[very far, the whole day\]. Before sunset the Ta´n·ñịn
warrior began to lose his breath, and his tongue lolled (out of his
mouth). He felt quite weak.

 All at once he sat down upon the ground. The girl said, "I will not
kill you. I am a woman. I feel confused on account of this." The
Ta´n·ñịn warrior said, "Oh, oh! but it is by a Ta´n·ñịn woman with a
tattooed nose<span id="page_98_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_98_note_1) that I
am treated like this!"

 The Ta´n·ñịn warrior was very nimble. He was really a very strong man.
Then he said again, "Oh, oh, such a one, a Ta´n·ñịn woman with a
tattooed <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> nose, I have met only now! I am
not ashamed to return home. Well, now, dispose of me! I will not return
home."

 A very nimble Ta´n·ñịn warrior! "Still, I have also despatched many,
\[I will not return home\]." The girl said again, "I will not kill you.
I am a woman." The man said, "Indeed, then if you will not kill me, I
shall do something myself to my own body. Oho! these Ta´n·ñịt (i. e.,
the Chukchee) are born (in life) better than we. Here is such a Ta´n·ñịn
woman with a tattooed nose! Kill me, now! Shall I come home without
shame? Never! And, indeed, even if I should return home, my father would
not allow me to live. He would say, 'Oh, you were overpowered by a mere
woman!'"

 "Tell me, have you brothers still?" — "Yes, I have one brother." —
"This spear of mine give to your brother." — "I cannot do this. They
will blame me. They will say, 'Where have you found this spear, being a
woman?'"

 "Surely, I will not go home. Take also this armor of mine. But first
shall take a smoke of tobacco." He would not listen to any persuasion.
He wanted to die.

 He had a smoke. As soon as he took the pipe out of his mouth, she
stabbed him, and he fell on his back. (He lay there, touching the
ground) merely with his calves, with his shoulder-blades, and with the
other fleshy parts of his body. He lay (with the small of his back)
quite on high. So strong was he. Then he died, and came to his end.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm19)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_97">p. 97</span>

<span id="page_97_note_1"></span>[1](#page_97_fr_1) Two brothers are
also "a set" (Cf. Vol. VII, p. 539).

<span id="footnotes_page_98">p. 98</span>

<span id="page_98_note_1"></span>[1](#page_98_fr_1) The Reindeer
Chukchee and the Reindeer Koryak call each other mutually Ta´n·ñịt (cf.
Vol. VII, p. 11). The Reindeer Chukchee women put their tattoo-lines on
both sides of the nose (cf. Vol. VII, p. 254).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
