[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm23) [Next](cm25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 2. Pintail-Duck Incantation (Valo´k-ê´wġan, Yelke´kin ê´wġan).<span id="page_127_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_127_note_1) (A Middle-Anadyr Incantation.)

 This is to call game. I call every game, every living thing, from the
very first limit of creation. A young pintail-duck I use for my leader,
it is (so clever) \[in hiding\] in hiding from everybody, not to be
seen.

 I call an old pintail-duck to be my leader. The lone reindeer-buck I
make to wade into the water. Oh, let us try to adopt it (for the
leader)! Let the leader give his call (before the reindeer)!<span
id="page_127_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_127_note_2) This is finished.

 Now, again I sing, "Just so, just so, oh, who are you?" I use the
distance (of game) of yesterday, (I use) the distance of to-day. I make
them appear before me. I cover my face with soot. To every species, to
every kind of game, I become unknown; to every species (of animal) I
become unrecognizable. Only the soot on my face, appears (to their
eyes).

 Taking off my breeches, I stand on <span id="page_128">p. 128</span>
the ground without any precautions. My buttocks have three eyes, and
they keep watch for me. They see every hidden ke´lẹ, and they make the
ke´lẹ close his eyes.

 The foremost reindeer I make very slow, using the two legs of the small
pintail-duck, forked in two (from its buttocks). Everything difficult to
scent (I am using) all the time. Without any precaution I enter (the
confines of) every place, I may sleep without care. All kinds of game
have a liking for me, every kind of game has a great love for me.

 Thus I have almost acquired a good careless sleep, The thing lying
under my pillow I have for my leader. Blowing over it, I make it rebound
(backwards), I make it scatter (backwards). That is all.

<span class="small">Told by Nikon Taġra´tịrġịn, a Middle Anadyr Chukchee
man, in the village of Chikayeva, November, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm25)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_127">p. 127</span>

<span id="page_127_note_1"></span>[1](#page_127_fr_1) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 497, No. 2.

<span id="page_127_note_2"></span>[2](#page_127_fr_2) The Chukchee of
the Middle Anadyr live chiefly by hunting wild reindeer on the river. So
this incantation refers to the hnnting of wild reindeer.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
