[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm30) [Next](cm32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. Incantation to bring back the Dying.<span id="page_135_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_135_note_2)

 When a man has (just) died, (another person) goes into the open, while
(the dead) is still lying in the inner room. That man goes out and talks
to the Morning Dawn, to the Upper Being. He says, "Oh, my mind is
uncertain! Enough!<span id="page_135_fr_3"></span>[3](#page_135_note_3)
Whom (else) may I ask (for help)? You are most fit. Oh, give me your
dog! I will also use it as a dog myself. I am sorrowful for my
child.<span id="page_135_fr_4"></span>[4](#page_135_note_4) It has gone
away to a far-off (place). Therefore let me use that (dog) for (my)
assistant."

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

 He makes (a motion) with his left hand, as if receiving that dog (from
somewhere). Then he (comes back and) blows into the ear of the dead
person, and howls (like a dog), "Uu, uu!" thus.

 Then this dog starts on, pursuing the dead man, \[who has gone away.\]
It follows him, howling and barking, "Haw, haw, haw!" It passes ahead of
him, and meets him (on the road with fierce) barking. It snaps at him
(while he is) going, and intercepts his path in every direction. At last
it makes him come back from his long journey. He must enter the body and
put it on again. Then he begins to breathe, and (gradually) improves.
And so he, though a real dead (one), revives again.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, in October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm32)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_135">p. 135</span>

<span id="page_135_note_2"></span>[2](#page_135_fr_2) Compare Vol. VII
of this series, p. 506, No. 9, *a*.

<span id="page_135_note_3"></span>[3](#page_135_fr_3) Rattan·ñau´ñịn
("enough") means also "stop talking" and "stop doubting,"

<span id="page_135_note_4"></span>[4](#page_135_fr_4) The man who utters
the incantation calls the patient his child (cf. Vol. VII of this
series, p. 476).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
