[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm36) [Next](cm38)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 3. Story of Raven and Wolverene.<span id="page_156_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_156_note_1)

 Once there lived Raven and Wolverene. Wolverene took Raven's girl for a
daughter-in-law. They ill-treated her, beat her all the time; then they
tied her tongue with a thread, smeared her face all over with fish-roe,
made her put on clothing of walrus-hide. They kept her with the dogs,
and fed her like a dog, with bones crushed and boiled down to extract
the marrow. She had to drink from a chamber-vessel.

 Raven's son is a shaman. One morning he awoke, and said, "Oh, I see my
sister in a bad state! They are treating her quite badly." — "Oh," says
the Raven, "then let us go and visit her!" — "All right! Go and do so!"
Raven came to the Wolverene's house. "You have come!" — "Yes, I have
come. Where is the young woman?" — "Her eyes are troubling her. She is
sitting in the dark sleeping-room, and cannot go out." — "Oh, oh!" In
reality, however, she was there, clad in walrus-hide. He did not
recognize her. In the sleeping-room, in the dark, a young Wolverene
woman was sitting, a daughter of their own, "Oh, oh! that female slave,
the loathsome one! Why is she staring so at you? If she comes near you,
strike her with a stick! She is stinking!" Indeed when she seeks to
approach him, he strikes her with a stick. "Keep off, you stinking one!"
They ate supper. She was given a blunt-edged knife, and could not keep
up with the others. Her knife was almost edgeless. They say, "How slow
she is, your meat-carver, that one who sits at your side! If she lags
behind once more in <span id="page_157">p. 157</span> carving meat for
you, strike her again and again!" She could not carve with that edgeless
knife. So he struck her again with a stick, nor was he able to recognize
her. They lay down to sleep. "Let her lie at your side, and let her
carry the chamber-vessel for you! Only you must be careful of her. She
is given to biting in the night-time. She always bites; such is her
wont. If she tries to bite you, strike her again with redoubled
strength!" They slept. And really she took the father's hand and carried
it to her mouth, in order to make him touch her tied tongue. He started
up, and cried, "Oh, oh! Really she wants to bite." He struck her with
redoubled force. He did not recognize his own daughter. In the morning
he returned home. One more night has passed. In the morning his son got
up, and said, "Oh, I see my sister in quite a bad state!" — "Let me
visit her again!" — "No! This time I will visit her." He went to the
Wolverenes. "You have come?" — "Yes, I have come." That one clad in
walrus-hide is standing near the entrance. He looked, and recognized
her, being a shaman. "That female slave, why is she staring so at the
new-comer? Beat her with a stick!" — "For what shall I beat her? She
also is curious to know. She wants to be with the other people." They
ate supper. She was given the very worst knife. She could not carve meat
with it. "How lazy she is! Strike her! She refuses to carve for you." —
"For what shall I beat her? She needs a proper instrument for carving."
And he gave her his own knife

 They went to sleep. She had to sleep again at his side. "Be careful!
She bites in the night-time." — "Does she, eh?" — They put out the
light. She took her brother's hand and put it into her mouth. He touched
the string with which her tongue was tied. Then he took out another
knife, a small one, and cut the thread.

 It was so tight, it snapped on being cut. The people awoke. "What
snapped with such force?" — "My belt snapped." They slept again. "Oh,"
says he softly to his sister, "thus they are treating you!" — "Yes!" —
"Well, to-morrow morning, when I am about going away, be near my
sledge." The next morning they brought his reindeer. "Why does my sister
not come out of the sleeping-room? I am going, and want to see her."
There in her sleeping-room sits their woman, feigning illness. They
entered the sleeping-room as if to ask her. "No, she is unwell, she
cannot go out." — "Tell her that I want to see her. Let her come out!"
The people of the house entered the sleeping-room again. "No, she
refuses. She cannot come out." — "Oh, how false are your words! Is not
this my sister standing by the sledge?" She jumped upon the sledge. He
made the reindeer run at full speed. They cry from behind, "Oh, oh! He
has carried off our female slave, our household woman-worker!" He made
the reindeer run. So he came home. "There," he says, "see what they have
done with your daughter!" — "Oh," says the Raven, "and I did not
recognize her." The young Raven-shaman <span id="page_158">p. 158</span>
called for his dog, and made him defecate. He turned the dog into a man,
and the fæces into an infant. These two he made into a father with a
little son. They were driving a spotted-reindeer team. Bells were on the
sledge. Everything was quite neat, but it was only a dog with its fæces.
The man drives on, singing. In the camp of the offenders they heard his
song and the tinkling of the bells. "Oh, a good one is passing by! — a
man from a wealthy camp." When they drew nearer to the camp, the infant
cried. The women felt sorry. "Oh, stay for a while! The child is crying,
— a motherless child. Probably the mother is dead." He came and stopped.
"Who are you?" — "We are going to the spring fair. My people are coming
behind." — "Oh, but where is your female companion?" — "She has been
carried away by the Red Ke´lẹ (Small-Pox)." — "Oh, poor little child!
Where shall we put it?" Whichever woman comes near, the infant cries
still stronger. At last that one approached, the feigning one with the
ailing eyes. The infant stretches out its hands toward her. "It is
because her face has a likeness to that of its mother." — "Well, come
in!" says the woman. They entered. "If I am like the mother, treat me as
you treated her." He copulated with her. Then he turned into a dog, and
they remained together as dogs do. He dragged her onward over stones and
roots of trees, tore her body all to pieces. The infant turned into
fæces. Only some excrement remained upon the bed. The end.

<span class="small">Told by A<sup>ɛ</sup>´ttịqäi, a Reindeer Chukchee
man, in a camp near the village of A´čon, April, 1901.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm38)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_156">p. 156</span>

<span id="page_156_note_1"></span>[1](#page_156_fr_1) This tale and the
next one, though not exactly referring to the creation of the world,
still belong to the Raven cycle: therefore I have placed them here.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
