[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm42) [Next](cm44)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 5. (Story of Object-of-Loathing.)

 Object-of-Loathing (Êkịrka´ịrġịn) lives with his uncle. He stays with
the herd. All the time he is busy with the reindeer; but his uncle
chides him, saying, "You good-for-nothing!" He is alone with the herd, —
the only herdsman. One time, while he was with the herd, some people
came, driving reindeer. They were Wolves. They said, "We want to
slaughter reindeer." — "Oh, how can I do the slaughtering? I am afraid
of my uncle." — "Why are you afraid? This is your herd. You are the sole
herdsman." — "No! I am afraid!" Notwithstanding, they slaughtered
reindeer, and carried them away on their sledges. He went home, and on
the way he met a person clad in white skin. It was a Polar Bear. The
Polar Bear said, "If you slaughter reindeer for strange people, then
better go away and look for a wife. Over there lives a wealthy
reindeer-breeder. You might try for his daughter."

 Object-of-Loathing went there. He gathered a sledgeful of fuel, — a
very large sledge, so large that he was not able to haul it along. Then
the Wolves came, a number of them. They said, "We will attach ourselves
to the sledge, and haul it along." So they did. "Sit down," they said.
He sat down, but they trotted on. They came to the camp of the rich
reindeer-breeder. The one clad in white skin said to him beforehand,
"When they go to sleep, catch the youngest girl, that one in the
corner." They went to sleep. Then he caught the youngest girl, that one
in the <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> corner. She cried aloud, "Oh,
oh! What is he doing? He caught me!" The master of the house awoke. He
said, "What noise is this? You have wakened me, you scamps! This
loathsome new-comer, why is he making trouble? — There, you, give me a
stick!" He caught hold of the wooden handle of a scraper and rushed at
those who were quarrelling; but before he had time to strike, the whole
sleeping-room filled with wolves. They howled all around. All the
people, in utmost fear,<span
id="page_167_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_167_note_1) rushed out quite naked,
the house-master still with a stick in his hand. They fled to the
neighboring house. Meanwhile he took the girl and carried her to his
home. The next morning the father-in-law sends for Object-of-Loathing in
soft and pleasing words: "Let him come and visit me!" The reindeer-herd
was brought. It was a large herd. "Cut it in two!" It was cut in halves.
"There, take one half!" Object-of-Loathing took the wife and the herd.
He settled separately, established his own camp, and lived there. The
end.

<span class="small">Told by Rịke´wġi, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm44)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_167">p. 167</span>

<span id="page_167_note_1"></span>[1](#page_167_fr_1) Em-yị´mġumġä, in
fear before supernatural things; for instance, before spirits, the dead,
etc. This is a special term for such kind of fear.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
