[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm49) [Next](cm51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 12. Tale about Qolênto´.

 Near the village Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun in a place called Ci´ni, an
orphan boy lived with his aged grandmother. The boy was all covered with
scabs, and so weak was he that he could hardly move about. The
grandmother was unable to get much food. So they suffered great hunger.
One time the boy was sitting alone in the sleeping-room in utter
darkness. Then he heard a voice, "Eġeġeġeġei´." A ke´lẹ came to him in
the darkness. "Oh, I have come! "Eġeġeġeġei´!" and still louder,
"Eġeġeġeġei´." — "Ah, ah! What is coming there? Is the (Spirit of)
Epilepsy coming?" — "No, I am not coming to strike you down with
epilepsy. I come through compassion for you. Why are you lying thus?" —
"I am unwell." — "Oh, indeed! Have you eaten anything to-day?" —
"Nothing at all." — "There, eat that!" The boy stretched out his hand in
the darkness, and there was in it a little piece of dried meat. He put
it into his mouth and began to chew. The meat in his mouth <span
id="page_177">p. 177</span> gradually grew larger. He swallowed, but
still his mouth was full. He ate and ate, and his belly became full.
When he wanted no more, the food vanished. "Well, then, go across the
sea and take the pretty young wife from the bad murderous ke´lẹ who is
living there. Take your eight uncles as paddlers in the boat." Indeed,
the grandmother had a younger brother, who lived in
Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, and who had eight sons. "But they will not go." —
"Send your grandmother to Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun: they will obey. Now I am
going. Brrr!"<span id="page_177_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_177_note_1) The
ke´lẹ went out. He was still lying in the darkness. The old grandmother
came home. "Oh, oh, I am so tired! I am hardly able to procure food at
my age. Well, I have brought some few scraps. Here, eat!" — "No." —
"What is the matter with you? Are you dying?" — "No." — "Then what is
the matter?" — "I have had enough." — "What have you had?" — "Oh, cease!
I want to send you to Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, that you may call my eight
uncles as boat-paddlers on a journey of mine." — "Where are you going?"
— "I am going to get the pretty young wife of the old ke´lẹ, who lives
across the sea." — "Oh, you shall not!" — "Now, then, I shall kill you!"
The grandmother went out of the house, sat close by, and wept bitterly.
She covered her face with her palms. "How can I get to
Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun? It is too far for me." While she was weeping, she
was carried to Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun quite unawares. She looked up and
said, "Is not this a boat-support of my father, made of whale-ribs!"
Then she saw her younger brother, who was working on something near his
house. He gave her a cordial welcome. "Oh, indeed! have you come?" —
"Yes." — "What is the matter with you? Are you suffering from hunger!" —
"No, but my little grandson has ordered me to take your sons as
boat-paddlers. He is going to bring here the young wife of a ke´lẹ from
across the sea." He did not say a word against this order. "Oh, hurry
up! Go down to the water, get the skin boat ready; cause no delay!" They
began to cover the frame of the boat with a skin covering. "Oh, how
strange you are! Why are you taking old skins? You are from a family so
strong in numbers. The people will point at you. You will be put to
shame. The people will say, 'This numerous family are but bad hunters,
since there are no new skins on their boat.'" They listened to his
words, and took the hides of walrus newly killed. When everything was
ready, they paddled toward the boy's place.

 The boy was lying in the inner room in utter darkness, as before. He
was very weak, and covered all over with scabs. " Eġeġeġeġei´!" and
again, still louder, "Eġeġeġeġei´! I have come again!" It was the ke´lẹ.
"What are you doing?" — "I am lying down." — "What for?" — "Because I am
very lame." Then he hears in the darkness, "Toq, toq, toq." The ke´lẹ
passed water in a chamber-vessel. "There, take that, and wash yourself
with it all <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> over your body!" He took
off his clothes and washed his face and his whole body with this urine.
Then he felt of his body with his hands. Oh, it was sleek all over, and
his hand just slid along over his skin. "There, put those on!" He took
breeches, outer and inner ones, and put them on. "There, also this!" It
was a double fur shirt. He felt of it with his hands in the dark. It was
covered all over with tassels. The ke´lẹ gave him also a cap, boots, and
a scarf. All these he put on. He gave him a small piece of dried meat.
"Now, that is your provision for the journey. This will suffice for the
whole crew. And here is fresh water and a strike-a-light. Take this
small parcel. When you want to rest yourself, unfold it, and then you
will see. And this is a paddle, — the arm of a still-born infant, along
with the shoulder-blade. The arm is the shaft, and the shoulder-bone the
blade. Now I am going. Brrr!" The ke´lẹ vanished. The uncles were
coming. "Who is that standing there on the shore?" — "It is your
nephew," says the old woman. "But they say that he is quite lame." — "It
seems that he is well now." As soon as they landed, he came to meet
them. "Let us push off!" — "But we have no provisions, nor fresh water."
— "I have." They pushed off. While paddling, they asked one another,
"But where are his provisions?" Still they have not the heart to ask
him. They paddled for a long time, and now were quite far from the
shore. Evening came. He asked, "Are you hungry?" — "Yes!" He took his
small piece of dried meat and detached for each one a tiny shred no
larger than half of a human nail. They looked at it and thought, "Now we
are starving to death. Our life is finished." They began to chew. The
meat grew within the mouth. They swallowed, but it was still there.
Their bellies were quite full. At last they wanted no more. Then the
food vanished. "Do you want a drink?" — "Yes!" He unfolded the parcel
and threw it upon the water. It was a small skin rug. It turned into a
little island. A small lake was in the middle of this island. They
landed on the island, drank from the lake, and eased themselves on the
firm ground. After that they took their places in the boat. He took the
skin rug by one edge and pulled it aside. Everything vanished. He rolled
the parcel up and put it in its former place. The uncles paddled on.
Night came. They felt quite exhausted. Then the boy said, "Now you may
sleep! I will paddle myself." He took the infant's arm and paddled with
it. The boat rushed forward more quickly than an American steamer
(literally, lelu<sup>ɛ</sup>´tvet, "whisker boat"<span
id="page_178_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_178_note_1)), more quickly than a
flying bird. With such swiftness it moved onward the whole night. The
next morning the other men awoke and took their turn in paddling; but
the boat moved much more slowly, though there were eight of them.

 On the third day there appeared from afar the mountain-ridge near the
<span id="page_179">p. 179</span> shore. On the shore was a settlement,
— a large group of jaw-bone houses. "Who comes here?" — "Qolênto´!" —
"Where from?" — "From Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun." — "What for?" — "To take
the ke´lẹ's wife from him." — "Oh, oh! do not speak so loud. He will
hear you. How strange you are! He will hear, and then he will eat all of
you. Better take wives here." — Oh, the paddlers were frightened! "It is
land. Let us land here." — "Oh, you good-for-nothings! you are the cause
of the delay. Paddle on." The ke´lẹ was sitting on a cliff with his
wife. He had eyes of fire, and a long tongue lolling down on his breast.

 "Who is coming?" — "Qolênto´." — "What for?" — "For you to eat. I have
come, and have brought eight companions." Oh, he was glad! "Whom shall I
eat first, whom shall I eat first?" — "How strange you are! They have
paddled so long, they are quite exhausted. First give them food." — "All
right! Bring some whale-skin, walrus-blubber, reindeer-fat, and
reindeer-tenderloin. Let them eat their fill." They ate. Now, whom shall
I eat first, whom shall I eat first?" — "How strange you are! They have
not slept. Let them rest themselves. You shall eat them to-morrow
morning. They shall not go away, since I brought them for your food."
They slept. Early in the morning the ke´lẹ called out, "Qolênto´, get
up! Whom shall I eat first, whom shall I eat first?" Qolênto´ had a
small stone. He selected one paddler and drew a line with this stone all
over his body, from the crown of his head to the tip of his toes. Then
he pushed him forward. "Here, eat him!" The ke´lẹ wanted to chew, but
could not do anything. He left him, and he rose to his feet. "Oh, he is
too tough! I cannot eat him. Give me some one with meat more tender!" —
"Then take this one!" But this one was also as hard as stone. He could
do nothing to any of the eight. "Oh, is there no one who is more
tender?" — "Perhaps I am. Try me!" As soon as the ke´lẹ wanted to catch
him, he struck him with the stone upon the head and killed him. His wife
was quite young, of human origin, had hardly once been slept with.
Qolênto´ took her for himself. She said, "But he has another wife, an
old one. She is very bad. She will kill you." — "We shall see!" — "Yes,
she will, even with copulating she will kill you, with her vulva, which
has strong teeth." — "Oh, oh!" — "And also with her anus, which also has
teeth." — "Oh, oh!"

 Qolênto´ had a retriever.<span
id="page_179_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_179_note_1) It had long hooks. He
brought it along. A stamping of feet was heard from without, and a voice
called, "Where is that Qolênto´; the mischievous one? He has carried
away other men's wives. He has killed my husband. There, now! let him
take me, and fare as my husband fared." — "All right!" They entered the
sleeping-room. "Copulate with me!" The woman lay down and spread her
legs apart. He took his <span id="page_180">p. 180</span> stone, still
covered with her husband's blood, and shoved it into her vulva. She
caught it greedily, and all her teeth stuck in it. She turned toward him
her anus. "Copulate also into the anus!" He shoved into the anus the
retriever with many hooks. All the teeth of the anus stuck into the
retriever. She tried to chew it, but could do nothing. So at last she
choked herself to death with it and was destroyed.

 He took the other woman. She was very pretty. He took also all the
property. They came back to the settlement. No one came to meet them, so
frightened were they. Then Qolênto´ called out, "Come out! I have killed
him." Oh, they rushed onward. They caught the best of their girls and
put them into the boat for wives for the paddlers, and the girls
consented with joy.

 They left, and went across the sea. When they were nearing
Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, they saw upon the cliff eight large tents. Each
tent had a reindeer-herd of its own, two herdsmen, and a large bag of
tobacco in the outer tent. "This is your reward for the journey." The
front house had two herds, and two bags of tobacco for the master. "From
now on be reindeer-breeders! So they left Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun for
Či´ni, and became reindeer-breeders. They lived there. That is all.

<span class="small">Told by Nuten·qeu´, a Maritime Chukchee man from the
village of Nunä<sup>ɛ</sup>´mun, in the village of Uñi´sak at Indian
Point, May, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm51)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_177">p. 177</span>

<span id="page_177_note_1"></span>[1](#page_177_fr_1) The so-called
moomġa´tirġịn ("gibbering"), a characteristic sound somewhat similar to
the buzzing of a fly. It is supposed to be the voice of the ke´lẹ.
Compare Vol. VII of this series, p. 437.

<span id="footnotes_page_178">p. 178</span>

<span id="page_178_note_1"></span>[1](#page_178_fr_1) Compare vol. VII
of this series, p. 19.

<span id="footnotes_page_179">p. 179</span>

<span id="page_179_note_1"></span>[1](#page_179_fr_1) An implement for
securing killed seals floating upon the water before the go down (cf.
Vol. VII of this series, p. 121).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
