[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Asia](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](cm54) [Next](cm56)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

### 3. (War with the Ta´n·ñịt.)

 There lived two brothers, Čịnto´urġịn and Añqa´lqan. Their houses were
very poor. Some Ta´n·ñịt warriors came, ten in number, all driving
reindeer, and also all able-bodied. They murdered all the people near
the lake. Čịnto´urġịn and Añqa´lqan were both absent, hunting reindeer.
The Ta´n·ñịt began to kill their house-mates. At that time both came
back. Ten Ta´n·ñịt warriors were standing side by side. The two on the
ends were quite weak. The fifth, the middle one, was the strongest of
all. The one on the left end said, "How shall we kill them?" That on the
right end said, "Let it be by shooting!" The strong one said, "You are a
weakling, I am able to bind them hand and foot, and then to take them
alive to the Ta´n·ñịn women."

 Añqa´lqan said, "We shall see!" They fought. One warrior struck
Añqa´lqan upon the breast with his spear. He hit his armor of
thong-seal-hide, Añqa´lqan fell down, "Ġa, ġa, ġa!" cried all the
Ta´n·ñịt, "Not yet," said Añqa´lqan, "I am still alive, My hands are not
bound, nor my feet either." Lying down, he made a thrust with his long
spear. His spear-head was much stronger than that of the Ta´n·ñịn. He
pierced the Ta´n·ñịn all through, and killed him. His companion was
still more active. Even before Añqa´lqan had killed his adversary, he
had killed those on the right and on the left side, and destroyed them
all. They gathered the reindeer, and took all the belongings of those
killed.

 Then they went home, and found their house-mates half starving.<span
id="page_185_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_185_note_1) They slaughtered
reindeer and gave their friends to eat. The next year ten other Ta´n·ñịn
warriors came again. Añqa´lqan went to meet them, driving a single
reindeer. Then he said, "Can I save myself with the help of this single
reindeer? I will rather be wholly without reindeer!" So he stabbed the
animal with his knife. The reindeer rushed forward, broke through the
Tan·ñịn file, then fell down. They fought, Añqa´lqan killed all the
Ta´nñịt, but he was also mortally wounded by them. While he was lying
there, Kere´tkun<span id="page_185_fr_2"></span>[2](#page_185_note_2)
came to him and said, "I am sorry for you! I may bring you back to
life!" — "Do it," said the corpse. '"If you will promise to follow my
orders, I will make you alive, as before." — "I promise to do so." —
"Then listen! A Ta´n·ñịn will pass by, driving a reindeer-team, That is
the object of your thanksgiving ceremonial. Over him and his reindeer
carefully celebrate it!" — "All right!" He made him alive. A Ta´n·ñịn
passed by, driving a reindeer-team. He struck him with a spear and
killed him, and carried the body home. Upon this, he celebrated the
thanksgiving ceremonial. His head was the object of the ceremonial, and
also his two reindeer. Thus he was restored to life, The end.

<span class="small">Told by Paña´nto, a Maritime Chukchee man, at
Mariinsky Post, October, 1900.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](cm56)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_185">p. 185</span>

<span id="page_185_note_1"></span>[1](#page_185_fr_1) From what was told
before, one would suppose that the fight was near the houses.
Discrepencies of this kind are not rare in Chukchee stories.

<span id="page_185_note_2"></span>[2](#page_185_fr_2) Benevolent spirit
(cf. Vol. VII of this series, p. 316).

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
