[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dcj02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0877850542/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*De Conjugio*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1788\], tr. by John Whitehead
\[1914\] at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### De Conjugio

<span class="margnote"><span id="101.">101.</span></span>

In general it is to be held that the loins, and the members appertaining
thereto, correspond to genuine conjugial love, consequently to those
societies where there is such love; the angels there are more celestial
than others, and more than others live in a state of innocence and
peace, and in its delights which are inmost.

<span class="margnote"><span id="102.">102.</span></span>

There appeared to me trees planted in a nursery, one of which was
taller, the other lower, and two small ones. The lower tree delighted me
greatly; and at the same time the most pleasant quiet, which I cannot
express, affected my mind. The angelic spirits interpreted this sight,
saying, that conjugial love was represented, the quiet and peace of
which were also felt in the mind. By the higher tree was signified the
husband, by the lower one the wife, and by the two small ones children.
They added that in such pleasantness of peace were those who belong to
the province of the loins.

<span class="margnote"><span id="103.">103.</span></span>

There appeared to me a great dog, such as he who is called Cerberus
among the most ancient writers; he had terrible jaws. It was said that
such a dog signifies a guard, that man may not pass from celestial
conjugial love to the infernal love of adultery. When there is a passing
from that love to this opposite one, the delight appearing almost
similar, then there is set such a keeper, as it were, that opposite
delights may not communicate.

<span class="margnote"><span id="104.">104.</span></span>

The inmost heaven through which the Lord insinuates conjugial love,
consists of those there who are in greater peace than others. Peace in
the heavens is comparatively like spring in the world, which delights
and vivifies all things; it is celestial delight itself in its essence.
The angels who are there are the wisest of all, and from innocence
appear to the others like infants; they love infants even more than
their fathers and mothers have loved them. They also preside over those
who are with young.

<span class="margnote"><span id="105.">105.</span></span>

There are celestial societies with which each and all the members and
organs dedicated to generation in either sex correspond. Those societies
are distinguished from others, just as that province in man is
altogether distinct from the rest. Those who have loved infants most
tenderly, as such mothers, are in the province of the womb and the
surrounding organs, namely, in the neck of the womb and the ovaries; and
those who are there are in a most sweet and tranquil life, and in
celestial joy more than others.

<span class="margnote"><span id="106.">106.</span></span>

But what and of what quality those societies are which belong to each
organ of generation, is not given to know, for they are interior. They
refer also to the uses of those organs which are hidden and also removed
from knowledge; for the reason, which is providential, that such things
which are in themselves most celestial may not be injured by filthy
thoughts, which are of lasciviousness, whoredom, and adultery, which
thoughts are excited with many when those organs are only named. From
the Arcana Coelestia \[n. 5055\].

<span class="margnote"><span id="107.">107.</span></span>

It is enough to know that love truly conjugial has immediate
communication with the third heaven, and also that love itself with its
celestial delight is there preserved in all its variety, and also its
acts, such as kisses, embraces, and many other things which delight that
heaven, for that heaven is in the communication of good affections, when
the spiritual heaven is in the communication of the thoughts of truth;
hence it is evident that filthy affections and thoughts altogether close
both heavens.

<span class="margnote"><span id="108.">108.</span></span>

A triturating vessel was seen by me, and by it stood a man with an iron
instrument, who from his phantasy seemed to himself to triturate men in
the vessel, torturing them in direful ways; the man did this with great
delight. The delight itself was communicated, that I might know what and
how great was the highest infernal delight with those who were such. It
was told me that such a delight reigned with the posterity of Jacob, and
that they perceived nothing more delightful than to treat the Gentiles
cruelly, to expose them when killed to the wild beasts and birds to be
devoured, to cut them while living with saws and axes, to cast them into
a brick furnace (2 Samuel 12:31), to dash to pieces and cast forth
infants. Such things were never commanded nor ever permitted, excepting
to those the sinew of whose thigh was out of joint, as Jacob's when he
wrestled with the angel (Gen. 32:26, 32, 33). Such dwell under the right
heel, where are adulterers who are also cruel. Among the adulterers who
are both cruel and the most unmerciful, are many of the Jesuits and
monks who were adulterers; their delight is similar when they behold the
punishment of death, especially on those who derogate from their
despotic power over the church and heaven, and over the souls of men,
and also who infringe on their privileges.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109.">109.</span></span>

Those who have lived in things contrary to conjugial love, namely, in
adulteries, when they approached me, infused a pain into the loins,
severe according to the life of adulteries which they had led, from
which it appears that the loins correspond to conjugial love; their hell
also is under the hinder parts of the loins, under the buttocks, where
they live in filthy and excrementitious things; these also are
delightful to them, for such things in the spiritual world correspond to
their pleasures.

<span class="margnote"><span id="110.">110.</span></span>

Those who are in things contrary to conjugial love, strike pain also
into the testicles; they are those who lay an ambush by love,
friendship, and good offices, concerning which the following: There
arose from the region of Gehenna, as it were, a certain inconspicuous
air; it was a band of such spirits, but it appeared then to me as one
only, although they were many; against whom were interposed, as it were,
bundles, which nevertheless they seemed to themselves to remove, by
which was signified that they desire to remove obstacles, for in such
manner do the thoughts and efforts of the mind appear representatively
in the world of spirits, and when they appear, it is immediately
perceived there what they signify; afterwards it seemed as if there
proceeded from that body someone small and snow-white, who came to me,
by which was signified their thought and intention, that they wished to
put on the state of innocence, that no one should suspect anything of
their quality; when he came to me he let himself down towards the loins
and seemed to bend himself, as it were, around both of them, by which it
was represented that they were in chaste conjugial love; then around the
feet by spiral turns, by which was signified insinuation by such things
as are in their nature delightful; finally that little one became almost
invisible, by which was signified that he wished to be altogether
hidden; it was told me that such was the insinuation of those who
plotted against conjugial love: namely, who in the world had insinuated
themselves for the end of committing adultery with wives, talking
chastely and sanely concerning conjugial love, caressing infants,
praising the husband in every manner of speech, so that they might be
thought friendly and innocent, when yet they were cunning adulterers; it
was shown me what such become, for after these things were done, that
little snow-white person who represented the band arising from Gehenna
was made conspicuous, and appeared dusky and very black, and very much
deformed besides, and was cast forth into a deep hell under the middle
part of the loins, where they live in excrements. I afterwards spoke
with similar ones, and they wondered that any one should have conscience
about adulteries, and on account of conscience should not lie with the
wife of another when it was allowed; and when I spoke with them about
conscience, they denied that anyone had conscience. It was told me that
such were mostly from the Christian world, and rarely any from other
parts.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111.">111.</span></span>

MARRIAGES. What genuine conjugial love is, and whence is its origin, few
at this day know, because few are in it; nearly all believe that it is
inborn, and thus flows from a certain instinct, as they say, and the
more so because the conjugial exists also with animals; when yet there
is such a difference between conjugial love with men and the conjugial
with beasts as there is between the state of a man and the state of a
brute animal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="112.">112.</span></span>

Conjugial love takes its origin from the marriage of the Lord with
heaven and with the church, and thence from the marriage of good and
truth. That conjugial love draws its inmost essence from thence, does
not appear to the sense and comprehension, but yet can be proved from
influx and from correspondence, and besides from the Word; from influx,
because heaven is from the union of good and truth which inflows from
the Lord, and is compared to marriage and called marriage; from
correspondence, because when good united with truth flows down into a
lower sphere, it presents there a union of minds, and when into one
still lower, it presents a marriage; wherefore the union of minds from
good united to truth from the Lord is conjugial love itself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113.">113.</span></span>

That genuine conjugial love is from thence may also be proved from this,
that no one can be in it unless he be in good through truth, and in
truth from good from the Lord, also from this, that celestial
blessedness and happiness are in that love, and all they who are in it
come into heaven or into celestial marriage; also from this, that when
there is speech with the angels concerning the union of good and truth,
there is presented in the lower region among good spirits a
representative of marriage, and among the evil spirits is presented a
representative of adultery; hence it is that the adulteration of good
and the falsification of truth is called adultery and whoredom.

<span class="margnote"><span id="114.">114.</span></span>

The men of the Most Ancient Church more than others on this earth lived
in genuine conjugial love; they are those who were described by the
ancients by those who lived in the golden age where innocence, love, and
justice reigned. In that love there was heaven to them, but later, after
the knowledge of the Lord, and thence love towards Him, perished,
conjugial love perished, love towards children remaining; but children
can be loved by the evil, but a consort cannot be loved except by the
good.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115.">115.</span></span>

I have heard from the most ancient people that conjugial love is such,
that each one wishes to be altogether the other's, and this
reciprocally, thus mutually and interchangeably, and then that the
conjunction of two minds is such, that this mutual and interchangeable
is in all and everything of the thought.

<span class="margnote"><span id="116.">116.</span></span>

I have spoken with the angels concerning this mutual and reciprocal, and
it was described that the image of one is in the mind of the other, and
that thus they cohabit, not only in the single things but also in the
inmosts of life; and that the Divine love of the Lord can flow into such
a one with what is happy and blessed. They said also that they who have
lived in such conjugial love in the world, are together, and cohabit in
heaven as angels, also together with their children; but that very few
are from Christendom at the present day, but all from the Most Ancient
Church which was celestial, and many from the Ancient Church which was
spiritual.

<span class="margnote"><span id="117.">117.</span></span>

It was told me that the kinds of celestial and spiritual happinesses,
that is, only their universals, are indefinite in number and ineffable,
and scarcely any one of them is known in the Christian world, because
they are not in the marriage of good and truth, nor in love to the Lord;
they know not whence is good, and thus what is truth, and they know not
that the Lord alone is the God of the universe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="118.">118.</span></span>

With those who live in conjugial love, the interiors of the mind are
open through heaven, even to the Lord, for that love inflows from the
Lord through the inmost of man; they thence have the kingdom of the Lord
in themselves, and thence genuine love towards infants, which is for the
sake of the Lord's kingdom, and thence they are more receptive of
celestial loves than others, and are in mutual love more than all, for
this comes thence as a stream from its fountain; for from the marriage
of good and truth descend and are derived all loves, which are like the
love of parents towards children, the love of brothers between
themselves, and love towards relatives, thus according to degrees in
their order, which loves are only from the marriage of good and truth;
from this marriage are formed all celestial societies, according to all
their consanguinities and affinities, and at the same time in each
society, whence heaven is called a marriage.

<span class="margnote"><span id="119.">119.</span></span>

Genuine conjugial love is not possible except between pairs, that is, in
the marriage of one man with one wife, but not with many; because
conjugial love is mutual and reciprocal, and the life of one
interchangeably in that of the other, so that they are as one. Such a
union is given between pairs, but not between many, for many destroy
that love. The men of the Most Ancient Church, who were celestial and in
the perception of the union of good and truth like angels, had one wife
only; they said that they perceived with one wife celestial delights and
happinesses, and when marriage with several was only named, they were
horrified. That the marriage of one wife and husband descends from the
marriage of good and truth is evident from the words of the Lord in
Matthew 19:3-12, which may be seen and adduced; also from the words of
Adam concerning his wife. By "Adam and his wife" there is signified in
the internal representative sense the Most Ancient Church, which was the
golden age, the age of Saturn, concerning which the ancient authors
wrote.

<span class="margnote"><span id="120.">120.</span></span>

I have perceived the contrary with adulterers, that they are nauseated
at marriage and all things which are of marriage, so that they see a
wife but do not speak with her from any life; they are averse to all
things of it which consorts formerly loved with delights. But as soon as
they see the beautiful wife of another as the wife of another, they burn
with cupidity; a fiery life kindles the countenance and eyes, and they
take delight in everything of her which the husband is averse to, and
thus he does when he sees other women.

<span class="margnote"><span id="121.">121.</span></span>

There was a certain spirit in middle altitude, who in the life of the
body had lived lasciviously, being delighted with variety, so that he
had loved no one woman constantly, but in brothels, and thus had
committed whoredom with many and afterwards rejected each one, whence it
happened that he had extinguished the desire for marriage, and had
contracted an unnatural nature; all these things were disclosed, and
when he attempted a like thing in the spiritual world he was miserably
punished, and this in sight of the angels, and then cast into a hell,
which is such that they appear there like scum such as is on the surface
of the sea; they are the mucus of the nostrils and almost without life,
because they have lost everything human, because everything of heaven,
which is founded upon conjugial love.

<span class="margnote"><span id="122.">122.</span></span>

That they cannot be in heaven is evident, for they are as it were
contrary to the love of marriage, thus they are contrary to the
affections of good and truth from which heaven originates; for when
marriage is mentioned there, filthy ideas immediately come in from
influx into the contrary. In their ideas are obscene, yea heinous
things. They are also in the purpose of destroying heavenly societies.
Their religion is to say that they acknowledge the Creator of the
universe, Providence only universal, and salvation from faith alone, and
that it cannot be worse with them than with others; but when they are
explored as to what they are in heart, which is done in the other life,
they do not believe those things at all, but in nature instead of the
Creator of the universe; and instead of a universal Providence, in none
at all; religion they believe to be for a restraint on the common people
to make them live morally. With those who by adulteries have acquired a
disgust and nausea for marriages, when anything pleasant, blessed, and
happy flows down from heaven, it is turned into what is nauseous and
loathsome, then into what is painful, and finally into what is noisome;
with others into what is obscene.

<span class="margnote"><span id="123.">123.</span></span>

They desire to obsess man, and with man to return into the world; but
they are shut up that they may not speak with man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="124.">124.</span></span>

The conjugial is represented everywhere in the kingdoms of nature, as
from the transformation of worms into nymphs and chrysalises, and thus
into winged insects; for when the time of their marriages arrives, which
is when they put off earthly forms, which is their worm form, they are
distinguished with wings and become flying insects; then they are
elevated into the atmosphere as into a certain heaven of theirs, and
there they sport among themselves, transact marriages, lay their eggs on
leaves, and are nourished with the juice of flowers. They are then also
in their beauty, for they have wings of golden, silvery, blue, and
shining white colors, and some beautifully distinguished and variegated.
Such things does the conjugial produce with such lowly small animals.

<span class="margnote"><span id="125.">125.</span></span>

There are those who have the cupidity of deflowering young virgins, or
to whom virginities and thefts of virginities are the greatest
pleasures, without the end of marriage, and when they have stolen the
flower of virginity, they afterwards desert them. Those who have led
such a life, because it is contrary to their spiritual and celestial
nature, and because they destroy the conjugial, are interior murderers,
who undergo the most grievous punishment in the other life, for they
regard this only from the flower of virginity, which being bereft, they
love them no longer, and because it is contrary to innocence, which they
wound and kill by leading into a life of harlotry innocent women who
otherwise would be chaste, who might be imbued with conjugial love, and
thus are destroyers of marriages. It is known that it is the first
flower of love which initiates virgins into chaste conjugial love and
conjoins the souls of consorts, and because the sanctity of heaven is
founded upon conjugial love, thus upon innocence. They are led into
phantasies, the actions in which appear as it were real and sensible,
and they seem to themselves to sit upon a furious horse which throws
them upwards, so that they are thrown down from the horse as if with
risk of life, such a terror is struck into them; afterwards they appear
to themselves to be under the belly of a furious horse, and shortly it
seems to them as if they went through the posteriors of a horse into his
belly, and then it appears to them as if they were in the belly of a
filthy harlot, which harlot is changed into a great dragon, and there
they remain wrapped up in torments; this punishment returns as often as
they are in that cupidity, and approach young virgins with their craft.
Others are punished by disjointings and unjointings, or by contortions
and retortions, from which punishments they are so torn to pieces that
they seem to themselves as if cut into bits or fragments with cruel
pain, and if then they do not desist, they are cast into a hell of
foul-smelling odor.

<span class="margnote"><span id="126.">126.</span></span>

Those who in the life of the body think lasciviously, and whatsoever
others speak convert it into lasciviousness, even holy things, do not
cease to think and speak thus in the other life; and there, because
their thoughts are communicated, those things come out into obscene
representations, whence are scandals. Their punishment is to be
stretched out horizontally in the presence of the spirits whom they have
injured and whirled around like a roller from left to right rapidly, and
then in a reverse direction in another position, and then in another,
and so naked in the presence of all or half naked according to the
quality of their lasciviousness, and at the same time they are struck
with shame. Then they are whirled around by the head and feet
transversely like a wheel; resistance is caused, and at the same time
pain, and again resistance and at the same time pain, for two forces
act, one around, the other back, and so with the drawing apart pain is
caused. N. B. N. B. More concerning these subjects may be seen in the
first extracts: in ADULTERY, HARLOT, LASCIVIOUSNESS, MARRIAGE; also in
Notes from the ARCANA COELESTIA. Especially from Note upon the
Apocalypse, and in extracts from the work on "Heaven and Hell," and also
from other places.
