[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv15)  [Next](rsv17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### C. RELIGIOUS DISCIPLINE AND CONCEPTS AFFECTING BEHAVIOR

1\. <u>Time Concepts</u>

a\. <u>Western</u>: To Americans, time has a beginning, a span with
fixed events, and an end. This time is divided into B.C. and A.D.
measurement. This is linear time measurement, The linear concept of time
motivates change, improvement, progress. Americans look for ways in
which they can explore, dominate, and utilize the universe. Because of a
sense of personal, individual dignity and value, they don't

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

hesitate to tamper with the world; to grasp and exploit its elusive
secrets and make them man's servants.

b\. <u>Vietnamese</u>: The Vietnamese understanding of time and history
is different. To them-except when influenced by Western thought-time is
circular. As the twelve-year repeating calendar repeats itself, so
historical events repeat themselves. There is little sense of progress.
History possesses little value and few goals. Hence, the Vietnamese is
not impressed by a need to "rush". He has lots of time, but little
money. His life span is already too short; so why rush it away? There is
usually an abundance of labor and many mouths to feed; make do with what
you have. Develop sufficient patience, and perhaps in the next existence
your Karma will permit improvement. After all, the only way to make any
real progress is by improving one's merits and the practice of the
Eight-Fold Path to Nirvana with the removal of the 108 desires.

This concept of time combined with poor diet and disease often results
in less than the fullest possible effort. When climatic conditions are
added to these three elements, along with the teachings of Taoism and
Buddhism, it is to their credit that the Vietnamese have achieved as
much as they have. So remember:

\(1\) Time is not as valuable to the Vietnamese as time-conscious
Americans feel it is to them. For the Vietnamese, the ability to live
each day and have sufficient food, etc., is more important than anything
else.

\(2\) American exuberance tends to overwhelm and "smother" the
Vietnamese.

<u>Family Concepts</u>: These are affected in Vietnam by Hinduism and
Buddhism, and by the older concept of Ancestor Veneration encouraged by
Confucianism. The latter ties people to the past and to the future so
that they might be adjusted to the present. Each individual is taught
his exact position in society. There is little confusion about place,
and few decisions to be made. A part of the family, the individual is
neither superior nor inferior, but is an integral part of yesterday,
today, and tomorrow. His life is bound by the family/clan/community--by
those who lived before him, by those who live with him, and by those who
will live after him. The individual feels secure because of his accepted
role. This role does not require efficiency and productivity as much as
loyalty and conformity to prescribed roles. Old age is respected by
virtue of being a father, grandfather, or great grandfather in the
community rather than because of acquired wisdom, skill, or wealth.

Thus even grown people must consult grandmothers, parents, elder
brothers, departed ancestors, etc., before making decisions. Business
transactions take time because the whole community--living and dead--is
involved. Embarrassment or shame is due more to violations of the
socially accepted code than to a sense of moral wrongness. All proposed
actions must be preceded by consideration of what consequences they will
have on the total family. This is why even deceased ancestors are
consulted.

The belief in ancestor veneration encourages early marriage and many
children. It would be wrong to deprive ancestors of worship and lessen
their estate in the spirit-world due to lack of descendents. The more
respect shown for the spirits of the dead, the greater opportunity for
them to be "good spirits", who will help the living members of the
family.

Because one's estate in the spirit world is dependent upon worship given
to the deceased, planned marriages by the family help promote and
protect this veneration. Spirits not venerated may become "wandering
spirits", and can do harm. These are feared by one and all.

2\. <u>Concept of Spirits and Spirit-Controlled  Environment</u>

Belief in good and evil spirits, both animate and inanimate, is basic
throughout Vietnam regardless of other religions professed. Some
Americans are superstitious; but usually in spite of their religious
beliefs. Many Vietnamese are superstitious because of their beliefs.
Some Vietnamese are very serious in seeking to appease evil or
harm-causing spirits and the spirits of deceased ancestors. Not to
appease would be to create problems.

Thus the Spirit House, the Spirit Pole in the rice paddies, the mirror
by the door of the home, the "ishi" lions at the Temples or homes, the
[Ancestor](errata.htm#26) Altars or Shelves, etc., are attempts to be in
harmony with the spirits, and to have the spirits to do the will of the
appeaser. Moreover, pleased spirits can do much to counteract evil ones.
It is widely believed by most classes throughout Vietnam that spirits
have the power to do evil by causing sickness, death, and other
troubles. It is because of such beliefs that:

a\. Mirrors by the door frighten spirits and prevent them from entering
the home.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

b\. Red paper representing the "Door God" does the same thing.

c\. Buddhists desire that an even number of people be in a picture lest
death be caused to one of the group.

d\. Since the "life-stuff" of man lives in the head, patting the head is
believed by some to be an attempt to steal away the spirit and cause
death. NEVER PAT ANYONE ON THE HEAD. Better yet, simply keep your hands
to yourself. Because the head is the residence of the soul, the feet are
considered of lowest value. So do not sit with feet crossed, pointing
the soul of the foot to anyone. This is considered gross insult by many
Vietnamese.

e\. Since spirits cause sickness and death, never joke about these lest
the spirits be angered and take action.

f\. Many of the rituals created by Animism, wherever found in Vietnam,
are designed to ward off illness, death, etc., by requesting protection
or by propitiating an errant or evil spirit. Many women have small
shrines to Quang An for protection during childbirth and while children
are small. The small children may also wear numerous amulets as charms
against harm or ailments caused by errant or wandering spirits.

Many Vietnamese families have a service within the first twelve years of
a child's life which is suppose to cleanse the child from the evils of
its birth and allow intelligence while promoting a healthy adulthood.
This service may consist of a small altar dedicated to the goddess of
birth--usually Quang An--on which are placed twelve bowls of sweet
soybean and sugar soup. Twelve pieces of paper with pictures of the
calendrical cycle is then burned. Because childhood is the time when the
evil spirits are most zealous, the little ones must be carefully
guarded. It is now that little boys especially must be protected and
brass bracelets may be placed on the small child as the spirits do not
like the feel of metal, or an earring may be worn by the male-baby to
fool the spirits into thinking it is a girl. Likewise, the small
children are sometimes cautioned not to play under the trees where the
spirits "rest" for fear they may anger the spirits.

Pregnant women often observe many taboos in order that the strains of
pregnancy be eased and that birth may bring forth well-formed children
without deformity. They must not eat "unclean" foods such as the snake,
rat, mouse, dog, or beef lest the child be retarded; this does not
preclude the use of tobacco or betel-nut. Because her presence might
create "bad luck" for a bridal couple, a pregnant woman is not supposed
to attend weddings, nor is she to take part in funerals as this may
cause her child to be a "crybaby". She is to also shun places of worship
including the pagoda and shrines to avoid angering the resident spirits
of these places: since the spirits often promenade at twelve and five
o'clock, she must not be outside her house so the evil spirits will not
see her and create harm for her or the baby. Within the house, she must
always take care to avoid stepping over a sleeping place or the unborn
child may be infected with lethargy so that it will take seven days
after birth for its eyes to open. Moreover, stepping over her sleeping
husband can afflict him with sleeping sickness even as drinking from a
cup which he is using may create many problems for him.

3\. <u>Concept of Individuality</u>

In contrast to the Confucian teaching that the individual is merely a
link between past and future generations, Buddhism stressed
individuality. Among the Twelve Principles of Buddhism, the place and
responsibility of the self is emphasized when it is declared that
"self-salvation is for any man the immediate task". Man is not his
brother's keeper; but must find his own way to Nirvana by escaping the
Wheel of Existence through the use of the Eight-Fold Path and the
elimination of the 108 Desires or Cravings. Because each individual has
his own Karma which must be worked out for eventual salvation, it is
necessary that merit be gained through good works in order to climb the
ladder to Nirvana. For the Buddhist Bonze, this may be done through
giving sermons, through meditating, etc. For the laity it will include
meditation before Buddha's statue, and giving gifts to the pagoda and
the bonze. In some cases there may be merit granted for helping other
people; but, normally, the greatest merit is gained through help to the
pagoda and to the monks. The denial of the 108 Desires or Cravings means
submission to fate and resignation to life as it is. This denial
prevents involvement in the quest for a better life and the acquisition
of material things, as these are thought to be illusory. The real
virtues, by contrast, are patience and humility.

The preceding concepts create the following ideas and behavior patterns:

a\. Avoid showing anger to anyone who offends. The more annoyed or
perturbed the Vietnamese becomes, the more polite he will be, he will
speak in a softer voice, and he will smile more. Therefore, loud speech,
vulgarity,

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

and anger by Americans are acts which may create concealed or repressed
anger and hostility.

b\. Humility is revealed in attempts to make you feel completely at
ease. You will be seated higher than your hosts. Dignitaries and
officials walk in front of others. Places of honor are offered to
guests. Humility prevents the Vietnamese from contradicting you, even if
you are wrong. And verbal agreement may be given to your plan, even when
there is no intention to follow it up with action.

c\. Teachings of individuality and eternal Nirvana tend to hinder
industrial growth, capital investments, and general economic progress.
Such material developments run contrary to the idea that man can find
ultimate success only in the denial of the very drives which facilitate
them.

Men in all cultures-including the Vietnamese-respond to problems of life
in one of four ways or modifications thereof: (1) Fight or resist; (2)
Submit, accept, or surrender; (3) Take flight or flee; and (4) Ignore
the problem: the "head in the sand" attitude. With the foregoing in
mind, and in view of what you will observe and experience in Vietnam, it
may be beneficial to mention some <u>Guidelines for American Vietnamese
Rapport</u>:

Be prepared for differences in thought, behavior, customs, etc.

Be patient, persistent, consistent, acceptable, and accepting.

Be interested in people as individuals.

Be alert to areas of agreement rather than disagreement.

Be aware of possible long-range consequences of gifts, actions, and
reactions.

Be adaptable when moral principles are not involved.

Be prepared to treat Vietnamese as you would desire to be treated.

Be aware of your attitudes. Your actions will produce good or bad for
you, your buddies, and those who follow you.

Be understanding, compassionate, and concerned.

Determine to be the best American example possible.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Religiously Influenced Culture](rsv17)
