[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv12)  [Next](rsv14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

### X. PHAT GIAO HOA HAO

(Normally only HOA HAO used; pronounced "Wah How")

The HOA HAO is an indigenous Vietnamese religion founded in 1939 by
HUYEN PHU SO. It is a Vietnamese development of
[Theravada](errata.htm#22) Buddhism which emphasizes reforming and
simplifying Buddhist doctrine and practice, and has a history of
religious, political, and military organization and activity.
[Theravada](errata.htm#23) Buddhism is that form of Buddhism prevalent
in Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Burma, and Ceylon, in contrast to the
Mahayana Buddhism of Japan, Korea, China, and the major Buddhist group
of South Vietnam. The current membership of the HOA HAO in Vietnam is
between 750,000 and 1,000,000.

<u>Location</u>: The HOA HAO are located in the Mekong Delta with the
major concentration in the provinces of Chau Doc, Kien Phong, An Giang,
Kien Giang, Vinh Long, Phong Dinh, Chuong Thien, Bac Lieu, Ba Xugan, and
Kien Tuong. They form a belt across the delta from Cambodia to the South
China Sea, and include the southern portion of South Vietnam with the
exception of the extreme southern province of An Xuyen and the island
province of Phu Quoc. While there are HOA HAO to be found scattered
throughout other provinces of South Vietnam, their numbers give them
neither political nor military significance on a par with the ten listed
provinces.

<u>The Founder of Phat Giao HOA HAO</u>: Born in 1919 at Hoa Hao
Village, in Chau Doc Province, HUYEN PHU SO, at the age of twenty, was
the founder of this militant sect of Buddhists. Following the
"miraculous" healing in 1939 of a lifelong weakness and infirmity, SO
began to proclaim his doctrines of Buddhist reform while claiming
himself to be the apostle of Phat Tay.

SO had learned of Phat Tay, or Nguyen Van Quyen, while a student of a
Buddhist bonze named Thay Xom of Nu Cam. Phat Tay had been a famous
bonze (monk) who preached and wrote in the Mekong Delta about a hundred
years earlier, during the Minh Mang reign (18201841). Moreover, SO's
teacher Thay Xom had taught him concerning acupuncture (the art of
puncturing the body to relieve pain or cure disease and illness, and
still practiced through much of Asia), hypnotism, Buddhist philosophy
and some sorcery.

With convincing zeal and eloquence, SO proclaimed his doctrines, and
later wrote them in his book <u>SAM GIAN</u> (Translated: "ORACLES and
PRAYERS"). To help identify his teachings, he gave them the name of his
village Hoa Hao, by which his religion is still known. His first
converts were those who witnessed his "healing" and heard him preach.
His apparent "gift of prophecy" which foretold the defeat of the French
in World War II, the coming of the Japanese occupation, and the later
arrival of Americans, added impetus to his appeal. His additional skills
of healing by herbs and acupuncture made him appear almost supernatural
to his audiences. His hypnotic stare caused them to call him DAO KHUNG
or "Mad Bonze".

In time, the BOA HAD adherents began to think of SO as <u>Phat Song</u>,
or the Living Buddha. Because the French considered his preaching to be
anti-French and strongly political, he was exiled to My Tho and Cai Be,
where he gained many converts. The French then placed him in a mental
institution in Cholon, only to have the director; a psychiatrist, become
a convert. Declared sane and released, SO was exiled to Vinh Loi in Bac
Lieu Province, where he again converted many. In desperation the French
administration exiled him to Laos, only to have the Japanese insist upon
his return to Saigon as their protege in October, 1942.

Upon the surrender of the Japanese, SO led the HOA HAO into the National
United Front, a Viet Minh organization. It was soon evident, however,
that neither the Cao Dai nor the HOA HAD would accept the leadership of
the Viet Minh, so the latter caused the United Front to be dissolved. SO
then entered politics as the anti- French, anti-communist leader of his
adherents. Even so, the Viet Minh, hoping to use him, appointed him a
Special Commissioner to the nine-member Executive Committee for South
Vietnam, six of whom were communists. However, the differing opinions
and ideological clashes between the Viet Minh and the HOA HAO caused SO
to flee for his life to Duc Boa in December. 1946.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

In April, 1947, while traveling to a conciliatory meeting sponsored by
the Viet Minh, he was captured, tried and executed by the communists in
Long Xuyen. While the HOA HAO leaders tried to keep the murder "quiet",
it turned their full wrath against the Viet Minh, although they informed
the faithful that SO had only temporarily withdrawn, but would return.
After twenty years, the HOA HAO still do not care to discuss the
subject. Yet this is the basic reason that HOA HAO are noted for their
opposition to everything the Vietnamese Communists want or fight for,
and the HOA HAO do not hesitate to destroy communists who enter their
strongholds.

<u>Religious Doctrines of the HOA HAO</u>: Four major precepts of this
faith are: (a) honor parents; (b) love country; (c) respect Buddhism and
its teachings; and (d) love fellow man. The Eight Points of Honesty form
parts of the HOA HAO ethical teaching as do the virtues which HUYEN PHU
SO stressed. These virtues insist that marriage partners be faithful to
each other, and that officials be just, honest, and faithful in behalf
of their people even as parents care for their children.

The HOA HAO are forbidden to drink alcohol, to smoke opium, or to kill
either oxen or buffalo for food. In order to make such restrictions more
acceptable to the adherents, the ban on killing oxen or buffalo does not
preclude eating beef when it is offered by one's host. But even in this
matter, the faithful HOA HAO must not eat either meat or greasy food on
the 1st, 14th, 15th, or 30th days of the lunar month, as these are days
of abstinence.

The basic religion which gave rise to the HOA HAO is Theravada Buddhism.
The older form of Buddhism has encouraged repeated reforms, aimed at
conserving the purity of the teachings of the elders, with this teaching
being more correct or closer to Buddha's doctrines than Mahayana
Buddhism. But stress is given to austerity and salvation by personal
example. As in all forms of Buddhism, salvation is a result of personal
achievement.

SO taught the absence of statues, temples, bonzes, etc., provides a
means whereby an individual worshipper may have a richer spiritual
experience. SO wrote, "The cult must stem more from internal faith than
from a pompous appearance. It is better to pray with a pure heart before
the family altar than to perform gaudy ceremonies in a pagoda, clad in
the robes of a unworthy bonze." ("The Political-Religious Sects of
Vietnam," <u>Pacific Affairs</u>, XXVIII, No. 3, September 1955, page
224.)

Confucianism and Animism were included in SO's "reform" Buddhism, but on
a more restricted scale than found in other Vietnamese religions.
Prayers and offerings might be offered to Buddha, to Vietnamese national
heroes or to personal ancestors, but not other deities and spirits,
except some small offerings of the various incenses used to frighten
away the evil spirits who might be lurking nearby.

The natural consequence of such concepts taught by SO was a de-emphasis
of pagodas and other elaborate structures as well as increased value
given to rituals, symbols, and the [Songha](errata.htm#24), which is the
Buddhist order of monks. SO violently attacked the Vietnamese custom of
elaborate and often expensive funerals also. This funeral custom has
been brought from Tibet and China by the Chinese and absorbed into
Vietnamese Buddhism and Confucianism so that it became a national
custom. In SO's words, "The body should be interred simply and without
great ceremony so that its decomposition should not incommode the
living. Why spend lots of money under the pretext of materializing
feelings of filial piety, fidelity and friendship toward the dead, when
it should have been greatly preferable to show them such feelings when
they are alive...?" (P. 245, Bernard Fall, "The Political-Religious
Sects of Vietnam", <u>Pacific Affairs</u>, XXVIII, No. 3, September
1955.) In accord with these views, the HOA HAO have no Scriptures
peculiar to themselves, and have little need of an extensive clergy or
of large offerings.

While having doctrines based upon Theravada Buddhism which has a long
history of semi-passiveness, the HOA HAO are aggressive, and quite
acceptable fighters when well-led. While giving allegiance to no
religious figure as such, the fighting adherents of Hoa Haoism seem to
have an almost fanatical willingness to follow and obey their HOA HAO
immediate superiors without regard for personal loss. At the same time,
neither does the HOA HAD shrink from acquiring possessions or seeking to
improve himself instead of resigning to fate. Non-adherents of Hoa
Haoism in areas of that faith often point out that HOA HAO don't seem to
follow the Eight Points of Honesty in their relations with non-members
of the faith.

<u>The HOA HAO Flag</u>: Like the other religious bodies in Vietnam, the
HOA HAO have a distinctive religious flag, rectangular in shape and
solid maroon in color inasmuch as the HOA HAO believe that maroon is the
combination of all colors and thus signifies unity of all people,
regardless of race, color, or language.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

<u>Founding Day Commemoration</u>: Each year on the 18th day of the 5th
lunar month, the HOA HAO have ceremonies which celebrate the anniversary
date of the HOA HAO founding. To the fullest extent possible, the
adherents gather to listen to sermons and speeches.

<u>The Mother of Huyen Phu SO, Mrs. Huyen Cong Bo</u>, lives in HOA HAO
Village in Chau Doc Province. The HOA HAO celebrate her birthday each
year, and she is reputed to have great influence in HOA HAO ceremonial
matters. Moreover, she is the recognized head of the To Dinh which is
supposedly the non-political group of BOA HAO and which claims at least
60% of all the BOA HAO followers.

<u>HOA HAO Village</u> is undoubtedly the major stronghold of the
religious faith which bears its name. The major pagoda of the BOA HAO is
located here, and while elaborate in comparison with other HOA HAO
religious structures, it is quite simple when compared to the major
churches of other religious organizations. The picture of HUYEN PHU SO
has the position of honor within the pagoda, with pictures of other HOA
HAO personalities also about the structure.

<u>Religious Practices of the HOA HAO</u>: Similar to the Cao Dai, the
HOA HAO adherent is to pray four times a day. Normally the first prayer
is for devotion to Buddha; the second is for the Reign of the
Enlightened King; the third prayer is for all ancestors, both living and
deceased; and the fourth prayer, according to SO, is for "the mass of
small people to whom I wish to have the will to improve themselves from
the shackles of ignorance". (P. 100, Major A.M. Savani, <u>Visages et
Images du Sud-Vietnam, Saigon</u>: Imprimerie Francaise d'Outre-Mer,
1955).

The small and simple altars, normally covered with a single red cloth,
in either home or temple, may have one to three bowls of fruit or
flowers as well as three bowls of water on them. The red cloth is a
symbol of universal understandings, as Vietnamese think red to be the
all-embracing color. Just as the ability of the HOA HAO adherent to
communicate directly with the supernatural removes the need of a large
clergy, so the offering of water and flowers in place of wine and food
reduces demands on the peasant worshipper. Undoubtedly, such factors
tend to make this faith more acceptable and more solidly established
among the Vietnamese delta peasantry where it had its origin and now has
most of its current membership. Within the home of the BOA HAO, the
picture of SO is normally found hanging above the altar or table
reserved for the practice and worship of the religion.

The adherents of Hoa Haoism are largely ethnic Vietnamese, even though
the religion itself springs from Theravada Buddhism. Thus the customs
and patterns of life are similar to the Vietnamese except where the
tenets of faith cause differences. Normally, only the alert and informed
observer can quickly distinguish between the HOA HAO and other faiths in
the delta. In this respect, it is well to know that the HOA HAO are
members of the sixteen member Unified Buddhist Association of Vietnam,
in contrast to the Cao Dai who are not normally accepted by the
Buddhists as belonging even faintly to Buddhism.

<u>Organization of the HOA HAO</u>: In 1964 an election among the HOA
HAO created a sixteen member Central Executive Committee; the members
hold a two-year term. The elected chairman is Mr. Loung Trong Tuong;
others are elected vice-chairman, advisors, secretary, assistant
secretaries, etc. Moreover, this type of structure is duplicated in each
level of organization down to the hamlet. While basically designed to
function only in the area of religion, the influence and interest of
this organization undoubtedly affects both political and military
concepts inasmuch as the HOA HAO have a history of
religio-political-military involvement. But when it is recalled that
this religion has never experienced a time of peace, its involvement in
the religio-military scene may not be too strange.

Many observers say the HOA HAO troop commander is the unquestioned
leader of his religio-military unit, and that his troops will obey him
to the extent that one observer has remarked: "They would follow him off
the side of a cliff." This loyalty is not normally found in units of HOA
HAO where non-HOA HAO are in command. According to some adherents, the
HOA HAO, like the Moslems of the Middle East under the influence of
Islam, have sometimes exerted forceful persuasion in effecting
conversion. Several Vietnamese have remarked on occasion that while
sometimes divided among themselves, the HOA HAD will more often be
united together against non-adherents, and seem to prefer to have local
government officials of their own faith.

<u>Miscellanea and Guidelines of American/ Vietnamese/HOA HAO
Rapport</u>: Because of the political and military conditions under
which it was founded in 1939, as well as the attitude of its founder,
HUYEN PHU SO, the HOA HAO is a religio-political-military organization.
The

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

death of SO, with his prophetic gift of leadership, disrupted the
movement and the HOA HAO quickly demonstrated the splintering so typical
of a people without firm goals, guidelines and leadership. Yet the fact
of the survival of the HOA HAO makes an understanding of the followers a
necessity for all who serve in their area or make decisions affecting
them. Created in violent stress, the HOA HAO have been involved with and
against the communists, with and against the French, also with and
against the Japanese as well as with and against various Vietnamese
governments.

While the HOA HAO may be politically and militarily divided from time to
time, the adherents seem to have a consistent loyalty to the religion
itself. Since HOA HAOISM originated in time of Vietnamese national
crisis and stress, it has existed under threat of annihilation by one
force or another, and so has been aggressively hostile itself. At least
it has been able to convey this impression to the noninvolved Vietnamese
peasant of the delta.

In spite of the reputation which the HOA HAO soldier has established,
some observers believe that the average one is much the same as other
Vietnamese servicemen; he may be either a poor, average or excellent
fighter depending upon his background, his training and his personal
motivation. However, his loyalty to HOA HAO leadership is sufficiently
strong that good leadership can compensate for other factors.

The HOA HAO seem to like Americans, or demonstrate little hostility or
non-acceptance toward them. This may grow out of SO's early prophecy of
the coming of the Americans as well as the relationships experienced
thus far between the HOA HAO and the American military personnel. Yet
their loyalty toward immediate HOA HAO leadership requires that all
Americans must establish rapport and acceptable relationships with these
leaders. To be successful, national objectives must be accepted by the
HOA HAO as their own goals. Wisdom dictates that private conferences
with the leaders at all levels will allow them to present the national
program as one to which they have agreed. The attainment of the goals
will then reflect to their credit. Experience has shown that some HOA
HAO leaders will resign when their men fail to achieve an objective,
unless they are convinced that factors beyond their possible
consideration affected the outcome.

To ascertain who the HOA HAO leader is may be difficult sometimes; but
discreet observation normally reveals this in spite of the fact that the
"front-man" is often only the agent of the individuals who control the
funds. Experience makes it possible to "play the game" and still secure
objectives while staying on good terms with all.

Since most of the HOA HAO adherents are ethnic Vietnamese, the same
courtesy and understanding extended to other Vietnamese is normally
sufficient, particularly if one remains alert to their religious tenets.
This includes discretion in comments or questions pertaining to HUYEN
PHU SO's death or "current location", as some adherents believe that SO
is still alive and will return at the appropriate time. Such adherents
tend to refer almost unconsciously to SO as "My Master".

It is obvious that strong religious factors of the Vietnamese must be
carefully considered in any effective national endeavor. These factors
must be recognized on both the policy and the implementation levels.
Especially in the latter, the attitude and actions of each American
become vital. Military objectives in strong religious communities must
weigh the religious forces, concepts and practices. This sometimes
necessitates decisions that give first priority to religious
considerations and second priority to the usual military procedures.
Damage may result if influences are ignored, as some Vietnamese
adherents are "forceful" in maintaining their practices.

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="img_05700"></span>

[![Approximate HOA HAO Population Percent Provinces of
Vietnam](tn/05700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05700.jpg)  
  

Provinces of Vietnam Approximate HOA HAO Population Percent according to
best available figures

<div align="center">

|              |              |
|--------------|--------------|
| An Giang     | 75%          |
| Chau Doc     | 53%          |
| Kien Phong   | 28%          |
| Kien Tuong   | 26%          |
| Vinh Long    | 20%          |
| Chuong Thien | 2 to 3%      |
| Phong Dinh   | 10%          |
| Bac Lieu     | 1 to 1.5%    |
| Kien Giang   | Less than 1% |
| Ba Xuyen     | Less than 1% |

</div>

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Chaffard, George, <u>Indochine dix ans d’independence</u>, Paris,
Calmann-Levy, 1964

Donoghue, John D. and Vo-Hong-Phuc, <u>My-Thuan: The Study of a Delta
Village In South  Vietnam</u>, Saigon, Vietnam, Advisory Group, Michigan
State University, 1961

Fall, Bernard, <u>The Two Vietnams, A Political and Military
Analysis</u>, New York, Frederick A. Praeger, 1963

Hammer, Ellen Joy, <u>The Struggle For Indochina</u>, Stanford,
California, Stanford University Press, 1954

Lancaster, Donald, <u>The Emancipation of French Indochina</u>, London,
Oxford University Press, 1961

Nguyen Phut Tan, <u>A Modern History of Vietnam</u>, Saigon, Nha Sach
Khai-Tri, 1964

Savani, Major A. M., <u>Visages et images du Sud-Vietnam</u>, Saigon,
Imprimerie Francaise d'Outre-Mer, 1955

PERSONAL RESPONSE PROJECT FILE

<u>Magazines</u>

Fall, Bernard, "<u>The Political-Religious Sects of Vietnam</u>" Pacific
Affairs XXVIII, No. 3, September 1955

Jones, P.H.M., "Khanh In Command", <u>Far Eastern Economic Review</u>
XLIV \#5, April 30, 1964

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A. Scenes Of Vietnamese Life](rsv14)
