[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv10)  [Next](rsv12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

### VIII. PROTESTANTISM IN SOUTH VIETNAM

The Protestant Church is represented by several denominations within
South Vietnam. These include the French Reform Church,
Anglican-Episcopalian, Christian and Missionary Alliance, Baptists,
Church of Christ, Worldwide Evangelization Crusade, and Seventh-day
Adventists. Other Protestant churches are represented in the various
social services and/or welfare agencies, but do not seem to have formal
church or missionary organizations.

Protestantism's 150,000 adherents represents about 1% of the total South
Vietnamese population of fifteen million. Exact measurements of its
influence on the national scene would be quite difficult to ascertain in
view of the nonpolitical stance of the Protestant Church within Vietnam.
While the Church makes no political pronouncements nor sponsors any
organized political activities, its influence in some local areas is
significant. Having only a small membership percentage of the total
population, Protestants have been allotted six Chaplaincy billets in the
South Vietnamese Armed Forces. The Buddhists and Roman Catholics share
equally the remaining 176 positions, with each of the three faiths
having its own Chief of Chaplains. This division of religious faiths
with chiefs for the respective group is quite similar to the practice of
many governments.

<u>The French Reformed Church</u>: is located at 2-bis Thong Nhut,
Saigon. Here is its major church building, and the address at which its
pastor may be contacted. In addition to being a "circuit-rider" for two
other small groups of adherents in South Vietnam, the pastor is
responsible also for divine services of French Reformed adherents in
Cambodia. Though this faith has been in South Vietnam for many years,
its activities seem primarily directed to the spiritual needs of the
French rather than of the Vietnamese.

<u>The Anglican-Episcopal Church</u>: is represented by St.
Christopher's in Saigon. Their divine services are conducted at the
French Reformed Church through a resident pastor to be found at 193 B
Cong Ly, Saigon. Similar to the French Reformed, the Anglican-Episcopal
appears to be oriented toward serving foreign adherents within the
country rather than Vietnamese citizens.

<u>The Church of Christ</u>: is located at 28 Phung Khac Khoan, Saigon.
This is a missionary effort by the Church of Christ denomination of the
United States and divides its attention between the service connected
personnel and the indigenous population. Being a recent arrival within
South Vietnam, it does not yet have an extensive membership within South
Vietnam.

<u>The Evangelical Church of Vietnam</u> (Christian and Missionary
Alliance): is the oldest and largest Protestant Church in Vietnam.
Pastor Robert Jaffray began the Protestant missionary effort in Vietnam
in 1911, and since that time, the Church has grown to more than a
hundred thousand adherents. Known in Vietnamese as Tin Lanh, "Good
News", the Church has an indigenous organization and a strong missionary
drive which expands its efforts.

The Christian and Missionary Alliance headquarters in South Vietnam is
located at 14 Hong Bang, Cholon (part of the greater Saigon) while the
United States office is 260 W. 44th Street, New York, New York. From its
first efforts in 1911 by pioneer Protestant missionary Robert A. Jaffray
onward, determined efforts have succeeded in creating an indigenous
church with its own administrators and staff of some 441 persons
composed of 346 ethnic Vietnamese and 95 Montagnards. The total of 441
is made up of 296 pastors, 23 teachers, 20 nurses, 18 other medical
workers and 84 other church employees.

In support of these Vietnamese citizens who are full-time church
workers, the Christian Missionary and Alliance in Vietnam has 131
overseas missionaries laboring under the direction of Pastor Thomas
Grady Mangham, Jr. These include 54 clergymen, 1 doctor, 8 nurses, 16
teachers and 52 unsalaried missionary wives. In a number of different
locations and among various tribal peoples, the missionaries have been
the first to succeed in transforming the spoken tribal language into
written form with grammar, etc. This has enabled the reading of
Scripture in the language of the individual and also opened the avenue
of thought in other areas

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of human endeavor. The close cooperation between missionaries and the
Summer Institute of Linguistics provides opportunities for the more
rapid advancement of information and the development of rapport with the
various ethnic groupings of South Vietnam.

The 572 member staff of the Evangelical Church of Vietnam (Christian and
Missionary Alliance) currently operates 341 churches, 14 elementary
schools, 1 high school, 2 hospitals, 1 leprosarium, 3 seminaries or
training schools for pastors and 1 printing house for the publishing of
religious literature. While serving the 41,733 baptised members of this
faith (baptism does not occur until the individual is mature enough to
make this choice for himself), the Church continues to stress the
responsibility which each adherent has for his fellow Vietnamese.

<u>Vietnam Baptist Mission</u>: under the sponsorship of the Foreign
Missionary Board Southern Baptist Convention, Box 6597, Richmond,
Virginia 23230, has a Saigon headquarters (Box 107 Saigon) with current
church work being directed by Pastor Herman P. Hayes. The Baptists began
their efforts in Vietnam on 1 November 1959, and have 300 baptised
members and approximately 400 adherents at present. These figures do not
include the American civilian and military personnel serving in Vietnam
even though many attend and support Baptist activities.

The Vietnam Baptist Mission staff is composed of 15 ethnic Vietnamese
and 27 overseas missionaries. Four Vietnamese are pastors as are 14 of
the overseas missionaries, while the other 11 Vietnamese are engaged in
other church functions. The church staff now operates eight churches, 1
publishing house or plant for the production of religious literature,
and 2 training programs for pastors predicated on plans for the future
and anticipated growth. Pastor Hayes expressed the Vietnam Baptist
Mission's goals in the following words on 14 July 1966:

Baptists carne late to Vietnam. Protestants had been in Vietnam about 48
years prior to the coming of Baptists. Our work on a comparative basis,
therefore is small. We are now located in four major cities with plans
to reach out into others. Our work is primarily church-centered. Our
efforts are primarily in the direction of winning people to Christ,
baptising them, teaching them, and leading them into active Church
life....out of these will grow many of the expressions of Christian Life
and service such as schools, orphanages, etc. The Vietnam Baptist
Mission (the organization of missionaries) does have hopes for medical
work in the near future.

<u>Worldwide Evangelization Crusade</u>: Box A, Fort Washington,
Pennsylvania, is active in Vietnam especially in I and II Corps. P.O.B.
101, Danang is the civilian mailing address for the organization
popularly known as WEC with its Vietnam headquarters in Danang. The
multiple activities of this Protestant Church are directed by Gordon
Hedderly Smith and his son Stanley E. Smith. The formal start of this
church in Vietnam is given as 1956 although the Smith family has been
engaged in Protestant Church work in Vietnam for approximately 30 years.
During this time, the Smiths pioneered in many areas and worked with
tribes in the attempt to convey to them the Protestant faith prior to
the establishment of Worldwide Evangelization Crusade in Vietnam.

At present the WEC with some 500 baptised members have more than 6,500
adherents who attend divine services and are influenced by the church
teachings. Its overseas staff is composed of three clergymen, 1 doctor,
2 nurses, 3 teachers and 3 administrators for a total of 11, while the
indigenous staff numbers some 70 persons. This indigenous staff is made
up of 50 ethnic Vietnamese and 20 Montagnards. The staff consists of 30
pastors, 4 teachers, 5 nurses, 20 medical workers, and 10 miscellaneous
church employees.

In spite of strife, war and Viet Cong activities among both Vietnamese
and Montagnards, at least 21 of the WEC's 38 churches are still
operating. The adherents of the other churches have generally either
fled as refugees or have become casualties of the war. WEC has two
elementary schools, 1 leprosarium, 1 training school for pastors, and
one orphanage for both Montagnard and ethnic Vietnamese children. Though
working among the ethnic Vietnamese, the major strength of the WEC's
following is currently among the Hrey and Jeh tribes, with some 5,500
adherents for these two tribes alone. The activities and teachings of
the WEC, like other organizations, have influences which cannot be
measured in statistics alone.

Extended information may be gleaned about this Protestant missionary
effort by reading Gordon H. Smith's book <u>The Blood Hunters</u> or

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Laura Irene
Smith's Victory in Vietnam. Two color films produced by the WEC show
many mission activities and also reveal many of the customs of the
people among whom the WEC labor. Contact can either be made directly or
through the I Corps Chaplain, Advisory Team \#1, APO San Francisco
96337.

<u>Seventh-day Adventist Mission</u>: P. O. Box 453, Saigon, South
Vietnam began its activities in Vietnam in 1930 as a part of the
worldwide missionary effort of the Adventists with world headquarters at
6840 Eastern Avenue, N. W., Washington, D. C. 20012. Pastor Ralph E.
Neall, the current director, heads a mission staff of 209 people working
within Vietnam. This comparatively large group of workers for a baptised
membership of 1300 is composed of 11 Western missionaries and 198
indigenous workers. The Western missionaries include one pastor, 2
doctors, 1 nurse, 2 business administrators and 3 unsalaried wives. The
indigenous component includes 12 pastors, 16 teachers, 15 nurses, 85
other medical workers, and some 70 miscellaneous employees, many of whom
are salesmen of religious literature.

The Vietnam Seventh-day Adventist Mission currently has 15 churches, 1
large elementary school (presently being converted into both elementary
and high school), 1 nursing school for the training of fully qualified
nurses, 1 hospital (with a new larger one in the plans stage), 1
publishing plant for the publication of religious literature in
Vietnamese and 2 welfare centers for various social services provided to
the community regardless of religious affiliation. With the exception of
nurses, the training of other professional church employees is
undertaken largely in the Philippines or other countries in Southeast
Asia where the church has established schools for this purpose already.
The educational opportunities offered within Vietnam will be expanded as
will the other institutions normally operated by the church as a part of
its church and community services as the membership grows.

<u>Observations of Vietnamese Protestantism</u>: For reasons not covered
in this study, the Protestant churches represented in active Vietnamese
endeavor are conservative. In spite of theological and organizational
differences, the personnel of the various churches have cooperative
rapport with the practice of friendliness and concern for each other.
These conservative Churches practice baptism and membership based upon
the believer's profession of faith, so if children and non-baptised
adherents are included the number of 150,000 or more is not unrealistic.
The insistence of these churches on doctrines of belief so different
from many of the Vietnamese cultural patterns may keep the percentage of
Protestantism comparatively small. However, highly motivated by the
sense of personal responsibility, the Protestants can make valid
contributions to the community and the Vietnamese nation.

<u>Other Religious Groups in Vietnam</u>

<u>Bahai World Faith</u>: has a meeting place at 193/1C Cong Ly, Saigon.
With a belief much like that of the Bahai of the United States, its
adherents are few in number.

<u>Christian Science</u>: have a regular service in the Saigon area at
69 Nguyen Du, on the third floor. This denomination in Vietnam seems to
be for service personnel of Christian Science persuasion as no
Vietnamese adherents were discovered.

<u>Latter-day Saints</u>: 22 Gia Long, Apt. 12 also appears to be
service oriented as it is not listed in the phone book nor do there seem
to be any resident missionaries of the church in the country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Cao Dai](rsv12)
