[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv30)  [Next](rsv32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>The Lotus</u>

Amid the dirty waters of small streams and rivers as well as from the
semi-stagnant pools of water throughout the tropical area of Southeast
Asia (Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Malaysia, etc.) can be seen the
bright green floating leaves and the lovely colors of the Lotus. Such is
the contrast of the flower to the environment wherein it grows, that
long ago, Buddha used it as a symbol of his teachings. Growing out of
the impure, the dirty, and the waste products of civilization, where
sanitation is practiced quite differently than in America, the Lotus
lifts high its stately and lovely blossom in such unsullied and pure
form that it is an object lesson. Buddha taught that as the flower
achieves its mark in spite of its environment, so may men lose their
passions and desires and thereby find release in the spiritual serenity
of Nirvana.

The Lotus flower thus became a religious symbol as well as a popular
food and a sight that creates aesthetic pleasure. The Lotus bud is
perhaps the single most popular offering of the Buddhist as he worships
at his temple, or his home altar. It is quite often held in the folded
hands of the listener within the temple as sermons are given or
meditation is practiced. Often in the early morning hours as the
Buddhist bonze makes his way through the streets with the "merit bowl"
wherein the laity may earn merit by giving cooked rice, there will be a
Lotus bud or two within his hand. Likewise, it has come to form a part
of Asian architectural and sculptural motifs.

Sometimes the Lotus is compared to the feet, the heart, or the
life-giving attributes of the Buddhist female. Moreover it has a history
that predates Buddhism as its symbolism was also of Hindu heritage. For
instance, Brahman legend tells the story of how when Brahman, the god of
the universe, was creating this universe, he went to sleep on the job;
as he slept, the Lotus bud appeared from his naval and its petals
opened, Vishnu emerged and finished the creation.

Buddha used its four stages to symbolize the four types of people and
their distance from enlightenment. The four stages are: (1) the Lotus
bud deeply submerged as it starts its development; (2) the bud about to
reach the surface of the pond; (3) after the bud has cleared the
surface, but with leaf and bud still folded; and (4) the bud standing
tall and straight with its beauty undefiled by the mire from which it
grows. Because of this symbolism, it is always proper to use it as a
floral offering to bonzes when ceremonies are performed or as means of
earning merit. The Lotus bud signifies in Buddhism that the worshipper
is capable of reaching enlightenment because of the opportunities within
his grasp. The unopened bud also tends to last longer than other
flowers, and it has the capacity to bloom when placed in water and left
before the altar.

[Incidentally](errata.htm#38), there are at least five varieties of the
Lotus with the water lily being included, even if not always accepted as
a true Lotus; but the Thai people refer to the two types as "string
Lotus" and "stalk Lotus" with several types of "string Lotus" with
flowers of purple, white to pale blue, and red. There are also at least
five kinds of "stalk Lotus", with each having its own characteristics
and charm when closely studied.

Apart from its religious symbolism and its aesthetic and, at times,
almost ethereal beauty, the Lotus is also a food plant. As food it was
known to the Greek Homer and was widely used by the Chinese, Japanese
and Southeast Asians. Its seed may be eaten fresh or dried and used in
sweet soups and deserts. The root may be used in salad, boiled in soup,
or preserved in sugar and used as desert. From the root may also be
extracted a fine starch used by the inhabitants of that area for certain
special foods. Thus, while in many places it might be just a nuisance,
the Lotus has been turned into food and given religious values while
adding lovely colors in unexpected places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Meaning and Importance of TET](rsv32)
