[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv31)  [Next](rsv33) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>The Meaning and Importance of TET</u>

TET is actually a three day holiday which marks the beginning of the
Lunar New Year, which synchronizes with the Chinese New Year and is
closely tied to the Spring Equinox. To many this means the annual
awakening of nature. 1966, for example, was the year of the Horse, and
1965 was the year of the Snake. Each year of the 12-year cycle has an
animal name. While the Vietnamese celebrate TET, the Chinese in
Thailand, Vietnam, etc., celebrate the new year with many festivities
and ancient religious rites.

Due to religious beliefs, age-old traditions and customs, TET is the
single most important holiday season in Vietnamese life. The first
visitor of the new year is vitally important to them as is the urgent
necessity to avoid anything unpleasant or sick for fear that such will

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

be repeated throughout the year. Because o long Chinese influence and
Confucian teachings, many of the customs and practices are familiar to
the students of Chinese culture. For instance, this is the time when all
debts must be cleared up, when ancestral graves must be visited and
cleaned up; when ancestor family altars must receive special attention
with incense, prayers and flowers as well as food offerings.

To many of the people in this beautiful land, TET is the opportunity to
renew the communion of the dead with those of the future through the
veneration offered by those presently living. It is a renewing of spirit
and body, a settling of old accounts, financial and spiritual. TET is
the time when families want to be together much as do Americans at
Christmas. The longtime Chinese occupation planted the belief that at
this time the "God" or "Spirit" of the Hearth must go and render account
of the family to the Heavenly Emperor in the Jade Palace. To make sure
that the report will be sweet, some families place honey or other sweets
on their paper Gods of the hearth or kitchen before they are burned and
sent on their way. To be sure of a good report for the home, gifts of
fruit, a new paper coat and a paper carp (sacred fish) for riding are
added as inducements, while in the delta, paper animals for burning may
be added.

Sometimes at TET the number of fires in the shopping and industrial
areas have caused the remark "Someone is trying to get insurance to
settle accounts". While firecrackers, and other explosives were used in
peacetime to drive away evil or dangerous spirits, these are now
strictly forbidden. One Celebration almost resulted in tragic deaths for
many when illegal firecrackers were exploded near tense combat troops.
But so that past, present and future may be joyfully united, the
year-end ceremony of sacrifices still occurs as an invitation to the
deceased to take part in the feasting.

Celebration continues for three days, ending the evening of the third
day when all ancestral souls who have returned to the family for the
occasion, must depart for their world. It is then that artificial silver
and gold paper money is burned by the family. This allows the departing
"ghosts" to hire sampans to transport them across the river that divides
"spirit heaven" from the world of the living.

The Vietnamese TET NGUYEN DAN combines many of the secular features of
the American Christmas holidays with religious features observed in All
Souls' Day, etc., with animism, Buddhism, Confucianism, and Hinduism;
each contributing sometimes conflicting features and ideas, but all
combined to make a valid holiday season for our Vietnamese allies.

When the "hearth spirits", or "gods" are absent to make an annual report
to the Jade Emperor, the Vietnamese peasant wants protection from evil
spirits, etc. As a consequence, Buddhism plays an important role during
the three day TET holiday period. The villagers feel that protection is
gained by the special preparation of a long bamboo pole. The pole is
stripped of all leaves but the very top ones and a red eight-sided
paper, bearing the symbols of Buddha's Eightfold Path of righteousness,
is then attached. This pole, which may also have some areca nuts and
betel leaves tied to it for the good spirits, is planted in their yards.
Sometimes small bells which tinkle in the breeze and frighten evil
spirits away, or a small plaited bamboo square symbolizes barriers which
they cannot overcome are used. A small bronze gong, which serves as an
emblem of the "Lord Buddha" may also be found attached to these poles.

Children are sometimes told the story of Buddha's clever victory over
demon spirits. These stories are repeated year by year and become a part
of the heritage given to so many Vietnamese children that animism is
quite evident in much of Vietnam. Briefly told, it seems that the land
of Vietnam was being overrun by terrifying demons. The inhabitants were
frightened, helpless, and always fleeing. But Buddha arrived in answer
to their prayers to save them from their desperate situation.

Buddha sought to purchase some Vietnamese soil, but could buy only as
much as could be covered by his cloak, for which he promised precious
stones and many jewels. The demons, being quite greedy, agreed. Buddha
then backed his demand for the departure of the demon spirits by
throwing down his cloak which grew in size until it covered the land. He
then turned the land over to the people. The raising of the simple
bamboo poles about their homes on the 23rd day of the 12th month of each
lunar year is in remembrance of Buddha's power to deliver from evil.
While Buddha may have this power in the minds of many Vietnamese,
Buddhists from some countries would find this completely unacceptable.
Whether or not you agree with the legend, the point is to remember that
many of the ethnic Vietnamese do.

Naturally TET also is the high point of the year for foods, but a
description of the more popular ones would take a number of articles,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

and even then the sight and scent could not be conveyed to give adequate
representation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dragon in Vietnam](rsv33)
