[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv36)  [Next](rsv38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Vietnamese Self-Sacrifice Customs</u>

Vietnam is a land of tradition and ancient customs. From time to time
the American is "shocked" to see, read or hear of Buddhists who set
themselves afire as part of a technique to achieve certain goals in
which they believe. The difference of religiously influenced cultures
may create an obstacle to ready understanding of this custom.

According to ancient Vietnamese custom, anyone who feels themselves to
be mistreated, or has a claim which demands satisfaction but does not
receive attention, may secure redress by going on a "hunger strike", by
lying down and refusing to move until the "guilty party" gives in. This
may continue until death occurs if necessary. The origin of this custom
seems to have arisen from the Vietnamese horror of scandal in a society
which has a basic tenet of getting along with one's fellowman. Such a
sense gives vivid evidence that the accused must not be a good person,
or such a scene would not be necessary.

By such actions as lying down, refusing to move or eat, etc., the victim
attracts attention of neighbors and even the authorities to his claims,
and these increase pressure on the "guilty" and promote chances of
success in "obtaining justice". It is a personal martyrdom as a protest
against bad judgment!

Suicide is not uncommon, but in such cases either someone is told the
reasons of this drastic action or else a note is left in which the
grievances are set forth as the cause of the action. Ancient Vietnamese
law incriminates those who cause such suicide and classify it "murder by
oppression".

The procedure for creating such scandal is an outgrowth of the Confucian
teachings of the ideal relationships that are to exist between child and
parent, wife and husband, ruled and ruler, individual and society. When
the Buddhist concept of the endless "Wheel of Existence" is added, the
climate is established wherein

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

suicide for cause is given a radically different slant than most
Americans accept.

Awareness that hunger strikes and "suicide for cause" have a long
tradition in Vietnam should provide a better understanding of such
actions when these occur. Should one be present when self-destruction is
about to occur, intervention to save life is acceptable if timed to
"save face" as it provides adequate opportunity to express one's
grievance without the necessity of painful death. Since such possibly
violent actions are viewed in a different context by the Vietnamese
population as a whole than is normal for Americans, it is imperative
that acceptable solutions which do not violate principles be sought when
possible. Having considered all possible solutions to a situation and
having accepted one as being the only valid recourse of action, it may
be just as necessary to act or refrain from acting as it is for the
sincere Buddhist to set himself afire to express protest.

Since it is normally the Mahayana Buddhists of Vietnam who engage in
this fiery death voluntarily, the statement of a leading Vietnamese
Buddhist monk may be of help in understanding just how such deaths are
viewed by the Buddhists, and to what extent these may be either
encouraged or discouraged by religious doctrines found in Vietnam.
"Reverend" Tich Tam Giac is a graduate of the Vietnam Institute of
Buddhist Studies, Saigon, South Vietnam and his statement "The Meaning
of Self-Burning in the Doctrine of Buddhism", was in December 1963
"World Fellowship of Buddhist Bulletin", p. 3. Since he is a Mahayana
Buddhist monk speaking about a Mahayana Buddhist custom in Vietnam, his
words are quoted:

To burn oneself by fire is to prove that what one is saying is of the
utmost importance. There is nothing more painful than burning oneself.
To say something while experiencing this kind of pain is to say it with
the utmost of courage, frankness, determination and sincerity. During
the ceremony of ordination, as practiced in the Mahayana tradition, the
monk-candidate is required to burn one or several small spots on his
body in taking the vow to observe the 250 rules of a Ghiksu (Monk), to
live the life of a monk, to get enlightenment, and to devote his life
for the salvation of all beings. One can, of course, say these things
while sitting in a comfortable arm chair, but when these words are
uttered when kneeling before a community of Sangha (Buddhist clergymen)
and experiencing this kind of pain, they will express all seriousness of
one's heart and mind, and carry much greater weight. In the <u>Sadharma
Pundarika</u>, one of the most famous suttras (Chapters of Scripture) of
Mahayana Buddhism, we see a Bohhisattawa burning one of his arms to
express the determination to work for the salvation of all beings.

The Vietnamese monk, by burning himself, says with all his strength and
determination that he can endure the greatest of suffering to protect
Buddhism, that he is protesting <u>with all his being</u> the policy of
religious oppression and persecution. But why does he burn himself to
death? The difference between <u>burning oneself</u> and <u>burning
oneself to death</u> is only a difference in degree, not nature. A man
who burns himself too much must die. The importance is not to take one's
life, but to burn. What he really aims at is the expression of his will
and determination, not death. In the Buddhist belief, life is not
confined to a period of 60 to 80 or 100 years. Life is eternal. Life is
not confined to this body--life is universal. To express will and
protest by burning oneself, therefore, is not to commit an act of
destruction but to perform an act of construction (or consecration),
i.e., to suffer and to die for the sake of one's religion and one's
people. This is not suicide. Suicide is an act of destruction having the
following causes:

-- lack of courage to live and cope with difficulties

-- despair of life and loss of hope

-- desire of non-existence (Abhava)

This self-destruction is considered by Buddhism as one of the most
serious crimes. The monk who burns himself has lost neither courage nor
hope, nor does he desire nonexistence. On the contrary, he is very
courageous, hopeful and aspiring for something good in the

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

future. He does not think he is destroying himself; he believes in the
good fruition of his act of self-sacrifice for the sake of others. Like
the Buddha in one of his former lives--as told in a story of Jataka--who
gave himself to a hungry lion which was about to devour her own cubs,
the monk believes he is practicing the doctrine of the highest
compassion by sacrificing himself in order to call the attention of, or
to seek help from, the people of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Selected Bibliography](rsv38)
