[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv35)  [Next](rsv37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Ancestor Worship--Worship of Nham-Dien</u>

Among the gifts of the Chinese to Vietnam during 1,000 years of
occupation, and as the big neighbor next door, is ancestor worship
Ancestor Worship is more than just the worship of "spirits" of one's
deceased relatives; it is also the veneration and worship of great men,
or at least the "spirits" of these great men, and many temples have been
erected in which that particular personage may be worshipped. Among the
recognized religions and places of veneration or worship in Vietnam are
many of these temples-some quite small and simple, others large and
showy.

Since rice is the major foodstuff and the staff of life to the
Vietnamese, with the average consumption computed to be a bit over two
pounds a day per adult, anyone aiding rice production in a notable way
would become a famous man. One such individual who lived about the time
of Christ was Nham-Dien, governor of Thanh-Hoa, which today is a
province in North Vietnam. As rice growing seemed not to produce
sufficiently for the labor expended, the farmers turned to fishing and
hunting (wild game such as elephants, tigers, deer, are still available
in Vietnam), and the people suffered from insufficient diet.

Nham-Dien--who apparently had been either raised or educated in
China--taught the Vietnamese the art of wet rice culture. So that water
might be readily available, he laid out canals and divided the lands
into small plots which could be flooded readily from the canals and
rivers that are abundant in Vietnam.

Two thousand years after Nham-Dien introduced wet rice culture to the
Vietnamese, his methods are still used. Throughout the length of South
Vietnam, the rice fields, divided into small plots and watered by canals
that never seem to dry, are constant reminders of this long-dead
governor. To the Vietnamese, who study and learn much of their material
by rote, Nham-Dien is still a vibrate personality whose spirit can help
those who worship him. To aid such worship, there are a number of
temples-especially in his province of Thanh-Hoa-built in his memory,
Because of his work with rice production, and his rules regarding
marriage, Nham-Dien is considered to be among the great men of his
country.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Vietnamese Self-Sacrifice Customs](rsv37)
