[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv32)  [Next](rsv34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>The Dragon in Vietnam</u>

Perhaps the figure most used for decorative purposes in Vietnam is the
Dragon. It is to be seen in temples, on silverware, and cloth of all
kinds, and next to the depiction of bending bamboo is perhaps the most
familiar symbol of that land. The dragon is the most important of the
four symbolic animals of Vietnamese mythology--to the Vietnamese it
symbolizes nobility and power and is believed to be immortal. It can
live anywhere--in the air, underground, in water, etc.; it is believed
to possess such power that, when provoked, it can spit a deadly vapor
which it can turn into either water or fire at will.

While in Western mythology the dragon is an evil beast, and best
illustrated by the story of St. George and the Dragon, in the
East--especially in mainland Asia--it has an opposite significance. The
dragon is the totem, the palladium and emblem, of Vietnam. It is the
symbol of man in general, just as woman is represented by the phoenix,
another of the four mythical animals of the land. When a dragon and a
phoenix are shown together either in cloth designs or carvings, a
marriage is represented; sometimes this is emphasized by the addition of
a Chinese character meaning joy, and greater emphasis is achieved by
repeating the character.

The dragon may be a fanciful elaboration of the several varieties of
common lizards of Vietnam, but its symbolic use seems to be of ancient
Chinese origin.

According to popular belief, the dragon is a genie that presides over
the creation of meteors and other cosmic activity, and belief in cosmic
activity is exceedingly strong in Vietnam. In addition, he is often
considered to be the god of the waters who lives in the sea and other
bodies of water.

According to the Chinese tradition, which is still prevalent in Vietnam,
the dragon has the horns of a deer, the head of a camel, belly of a
crocodile, scales of a fish, and buffalo-like hair. Its hearing ability
is in its horns rather than the ears. The neck of a serpent, eyes of a
demon, and claws of an eagle complete a figure which is rather strange
to the Westerner.

There are many legends of the dragon with some being used to explain the
origin of the Vietnamese people. One of these tells a story of a
Vietnamese King named Lac-Long Quang(circa 2,500 B.C.) of the dragon
race, who kidnapped the wife of his cousin, a Chinese king De-Lai, and
got 100 eggs. From these came a hundred boys: fifty of these, taking
after their father, becoming water geni--the other fifty took after
their mother and became land dwellers. One of the latter founded the
Hung-Vurong dynasty, but its kings were still more at home at the bottom
of the rivers than in their palaces. While Vietnam had a dynasty and
from time to time the ruler died, the Vietnamese did not say "The King
is Dead" but rather "The Dragon has gone up into the upper regions". A
second proverb states, "When the Dragon (the ruler) is peaceful and
happy, the fish (the people) swim freely".

The reddish color of the Sai river is explained by the following legend.
When the Chinese invaded Tonkin in ancient times, their general used
explosives to break up the rocks blocking the river. This explosion
wounded the dragon hidden in its depths and the wound, having never
healed, continues to color the water with its blood. This is very
similar to the Chinese legend that the dragons are found everywhere
underground, and serious difficulties would result if a dragon were
[accidentally](errata.htm#39) wounded. His fury could result in untold
[catastrophe](errata.htm#40).

There are numerous other dragon tales which might be told, but they have
a similar thought and seem to spring from the animistic concept of the
earth having a "spirit" of its own which must be worshipped and
appeased. These legendary stories have a present-day effect on the
thinking of many common folk. To illustrate: a Chinese legend still
current in Vietnam is that a three year old carp can be transformed into
a dragon by certain rites. The Vietnamese, therefore, do not wish to eat
large carp particularly if they are black as this may have dire
consequences. While such concepts are entirely alien to the Western
thought, awareness of such beliefs may help to avoid needless hostility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Veneration of Vietnamese Benefactors](rsv34)
