[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rsv33)  [Next](rsv35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Religions of South Vietnam in Faith and Fact*, US Navy, Bureau of
Naval Personnel, Chaplains Division \[1967\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<u>Veneration of Vietnamese Benefactors</u>

The evidence of ancestor worship in Vietnam is a constant reminder of
Chinese religious influences. The Vietnamese do not hesitate to state
that veneration is given to historical figures who made permanent
contributions to Vietnamese life. These include Marshall DUYET, the
Trung sisters, Nguyen Con Tru, as well as the discoverers of certain
vocations, crafts and arts.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Much of the Vietnamese culture and development was largely in what is
now North Vietnam. Only within the last century or two has the area
known as South Vietnam become settled and developed to any substantial
degree by the Vietnamese themselves. Perhaps this is one reason the
southern Vietnamese seem to resent the northern Vietnamese; the cultural
history and influence of the north is apparently not appreciated nor
accepted. This is comparable to attitudes occasionally found in the
United States between the East and West Coasts, or parts of the North
and South as a result of economic, geographic, and cultural differences.

It was Tich-Quang, governor of what is now the area around Hanoi, who
introduced the Chinese culture which colors every phase of lowland
Vietnamese life. His successor introduced the reading and writing of
Chinese which continued as the basic tool of written communication until
Alexandre De Rhodes, a Roman Catholic Priest, introduced the present
Vietnamese language.

It was a bonze who was credited with the origin of medical arts in
Vietnam in the 10th century. Upon his death, a temple was erected in his
name with an official cult instituted in his memory. Even this "holy
man" learned his medical arts in China! Likewise, Luong-Thi Vinh
introduced mathematics about 1700 after studying in. China, he also
translated Chinese mathematics books and introduced the abacus. To show
gratitude, a temple was erected to honor him.

The brothers who introduced goldsmithry as a craft were honored after
their deaths by having a temple raised in their memory. Likewise, the
book Bac-Ninh-Chi gives credit for the origin of the craft of copper
working to a bonze, Khong-Lo, of about 1250 A.D. who also had a temple
erected in his memory, as did the maker of Vietnamese coinage, one
Luu-Xuan-Tin. Because of his contribution, the king, Le Thanh-Ton,
erected a temple wherein his cult could be perpetuated.

Even the individual credited with introducing mat making to the
Vietnamese has a temple in his memory. Similarly, honor and veneration
is given to that "clever" ambassador who learned from the Chinese the
methods of silk weaving and the methods of growing soya beans and corn.
In spite of Chinese embargoes against the moving of seed out of China,
the ambassador did so. There is still a temple to his memory even though
this was more than 400 years ago.

The facts of ancestor worship and Chinese cultural influences must be
considered in evaluating the forces that have moulded culture in this
part of Southeast Asia. No valid understanding of current thought and
behavior patterns can be gained without awareness of the past and
present Chinese influence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ancestor Worship](rsv35)
