[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs16)  [Next](abs18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

**13. The Western Approaches**

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Despite all the current folderol, the real dividing line between the
"West" and the "East" has always lain, and will always lie, along the
eastern border of the U.S.S.R.*

</div>

We have now reached the summit. Further, I have to admit, albeit with
reluctance, that all my reportage up to this exalted point looks, both
in retrospect and in view of what now faces us, pretty paltry. In fact,
the old saw about straining at gnats intrudes itself on my attention,
unwanted but persistent. It were as if I had up till now been squeezing
a sponge of its last drop of information when what has already been said
is reviewed in the light of what we now have to tackle. Whereas the
reports even from such ABSMally rich areas as British Columbia may be
counted on your fingers and toes, we now find ourselves confronted with
literally thousands of them, spread over a thousand years in time, and
throughout a triangular area with sides measuring approximately 5000,
4000, and 3000 miles in length. Moreover, these reports increase in
number per annum on what looks suspiciously like geometrical progression
so that the greater part of them are bunched up in the immediate past.
Also it now transpires, the matter on hand has been pursued, and even
scientifically pursued, in this area for over a century, though that
pursuit has been plagued by all the same asininities and obstructions as
elsewhere.

At this juncture a few words on the gruesome subject of geopolitics are
called for. Most political boundaries are ridiculous. At one extreme we
have gross misconceptions about "continents," rather fully discussed in
Chapter 18; at the other, such

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span id="img_map12"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP XII. EASTERN
EURASIA](tn/map12.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map12.jpg)  
MAP XII. EASTERN EURASIA  
</span>

**MAP XII. EASTERN EURASIA**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

This most complex geographical setup in the world forms a vast triangle
some 3,000 miles along its western face, which is the great barrier
abutting onto the Russian steppes; some 2,500 miles along its southern
curve, which runs from the Pamirs along the southern rim of the Tibetan
Plateau to Sikang; and 3,000 miles from there along its eastern face to
meet the Barrier in eastern Siberia. The whole of this is basically a
high plateau, the central portion being a hot desert. Upon this, and all
around its rim, lie immense mountain ranges. In the south, there is a
super-upland, the plateau of Tibet, with even greater ranges upon it. It
is an astonishing fact that the greatest of all mountain ranges in the
world, that forms the southern rim of the Tibetan Plateau and contains
the Everest Block, has no recognized name in English. The Tibetans and
the Nepalese know this as the "Mother of All Mountains" or the
*Muh-Dzhura* *rDzhung* *pBlhüm*. The Karakorams are the western end of
this range.

</div>

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

absurdities as the delineation of the North American state of Montana.
In between these extremes man has further insisted on erecting quite
arbitrary fences—such as that between the United States of Northern
North America and the United States of Mexico—though these are sometimes
called iron, bamboo, or "curtains" of other materials. Ridiculous terms
like "the Near East" and "the Middle East," both of which lie in what is
manifestly and geographically "*The West*," add to the confusion; and
then, to top it all off, we get purely political expressions such as
"East" and "West," bits of both of which are now scattered all over the
globe inside each other. Then, some buffoon (like Haushofer or
Treitschke) must needs go and coin the phrase "The Heartland" but omit
to define it. In some respects, such a concept is a splendid idea, as it
implies a central blob which pumps away without cease or surcease, and,
if applied to a certain area in central Eurasia, it makes a lot of sense
ethnologically. Yet, the area that was finally pinned down for this
happens always to have been one of the greatest ethnological blanks—this
is the lowlands between the Urals and the great mountain barrier that
cuts straight across Eurasia from southwest to northeast—while the
"pumping" appears always to have gone on beyond that lofty barrier to
the east.

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

If people insist on splitting themselves into two ethnological camps and
calling these "West" and "East," they would be well advised to consider
some ineradicable geographical facts. The most pertinent of these is
this monstrous mountain barrier lying athwart Eurasia, since it has
always formed, and will always form, the true dividing line between west
and east. It lies along and constitutes the *eastern* boundary of the
U.S.S.R.; and, if you want to be precise about the matter, it also forms
by extension the southern boundary of that vast Union. Today also it
forms the boundary between the Mongoloid-type peoples and the
Caucasoid-type peoples; and I add the suffix "-type" most firmly because
a not inconsiderable body of the peoples west of the barrier were
original Mongoloids, and some on the east side originally Caucasoids but
today (in the now almost classic expression of a certain comedian
imitating a Chinese waiter): "So funny; all American look alike": so
also do all Europeans, even the mongoloid Magyars. This great dividing
line is of the utmost significance.

ABSMs are not found west or north of this line but they are reported
from all along its edge and more or less all over the eastern area
exclusive of the subcontinent of India and the eastern fringe of
islands, as we have already noted. At the same time our information on
ABSMs in this area, apart from the Himalayas and the Indo-Chinese
Peninsula, comes almost exclusively from or through the Russians who
are, of course, wholly in the *Western* area. This last fact may be
rather puzzling to the general reader and somewhat aggravating to
students of disciplines other than the purely geographic and biologic.
Nonetheless, short of a major shift in the earth's crust, nothing—not
even an all-out nuclear war—can alter the facts. Nature constructed our
bed in the "West," and we might just as well make up our minds that we
have got to lie in it together! \[I cannot refrain from adding, purely
as a student of plant and animal distribution, that we might also just
as well give up any thoughts of trying to go and lie in any other
peoples' beds; not only because, as in the case of eastern Eurasia, it
is a bit crowded, but much more definitely because none of them are our
environment. If we do so, we'll go Mongoloid

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

or Negroid in time either by absorption or physical mutation, just as
the Magyars have become Caucasoids in a few hundred years after landing
up in our bailiwick.\]

Considerations such as these are often regarded as what is
euphemistically called political. They are not; they are purely
biological. What is more, if such *facts* rather than a lot of (often
mistaken) *ideas* were used to guide our policies and our activities,
our species would get along much better. Early, primitive, and ancient
man seems to have appreciated these facts if only instinctively, and
acted accordingly. ABSMs seem to have had the clue since the first.
Driven out of their original lowland forest homes they retreated into
the montane forests, and particularly into those areas within those
vegetational zones where Modern Man finds it hardest to get along. This
is true "survival of the fittest": we might well emulate the forlorn
ABSMs. The process happens also to make an otherwise appalling task a
lot easier for this reporter. All I have to do is locate said particular
regions, and the great mass of facts now to be presented then falls into
a very fair semblance of order. The mess can be broken down into
manageable parts—geographical units—and presented one at a time in
logical sequence. To this I shall now proceed.

Let us assume that we have ended up at the northwestern end of the
mighty Himalayas. This lands us in an area known as Gilgit which now
lies in the north of Western Pakistan. \[I apologize for this and a
coming plethora of "political" definitions but there is nothing that a
mere biologist can do about it.\] At this point (see [Map
XII](#img_map12)) you will note that we are very close to (on the right
side, going west) the end of the almost as mighty Karakorams, which in
turn constitute an extension of the "Mother of All Mountains," the
*Muh-Dzhura* *rDzhung* *pBlhüm* of the Tibetans, and which we have
called the southern Tibetan Rim. Ahead of us lies a most unpleasant
complex of mountains known as the Pamirs or "The Roof of the World."
These form a nodal point for all kinds of things in Eurasia—plants,
people and other animals, languages, *and* ABSMs.

The Pamirs may be likened to a monstrous starfish with the appropriate
five arms. These are vast strings of mountain

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

ranges that go off in all directions—the Himalayas; the Karakorams; the
Kunluns leading to the Altyn Tagh and Nan-Shans; the Altai Tagh leading
to the Tien-Shans; and finally the Hindu-Kush going off to the
west. <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_37) From this point we have first
to follow the Hindu-Kush in order to get rid of a rather irksome
business. This is that ABSMs have been reported from all along the
extension of those mountains, which is to say along the Ala Dagh and
Elburz in Iran to Azerbaijan and the Caucasus. There are those who
regard the Caucasus as being in "Europe." As a matter of fact, nobody
has ever made up their minds just where Europe does end in the east
\[*vide: Europe: How Far?* by W. H. Parker in *The Geographical
Journal*, Vol. CXXVI, Part 3, pp. 278-297, September 1960\]; and rather
naturally, since it does not do so anywhere, being only a large
peninsula at the western side of Eurasia. If this peninsula needs
definition—and it does—it should be considered as lying west of the 30th
meridian east which runs roughly from the White Sea to the Bosporus. The
Caucasus area is profoundly in Eurasia.

The Hindu-Kush, Ala Dagh, and Elburz, together with the lower Caspian
Sea, form the southern boundary of the Turkmen S.S.R. Between the
Caspian and the Black Sea there are really two great mountain ranges
with a lowland gutter between them. The southern is composed of Armenia
and Azerbaijan in the U.S.S.R.; the north is the Caucasus. Both are
still very rugged and over their upper reaches uninhabited by humans,
and the latter appears to be a retreat of ABSMs. Their presence is fully
accepted over both areas not only by mountain folk but also by
inhabitants of the lowland villages and towns around their peripheries.
As one of the Russian reports puts it, however, the younger generation
put on a show of scoffing at the whole thing, probably in order to
appear "modern," while the older people are most reluctant to speak
about the creatures for deep-seated and most ancient "religious"

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

reasons. This matter is made abundantly clear in Appendix A by Yonah ibn
Aharon, who points out that there still remains a prehistoric animinism
throughout this whole swath of Eurasia in which the souls of people
enter the lower anthropoids, which latter are consequently held in such
great reverence that even the mention of their names is most
ill-advised. ABSMs, known in this area as *Kaptar* or *Kheeter*, seem to
be regarded as the highest of all anthropoids and nearest of all
"animals" to man.

There are dozens of reports on these *Kaptar* having been seen in recent
years, as distinct from the endless older reports and myths, legends,
and folklore. Many of these are very precise and really quite scientific
in that they were reported by properly trained persons with the usual
Russian mania for precision and suitable confirmation. This makes them
the more instructive and convincing. I would that I could quote them in
their original form but, alas, we don't read Russian so the best I can
attempt is a paraphrasing of translations, using from time to time
phraseology that may look quaint to us but which must be retained as
expressing more exactly what the raconteur had in mind in his own
language. Russian is almost as "mobile" a language as English and, when
reporting in it, shades of meaning are most important. \[Calling upon
another language, to explain what I mean, the Spanish word *noticias*
does not mean precisely "notices"; a good translator expresses it better
as "advices upon (a subject) to everybody, by persons who are presumed
to know what they are talking about" but with a distinct indication that
the editor does not take full responsibility for same. This is a rather
more precise form of our loose phrase "informed sources state."\] One
must bear in mind that the average Russian, especially when making a
deposition or statement on which he may be called, often places more
emphasis on the qualifying words than, perhaps, on the word itself. Thus
"The Engineer X told me in Tomsk that when he was in Omsk …" has a very
special meaning, and aids us in assessing what he finally records.

I could devote a whole book, let alone a full chapter to these reports
of ABSMs from the Caucasus but, for obvious reasons

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

can only give some examples. However, I will add the conclusions of the
reporters since they are so very sane, orderly, and significant. The
only other people who have published such sane statements on this
subject that I know of are the Canadians. It is a pleasure to get back
to fact without a gross overlay of preconceived ideas, prejudice, and
doubt.

The main range of the Caucasus runs from the Black Sea coast about
Krasnodar southeast to the peninsula on which the famous port of Baku is
situated on the Caspian Sea. The range is divided into two blocks of
higher mountains, the smaller in the northwest; the greater forming the
boundary between the Dagestan A.S.S.R. and Chechen on the north and east
side, and Georgia and what is called the Trans-Caucasian republics
(Armenia and Russian Azerbaijan) on the south. There is a particularly
wild area cutting across this block and known as the Tlyaratin, which
embraces practically the whole basin of the River Jurmut and the upper
parts of the Avarskoy Koysu which is a tributary of the Sulak, the main
river of Dagestan. <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_38) These
mountainous regions are clothed in dense, montane, coniferous forests
right up to the snow line and right down to the edges of the few
villages that lie on the adjacent lowlands, and are, over wide
stretches, really quite impenetrable. At the same time, the upper crags
and rocky reaches are equally unapproachable except by well-organized
professional mountaineering expeditions. Despite the most ancient
civilization of the Caucasian region as a whole, and of the adjacent
Armenian block to the south, huge areas remain quite unexplored. In
these, large game reserves have been established, and these

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

are populated by a very large and varied fauna including moose, some
remaining Wisent or European Bison, Red Deer, mountain Sheep, Brown
Bear, wolves, the great northern Lynx, and the Leopard. \[The Snow
Leopard's range does not extend west of the Hindu-Kush. However, Tiger
occur in the Elburz Ranges even west of Teheran.\]

Opposite the Georgians, on the northeast side of the main ranges, the
hill folk are called Avars, those herders and hunters who have for
centuries penetrated farther upward into these fastnesses than any
others. Among them there is universal belief in and acceptance of the
ABSMs they call the *Kaptar*. Surrounding peoples regard them with
increasing skepticism as Folklore, Legend, or Myth in proportion to
their distance from these unexplored uplands; which is the invariable
rule as we shall see when we come to examine these matters (contracted
to M, L, and F, in Chapter 17) . The description they give of this
creature is remarkably clear and quite invariable except for one set of
facts. These concern the number of kinds of *Kaptar* that exist. The
discussion on this point stems mostly from those who live farthest from
the area where they are met with, and it has become enmeshed in a
certain amount of straight myth, notably the curious notion that all of
one kind are females. According to Russian investigators, however, those
who so claim are the least likely to have firsthand knowledge of the
matter, while they were quite unable to explain how this race of females
reproduces and maintains itself. The notion of self-perpetuating, virgin
birth, if I may so express the notion, has been widespread since time
immemorial. It sounds absurd but, of course, it is not biologically
impossible per se; at the same time, there is one very simple
explanation for it. Even modestly civilized people sometimes separate
the sexes in everyday living quarters, and my wife and I once spent some
time with a tribal group of South Amerinds and had to reside in separate
though adjacent villages. Then again, ABSMs seem to show a marked sexual
dimorphism everywhere they are reported, this showing not only in size,
but in color of fur or hair, while the young are said to look different
again. Also, most ABSMs are stated to be solitary, only occasionally

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

seen in pairs or with young in tow. The females, it seems, tend to
associate in going to water, in food gathering, and so forth, while the
males range widely. They are food gatherers rather than hunters and this
we must not forget.

In the Caucasian region, the males seem to be encountered alone in the
upper fastnesses whereas the females, which are readily recognizable it
is said by the great and sometimes positively enormous development of
their breasts (which, unlike any pongids, are pendant or hanging), show
up at lower levels. Then, a Dwarf *Kaptar* is also spoken of,
particularly on the southern face of the mountains, but as one Prof. V.
K. Leontiev, who studied this business locally, with consummate
discipline, observes, nothing is stated about these beings that obviates
their being the young ones or "teen-agers," who also tend to band
together and go off on their own. They are said to be smaller than the
average man and to be clothed in reddish brown wool as opposed to the
other two types—one of which, be it noted, is said always to be a male,
while the other is always female; from which one may draw a rather
obvious assumption one would have supposed—which are variously described
as having dark gray, black, or silvered hair. This change of coat color,
from gingery to gray-brown, to gray-black, and finally to white with
age, is just as consistent with what is found among other Primates as is
the change from shiny black in youth, as displayed by the sad little
Jacko of the Fraser River, to brown and then grizzly. One must note
that, with increasing age, those of us whose head-hair turns white will
find that our axillary and pubic hairs do the same while those who have
profuse chest hair will see that it also follows the head-hair in this
respect. Thus a venerable male ABSM might be as white as the old chap
who paced the truck in Oregon (at 35 mph, be it noted) and then popped
into a lake. If Neanderthalers were hairy, they may well have had a
fluffy wool, like that of a baby One-humped Camel as is so repeatedly
stated by almost all the Eurasians who say they have met their local
small ABSMs, and an "overcoat" of darker hairs like a muskrat and most
other mammals of cooler climates, which develops with age, becomes
profuse and dominant

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

in the prime of life, and then goes silvery to pure white with age.

I cannot find any suggestion that there is more than one type of ABSM in
this area, despite the fact that three quite distinct sets of names are
applied to it there. The indigenous name is *Kaptar* and its derivatives
and associates, but the Kirghiz "*Guli-aban*" group is also used among
peoples of similar origin, while I find that the more distantly
originating "*Almas*" stem also crops up in the form of "*Almasty*" and
"*Albasty*." Some painstaking analysis of the origins of the reports of
these names used in connection with the Caucasus area however brings to
light the fact that the reports in which they were used were made by
"foreigners" or at least by members of groups that are known to have
moved in from the east. The Caucasus is an appalling mix-up; a sort of
Grand Central Station for nomads, conquerors, emigrants, immigrants,
wanderers, lost tribes, lost causes, and perhaps also indigenous
evolution—hence the designation "Caucasoid" which actually means
nothing. The oldest peoples in the area, which is to say those of whom
we have no record of immigration, such as the Georgians and Avars, one
and all adhere to the *Kaptar* designation for their local ABSMs—which,
incidentally, have been perhaps facetiously called "Wind Men" by more
frivolous outsiders!

That these manifestly original Caucasians—if not Caucasoids —are of one
variety comes as rather a relief, especially at this juncture and before
plunging into inner Asia, because there we are going to be beset by
affirmations from all sides that there are not just two or three kinds
in any one area, but that these are all quite different from others in
other areas. I am not quite sure if we will be able to keep our heads
through all that, and I am sure that I have not yet myself got it all
straight, but in the meantime we may take what the Hollanders call a
pause (but pronounce *powzer*) and try to come to grips with the
*Kaptar*.

The clearest account of this creature is a firsthand one reported by
none other than the Prof. V. K. Leontiev mentioned

before and who is graced in one publication \[No. 120, of the Third
Publication of the Special Commission to Study the Snowman

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

of the U.S.S.R. Academy of Sciences, under the Direction of Prof. B. F.
Porshnev and Dr. A. A. Shmakov\] with the illuminating title of "Hunting
Instructor of the Ministry of Hunting of Dagestan A.S.S.R." This is a
man both of parts and of profound precision. I herewith paraphrase his
account with due regard to that precision but with considerable
compression.

It appears that in late July 1957, this gentleman with three associates
was conducting an official investigation of a territory called the Gagan
Sanctuary. On August 5 his companions returned to their headquarters as
their work was finished, and Leontiev decided to make a few days' tour
on his own. He was then at the head of the Jurmut River and spent two
days there checking on some glaciers; he then trekked up a tributary
stream. He notes that he came across leopard tracks on a patch of snow.
After a rest overnight he continued onward and came across a set of
quite different tracks on another patch of snow. He says that "you had
the impression that this animal was walking on his toes—never getting
very heavy on his heels … you could see that his big toe was unusually
developed, but was it a toe or a claw? These footprints were deformed
somewhat because of the snow being slightly in a melted condition."

The next night he camped under an overhanging rock but when preparing
for sleep, "All of a sudden there came a strange cry. It stopped as
suddenly as it started," he writes. "Then after a pause it repeated
again; this time somewhere to the side of the original one. Then it was
quiet. The cry was not repeated again. The cry was very loud. It wasn't
like the yell of an animal—not any wild mammal or bird known to me could
make such a sound, and yet it couldn't be a human being either. \[And he
is a professional wildlife conservator.\] From where I was sitting to
the origin of the cry was approximately 100 meters \[110 yards\], and at
the time the cry was repeated, 200 meters. I just say approximately."
The following day ap- pears to have been a miserable one so that he
decided to camp before dark at the head of the stream in a very dark
gap. He ran out of matches and all the wood was wet but he just managed
to keep the fire going long enough to brew tea; then,

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

he chanced to look up at a neighboring snowfield to the south. Something
moving thereon caught his eye and of this he wrote: "This creature was
going across, ascending slightly the upper part, and away from me. At
the moment I saw him he was approximately 50 to 60 meters away from me.
It was sufficient to have only one glance of him to know that this was a
*Kaptar*."

Leontiev goes on to state that it exactly resembled the descriptions he
had obtained from all the locals adding, "He was walking on his feet,
not touching the ground with his hands. His shoulders were unusually
wide. His body was covered with long dark hair. He was about 2.2 meters
\[about 7 feet\] tall." Realizing that this was a chance for the
procurement of the most priceless scientific information but also
realizing that he could neither catch nor, if he did, overcome the
creature, Leontiev took careful aim and fired a shot at its feet.
However, by this time the *Kaptar* was at extreme range for his rifle
and he does not seem to have hit it for it turned to him and then with
incredible speed waltzed about and ran up the slope with tremendous
speed, cutting through the snowfield, reaching high rocks beyond and
disappearing. Leontiev tried to follow but it was hopeless so he
measured and sketched the footprints before it got dark. The next
morning he re-examined these, made more sketches, and then spent the day
searching around for the creature. Being out of food he had to leave the
next day.

Altogether he estimates that he had the *Kaptar* in view for 5 to 7
minutes and pursued him for 9. He saw his back, left side and cheek;
when he fired he had just a second's sight of the face for it was late
evening, beginning to snow, and he could not see much detail. He then
makes some most interesting remarks, to wit: "He was not too tall \[7
foot would seem enormous to me, *Author*\]; his shoulders were unusually
wide; his arms were long—longer than a man's but shorter than a
monkey's. His feet were *slightly bent* and very heavy \[italics mine\],
and the whole body was covered with a dark gray fur. The length of the
hair on the body was shorter than the hair or fur of a bear. He had
especially long hair on his head. I had the impression that the hairs on
the head were darker than on

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

the body. I couldn't see anything of a tail. I couldn't see any ears.
The head was massive, and when he turned to me, I saw for one second his
face. It was somewhat like an elongated animal face, the general outline
of the nose, lips, and forehead, or the chin or the eyes I couldn't see.
I had the impression that his face, like his body was covered with hair.
His back was slightly bent; he was stoop-shouldered. His general
appearance was human-like. If you want to compare the *Kaptar* with some
living creature the best comparison would be to think of him as a tall,
massively built, wide-shouldered man, with a heavy growth on his face
and the rest of his body."

Leontiev measured and sketched the *Kaptar's* footprints when only a few
minutes old. Of them he says: "This footprint had a very strange
formation. The whole print was about 25 centimeters \[about 9 inches\]
long. <span id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_39) The general impression was of
the toes pushed deeply into the snow. Also around the toes you could see
some rough formation. The explanation is, of course, that he was walking
with bent knees and like 'clawing' into the snow. The \[outer\] four
toes did not come very close to each other, as in humans, but they were
slightly spread out—about ½ of a centimeter to 1 centimeter. The width
of the big toe was 3½ centimeters; in length, 9 centimeters. The length
of the other toes about 5 centimeters. You had the impression that on
all the toes there were very hard scar tissue formations—that the toes
were widely separated and in between there was scar tissue formation.
The entire print narrowed down toward the heel, and there were two
parallel deep ridges like wrinkles. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[†](#fn_40)You had the impression that it was not the
whole step, and only the toes. This was not too unusual because when I
looked at my own footprints I noticed that I put a little harder on the
toes than on a heel and actually, that's the way the *Kaptar* would
walk. The large toe was very far apart from the rest and it was very
long. It seems when you look this over and study the print, the entire
heel of the foot is covered with a thick growth of a tough hide
interspersed with all kinds of little growths and heavy wrinkles.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There were no
claws at all. This footprint has no resemblance to the footprints of any
of the animals that I know. It doesn't look like a footprint of a bear,
and, of course, is entirely different from a footprint of a human heel.

"The cry of the *Kaptar* is very strange and you cannot compare it with
anything else. It consists of several repeating high-and-low pitched
sounds, that remind you of the sound of a gigantic chord. There is
certainly a kind of metallic quality about them. In the cry you can hear
some plaintive note too. I, personally, did not experience any fear
hearing this cry, but to me they seem to express the loneliness of a
lost creature. I could not hear any coherent sounds, or perhaps I
couldn't quite catch the fine shadings of the sound, just the way a
human being pronounces them. The name *cry*, or terminology *cry*
actually does not describe the sound that the *Kaptar* issues. This cry
is peculiar, and so much of its own, that there would be many different
ways of describing it and no particular way to give it *real*
definition. At any rate, not any of the mammals or birds that I know
have a cry similar to the *Kaptar*."

This is by no means the only close encounter with a *Kaptar* in modern
times. First there are literally dozens of reports from locals including
whole village populations who reported them about at various times, and
sometimes for months and at low levels. Then also, one appears to have
been captured in 1941 and physically examined by a lieutenant-colonel of
the Medical Service of the Soviet Army, by the name of V. S. Karapetyan.
I give this report verbatim as supplied to me, already translated, by
the courtesy of the Russian Information Service. It goes as follows:

"From October to December of 1941 our infantry battalion was stationed
some thirty kilometers from the town of Buinaksk \[in the Dagestan
A.S.S.R.\]. One day the representatives of the local authorities asked
me to examine a man caught in the surrounding mountains and brought to
the district center. My medical advice was needed to establish whether
or not this curious creature was a disguised spy.

"I entered a shed with two members of the local authorities. When I
asked why I had to examine the man in a cold shed and not in a warm
room, I was told that the prisoner could not

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

be kept in a warm room. He had sweated in the house so profusely that
they had had to keep him in the shed.

"I can still see the creature as it stood before me, a male, naked and
bare-footed. And it was doubtlessly a man, because its entire shape was
human. The chest, back, and shoulders, however, were covered with shaggy
hair of a dark brown colour \[it is noteworthy that all the local
inhabitants had black hair\]. This fur of his was much like that of a
bear, and 2 to 3 centimeters long. The fur was thinner and softer below
the chest. His wrists were crude and sparsely covered with hair. The
palms of his hands and soles of his feet were free of hair. But the hair
on his head reached to his shoulders partly covering his forehead. The
hair on his head, moreover, felt very rough to the hand. He had no beard
or moustache, though his face was completely covered with a light growth
of hair. The hair around his mouth was also short and sparse.

"The man stood absolutely straight with his arms hanging, and his height
was above the average—about 180 cm. He stood before me like a giant, his
mighty chest thrust forward. His fingers were thick, strong, and
exceptionally large. On the whole, he was considerably bigger than any
of the local inhabitants.

"His eyes told me nothing. They were dull and empty—the eyes of an
animal. And he seemed to me like an animal and nothing more.

"As I learned, he had accepted no food or drink since he was caught. He
had asked for nothing and said nothing. When kept in a warm room he
sweated profusely. While I was there, some water and then some food
\[bread\] was brought up to his mouth; and someone offered him a hand,
but there was no reaction. I gave the verbal conclusion that this was no
disguised person, but a wild man of some kind. Then I returned to my
unit and never heard of him again."

On the little map of Asia in a box at the left-hand upper corner of [Map
XII](#img_map12), you will see a small vermiform tongue of shading
sticking out of the left-hand lower corner of the contained rectangle.
This represents the extension of the Hindu-Kush Range, via the Ala-Dagh
and the Elburz in Iran, to the Armenian highlands and the Caucasus in
the west. This is the

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

farthest west for ABSMs in the Old World unless some really very
startling though admittedly vague reports that have just reached me from
Sweden should have substance. The Scandinavian countries are hotbeds of
myth, legend, and folklore regarding ABSM-like creatures of long ago but
these new statements sound suspiciously like our own Northwestern ones.
I must admit that this has quite unnerved me and I am not prepared to
say any more until I have at least made some attempt to investigate. We
may therefore turn east again and will follow that little wormlike strip
back to the Roof of the World. Along the way, we pass through the Elburz
Ranges.

These are quite surprising for their wildness and the existence therein
of such obvious things as Tigers only a day's drive from Teheran. But
then, I suppose it is really no more odd than Jaguars wandering about
almost within sight of Los Angeles. Nonetheless, there is plenty of
space here for lots of big as yet uncaught things and, by jingo, we get
an alleged ABSM. This came to me from the indefatigable Bernard
Heuvelmans, in the form of a plea for help since we are a sort of
private "Bureau of Missing Persons" for the natural sciences, among
other things. It transpired that a gentleman in New Jersey had written
Bernard and stated: "When I was in the Army \[in World War II\], one man
in my company was an engineer who had worked for an oil company in
Persia. He and I talked together for hours and hours, as men do in the
army, and I never detected him in a single lie, or what I thought was a
lie, or even suspected that he exaggerated anything, but for one curious
thing.

"He said that when he was working in Persia, some Persians brought
around a \`gorilla' they had killed in the mountains. I was amazed that
he should say such a thing. I assured him that there were no gorillas in
Persia, or anywhere else outside of Africa. He said that it was as big
as one, and surely looked like one. He saw it, and that was enough. I
said that there were no anthropoid apes in Asia closer to Persia than
the Malay Peninsula \[sic\]. He was indignant. Was I telling him that he
didn't see it? Of course, he thought also that there were no gorillas
outside of Africa—until he saw this one. He was a bit short-tempered
about it, so I dropped the subject."

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

\[I have not yet traced the gentleman concerned but his name is Daniel
Dotson; his home state is Utah but he was in Washington, D.C. when he
joined the Army. If anybody knows him, for the love of mike, please
write me; and if you know where he is, don't wait on ceremony but extend
to him my invitation to dinner forthwith. He can name the time and
place.\]

This is the only specifically Iranian (Persian) report that I have but
there are others from the Iranian-Turkmen S.S.R. border, and more from
the Iranian-Afghanistani border. The geography of this and the adjacent
area, which I call that of the Pamirs generally, and to which we will
now proceed, is so complicated both physically and politically that I
have to resort to the accompanying little maps. Most of the material
that

<span id="img_29800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The borders of the
U.S.S.R., Iran, Iraq, and Turkey, and the Caucasus. Dagestan is one of
the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.](tn/29800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29800.jpg)  
The borders of the U.S.S.R., Iran, Iraq, and Turkey, and the Caucasus.
Dagestan is one of the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics.  
</span>

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span id="img_29900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The borders of the
U.S.S.R., China, Pakistan, and Afghanistan. About these borders is the
Pamir Range. B.A.A. is the Badakshan Autonomous Area.](tn/29900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/29900.jpg)  
The borders of the U.S.S.R., China, Pakistan, and Afghanistan. About
these borders is the Pamir Range. B.A.A. is the Badakshan Autonomous
Area.  
</span>

immediately follows comes from Russian sources and I am simply following
their breakdown of this into regions of their designation. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_41) These have political or rather ethnic
tabs on them such as Kirghiz, Uzbek, Tadzhik, Kazakh, or simply
"Chinese" assigned to them. This is really most muddling for the
boundaries of these groups are utterly bewildering and interlocking as
the map shows, while all these peoples have been surging about for
centuries, elbowing each other, and dozens more peoples, in and out of
valleys and off plateaus, gradually getting themselves worked into a
sort of political pudding. Also lots of them are still nomadic, while
families

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

and sometimes whole villages just up and move somewhere else. Then the
tab "Chinese" in this case means simply that the place is on the Chinese
side of the border, here principally Sinkiang, but also a whole host of
other border provinces, autonomies, and such. Finally, a considerable
percentage of the place names cited are not on any map; not even the
most excellent, modern, Russian maps. This area must therefore be
understood to encompass not only the Pamirs themselves, but the adjacent
mountainous portions of Afghanistan, the Uzbek, Tadzhik, Kirghiz, and
Kazakh S.S.R.'s and the Badakshan Autonomous Area \[to be called simply
the A.A.\] unless otherwise stated. This of course runs off into the
Karakorams to the east and the Ala-Tagh and Tien-Shan to the north. Most
of the information from these regions was unearthed by the 1958
Expedition of the Russian Academy of Sciences to investigate the
"Snowman" problem there.

In one of the Russian booklets cited, a map was included showing the
distribution of myth, legend, and folklore about ABSMs in Eurasia; the
areas from which reports of sightings, encounters, and tracks have been
recorded within this century; and a dark globular blob covering this
general Pamirs region. The legend states that this blob or blot was
considered by the Soviet scientists to be the last remaining stronghold
and the only remaining breeding ground of the Asiatic ABSMs. This is a
very curious notion and not strictly in accord with either the published
opinions of Prof. Porshnev himself \[due to a certain very pertinent,
and in my opinion, correct observation that he makes in one of his
articles\] nor with those of the Mongolian and Chinese scientists. In
fact, I am of the mind that it was an idea imposed on the Commission by
a sort of backhanded tradition stemming from the days before ABSMs were
taken seriously even in Russia. Once again it was probably due to the
old "*snow*man" bit; the everlasting reiteration that the creature or
creatures *lived* in the perpetual upland snowfields, the obvious
corollary to which was the biggest and most perpetual snowfields were
the most logical places to look for them.

Professor Porshnev however states in what I can only describe

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

as a stirring article in a magazine entitled *The Contemporary East*:
"The expression Snowman is not supposed to mean a creature living among
perpetual snow (or exclusively in the snow). Similar expressions are
used in connection with some animals, like the Snow Leopard. It means
only that this specimen (species) belongs to the fauna of the high
mountain ranges. He appears on the snowfields or glaciers only while
migrating. He lives, however, and finds his food *below* the snowline,
among the rocks and alpine meadows, sometimes even in the subalpine
zone, in the forests, as well as among the rocky sands of the desert and
in reedy thickets. The alpine zone \[i.e. Upper Montane coniferous
forest\] is known for its rich and lush vegetation and the variety of
its animal life." Professor Porshnev is so exactly right.

Neither the Pamirs themselves nor the area generally are wholly
snow-clad; as a matter of fact the whole is a vast hodgepodge of deep
valleys, gorges, canyons, and intermediate ridges, and all the former
are heavily forested up to considerable heights being at a rather low
latitude. This may be called a wilderness area but it is not, strange as
it may seem, anything so much like one as our own Northwest. There have
always been people there, or barging through it, since most ancient
times and today there are meteorological stations dotted all about it,
while the extensive international boundaries that meander through it are
not exactly left to the imagination or desires of the locals. Both the
Russians and the Chinese have conducted rather thorough explorations
into the area, while the Afghans live there, as do most of the Tadzhiks
and Kirghiz, and quite a lot of other people.

Practically everybody who does live, or even camps there, is of a single
mind about the existence among them, and all over the lot, of ABSMs.
This is another case such as that of the Himalayas, the Great Gutter,
and the Southern Tibet Rim, where the cases reported are just too
numerous to detail as well as too consistent to be worth recording
specifically. Such a procedure would be quite silly: rather like
recording sightings of Mountain Lions from our Southwest. The bloody
things are everywhere and seem always to have been; nobody locally

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

paid much more attention to them than they did to other large wild fauna
until outsiders started asking about them. Then they mostly clammed up;
for two very different reasons, however.

First, the ancient animism mentioned above, is here even more deeply
ingrained, but more shallowly covered by modern faiths such as Buddhism,
and Islam than it is in the Caucasus, so that ABSMs being only just not
men are regarded as ideal recipients for departed souls and should not
be molested. This leads to taking special pains to steer foreigners away
from them, while not mentioning their real names but referring to them
vaguely, in generic terms. Secondly, to put the matter frankly, boiled
ABSMs produced the most extremely potent and magical medicines for which
really vast sums, in bar gold, were once paid in Russia, China, and
especially in India. These medicines were known to the most ancient
Chinese, to the Mongolians, the Tibetans, and to all Mongolic peoples
all the way to Turkey. In the Pamirs area, the boiling, preparation,
export, and marketing of these ABSM extracts (*moomuyam*) \[called
*mumer* by some\] was carried on principally by Gypsies —referred to as
the Luli or Asiatic Gypsies—who wandered all over the lot but mostly in
directions exactly contrary to the normal annual migrations of the
nomads for very obvious trade purposes. These Gypsies held a very
peculiar and unique position in this part of the world. They were
regarded as having sort of direct lines of communication both with God
and the Devil, \[and whole pantheons of other entities to boot\] and so
to be both able and sanctioned to tamper with most venerated things.
Actually, like their Western congeners, they were consummate poachers,
and since they could not be prevented from hunting anything, however
sacred, and did not seem to suffer any dire consequences from doing so,
they were assumed to have some special immunity or divine dispensation.
At the same time, the whole concept of "Extract of ABSM" was probably a
hang-over from most ancient ritual cannibalism, whereby token
consumption of special parts of a powerful quarry or enemy \[or even
fellow citizen\] was believed to transfer to you some of his powers. I
witnessed just this process in the

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cameroons, West
Africa, when an enormous male Gorilla was killed. The local Juju-chap
begged bits of certain glands—and he knew his anatomy as well as any
college demonstrator—and other parts of the body, made a brew out of
these, and passed it around to all the hunters who took a token sip and
smeared some on their gun barrels.

These two factors—the deep-seated reverence for ABSMs by the locals on
the one hand, and their value as "medicine" on the other—have proved to
be most potent ones in keeping information about the creatures from all
outsiders. Personally, I suspect that there is something of the first
attitude current among both the Northern and Southern Amerinds. This
whole attitude in both its aspects comes to light in another way. This
is the careful preservation of the heads and hands of ABSMs—and other
Primates as well, it may be noted. The head, dried whole, has special
significance, not for ingestion, like the extract, but as an object with
its own medicinal qualities, and like any other sacred reliquary is kept
hidden. This custom is pre-Buddhist but has been incorporated into
Lamaist practice. The hands have another significance. They are kept as
mere talismans, not having any deep religious significance, but rather
because the hands of Primates (and men) have always seemed a marvel to
Mongolian peoples, being literally the key to the success of both. There
are mummified or desiccated hands kept in monasteries and by private
individuals of communities all over Eastern Eurasia, from the Great
Barrier, east. A few in Nepal have been shown to foreigners as we have
related; others have been shown to Mongolian and Chinese scientists; and
there are a few reports of them recorded in the Russian publications.

This is not the only aspect of ABSMery that presents a completely
different face once we pass east, up and on to the great highlands of
the Middle Mongoloid peoples. Here is the true heartland, not only of
the greater part of modern humanity, but of culture also, for learning
was apparently thriving there when even the Greeks were yet occupied in
little else but bashing the Minoans' and each others' heads in, while we
in the far west were running about clothed in blue paint and chipping

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

flints. The ancient repositories of knowledge and of documents lie
sprawled up the great "basin" that forms the center of these eastern
uplands, between the Great Barrier on the west, the southern Rim of
Tibet on the south, and the escarpment on the east that fronts onto the
lowlands of Manchuria and China proper. Around the periphery, along the
Himalayas, through the Pamirs, and northeast up the Great Barrier to the
region of Lake Baikal, there is only a secondhand knowledge of this
ancient erudition or of its records of such matters as ABSMs; this
knowledge moreover is often vague and distorted. The peoples of the
western Pamirs were mountaineers, hunters, shepherds, and agricultural
peasants; those of the Barrier itself mostly nomadic herders, who moved
back and forth along the steppes that fringe the Barrier to the west and
north, and stretch west to the Caspian. They were not literate and they
did not support centuries-old libraries in monasteries, as did the inner
Mongols. The Chinese on the other side of the uplands were settled
agriculturists and at an early date took to city dwelling and the
formation of city-states. They too developed an advanced "learning" but,
despite the fact that "China" has for centuries nominally spread west to
the Pamirs and to the inside of the Great Barrier, it absorbed more
culture from those inner regions than it exported to them, while China
proper was itself constantly overrun by Mongols coming notably down from
the north through Manchuria.

When we get onto the great plateau, or rather into its great basin we
will meet for the first time straight talk about ABSMs, rather than
rumors, hearsay, and the somewhat dumfounded disbelief that we have
encountered everywhere else, even among the most erudite. Educated
Mongolians, using that term in its widest and proper sense to include
all the peoples from the Siberia border to Nepal, and from Sinkiang to
the Chinese escarpment, have a wealth of historical record about ABSMs,
and are brought up to the notion that they still exist, *in several
distinct forms*, all over their country, in isolated pockets, and all
around its periphery in an almost unbroken line. Modern scientists of
the Mongolian Peoples' Republic are fully aware of this and are
beginning to restudy, reappraise

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

and make known to the world this store of knowledge, but they have as
yet only just scratched the surface. The matter of ABSMs is really a
rather abstruse item in their fund of knowledge. Mongolians are very
practical people and although they have for millennia delved into every
aspect of life, ethnology per se was one of the last of their interests.
Wildlife was important, and medicine very much so, and it is in these
literatures that amazing facts about ABSMs are found, as we shall see in
the next chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_37"></span>[286:\*](abs17.htm#fr_38) Place names from now
on are going to become as awful as political definitions. I have tried
to confine myself to larger generalities that are shown on the map, and
identify places that are not on that map by these generalities.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[288:\*](abs17.htm#fr_39) As far as possible I
have endeavored to choose place names, such as Krasnodar and Baku, that
can be readily found in standard atlases, and to use the traditional
English spellings for these though these are almost invariably quite
different from the official Russian and/or local spellings. Names that
are not to be found on readily obtainable atlases or maps are spelt as
given by the translators of the publications from which they were taken.
In many cases in this and the following chapter I quote names that do
not appear on any obtainable maps. These may well be altogether
inaccurately spelt, having been rendered phonetically first into Russian
and thence into English. The results may be quite horrible to the local
citizens. For this I duly apologize, in the unlikely event that they
ever read this book.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[294:\*](abs17.htm#fr_40) There would seem to be
something wrong here. A 9-inch foot for a 7-ft. giant seems most
improbable (*Author*).

<span id="fn_40"></span>[294:†](abs17.htm#fr_41) See the Shipton
*Meh*-*Teh* prints.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[299:\*](abs17.htm#fr_42) These sources are
first and foremost four Booklets issued by the Special Commission set up
to study the Snowman Problem by the Academy of Sciences of the U.S.S.R.,
under the Direction of Prof. B. F. Porshnev and Dr. A. A. Shmakov. Bks.
1 and 2 were published in 1958; Nos. 3 and 4 in 1959 in Moscow. Secondly
there are a number of articles kindly sent to me by Prof. Porshnev and a
voluminous report made available by the Russian News Services.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14. The Eastern Horizon](abs18)
