[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs09)  [Next](abs11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

6\. In Our Own Back Yard

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*When something happens in the next county, we all get excited, but how
many of us go take a look at it? If it is not pleasant or impugns our
local community, we usually assert it is a hoax.*

</div>

Now that we are squarely back on the tracks, we might as well stay on
them and skip, for the moment, all chronology. There is a business about
giant, humanoid-appearing foot-tracks that has been going on in this
country for far too long. It needs examination, and either exposition or
debunking. It centers around the Great Basin, which is mostly now the
state of Nevada, but it slops over in all directions and, in the form of
giants capable of making such tracks, it reaches from Canada to Mexico,
from the Pacific coast to Pennsylvania, and right on into the portals of
the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.

As will be seen from the discussion of what I euphemistically call
Myths, Legends, and Folklore (Chapter 17) such things are linked up all
over a wide area from New Mexico to Puget Sound but center round the
Sierra Nevada. They are linked by both traditional, early, and even
recent accounts of a giant race of wild people, who inhabited this area
in bygone days, and who not only were there before the Amerinds arrived,
but persisted for a very long time after they had done so and, it is
alleged, still linger on today. In tradition, these personages are not
overly exaggerated. They are consistently reported as having been on an
average about 7 to 8 feet tall (or its equivalent), but to have included
outsized individuals, to boot, that were especially reverenced.

We have seen a record of a skeleton fitting these dimensions

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="img_map04"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP IV. NORTHERN
CALIFORNIA](tn/map04.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map04.jpg.md)  
MAP IV. NORTHERN CALIFORNIA  
</span>

**MAP IV. NORTHERN CALIFORNIA**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The land area on this map represents approximately 45,000 square miles.
All but a small portion at the extreme south around San Francisco, and a
sliver of the upper Sacramento Valley, are mountains. These are not
excessively high but are very steep and closely packed, with deep narrow
gorges between. However, the various blocks contained within this area
are not at all homogeneous. The mighty Cascades are volcanic and much
larger than the coastal ranges. The Klamaths are the "oldest" from a
faunistic point of view; the Trinities are newer and of somewhat
different phyto-geographic constitution. Along the coast, from just
south of Cape Blanco, but a little way in from that coast, to a little
south of San Francisco Bay is the land of the great Redwoods (Sequoia
*sempervirens*). The whole mountainous part is clothed in almost
unbroken forest, and ABSMs have been reported from Clear Lake in the
south to the northern edge of the Siskiyous and beyond to the northeast.

</div>

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

allegedly found in British Columbia. There are plenty of others but we
just don't talk about them. Unfortunately, I have not had the
opportunity to follow up the notes given to me some time ago on this
subject, regarding Nevada, by a good friend, a man with a genius for
bibliographical research, a very wide and real knowledge of American
prehistory and folklore, of Amerindian history, and of colonial
tradition. It is a voluminous and very startling file, containing what
seem to me to be endless references to what are classed as "giant
burials" from all over the place. Many of these are said to be housed in
small county and city museums dotted about the West, and most seem to
have been lodged therein during the 19th century. A few are said to have
gone to the Smithsonian, yet all have been totally ignored ever since.
The reason for this ig-*nor*-ance, as well as a notable ignorance of the
subject, is stated by this indefatigable literary groundhog to be the
really abominable story of the foot-tracks of Carson City jail, a most
odd affair. It goes as follows:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

This business was a *cause célèbre* 80 years ago. It could have passed
almost unnoticed but for two facts; first, that said tracks were found
in sandstone at a depth of some 25 feet below the surface in the jail
compound of Carson City, Nevada. The second thing that stimulated such

</div>

 

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

wide interest was not that some scientists said that some of these
tracks were made by giant men of over a *million* \[sic\] years ago, but
that Mark Twain wrote a positively hilarious story with the discovery as
its main theme or *raison d'etre*. These facts have been quoted,
misquoted, and just mentioned over and over again. The true story
represents one of the finest examples of scientific skullduggery—and
vagueness—on record.

First, some of the tracks—there were others of elephantines, deer, cats,
and "giant birds"—looked like those of a giant humanoid. This fact was
published by Dr. Harkness of San Francisco through the California
Academy of Sciences. In his report, the author gave some sketches of
said tracks but stated that he had "filled out those areas not clearly
shown in the originals." These areas happen very conveniently to go
right around the front of the imprints and down their inner sides. As a
result they look generally much more human than they would otherwise
have done; at the same time just such areas would have cut out any
imprints of toes (human or otherwise). Dr. LeConte, of California,
agreed in print.

The result of these communications was an immediate response \[as was
almost invariable in that decade\] from (Professors) O. K. Marsh and E.
D. Cope. Marsh, of Yale, blasted the idea in his own inimitable style:
he did not even bother to refute the matter; he simply stated that the
tracks were those of a ground-sloth—either *Mylodon* or what he called
*Morotherium* \[sic\]. No animal has received such a name, but there is,
of course, the really giant Ground-Sloth (*Megatherium*); a detail of
such a trifling nature would of course not hinder this paleontological
free-boater. The most interesting part of this pat pontification is that
he appears to have accepted Harkness' quite illegitimate touching up of
the tracks, and then to have stated that they were manifestly those of a
ground-sloth. Thus, he was, *ipso facto*, wrong in that, as touched up,
they were not those of such an animal. He seems to have completely
missed the further point that before touching up they could well have
been so. However, he pulled still another boner.

Ground-Sloths—which were actually enormous kinds of shaggy,
short-tailed, neotropical anteaters more closely related to the Giant
Anteater (*Myrmecophaga*) than to the living Tree-Sloths—could
apparently stand on their hind legs but they used their immensely thick
short tails as a third prong of a tripod to do so. If they waddled along
on their hind legs, their tails must have gouged a deep channel between
the tracks of their feet. There were no such channels in the Carson City
tracks. Marsh seems to have appreciated this fact so he conjured up some
"smaller imprints, obviously those of front feet somewhat outside the
main tracks." No such tracks were ever recorded, or sketched. \[Cope,
Marsh's most implacable

</div>

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

foe, simply implied that Marsh was wrong, and that anyone else (LeConte
and Harkness) was more reliable.\] They probably never existed! This is
the way awkward "scientific" discoveries are handled: if they don't fit
into the already approved scheme, you make them do so—and by any lie
your reputation can get away with. For all one knows, the original
tracks may even have been those of a good old *Oh-Mah*.

</div>

There is an official wind-up to this but it is almost as extraordinary
and inexplicable as the facts themselves. For some reason serious-minded
scientists—by which I mean those who still have open minds—*have*
concluded that these beastly things are the tracks of one of the Giant
Ground-Sloths. We have radiocarbon dated bones of some of these
creatures killed and eaten by men of a pretty advanced culture in the
Southwest—but I cannot understand how any paleontologist, let alone
zoologist, could ever conceive of any form of such a creature \[of which
we *have* a foot\] having ever either walked on its hind legs alone or
left a footprint anything like those of Carson City jail. This
identification, however, led to all the other large humanoid tracks
being dismissed as "just those of fossil animals."

Would that we might pursue the matter of giant skeletons but at this
juncture it would be inappropriate. It is (as of now) really a separate
subject, and until we obtain a fresh skeleton of one of the large or
giant ABSMs, or some competent, trustworthy, and really informed
physical anthropologist happens to stumble upon one in a museum, it must
be left dangling. So, again, we jump back onto the tracks.

This would be in the year 1890 at a place on the Chetco River about the
border between California and Oregon. It appears that about that date
and thereabouts, the citizenry had been bothered for some time by really
gigantic foot-tracks that looked, according to the contemporary records,
just like those that would be left by enormous naked human feet, which
passed back and forth from the forests to the seashore. Then things
began to happen at a mining camp some 50 miles inland. Large objects
were moved at night and there were unpleasant noises, all naturally
attributed to marauding bears, until one fine morning when, after a
particularly rambunctious

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

night, during which somebody fired at something, two sets of large
human-type tracks showed up all around the camp. A posse was organized
and tracked these for a long way into the forest but eventually gave up.
A short time later, however, a man was chased into camp by something
very large, the looks of which he did not wait to investigate. A watch
was set; two men at a time, for a few hours each. Then it happened.

One couple going to relieve a watch found their two companions dead and
really grossly mutilated. They had in fact been literally smashed and
apparently by being picked up and slammed repeatedly onto the ground so
that they looked as if they had fallen off a high cliff onto rocks. The
account particularly specifies that there was nothing anywhere near off
which they could have fallen. The wretched men had emptied their rifles
and there was both spoor and a large blood-trail leading off into the
bush. This the whole camp personnel followed with the aid of Amerindian
trackers. It led into the Siskiyou complex of mountains to a point far
beyond that which any even of the Amerinds had previously penetrated.
There, the men are said to have come upon a fresh lava flow. This is an
astonishing item. There is volcanicity in the area and there had been an
account 14 years before of a great quake and the sound of a far distant
explosion, heard on the coast of Oregon, and of a dull glow said to have
been seen in the sky for two nights but nothing definite about a
volcanic eruption was even suggested at the time. What is more, this
report by a party of ABSM hunters was also ignored and it was not till
after World War II that lava beds, now re-vegetated but nonetheless of
very recent vintage, were located in the area, although they had shown
up on aerial maps as irregular patches of some unique form of
ground-cover.

This rather gruesome incident appears to have satisfied even local
curiosity for some time as nothing much is reported for quite a few
years, though a very old Amerindian patriot told me with a whimsical
smile of one Chester Johnny of his tribal group who in the year 1905
spent a happy hour watching

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

a large papa *Toké-Mussi* (as the local giant ABSM or *Sasquatch* is
called) trying to teach his two youngsters to swim in a river, and to
spike fish with sticks. The records I have—though they are, of course,
very very far from complete—are almost blank until 1924 when a bunch of
hard-boiled loggers came literally roaring into the small town of Kelso,
Washington, from their advanced camp in the Cascades, and absolutely
refused to go back nor anywhere else in the region out of sight of a
highway. They said that their camp had been attacked by a number of
enormous hairy wild men who had pelted them with stones and other
debris. In view of their tough characters and stubborn attitude, a posse
was formed and, well armed, went to investigate. No ABSMs were seen but
they had left their enormous tracks everywhere and the cabin of the
loggers was not just a shambles but in great part destroyed. That year
there had been terrible man-induced forest fires in the region for the
first time. I have often wondered if the ABSMs decided to give little
"human" men a peremptory lesson in conservation—the best and only really
satisfactory approach to which is the total eradication of said little
men from the entire locality.

Now, here we are back again at the date 1924. Wherever we go, it seems,
and it will recur, there was a marked turning point in ABSM history in
the demi-decade 1920 to 1925. I think there must have been a great
world-wide historical break at that time which perhaps will not become
apparent to historians for many generations. What it was I can only
conjecture but more and more I am coming to think that this was the real
time of change-over from all that went before to what we call modern
times, or the new world. Most of the things that have really affected
the outlook of humanity, like the invention of the typewriter,
electrical power, and especially light, radio, internal combustion
engines, flying machines, and so forth, had taken place before this, but
then came the social upheavals of the postwar era. Not even these things
had really taken hold before the 1920's, and they took a few years to do
so even after that. Man's outlook on life then changed radically
everywhere, and he also took a completely

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

new look at his environment. A great number of the shibboleths he had
previously held most precious just collapsed, while a whole lot that he
had previously considered worthless or redundant suddenly acquired
entirely new status. The change was technologically induced but it did
not greatly affect basic science—funnily enough—but rather sociological
attitudes. It was not that new things began to happen all at once so
much as that people began to treat the old ones in an entirely different
light. On the one hand, real exploration began: on the other, just
plain, go-have-a-look exploration came to an end.

Things like abominable foot-tracks went into limbo. The age of "the
Curiosity" was over and people were no longer curious. They demanded the
facts and in some respects they got them. In others they got falsehood
or nothing at all. ABSMs became definitely *de trop*, and gay souls like
Prof. Khakhlov, Mr. Tombazi, and others, no longer went barging about
the world recording curiosities and writing about them. This initiated
the age of skepticism par excellence.

During the 35-year period subsequent to this strange historical turning
point, a lot went on nonetheless, and this, due perhaps to its
suppression, gradually built up a veritable explosion at the end of the
1950's. It is hard enough to suppress anything, but suppressing truth
(i.e. facts) entails its own special hazards. People are more suspicious
of truth than they are of falsehood and they almost invariably downgrade
it if it clashes with belief or faiths. But "truth will out" seems not
to be an altogether valueless cliché. Then again, both false facts, and
the suppression of unpleasant facts is apt to be extremely costly; and,
if you really want to get at the truth of anything, anywhere, reach
first for a pocketbook. I seem to be full of clichés, but it is also
perfectly true that if you hit anybody through his pocketbook you are
more likely to loosen him up than by hitting him anywhere else. And, as
I am in this rut, I might as well add that, while love of money may be
the root of all evil, it is still by far the best invention yet for
getting at the facts. The moment anything, however curious (or
unpleasant) it is considered generally, develops a

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

value, it automatically develops a potential, and when it is founded on
fact, it cannot forever be suppressed.

In our case, also, the facts have several special connotations. They
impinge directly upon our most basic precepts, such as religion, ethics,
politics, and science. A live ABSM would be the greatest propaganda
weapon possible; at one fell swoop it would prove Darwinism, and set at
nought a great part of religious belief and dogma, while it would also
confound a great deal of that which science has written into *its*
dogma. Quite apart from all of these high and mighty matters, plain
ordinary people have finally become fed up with being called fools,
liars, and idiots. The world is full of crackpots but it is rapidly
becoming manifest that most of these make a specialty of pursuing
beliefs, prejudices, and faiths rather than the facts of everyday life.
If you walk into a truck and stagger home bleeding to death, it is quite
useless anybody telling you that you are imagining things, that there is
no such thing as a truck, or that you ought to be confined. It doesn't
help your feelings (or matters as a whole) if somebody suggests that it
was undoubtedly a bus and not a truck, or perhaps even a motorcycle.
Either the damned thing was there or it wasn't, skeptics
notwithstanding; and the average citizen becomes peeved when he is told
that he, who saw the thing, is lying, especially by a person who was not
present. During the last 40 years, plain, solid citizens have been
getting pretty peeved.

During this period ABSMery in the United States contracted in upon
itself and became concentrated in and around this Klamath district in
northern California, which I described as an example of a virgin montane
forest area. It now transpires that somebody has reported something
about the matter every year since 1938 in this area while, of course,
the Amerinds thereabouts just went steadily and stoically on living with
the business and keeping their mouths shut. I won't go into all of these
items because they are so exactly alike, and they are all just like the
descriptions given of the *Sasquatches*. Hereabouts they are called, as
I have said, *Toké-Mussis* by one Amerindian group, the Yurok or Yurock,
and *Oh-Mahs* by

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the Hŭppas; there are endless other names for the big ones in accordance
with the number of tribes, sub-tribes, and familial dialects of the
Amerinds. The name *Oh-Mah*, which is rapidly coming into universal
acceptance, actually means something very close to "Devil" as used by
our ancestors—a sort of large chap with nasty habits who is dangerous,
bestial, potentially carnivorous, and smelly but definitely rather
human. *Non*—Amerinds in the area have come to call them "Bigfoot"
having the usually mistakes idea that there is just *one* giant of some
kind loose in the countryside—just as people speak of *The* Loch Ness
Monster, as if it were a lone individual that has been paddling about
therein since Cretaceous times, mateless and possibly even parentless.
But there is a complication here.

I would have had to come to this sooner or later in any case so I might
as well introduce it now, even if it is not the place to go into it in
full. To jump ahead, let me say that there are now some hundred separate
and isolated areas in the world where or from which ABSMs have been
reported—and this is apart from Myth, Legend, and Folklore. The
creatures described vary considerably but, with a few notable
exceptions, they appear to fall very clearly into four main types—a
large (or giant, to us), a medium or man-sized, a small or pigmy, and an
excessively bestial creature known as the *Meh-Teh*. These types are not
set or patterned, and there is considerable variety in the actual sizes
of each as reported. However, they would each seem to form a fairly well
defined animal form, having certain particulars, characters,
characteristics, and other perquisites all their own.

The giant ones are inhabitants of higher elevations and do actually go
around in snow when needs be. They seem to be more carnivorous, at least
in winter, like many Primates; they have very human-type feet; and they
are clothed in short, thick, hairy fur. The medium-sized are very
manlike but clothed in longer, darker hair, have very pointed heads, and
very short, broad feet with large toes, the first being extra large and
widely separated. They are vegetarian or omnivorous and live in upper
montane forests but seldom go up

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

above the tree-line. The little pigmies are also forest dwellers, but in
the valleys and bottoms, or at lower levels, and where it is much
warmer. They have little manlike feet but with very pointed heels, are
clothed in fur but have much longer head-hair that forms a mane down the
midback. They are excellent tree-climbers and will take to water. They
go about in small family parties and have a sort of primitive language
and they may even carry palm leaves or bits of anything that will afford
shade from sunlight. They are just about as nocturnal as chimps which
move about and feed at night in fine moonlight weather. The giants seem
to be almost wholly nocturnal; the medium jobs more diurnal or
crepuscular. The *Meh-Tehs* are quite another matter (see Chapter 15) .

Again and again and again, these four types will crop up. In Canada I
have so far heard only of the giants, and I thought that the same went
for the Puget Sound to California area, but I am afraid that I have now
to bring up the unruly suggestion that some reports from this area seem
definitely to be, or try to be, speaking of both the man-sized and pigmy
types. This, you may well think, is going a bit too far, in that it is
bad enough to be asked to stomach the possibility of a bunch of giant
"ape-men" running around half a dozen of our most up-to-date and worthy
states, without being asked to accept also Neanderthalers and "Little
People." I would have preferred, as I say, not to have brought this up
just yet but, as a reporter, what can I do? The very definite footprints
left near Roseburg, Oregon, during the night of October 23, 1959, were
definitely of the man-sized type, while literally thousands of the
little pigmy type are alleged to have started turning up along—perhaps
appropriately—the Mad River Valley about 1950. Thus, as we go along, you
must brace yourself for casual asides to the effect that such little
ones were seen hither and yon. The Roseburg case is happily so far
unique, so that we won't be bothered herein with others of its ilk and
so, when I speak of ABSMs hereabouts from now on, it will be of the
giant *Oh-Mahs* unless I clearly specify otherwise.

The outburst came in August, 1958.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

There was, as usual, an unreported and steady build-up before the event,
and there was the usual red herring almost at the outset. This latter
was such a bizarre report and was given such wide publicity that it has
both diverted public attention and caused many, who might otherwise have
investigated the main stream of events with diligence and an open mind,
simply to throw up their hands in horror at anything so impertinent. The
case is very peculiar, has no precedent and no conclusion. It occurred 3
months after the outbreak of true ABSMery in northern California in
August, and it took place 600 miles away from that area, near Riverside
in San Bernardino Valley of southern California. Nothing of a similar
nature has ever been recorded from anywhere near this place, while all
the mountains from the Sierra Nevada south into Baja California may
really be said now to have been explored and combed. \[At the same time,
we might note the proximity of Hollywood and several large mental
institutions.\] The following is an account from the *Los Angeles
Examiner* which speaks for itself, though very facetiously and says
everything that there is to be said about the business.

MONSTROUS! Driver Tells of "Thing" that Clawed at His Car

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

Riverside, Nov. 9 (UP). Funny thing happened to Charlie Wetzel on the
way home last night. A Monster jumped out at him. That's what he told
authorities who planned to continue an investigation of the incredible
story today. Wetzel, 24, a resident of nearby Bloomington, reported
soberly that he was driving on a street near Riverside when a
frightening creature jumped in front of his car. "It had a round,
scare-crowish head," he said, "like something out of Halloween. "It
wasn't human. It had a longer arm than anything I'd ever seen. When it
saw me in the car it reached all the way back to the windshield and
began clawing at me. "It didn't have any ears. The face was all round.
The eyes were shining like something fluorescent and it had a
protuberant mouth. It was scaly, like leaves." Wetzel said he became
terrified when the creature reached over the

</div>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

hood of his car and began clawing at the windshield. He said he reached
for a .22 pistol he had in the car. "I held that pistol and stomped on
the gas," he said. "The thing fell back from the car and it gurgled.
"The noise it made didn't sound human. I think I hit it. I heard
something hit the pan under the car." Sheriff's officers said Wetzel
pointed at some thin, sweeping marks he said the creature made on his
windshield. They went to the scene of the claimed apparition but said
they could find nothing to prove or disprove Wetzel's story. The scene
is at a point where North Main Street dips and crosses the Santa Ana
River bed, which is usually almost dry. Wetzel said he told the story to
his wife and she induced him to phone authorities. "I kept saying no one
would believe a story like this," he said. Sheriff's Sgt. E. R. Holmes
said he thought perhaps a large vulture might have flopped on the hood
of Wetzel's car—"sometimes cars hit them when they're in the road eating
rabbits cars have killed," he said. So he searched the area himself
today. "But," said Holmes, "I didn't even find a feather."

</div>

The build-up to the really valid events may be left till later, for it
consists once again of accounts of all the same old things, though,
withal, highly confirmatory, and showing that what happened at a place
called Bluff Creek in August of that year was neither an isolated case
nor anything novel. I will mention these more fully when I come to tell
of the aftermath of the Bluff Creek affair.

Before giving the facts of this business I must just hark back for a
minute to my description of this country. On Map IV you will see the
main roads marked by their route numbers. Apart from the four that
surround the area—Nos. 101, 299, 99, and the east-west route over
Grant's Pass, there is really only one road through this block of
territory. This runs from Willow Creek, diagonally northeast to join
Route 99, via Happy Camp. Immediately north of Willow Creek it follows
the Hoopa (Hŭppa) Valley and then forks, one small road going back to
101 at the coast, the other major route going into the hills. About 10
miles along this route a new road is being pushed north up a tight
valley named Bluff Creek. This

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

road was begun in 1957. I visited the road end in 1959 and it had only
gotten in 23 miles, so rough is the country. From this area, the
following matters came to light.

In August of 1958—on the morning of the 27th to be precise—a very sane
and sober citizen by the name of Mr. Jerald Crew, of Salyer township,
Humboldt County, northwest California, an active member of the Baptist
Church, a teetotaler, and a man with a reputation in his community that
can only be described as heroic in face of certain almost unique
personal tragedy, went to his work with heavy-duty equipment at the head
of this new lumber access road being pushed into uninhabited and only
roughly surveyed territory near the borders of Humboldt and Del Norte
Counties. This huge block of territory is crossed kitty-corner from the
south at Willow Creek to the northeast by a winding blacktop road, and
from east to west by only four other roads of lower grade. Logging
trails and some "jeep-roads" now finger into it from these roads and
from the main arteries that enclose it to north, west, south, and east,
but these are of very limited extent and are hardly used at all. "Jerry"
Crew's crawler-tractor had been left overnight at the head of the new
road, about 20 miles north of its digression from the narrow blacktop
that runs north through the Hoopa \[as it is on maps\] Amerindian
Reservation from Willow Creek to a place with the delightful name of
Happy Camp up near the Oregon border.

Jerry was an older member of a crew bulldozing this new road into
virtually unexplored territory for one Mr. Ray Wallace, subcontractor to
Messrs. Block and Company who had, in turn, contracted with the National
Parks Service to carry out the work. He is a local man. His fellow
workers were for the most part also local men and included a nephew,
James Crew, a very level-headed young chap, others whom I shall mention
by name in a minute, and two experienced loggers of Hŭppa Indian origin.
The crew had considerable heavy equipment at the scene of operations and
had started work in late May as soon as what little snow there is in
this area had

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

melted and the much more deadly mud had firmed up. The road had been
under construction for two seasons already. The country is mountainous;
though this is the understatement of the year, being to most intents and
everywhere almost vertical so that you can only go up on all fours or
down on your bottom. Unless you make an exaggerated and exhausting climb
you cannot see more than about four square miles of the country because
you are always on the side of something going either straight up or
almost straight down and unless a tree has fallen or been cut out, you
can't see *anything* because bare rock is confined to the uppermost
summits of the peaks and ridges. The road crawls laboriously up the face
of the western wall that encloses a stream known as Bluff Creek. It is
still unsurfaced and when I visited it in 1959 was ankle-deep in
ultra-fine dust that surpasses anything the deserts of Arizona can
produce at their damnedest. All along this mountainous trail there are
the stumps of vast trees cut and hauled out, and great slides of friable
shales, gray, brown, blue, or even green that have been sliced out of
the sheer valley side. The great dozers and crawlers clank and roar in
the hot summer sunlight as they gnaw their relentless way into this
timeless land. The great trees seem to recoil a little from their
mechanical jangling and screeching, but day by day these bright yellow
and red monsters munch away ever deeper into one of the last of
America's real wildernesses.

Those employed on this work lived during the work-week in camp near this
road-head. They had trailers or tents or prefabricated houses and some
of them had their families with them and stayed there all week. Others
with families resident in nearby communities normally went home on
Friday night and returned on the following Monday morning. The younger
fellows usually did likewise, for the drive to Willow Creek took only
about 2 hours for those who knew the road. Jerry Crew's practice was to
return to his family over the week end, leaving his machine parked at
the scene of current operations. He had been on this job for 3 months
that year before the eventful morning which blew up the storm that

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

literally rocked Humboldt County, California and made the pages of the
world press but which then sort of folded in upon itself and was heard
of no more for a year.

What Jerry Crew discovered when he went to start up his "cat" was that
somebody had inspected it rather thoroughly during the previous night,
as could be plainly seen by a series of footprints that formed a track
to, all around, and then away from the machine. Such tracks would not
have aroused his curiosity under normal circumstances because there were
three dozen men at that road-head and the newly scraped roadbed was
covered with soft mud areas alternating with patches of loose shale.
What did startle him was that these footprints were of a shoeless or
naked foot of distinctly human shape and proportions but by actual
measurement just 17 inches long!

Of these, Jerry Crew took an extremely dim view. He had heard tell of
similar tracks having been seen by another road gang working 8 miles
north of a place called Korbel on the Mad River earlier that year and
his nephew, Jim Crew, had also mentioned having come across something
similar in this area. Being a pragmatic family man he felt, he told me,
some considerable annoyance that some "outsider" should try to pull such
a silly stunt on him. He at first stressed an outsider because, although
his fellow workers liked a harmless joke as much as any man, he knew
they were far too tired to go clomping around in the dark after the sort
of working day they put in on that job, making silly footprints around
the equipment. Then, he tells me, he got to thinking about this outsider
and wondered just how he had got there without passing the camps farther
down the road and being spotted, and how he had gotten out again, or
where he had gone over these precipitous mountains clothed in tangled
undergrowth. He followed the tracks up. And that is where he got his
second shock.

Going backward he found that they came almost straight down an incline
of about 75 degrees on to the road ahead of the parked "cat," then
proceeded down the road on one side, circled the machine, and then went
on down the road toward

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

the camp. Before getting there, however, they cut across the road and
went straight down an even steeper incline and continued into the forest
with measured stride varying only when an obstacle had to be stepped
over or the bank was so steep purchase could be obtained by digging in
the heels. The stride was enormous and proved on measurement to be from
46 to 60 inches and to average about 50 inches or almost twice that of
his own. Jerald Crew was not only mystified; he was considerably peeved.
He went to fetch some of his colleagues. Then he received his third
shock that morning.

The majority of them, stout fellows and good friends that they were,
refused to even go and look at this preposterous phenomenon that he told
them he had found and he had a hard time persuading any of them that
even the tracks were there. Eventually, some of the men, who had in any
case to go that way to their work, agreed to go along with him and take
a look. Then they got their shocks and, Jerry told me, some of them
"looked at me real queer." But there were others who reacted
differently, and it then transpired that all of them had either seen
something similar thereabouts or elsewhere, or had heard of them from
friends and acquaintances whom they regarded as totally reliable. The
only Amerinds present said nothing at that time. Then they all went back
to work.

Nothing further happened for almost a month, then once again these
monstrous Bigfeet appeared again overnight around the equipment and
farther down the road toward the valley, notably around a spring. About
that time, Mr. Ray Wallace, the contractor, returned from a business
trip. He had heard rumors on his way in that either his men were pulling
some kind of stunt up in the hills or that some "outsider" was pulling
one on them. He paid little attention to these reports but he was, he
told me, somewhat apprehensive because the job was a tough one, skilled
and reliable workers were not plentiful, and the location was not
conducive to the staying power of anyone. When he reached the camp and
heard the details of the Bigfeet he was more than just skeptical. He was
downright angry. Moreover, all he encountered was more

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

talk which he at that time suspected was some sort of prank but just
possibly one prompted by more than mere high spirits or boredom.

The matter was until then and for a further 3 weeks a purely local
affair known only to the men working on the road, and their immediate
families for they did not care to speak about it to casual acquaintances
or even friends. Then in the middle of September a Mrs. Jess Bemis, wife
of one of the men working on the road and one of the skeptics among the
crew, wrote a letter to the leading local newspaper, the *Humboldt
Times* of Eureka, which said in part "A rumor started among the men, at
once, of the existence of a Wild Man. We regarded it as a joke. It was
only yesterday that my husband became convinced that the existence of
such a person (?) is a fact. Have you heard of this wild man?" Mr.
Andrew Genzoli of that paper told me that he regarded this letter with a
thoroughly jaundiced eye but that the longer he saw it about his desk
the brighter grew the clear blue light of his built-in news-sense, until
he could restrain himself no longer and ran the letter in a daily column
that he writes.

There was little response where he had expected a near storm of
derision; instead a trickle of tentatively confirmatory correspondence
began to come in from the Willow Creek area. This was continuing sub
rosa when, on October 2, the maker of the tracks appeared again on his
apparently rather regular round leaving tracks for 3 nights in
succession and then vanishing again for about 5 days. This time Jerry
Crew had prepared for his advent with a supply of plaster of Paris and
made a series of casts of both right and left feet early one morning.
Two days later he took a couple of days off to drive to Eureka on
personal business and carried the casts along with him to show to a
friend. While there somebody mentioned to Andrew Genzoli that a man was
in town who had made casts of the prints and he was persuaded to go and
fetch Jerry. Andrew Genzoli is an old newshand but of the new school; he
can sense a good story as fast as any man but he is properly averse to
too good a story. When he met Jerry Crew and saw his trophies he
realized he had some real live

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

news, not just a "story," on his hands, and he ran a front-pager on it
with photographs the next day. Then the balloon went up.

The wire services picked it up and almost every paper in the country
printed it while cables of inquiry flooded in from abroad. The first I
heard of it was a cable from a friend in London: he seemed to be
slightly hysterical. I get a lot of esoteric cables during the year
about sea monsters, two-headed calves, reincarnated Indian girls, and so
forth, the majority of which I am constrained to do something about
because the world is, after all, a large place and we don't know much
about a lot of it as yet, but this one I frankly refused to accept
mostly because I rather naturally assumed that the location as given
(California) must be a complete error or a misquote. I wracked my brains
for any place name in Eurasia or Africa that might have nine letters,
begin with "K" and end in "ia." The best we could come up with was
Corinthia but this was even more unlikely. Then somebody suggested
Carpathia, the country of Dracula and other humanoid unpleasantnesses,
and we actually spent 6 dollars on a follow-up. There are few people
interested enough in such abstruse matters as to spend that sum in
pursuit of truth but I fancy there were many on the morning of October
6, 1958 who doubted what they read in their morning papers just as
fervently as I did this cable.

The point I want to make is that this whole bit did sound quite absurd
even to us, who became immune to such shocks years ago. It is all very
well for abominable creatures to be pounding over snow-covered passes in
Nepal and Tibet; after all giant pandas and yaks, and an antelope with a
nose like Jimmy Durante, and other unlikely things come from
thereabouts; and it is even conceivable that there might be little hairy
men in the vast forests of Mozambique in view of the almost equally
unlikely more or less hairless pigmies of the eastern Congo which are
there for all tourists to see, but a wild man with a 17-inch foot and a
50-inch stride tromping around California was then a little too much to
ask even us to stomach, especially as we had not yet got the
news-stories.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

The amazing thing in this case was that the world press took it
seriously enough even to carry it as a news-item.

Not so the rest of humanity. One and all, apart from a few ardent
mystics and professional crackpots, and including even the citizens of
Humboldt County itself rose up in one concerted howl of righteous
indignation. Everybody connected with the business, and notably poor Mr.
Genzoli, was immediately almost smothered in brickbats. In the meantime,
however, a number of other things had happened. Most notable among these
was the reappearance of \`Bigfoot" as he was called one night before Ray
Wallace returned to his operations. Now it so happened that a brother of
the contractor, Wilbur Wallace, was working on this job and he, besides
seeing the foot-tracks many times, witnessed three other annoying and to
him most startling occurrences, which he had reported to his brother. I
will repeat these roughly in his own words which appeared to me not only
straightforward but most convincing.

First, it was reported to him by one of his men that a nearly full
55-gallon drum of diesel fuel which had been left standing beside the
road was missing and that Bigfoot tracks led down the road from a steep
bank to this spot where it had stood, then crossed the road, continued
on down the hill and finally went over the lower bank and away into the
bush. Wilbur Wallace went to inspect and found the tracks exactly as the
men had stated. He also found the oil drum at the bottom of a steep bank
about 175 feet from the road. It had rolled down this bank and had
apparently been thrown from the top. What is more, it had been lifted
from its original resting place and apparently carried to this point,
for there were no marks in the soft mud of its having been either rolled
or dragged all that distance, Second, a length of 18-inch galvanized
steel culvert disappeared from a dump overnight and was found at the
bottom of another bank some distance away. Third, he reported a wheel
with tire for a "carry-all" earth-mover, weighing over 700 pounds, had
likewise been in part lifted and in part rolled a quarter of a mile down
the road and hurled into a deep ravine. Ray Wallace, however, still
remained skeptical even after hearing this from his own brother.
However,

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

on his first morning at the location he stopped for a drink at a spring
on the way down the hill and stepped right into a mass of the big prints
in the soft mud around the outflow. Then, I gather from him, though he
is a man with a wonderfully good humor, he got "good and mad." There was
for him no longer any question about the existence of these monstrous
human-like tracks but there remained the question as to who was
perpetrating them, and why. Ray Wallace is a hard-boiled and pragmatic
man and he was already experiencing trouble keeping men on the job.
Handpicked as they were not a few had just *had* to leave for one
apparently good reason or another. Only later did he learn that almost
all of them did so not because they were scared by the Bigfoot, but
either because their wives were or because of the ribbing they had to
take when they went back to civilization, even for the evening to nearby
Willow Creek.

Ray Wallace said he at first thought somebody was deliberately trying to
wreck his contract and he was not alone. However, the local
representative of the *Humboldt Times*, Mrs. Elizabeth (Betty) Allen,
set about to investigate the possibility on her own, and discovered
beyond a doubt that neither good nor bad publicity, nor any kind of
"scare" actually made any difference to Mr. Wallace's contract. First he
was a subcontractor; second he was more than up to schedule; third there
was no time set on the job; and fourth, it was basically contracted by
Messrs. Block and Company with the Forest Service on a performance, not
a time, basis. Ray Wallace got so angry he brought in a man named Ray
Kerr, who had read of the matter in the press and asked for a job in
order to be able to spend his spare time trying to track the culprit.
Kerr brought with him a friend by the name of Bob Breazele, who had
hunted professionally in Mexico, owned four good dogs, and a
British-made gun of enormous caliber which considerably impressed the
locals. Kerr, an experienced equipment operator, did a full daily job:
Breazele did not take a job but hunted.

Tracks were seen and followed by them. Then one night in late October,
these two were driving down the new road after

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

dark and state that they came upon a gigantic humanoid or human-shaped
creature, covered with 6-inch brown fur, squatting by the road. They
said it sprang up in their headlights and crossed the road in two
strides to vanish into the undergrowth. They went after it with a
flashlight but the underbrush was too thick to see anything. They
measured the road and found it to be exactly 20 feet wide from the place
where the creature had squatted to the little ditch where it had landed
after those two strides. Spurred by this encounter they redoubled their
hunting forays but their dogs disappeared a few days later when they
were following Bigfoot's tracks some distance from the road-head. They
were never seen again though a story was told—but later denied by its
teller—that their skins and bones were found spattered about some trees.
Though this story was denied, there is as much reason to believe that
this was done to obviate ridicule as to clear a conscience.

All this was, of course, taken with hoots of derision by everybody even
in Willow Creek who had not seen any tracks—but with one notable
exception. This was Andrew Genzoli and he sent his newspaper's senior
staff photographer to Bluff Creek. The party saw fresh tracks at night
and photographed them. They also found something else; as did Ray
Wallace later. \[I have this first hand from these professional
skeptics.\] At first, the photographer told me, he was more than just
skeptical but when he found the tracks and inspected them he not only
was convinced that they were not a hoax or a publicity stunt but, as he
put it, "I got the most awful feeling that I can't really describe, but
it was nearer fright than anything I ever felt when in service." But
worse was in store for the newsmen for, in following the tracks down the
road, they came across a pile of faeces of typically human form but, as
they put it, "of absolutely monumental proportions." He then added, "I
can only describe it as a 2-ton bear with chronic constipation." They
contemplated going to fetch a shovel and some container and taking this
back to Eureka for analysis but it was a very hot night and a 5-hour
drive over a dangerous road and also, as they readily admitted, that
strange laziness that so often intervenes in offbeat and rather alarming
cases of this nature,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

took over and cast the die. Press coverage had gone far enough, and they
were not ecologists. Later, Ray Wallace stumbled upon a similar enormous
mass of human-shaped droppings. He shoveled them into a can and found
that they occupied exactly the same volume as a single evacuation of a
1200-pound horse.

Further foot-tracks and other incidents continued all that fall and
throughout the winter until the spring of 1959 ending in February.
However, later in the spring, two fliers, a husband and wife in a
private plane, were flying over the Bluff Creek area. It was April and
there was still snow on the mountaintops some of which are bare of
trees. It is alleged that they spotted great tracks in the snow and that
on following them up they sighted the creature that had made them. It
was enormous, humanoid, and covered with brown fur, according to
secondhand accounts. I tried, and am still trying to locate this couple,
with the co-operation of local fliers, several of them having heard of
the report, and despite the praiseworthy clannishness of fliers and
their willing offers to help, I have not at the time of writing been
able to identify this couple. The story may be a rumor or wishful
thinking. So also may, three other recent and a whole host of past, old,
and even ancient reports of actual meetings with one or more Big-feet in
this area.

Among these are alleged statements by two doctors of having met one on
Route 299 earlier in 1958; and of a lady of much probity who with her
daughter saw two, one smaller by far than the other, feeding on a
hillside above the Hoopa Valley. This lady, to whom a partner of mine
talked but who does not wish her name publicized, also stated that when
she was a young girl, people used to see these creatures from time to
time when they went fishing up certain creeks, and she once saw one
swimming Bluff Creek when it was in flood. She also stated that in the
olden days people did not go above certain points up the side valleys,
due to the presence of these creatures.

More important was a positive flood of further alleged discoveries of
similar foot-tracks by all manner of local citizenry

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

over a wide area and extending back for many years that came to light as
soon as the local press began to take this whole matter seriously. But
as these came in, public resentment and ridicule mounted so that the
reporters became ever more cagey. Finally, Betty Allen, who as an
old-time resident and with experience as an Assistant U.S. Commissioner
in Alaska, started talking to the Hŭppa and Yurok Amerinds about these
matters and, little by little, an amazing picture emerged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 7. Late North Americans](abs11.md)
