[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs25)  [Next](abs27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

<span id="page_453">p. 453</span>

**Appendix A**

**ABSMal Connotations**

One of the greatest headaches to laborers in ABSMery has been, almost
since its inception, its concomitant philology. The names for ABSMs that
have been recorded are seemingly without end, while very few of the
recorders of these names have been professionally trained or even
amateur philologists. Most of them did not understand the language in
which the name was given to them. Also, it was not until a quarter of a
century ago that an international agreement was reached upon the
transliteration of both the written and the spoken word in all
languages. There is now a sort of universal alphabet—known as the
P.C.G.N. <span id="fr_57"></span>[\*](#fn_54) System—by which anybody
can transliterate almost any noises made by men; even to the series of
incomprehensible glottal clicks used by the Bushmen. However, hardly
anybody uses it; and true linguists, philologists, and etymologists
frown upon it a little.

The names used today for the sundry ABSMs in various parts of the world
have been discussed in the body of my story, and in some cases their
origins and meanings, or supposed origins, were also touched upon. The
North American names are not as yet properly recorded—despite the
herculean labors of Mr. J. W. Burns—so that any further attempted
interpretation of their philology or etymology is at present worthless.
Those from Central and South America are probably beyond the ken of any
living scholars; and the same may be said about the few names such as
*Sehité*, *Muhalu*, and *Agogwe* of Africa. I have been told, but cannot
assert, that the first and last mean simply "little wild men." In the
southeast Asian

<span id="page_454">p. 454</span>

area, apart from the *Kra-Dhan* which seems to mean "great monkey," we
have only *Tok*, *Kung-Lu*, and *Sedapa*. I have asked around about
these but, although being the recipient of the usual plethora of
fascinating material that one always obtains upon applying to any
philologist for anything, I have not received clear answers as to what
the words may mean. *Tok* does, however, seem to mean "big mouth" in one
Kachin dialect.

This leaves us with *Eurasia*, and it is in this area—as it always has
been with regard to the names applied to ABSMs—that all searchers have
always been most interested, and seemingly most confused. The
inhabitants of the great "Gutter" of the upper Brahmaputra are of
Tibetan origin. Across the Himalayas themselves, moreover, there has
been a blending of central Asiatic and Indic tongues. Thus, in respect
to philology, the Himalayas and eastern Eurasia are connected, though
they are in different "continents"; and they must be taken together.

Even I, without any training in or even understanding of linguistics,
have for years been able to appreciate that there is a monumental muddle
and misunderstanding of both the languages of, and of the names used in
these areas for, almost everything alive. Some fifty different words
(spellings only in some cases) for ABSMs have got into our literature
through the writings of those who have visited the Himalayas. When we
come to Tibet, Mongolia, and Siberia, the whole business gets completely
out of hand. Yet, so important are the "proper" names of these
creatures, and so valuable is the information that may be gained from an
analysis of them, that every serious worker in the field has for years
been appealing for some proper exposition of them. This has been
attempted several times but those "scholars" who undertook the studies
appear to have been thoroughly incompetent because anybody, even without
any knowledge of the subject, can readily see that said "scholars," in
many cases, obviously did not have any understanding of the languages
concerned.

As a result, I prepared a list of all the names for ABSMs

<span id="page_455">p. 455</span>

from these two regions \[eastern Eurasia and the Himalayas\] that I
could find in the published literature of all languages, including the
Russian, and passed this to the Rabbi Yonah N. ibn Aharon (see Chapter
17) who is one of the few persons conversant with the principal dialects
underlying the languages that are spread all over this vast area—i.e.
from the east Russian border to China, and from the south Siberian
border to the Himalayas; and the great arc bowing northward from
Ethiopia in the west, via Arabia, Persia, and southeastern Russia, to
central Eurasia in the east. He has been kind enough to prepare the
following statement on the subject which will, I trust, not only settle
a number of rankling questions, but also the general confusion. At the
same time it will help scholars in the field of ABSMery. He writes as
follows:

A CONTRIBUTION TO THE PHILOLOGY OF ABSMery

By Yonah N. ibn Aharon

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The study of words relating to the ABSM differs from other aspects of
the problem in that the researcher has the advantage of a tangible
starting point from whence to launch his investigation. When we
remember, however, that the great majority of these words have been
reported to us by persons to whom even the fundamentals of phonetic
transcription constitute a mystery almost as profound as that of the
ABSM itself, the difficulties of the situation are evident.

In the first place, most of those who have reported these words, do not
realize the scholarly apparatus at the disposal of the specialist, and
so neglect even to make sure from what language the word comes. This
vicious combination of improper transcription and uncertain origin does
much to impede a reliable definition of many of these words, because the
homophonic properties of about 80 percent of them render them
interchangeable among several languages and even language groups, with a
corresponding divergence of meaning which is, of itself, a comedy of
errors. One of the most ambiguous of them for example, can mean anything
from silver spoon in one language to sour turnips, in another! \[See
*Teh-lma* below.\]

The vast reaches of Central Asia, <span id="fr_58"></span>[\*](#fn_55)
of course, constitute the prime source

</div>

<span id="page_456">p. 456</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

of Snowman literature, and of words relating to ABSM studies. It is
principally with this area, then, that we shall be concerned in what is
to follow. Although geographically Central Asia is one of the most
complex areas of the world, its philology is far simpler than most
people realize. There are only three important languages with which we
must trouble ourselves in the pursuit of satisfactory definitions of
words originating in this area—Tibetan, Mongolian, and, to a minor
extent, Nepali. There are two reasons for this relative paucity of
language groups. The first is the extreme antiquity of the Tibetan and
Mongolian socio-cultural groupings. The second is the fact that a single
literary tradition has held sway over most of these peoples almost since
the time they settled down in their present homes.

Once proper allowance has been made for local habits of pronunciation,
neither the Tibetan nor the Mongolian dialects present any problems of
philological verification, through the use of dictionaries,
chrestomathies, and written source material. In both areas, no attempt
has been made to preserve these peculiarities of local speech in the
written language (although this is amended every few centuries in order
to conform more closely to the changes in the speech habits of educated
persons since the previous revision), but the dialects are in no case
beyond the authority of the written speech. Indeed, differences of
pronunciation are rarely the occasion of anything more problematical
than good-natured remarks about the strange accent of the people in the
next valley. Grammar has changed only slightly since the most remote
times, and accents tend to change more slowly in rural areas than in the
cities.

Each dialect is, of course, characterized by certain kinds of sound.
Unfortunately, the ear of the average Westerner is rarely able to
resolve these sounds, even to the extent of telling us whether they were
or were not aspirated, or what quantity we should give to the vowels.
Fortunately for our purpose, Tibetan has only one vowel quantity (its
vowels correspond to those of the short vowel in Italian), but the
untrained ear of most reporters has led them to make even more mistakes
with regard to the vowel sounds of the ABSMal vocabulary, than with
regard to the consonants. This makes it necessary for the researcher to
consider each consonantal combination in the light of all possible
joining vowel combinations. The fact that the consonants may have even
more values than the vowel is of relative unimportance, because
dictionaries exist for both Tibetan and Mongolian, with the words
classified according to their final consonant, as well as their initial
letter. The value of these special dictionaries has been largely ignored
by Western scholars, but provides the determining criteria for some of
the definitions provided in this discussion.

</div>

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The important principle to be observed in evaluating these words is that
which is related to the direction of language movement. Specifically,
even the sketchiest knowledge of Nepalese history will reveal the
intellectual dependence of the Nepali people on Lamaism, a Tibetan
religion of Buddhistic origin. This fact has, however, been completely
ignored by a number of rather self-confident Indian and Western writers
who have, in perfect good faith, been seeking the word-meanings of
Nepali names for the ABSM either in Turner's excellent *Nepali
Dictionary*, or else in the dictionaries of other Indic languages which
they think to be related to Nepali.

The fact is that Nepali is a rather cosmopolitan speech, considering the
isolation of the country. Nepali has absorbed hundreds of Mongol words
(via Urdu) and almost as many English words as has Hindi. Nepali is an
idiomatic, colloquial speech, well suited to the needs of the people.
Its grammar is not too difficult, and it is written in the very same
Deva-nagari script that serves the rest of the languages descended from
Sanskrit. A great deal of the talk about the rare dialects of Nepal
generated by men like Prince Peter of Greece, is simply not true. W. R.
J. Morland-Hughes, in his convenient little *Grammar of the Nepali
Language* notes that Nepali is also known as "Gurkhali" (language of the
Gurkhas), "Khaskura" (language of the Khas), and "Parbatiya" (mountain
language). He might have added many more to the list of mystifying names
for this pleasantly uncomplicated vernacular.

The proper source for the ABSMal words of Nepal is in the *Tibetan
Lexicon* of Jaschke (London, 1889) or any of the many excellent
Tibetan-Sanskrit dictionaries that have appeared in the last thousand
years. The Tibetan-Mongolian dictionary printed for the Finno-Ugrian
Institute of Helsinki is also to be recommended when available. It will
be found that many of the Mongol names are merely translations of the
Tibetan names originating in the monasteries of Sikkim, Ladakh, and
Tibet itself.

When, how, and why Buddhism came to Tibet, it is not necessary to
explain, except to say that with Buddhism came a hybrid form of Sanskrit
known as Pali. The Tibetan scholars, however, were not content merely
with the loan of several thousand Pali and Sanskrit technical terms, but
they set about making Tibetan compounds and formulae to serve in their
place. The translation of the Buddhist canon into Tibetan took place at
an early date, and the number of Sanskrit words to be found in these
books is smaller than in some of the corresponding European
translations. But this absence of loan-words was not true of
translations made from the Tibetan into Sanskrit, Lepcha, Ladakhi, and
the other languages of Buddhist North India. In these, Tibetan words
were to be found in plenty,

</div>

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

and what is more, the people to the south were not always sure of the
meaning of these words, a problem that has been solved for them only
during the last century. Hindu scholars <span
id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_56) found themselves in this position more
frequently than Buddhist scholars, who had access to a better class of
dictionaries. The effect of this literary exchange on Nepal and its
dependencies was formidable. To this day, Nepal continues to borrow
words from the Tibetans, to the great distress of the Indian telegraph
offices, who are called on to handle such messages. And whenever a
Nepali is at a loss for words, he is more likely than not to throw in a
Tibetan phrase, much as the English are addicted to bad French in times
of stress.

Another factor which must be considered before we pass on to our
glossary is that of the Comparative Philology of the Indic and Tibetan
pronouns. The resemblance of the third personal forms of Nepali and
Tibetan are remarkable, and of great importance to our subject. We must
also advert in more detail to the significance of Lamaist Buddhism for
the philology of ABSMal words. In southern Tibet and Nepal, there
subsists a great religious tradition which has for its focal point the
mystery of the Sangbai-dagpo, or "Concealed Lords." This religion
certainly antedates Lamaism, and is obsessed with the transmigration of
the human soul into the bodies of the lower anthropoids. The ABSMs are
revered by the adherents of this sect, and the heads, hands, and feet of
deceased specimens find their way into their ritual. The effect of this
animistic doctrine on Tibetan Buddhism should not be under-estimated.
Its effect on the ABSM mystery has, moreover, been felt in two ways:
firstly, it motivates the local people to protect these creatures from
the quest of the European, and to mislead Westerners wherever possible
by passing off the remains of other animals for those of the ABSM.
Second, it has resulted in their unwillingness to speak the true names
of the ABSM, in much the same way that a Jew is not allowed to mouth the
name of the God of Israel. Thus, the names that find their way into the
literature almost all fall into the classification of indefinite
pronouns or else generic terms that describe other species as well as
the ABSM. This is also the case with the Mongolian words.

</div>

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

PRINCIPAL PUBLISHED NAMES FOR ABSMs IN THE EAST EURASIAN

AND HIMALAYAN AREAS

\(1\) *ADAM-JA-PAIYSY*

Said to originate from the Kunlun Mountain region.

A Mongolian word, in transcription to Tibetan. (No relation with the
Hebrew *adam*.)

Meaning unknown. Its origin could be highly various.

\(2\) *ALBAST* (also, *Alboosty*)

From the Mongol *alub* (traveler), and *usud* (water).

Thus, "One who moves over (lives in) wet places."

\(3\) *ALMAS* (also, *Almasty*)

Mongol *ala* (to kill), and mal (*cattle*).

Thus, "One who can kill stock (cattle) animals."

\(4\) *CHUTEY* (and by various spellings)

Tibetan *Tssu* (a diminutive), *teh* (it thing).

Thus, "The little (living) thing."

\(5\) *DZU-TEH*

Tibetan *Dzhu* (big, or hulking), *teh* (it thing).

Thus: "A hulking (living) thing."

\(6\) *GOLBO* (also *Golub-yavan*; *Guli-biavan*; *Gul-biyavan*;
*Kul-bii-aban*; *Uli-bieban*; *Yavan-adam*.)

Mongolian terms composed of *gul* (inf. auxiliary), and *bayi* (to
stand) or *yabu* (to walk), as in *yabugul* (to send). *Dam*, probably
"*dharma*" (but not the Semitic "*adam*")—i.e. "An Entity or Manifest
Being." Note: this word does not always occur in combination with the
*golbo* *stem*.

Thus; "A living entity that (also) stands upright and walks."

\(7\) *HUN*-*GURESSU* (also *Khun-goroos*; *Kumchin-gorgosu*)

Mongolian *khun* (man), and *kur* (to reach), *orgen* (long). The verb
*osu* (to multiply) should also be mentioned in connection with this and
associated terms.

Thus, "The Man-like One with extra long arms."

\(8\) *JELMOGUZ*-*JEZ*-*TYRMAK* (pronounced *dzhel-moghul-dzh-tura-muk*)

Mongolian *dzhel* (big), *moghul* (great), *dzh* (a conjunctive), *tura*
(hills—a Tibetan loan-word), and *muk* (a generic suffix).

Thus, "Great big living things not found in all but in most hilly
places."

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

\(9\) *KANGMI* (also \[?\] *Chumis*; *Meh-Teh*; *Mige; Migo*; *Migu*;
*Mih-Teh*; *Rimi*, etc.)

Tibetan *gyang* (scrambling, pulling), and *mieh* (3rd pers. sing. n.,
for "Man"). Tibetan *kung* (foot) should also be noted in this
connection, but, assuming the transcription to be colloquial in origin,
*gyang* is more probable.

Thus, "The Man-Creature that scrambles." (And, note that this is exactly
as described by the Dzungarians anent these, as described in Chapter 13,
who said that their ABSMs climbed like spiders.)

\(10\) *KAPTAR*

In part as in (8) above. Mongolian *qupa* (climbing or clutching),
*tura* (hills—a Tibetan loan-word). Urdu uses the word *qupatur* for
"illegitimate son" and *qaputra* for "degenerate or unworthy ones." In
our transliteration, "*khoop-turr*."

Thus, "A primitive climbing creature of the hills—One who 'hooks on to'
rocks, etc. But definitely not an animal."

\(11\) *KSY-GIIK* (*Ksy-Gyik* and possibly *Kish-giik*)

Mongolian *kusegchin* (pejorative; in the sense of a "curse"). (The Urga
lexicon does not agree with Poppe's rendering), and *ngui* (blackness).

Thus, "The black-colored Abominable Ones."

\(12\) *MEH-TEH* (also *Me-Teh*)

For the *Me*, see also *Kangmi*, *Mige*, *Migo*, *Migu*, *Mihteh*,
*Samjda*.

For *teh*, see also *Dzu-Teh*, *Mih-Teh*, *Yeti*.

Tibetan *mieh* (3rd. pers. sing. n., for "man"; corresponding to Nepali
*mi*, meaning "it"—something more closely related to *m//la* \[a being\]
than to *po*). Tibetan *teh* (living thing) corresponds to Nepali *ti*
(a 3rd pers. rel. pronoun, implying "remote distance," as in Spanish
*aguel*. This word, in fact, shows up in the literature in much the same
context as the English word "vermin" or American "varmint."

Thus, "A manlike living thing, that is *not* a human being."

\(13\) *METOH-KANGMI* (i.e. Col. Howard-Bury's original signal)

This could be either: (a) a pure mistake for *Meh-Teh*, *Me-Teh*,
*Mieh*-*teh*, etc., or (b) *MIEH-TÜH*, meaning "One who can carry off a
Man."

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

\(14\) *MI-GE*

For *mi*, see (12) above. The Tibetan *mieh*, or the Nepali *mi*,
meaning a "man-thing" as opposed to either a Man or a Woman and *ge* (an
object).

Thus, "A (neuter) Man-Thing or creature; but definitely a corporate,
living one."

\(15\) *MI-GO*

Apart from the *mi* (Tibetan; see above), the *go* is probably *gyo*
meaning "fast" or "quick."

Thus, "The fast-moving Manlike Creature."

\(16\) *MI-GU*

Again *mi* as above—perhaps the Tibetan *mi* plus again *gyo* but
equally probably *gyu* meaning "cave."

Thus, "The cave-dwelling manlike creature."

\(17\) *MI-TEH* (see also *Me-Teh*)

This is actually as here written a Tibetan loan-word, a version of
*mieh* plus *teh* (as in *Me-Teh*). However, it is probably a mere
mis-transliteration by the "westerner" who first recorded it.

\(18\) *NYALMO*

The Tibetan transcription of the *Pali* *niyalam//la*, a Buddhist
theological term describing a class of manlike beings. This is thus as
near a "proper name" for any Asiatic ABSM that we have.

\(19\) *RACKSHI-BOMPO*

Tibetan *rag* (to claw), *dzh* (a conjunctive), and *bompo* (to handle)
note; adjective, handlike, in ETib.

Thus, "The handy one (or with prominent hands) who claws at things."

\(20\) *RI-MI*

(For *mi*, see (12) above), and *ri* (mountain).

Thus, "A Man-Creature of the Mountains."

\(21\) *SOGPA*

Tibetan, transcribed into Khmer syllabary as *dzhogbo*, implying "a
mystery." (Note: This name is used only on the south slopes of the
Himalayan ranges where the ABSMs are not indigenous.)

Thus, "The Mysterious Ones."

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

\(22\) *TEH-LMA*

From *teh* meaning in Tibetan literally (as in Cockney English)
"That-there thing" (i.e. a 3rd. pers. rel. pronoun implying remote
distance) and Lma, a corruption arising from an incorrect reading for
the ligature *m//la* which, in Pali, means a class of "manlike beings."

\(23\) *ULI-BIEBAN* (see also (6) above).

Mongolian *ulus* (strange people or tribe), and *bieban* (adjectival for
"that which walks upright" with the implication of "nonetheless").

Thus, "Strange or Not-quite-right people who nevertheless walk upright."

\(24\) *YAVAN-ADAM* (see also (6) above).

Mongolian *yaban* (walking), and *dam* (being).

Thus, "A living entity who walks upright."

\(25\) *YETI* (see, in part, (12) above).

This is rapidly becoming the key name used by foreigners for ABSM in the
Himalayan region. The Nepali pronoun *ye*, and the Tibetan *teh*,
produce the provincial *yite*, *yihda*, and *yehda*. Herein, there is no
connection with the Mongolian *yati* (cold), the *ye* being a dual form
of *yi* (these) in literary Newari (see Turner's dictionary). Nepalese
*ti* may not be current among the hill people—see letter read before the
Benares Congress in Observance of the 2500th Anniversary of the Buddha
by one Anag. *dzhi-blo-Langyarup*. From *teh* (see above) meaning
"living thing," we get a concept that again can be expressed only in
Cockney English. This is simply "That-there Thing."

\(26\) *ZERLEG-KHOON*

See possibly in part also (7) above; but, further information would be
appreciated since *zerleg* has a most profane meaning in Karaturki, and
the recorder of this expression probably was not conversant with this
tongue.

Note: Bears in Tibetan are "*dara-unjeh*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[453:\*](abs26.htm#fr_57) Permanent Committee on
Geographical Place Names.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[455:\*](abs26.htm#fr_58) By this term should be
understood central and eastern Eurasia, and the Himalayan ranges of the
continent of Orientalia (see Map XV).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[458:\*](abs26.htm#fr_59) One of the most
notorious examples of such presumption is one "Sri Swami" Pranavananda
(See *J. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc.*) whose anxiety to discredit the
existence of the ABSM led him to betray a complete ignorance of the
U-chan, or written Tibetan, as in his contention that *teh* (3rd per.
sing. rel. pron.) means "bear"!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix B. The Importance of Feet](abs27)
