[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs21)  [Next](abs23.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

**18. Some Basic Facts**

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Much of what we accept as fact turns out to be fallacy; and, many
things that we would normally consider complete rubbish prove in the end
to be quite true.*

</div>

Having now met the ABSMs, you may well be a bit bewildered, and the
over-all impression you have gained of them will still be that they are
a pretty polyglot lot. Likenesses between two or more there can be but,
on the whole, there does not appear to be any one feature common to all.
This, however, is a gross misconception. As with so many things in life,
the whole question has been presented popularly on completely false
premises, or has, at least, been given a wrong twist, which is not only
most misleading, but initially set us all off on the wrong trail. The
causes of this are singular, and psychologically, very potent. They are
basically, the name, "abominable *snow*-man," that has become attached
to it. This is the one single, outstanding fact that has become attached
to all ABSMs. Yet, *none of them live in snow*, or in any place that is
either perpetually, or even for any substantial part of the year covered
by snow. This, indeed, is a negative fact but it is of very great import
because it has led to the misdirection of almost all our serious
attempts to solve the problem.

There is much misinterpretation of all the evidence—notably in the
department of footprints and tracks, which have always, as a result,
been immediately assumed to have been made in snow. \[Tracks and
imprints made in snow can be most misleading in a number of ways and are
open to all manner of interpretations. See Appendix B.\] Those left in

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

mud have altogether other significance. The best and sometimes the only
evidence we have of the existence of many creatures is nonetheless most
frequently seen on snow surfaces and, since snow does fall upon and lie
on the ground in many areas where ABSMs are reported, or near to those
places, it is in a way natural that the two should have become
associated. However, the search would never have followed the course
that it has, and it might well by now be over, had it not been for the
coining of the delightful but nonetheless nonsensical term
"snowman." <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_50.md)

There is, however, another feature that all ABSMs have in common. This
has remained just as obscure as the snow bit has been prominent. It is
that all of them are forest dwellers and, it seems, basically
inhabitants of mountain forests. Even the Malay Peninsula types, the
Sumatran *Sedapas*, the little African *Agogwes*, and the Central
American *Dwendis*, though sometimes reported from sea level or even
from coastal beaches, are invariably hard by large mountain blocks or
substantial uplands that are not inhabited by humans and which are
mostly unmapped and unexplored. The only terrain where as yet
unidentified creatures of larger sizes can exist today is that which is
forested, be it equatorial rainforest \[i.e. jungle to most people\],
*taiga* or spruce forest, or even the endless *mulga* of Australia.
Among forests, moreover, the two most likely types to be inhabited by
such creatures are swamps and mountains. Almost all of the "new" animals
that have come to light in this century have been found in one or other
of these sorts of forest; and with a considerable emphasis on the
mountainous.

Given the misleading tag of "snowman," our whole search has been further
diverted by a really extraordinary sort of mass blindness that must be
basically psychological. While tracks have on many occasions been found
in snow and at high altitude—there not otherwise being snow at the
latitudes

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span id="img_map15"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP XV. THE
WORLD](tn/map15.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map15.jpg.md)  
MAP XV. THE WORLD  
</span>

**MAP XV. THE WORLD**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The surface of the Earth is somewhat clearly divided between areas of
two kinds. One, which we call the land but which includes certain
peripheral areas at present under shallow seas, forms rafts of certain
kinds of rocks of lighter density, some 40 miles thick. The other, which
constitutes the ocean floors, is covered by a much thinner layer of
these strata. The hydrosphere—or water capsule of our earth—finds its
own level due to gravity. As a result, the first areas are subaerial,
the latter subaqueous. The former are "land-masses"; the latter "oceans"
(with adjacent seas). The first are not, however, the *Continents*,
which are specific land areas, with associated promontories and islands,
each of which has an unique history, structure, flora, and fauna. These
are seven in number, with the islands in the South Pacific forming an
additional unit. Current reports of, and myths, legends, and folklore
pertaining to, ABSMs are now recorded from five of the Continents.

</div>

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

concerned—and while some of these tracks have been followed for some
distances, and continued in snow, an end has never yet been found to any
one of them that do not either come from or return to forests. Nobody
seems ever to have considered the fact that our own human tracks in
snow, especially crossing high passes in such places as the Himalayas,
in no way indicate that we *live* *in* places of perpetual snow. Quite
apart from this, it would seem obvious that no creature, even of our
size, could find enough food in any such place to reside there
perpetually. *Mountain* snowfields in the tropics, sub-tropics,
temperate, and sub-arctic belts are perpetual and, unlike the Arctic
*lowlands* where the snow vanishes for some months each year, are not
underlain by a mat of rich vegetation which may be dug or scratched for
in winter. A limited number of larger animals, like the Muskox and
Reindeer, can gain a living on the Arctic lowlands but none live on or
can survive on ice, on snowfields, or on icecaps such as those of
Greenland and the Antarctic; *and none can live on the perpetual montane
snowfields* of other areas. ABSMs may, and often do, it seems, live
right up near the tree-line \[mostly because that is their last
retreat\] and they naturally and customarily cross over the upper
snowfields to

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

get from one valley forest to another and particularly when disturbed by
loathsome mountaineers! Gerald Russell's observations on this are most
pertinent.

Even the Russians were initially misled into sending all of their
scientifically mounted expeditions up into the worlds of perpetual snow
and bare rocks—in the Caucasus, in the Pamirs, on the Tibetan side of
the Everest Block, and in the Sayans. Some of their first reports in
1958 displayed distinct surprise at their failure to locate any evidence
of the creatures in these places while the map they issued showed their
belief that ABSMs not only lived in, but had their only remaining
breeding ground in such an area in the Pamirs. The truth of the matter
is they, like everybody else, were more or less hypnotized by the silly
expression "snowman." At the same time, neither they nor anybody else
seems ever to have mapped the *world* distribution of reports of ABSMs,
plus the MLF of ABSMs—though the Russians did attempt this for Eurasia.
But, of much greater significance, is the fact that not even they
correlated that map with the one factor that is of paramount importance
in elucidating the distribution of *any and all* living things—as well
as a host of other matters such as disease, civilization, industry, and
so forth. This is the distribution of vegetational types.

The study of vegetation, though a department of botany, has very little
to do with the details of that subject; more especially when it is the
geographical aspects of it that we are investigating. Plant geography,
or phytogeography as it is called, concerns the geographical
distribution of species, genera, families, and/or larger groups of
plants; the study of vegetation is concerned with the distribution of
the various types and forms of *growth* of plant-associations. In the
latter, the actual species, genera, families, or bigger groups of plants
themselves really do not matter at all; it is the manner in which they
grow—namely, to what height, how close together, in what form (as trees,
shrubs, or herbs), and so forth. Thus, any one patch of vegetation in
one area may have as its dominant tree a palm, but in another a
broad-leafed, hardwood, deciduous tree, and in still another a pine, yet
all three "forests"—if they be such-

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

may be of the same *vegetational* type. Further, an area of, let us say,
orchard-bush, in one place may consist of one kind of stunted acacia
tree, standing widely apart with, under and between these trees, tall
grasses of two species; but, suddenly, in an adjacent area, the whole
scene may change—often along a very precise line—to tall trees of the
same species, but standing much closer together and having only short
grass below; and this grass may be of a new species or one of the first
two or both. In other words, the appearance of the vegetation has
changed but the plant species have not. This is called a change of
facies, a term borrowed from the geologists, who first coined it to
define the appearance of strata of rocks in various places, which may be
totally unlike: thus, in one place a shale, in another a sandstone, in a
third a limestone may be found, and yet all still be of the same age and
laid down, or deposited, under the same shallow sea.

The study of vegetation is a grossly neglected science and, although it
has played a very lively part in geography, and especially in animal and
plant geography, since long before mere plant distribution studies were
initiated, it has never been given the place it warrants. In fact, there
is not yet even a single textbook devoted to it, as opposed to general
phytogeography. And yet, the whole of plant, *and animal*, distribution
is wholly dependent upon it; while, all the most important aspects of
human life such as agriculture, much of industry, and even nationality,
race, and all the larger characteristics and characters of human beings
are wholly subservient to it. It is amazing that the last thing to be
mapped in any country has been and still is its vegetational forms. Only
one state in this Union has done this—California—while there are states,
like Texas, that have vast afforestation, soil bank, and other programs
which are entirely dependent upon detailed knowledge of the distribution
of vegetational types and *facies*, but that do not yet have a single
map of any such.

Actually, the most important map of *any* piece of land is a vegetation
map. Even topography \[showing altitude\] is really of minor importance.
To zoology, and such matters as stock raising, it is not only just
essential, but so vital that it really

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

amounts to the *only* feature of the land concerned that is needed. As a
very broad example, it may be noted that nearly all our cattle are of
the wrong breeds for the vegetational belts and zones in which we now
keep them and try to raise them. Take the Hereford breed of cattle, for
instance. These were developed in Herefordshire in England in the middle
of the southern North Temperate Deciduous Forest Belt, yet we try to
raise them on prairies, scrub belts, and near deserts and then we wonder
why this stock deteriorates and needs constant infusion of new blood
from the old (original) country. The cattle that should roam our Western
ranges, and by the millions, are either Masai or Ankole bighorns from
Africa, or Sindi Humped Cattle from Pakistan. And so it goes with almost
every animal and plant that man tries to rear; as well as to man
himself. Hollanders from the coastal marshes of Europe are never going
to thrive in upland Colorado; Spaniards from the windy *desiertos* of
upland Spain are not even going to survive in the Canadian boreal pine
forests or in the Florida everglades. They either die out, or move out.

The mapping of vegetation is thus the sole most important task for the
terrestrial geographer. Details of rainfall, topography, soils, and all
the rest are purely secondary and can come later. And colonizers,
agriculturists, stock raisers, and others would be well advised to drop
all other studies until that has been accomplished.

If, therefore, we want to attempt any sort of interpretation of the
distribution of any living thing, the first task we have to perform is
to ascertain the distribution of the vegetational types throughout the
areas concerned; *and also* around the world, so that we may have some
notion as to the significance of the purely local distribution. In our
present case, it therefore becomes necessary even if only briefly to
outline the basic principles of vegetational classification and
geography. This is a tall enough order, but before we can attempt even
this, there is another more basic matter that has to be straightened
out.

It may seem almost impertinent to say that such a thing is necessary;
for it is, alas, a sad commentary on the present state of our
understanding; and it is a terrible indictment of

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

our educational system that it should be so. The truth of the matter is
that the very fundamentals of geography—all of which have been published
for nigh on a century—are simply not known, generally, in one particular
and most vital respect. This is the basic matter of the definition and
delineation of the real continents.

An immense amount of rubbish has been talked throughout the ages,
published in past centuries, and is still mouthed today about seven
continents and "the seven seas." None of these expressions have any but
the vaguest connection with reality. First, seas and oceans are
completely different things, with different structures, histories, types
of fauna, flora, and so forth. There are actually five *oceans*—the
North and South Atlantics, the Indian, and the North and South
Pacifics. <span id="fr_54"></span>[\*](#fn_51.md) All the rest of the
surface of the earth covered by salt water, is *sea*. There are six
*land-masses*, that emerge from the seas—North and South America,
Eurasia, Africa, Australia, and Antarctica. These land-masses are *not*,
however, *continents*. Continents are intrinsic areas of land under air,
just as oceans are really areas of "land" under water. They form
distinct units, each having its own construction, history, fauna, flora,
and so forth. What is more, the confines \[edges\] of these true
continents do not, except in some exceptional details, coincide with
those of the land-masses. This has been manifest for about a century but
we still persist in calling the latter by the names for the former, and
sometimes vice versa.

There are *seven* continents. These are outlined in detail on [Map
XV](#img_map15.md). They are, can be, or in some cases, might better be
named as follows: (1) *Erica* \[after the bawdy old Norseman who first
located it for the "Western" world of historical man\], which we now
call "North America" and which stretches from the northern tip of
Greenland to the Isthmus of Tehuantepec in southern Mexico, and from the
western Aleutians to eastern Greenland. (2) *Columbia* \[in memory of
the Italian, Christopher Columbus\] is the next area. This continent
stretches from the Isthmus of Tehuantepec and the Florida Strait,
between

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

the peninsula of Florida and Cuba and the Bahamas to the extreme tip of
Tierra del Fuego. (3) *Antarctica*, which is almost two sub-continents
divided by a long deep channel now filled with ice. (4) *Australia*,
which is the austral or southernmost generally, and which includes a lot
of partially sunken land running north to what has now been named
"Wallace's Line." There remain three others and these are going to cause
us somewhat more trouble.

Let us take (5) *Ethiopia* first. This was the original western name for
the vegetated lands south of the Sahara Desert, and includes the whole
of the African land-mass roughly south of that desert but also a bit of
land south and east of the great desert of Arabia. Next (6), we have
*Orientalia* or, as it is loosely called, "The Orient." This is
southeast Asia, with a lot of sunken land farther to the southeast and
multitudinous islands thereupon, down to this Wallace's Line. Its
northern and eastern limits are very precise but puzzling to many,
notably along the northern border of what is now Pakistan and India. The
essential point to grasp \[for our story\] is that the Himalaya
Mountains together with the great gutter of the upper Brahmaputra to
their north lie wholly within this continent, while the southern edge of
Eurasia \[the last and final continent\] begins along the great rampart
of the Tibetan uplands.

*Eurasia* (7), is by far the largest continent. It starts on the west
with Spitzbergen, Jan Mayen Island, Iceland, the Azores, and Canary
Islands, and reaches to a line drawn up the northeast coast of Asia,
from the mouth of the Yangtze River, west of the Aleutians and St.
Lawrence Island, and through the Bering Strait. To the north, it
includes all land and islands between these north to south lines, right
up to the North Pole. Its southern limit forms a great inverted curve,
with one northward-pointing kink in the middle. This curve runs, as may
be seen clearly from this same Map XV, from southern Morocco across the
Sahara to a point on the Red Sea about the border of the Sudan and
Abyssinia. Thence, it crosses the Red Sea and southern Arabia to Cape
Ras el Hadd; then across the Arabian Sea to the mouth of the Indus
Valley. From there it proceeds almost due north to the Pamirs and then
turns east

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

and continues north of the vast plateau of Tibet to the Tsin-Ling
Mountains of China, and finally to the mouth of the Yangtze about
Shanghai. It is really a very compact block of land containing only two
major flooded areas—those of the Mediterranean basin, with its ancient
extensions to the Black, Caspian, and Aral seas, and the Red Sea.

These are the real continents and, although the first and the last have
very much more in common than any others, they are fundamental units,
each with its own character, life, and history. For this reason,
whatever occurs on each has a significance that is doubly pertinent. If,
for instance, something that *looks* identical is found on two of them,
the odds are high that said two creatures \[or plants\] are not really
alike except in appearance. Further, vegetational types which may be
found on many, or more than one continent, may vary from one to another
in their botanical constitution, but still "look" alike. We must always
bear these facts in mind, and make due allowances for them.

The business of vegetation is really very simple. Our planet revolves
around our star (the sun) on a fixed and flat plane. The axis around
which our earth rotates is tilted to that plane by about 23 degrees.
Thus, we get seasons which mirror each other both in time and in
time-belts in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. As a result,
different amounts of sunlight bathe different *belts* around the earth,
in different ways, and at different times of the year. Plants as a
whole, feed on a combination of matter \[dissolved in water\] and energy
\[sunlight\] and they have evolved in various manners to survive under
various and differently changing conditions of sunlight during flexible
periods of time. If you can imagine the earth without any seas or oceans
and all at "sea level" but still having the same climate, weather, and
such like atmospheric features that it does today \[which, of course, is
impossible, even theoretically\], you would find that its vegetation
would be arranged in a series of 20 major belts—or 24, with two
vegetationless belts and circular blobs at top and bottom—half of which
\[in the Northern Hemisphere\] exactly mirror the other half \[in the
Southern Hemisphere\], and with a single double

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

belt around the midriff. This formation is, as a matter of fact, exactly
what our earth *does* have; but the belts are not all of the same width
and don't all run neatly all around. To the contrary, while they
invariably maintain a certain basic succession, they wave about from
north to south as they go round the earth, and they constantly swell up
or thin down, sometimes to the point of virtual disappearance.

These belts are, starting from the equator: the T-E-F or Tall Equatorial
Forest; the H-D-F or High Deciduous Tropical Forest; the Orchard-bush;
the Savannah; the Subtropical Scrublands; the Hot Desert; the Temperate
Scrublands; the Prairies; the Parklands; the Temperate Deciduous
Woodlands; the Boreal Coniferous Forests; the Tundra; the Barrenlands;
and finally the Polar Icefields. Within these there are several
prominent and many minor subdivisions but they need not concern us here,
except to note that a rather important transition zone of mixed
deciduous hardwoods and evergreen softwoods, or conifers, exists between
the deciduous woodlands and the coniferous boreal belts; and that the
T-E-F may be broken down into three very clearly recognizable sub-belts.
All these major belts invariably lie in that order all over the land
surfaces of this earth as you travel from the equator to either pole.
However, their width and exact position (latitudinally) is, as I have
already said, not the same when traveling down various meridians or
longitudinal lines. What is the cause of this situation?

The question is a fascinating study in itself, but is not suitable for
us here. It must suffice to sum it up with the simple statement that,
despite all that may be said about climate, weather, winds, moisture,
and other atmospheric factors, as well as geological and other
geomorphological matters, there proves to be but *one* factor alone that
causes these swings in the major vegetational belts. That is the major
ocean currents. The incidence of the major ocean currents is displayed
on [Map XVI](#img_map16.md). The origin and conformity of these forms
another subject in itself, that also cannot be pursued here, but which
is basically brought about by the spin of the earth, which causes all
blobs of liquid lying on its surface to

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

revolve clockwise in the Northern Hemisphere and counterclockwise in the
Southern. The heating up is done in the equatorial belts; the cooling,
as should be obvious, in the polar regions.

Another aspect of the distribution of vegetational types that is of
first importance is that of the effects of altitude. The really amazing
thing is that this does not have any effect on the basic arrangement,
the succession, or even the regional variations in the major
vegetational belts. Following any one, and coming to a mountain range,
you will find that it just "ducks under" the uplands and appears again
unscathed on the other side at the same altitude at which it met these
uplands. Anything above sea level is, in fact, simply "dumped down" on
this basic plan, as it were, and has no effect upon its general pattern.
Only on the slopes of the mountains themselves do we see something else.

This also proves really to be a simple matter if you don't lose your
nerve. Taking the most extreme possible case: if you start up a mountain
that rises right on the equator, you will pass upward through all the
major types (belts) of vegetation that you would pass through at sea
level on your way to a pole, eventually arriving on a perpetual
snowfield at about 17,000 feet. What is more, the farther toward either
pole you go, the fewer belts you will pass through going upward from sea
level, and the lower each one will be on mountains until, when you get
inside the polar icefield region, everything will be covered all year
round in snow and ice from its top down to sea level.

This is exactly what we find all over the world; invariably, and without
exception. The montane floras \[i.e. horizontal belts of different
vegetational types\] that you pass through as you climb are, however,
called technically *zones*, simply in order to save wordage and to
indicate that they are where they are due to *altitude* and not to
*latitude*.

The over-all picture of the distribution of vegetational belts is
displayed on [Map XVI](#img_map16.md). This shows what conditions would be
if all the land were at sea level. However, all land must be above sea
level, and the moment you start to go up, things

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

begin to change. Since the major belts are pretty large and wide, one
actually has to go up some 600 feet before one may expect to pass from
one noticeable zone to another. We may now compare this map with the
pertinent available information of a purely geographical nature that we
have about ABSMs as shown on [Map XV](#img_map15.md). When we do so,
moreover, we may well get quite a surprise.

We immediately see, and staring us in the face, a whole gamut of facts
that have not previously been apparent. For instance, ABSMs, one and
all, fall within the bounds of a rather limited number of narrow belts
and more especially, even narrower zones within those belts. Past
tradition of them—i.e. MLF—moreover, turns out to connect these special
areas but never to "slop over" into surrounding belts or zones. Places
where ABSMs have been reported, which are perpetually, or for long
periods annually, covered in snow or ice, *all* fall within montane
forest blocks. In fact, to sum up, ABSMs display in their distribution
exactly the pattern expected of any group of animals \[and notably of
terrestrial mammals\] and more particularly that of higher Primates.
This is more than just merely significant; but, there is a further even
more remarkable, and in some respects most convincing set of facts.

Possibly fossilized remains of primitive men, sub-men, sub-hominids,
"super"-apes, and more lowly Primates will be found almost all over the
land surface of the earth, but so far, we have merely scratched the
surface of a few surface strata and in only a few places in our search
for such relics. Yet, quite an amount of material *has* been unearthed,
as we saw in Chapter 16. From what has been discovered, we see that
there were once sundry pockets of higher primate evolution in various
places. This may be no more than a surface appearance \[or "emergence"\]
and due entirely to the fact that conditions suitable to the
fossilization of the creatures concerned just happened to exist only at
one time in those areas. However, even if all these Primate types were
once universal, but are so far known in the fossil form only from one
limited area, we can at least say that they *did* exist in that area.

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ignoring,
therefore, what we don't know, and plotting what we do, we see that
there were, at least at one time, various forms of ABSMs in various
places, and that those places appear to be of great significance
vis-à-vis the distribution of vegetational types. I should add that the
distribution of both MLF and historical record also fall more than just
neatly into the same pattern. To do another summing up, therefore, we
may say that, just as current ABSMs conform perfectly to the rules of
zoogeography and phytogeography, so also do they to the findings of
paleoanthropology.

Armed with reliable facts such as these—facts basic, simple, and
obvious—we may tackle the whole ABSM search in an entirely different
manner. We no longer have to be dismayed by the seemingly heterogeneous
plethora of details, apparent discrepancies, and outrageous suggestions
that may have appeared to arise in the reports. These facts have a
considerable cogency and a fine conformity. No longer are they just a
mass of random jottings and silly statements. To the contrary, they
speak enormously of the seriousness, honesty, and common sense of plain
people; for, I cannot find a single case of anyone who alleges that he
or she has information upon this subject who even suggests that his or
her information came from any place *outside* any area in which its
occurrence is logical, according to the above stated basic rules of
Nature. In other words, all the reports come from places where such
things are possible \[or have been in the past\], and all of them, as
far as I can see, from places where, according to the best findings of
the best scientific inquiry and effort, they are highly probable today.
For instance, even the really extraordinary—and certainly at first
sight, preposterous—reports from the bottomlands of the Mississippi
drainage basin conform to these general principles, and, whatever one
may think, they do not really, on proper analysis, outrage any valid
zoological precepts. There are actually no exceptional cases. Take that
of the puzzling suggestion that there are three distinct types of
sub-hominid unknowns in the eastern Himalayan Region—the giant
*Dzu-Teh*, the bestial *Meh-Teh*, and the little pigmy *Teh-lmas* of the
lower valley-forests. One's first

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

reaction is "don't be silly: why pile Pelion on Ossa? Isn't one bit of
outrageous nonsense enough?"

When one comes to regard the distribution of montane vegetational types
in the Himalayan area; and then map the discoveries of sub-men known
from fossil evidence around that area; and finally adds to this the
present distribution of other mammals in that area, one begins to see
that there should be at least these three types thereabouts. So also
with the little *Almas* and the large *Gin-Sungs* of the eastern
Eurasian area. Nature "abhors a vacuum," and invariably fills all her
niches; and there are slots in those mountain areas for just such a
small and a large omnivorous type of primate mammal.

This brings us to another aspect of geography; and one over which there
is as much if not more misunderstanding than there is over such simple
matters as the disposition of continents and basic vegetational belts. A
curious belief has grown up during the past half century to the effect
that "the whole earth has been explored." This is not so. By far the
greater part of it is entirely unexplored, very little of that part
which has been, is mapped; a great deal of the earth which is mapped is
never visited; while large parts of it are frankly unknown.

First, almost three quarters of the surface of this planet is covered by
salt water and about 80 per cent of this goes to form the five great
oceans. These are on an average about 2% miles deep, and it is only now,
since the last IGY, that we have even begun to obtain any over-all—let
alone detailed—picture of the bottoms of the oceans. The seas are better
charted and in some respects, we know more about their bottoms than we
do of the land surfaces of our planet. Of the land, one ninth—or
Antarctica at 5,700,000, plus Greenland at 840,000 square miles—out of a
total of 58,000,000 square miles, is covered by great domes of solid
ice. Another ninth is permanently frozen and supports endless coniferous
forests that are not used—the immense *taiga* of Russia and Siberia, and
the boreal forests of northern Canada. Much of these two largest forest
areas are quite unknown and virtually impenetrable. Of the remainder, a
third is desert \[with surrounding

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

sparse scrublands\], and another third equatorial forest. There are
still a few areas of considerable extent in the middle of the larger
deserts that are not explored or mapped, and have only been passed
through once or twice. The tropical forests are even less known. If you
look at [Map XVI](#img_map16.md), you will see the disposition of the
tropical forests.

It is the closed-canopy forests that interest us most. Of these there
are one major and two minor blocks in the Western Hemisphere; the same
in Ethiopia; and, in a manner of speaking, the same again in Orientalia.
Modern maps show all of these surrounded by place names, crossed by
roads and even railways, and bespattered with names of rivers, towns,
and mountains. In any standard atlas it looks as if the Amazon or the
Congo Basins were as cluttered as the Mississippi Valley; while it looks
as if this, in turn, was as fully occupied and as well-known as that of
the Yangtze. Both concepts are not only misleading and misconceptions:
they are downright rubbish.

If you will take a map of the Pacific in any standard school atlas, of
say about the dimensions of *Life* Magazine; use a good magnifying glass
and measure the dot on an "i" in the word "Pacific," and then calculate
\[or simply measure\] its width on the scale given at the bottom, you
will get a great surprise. I did this with a powerful magnifying device
and some care, checking the actual distances on the printed map from
other geodetic data, and I found that the dot actually covered 345 miles
of territory \[or water\]. A place name, therefore, such as "The
Tumuc-Humac Mountains" printed on a map of Surinam (previously Dutch
Guiana), a country just about 200 by 200 miles in dimensions, can
entirely fill up the hinterland (one third) of that country. To make
matters in this instance worse, a certain Mt. Wilhelmina is usually
marked in the middle of these Tumuc-Humac Mountains. It so happens,
however, that the latter are actually a series of modest hills and
uplands, while Mt. Wilhelmina is a complete myth; for, when planes flew
over the place during World War II, where it was alleged to be, it was
discovered that it was a large *depression*, in these "mountains," and
almost

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

at sea level! For this, if no other reason, I may just as well use this
delightful little country for further examples of geographical
don't-knows.

I spent a year there in 1938, collecting animals. Its coast is lined
with a 30-mile-wide strip of impenetrable mangrove swamps. Behind, or
south, of this lies a belt of coastal deposits with rich soil, on which
are bauxite mines, the capital, and some small towns, farms,
plantations, and a few roads. Behind this lies another 50-mile strip of
continental plain. This is crossed from south to north by some enormous
rivers at almost regular intervals. Strung along these, for about 100
miles inland, are isolated villages of the Djukas—free Africans who just
walked away from slavery in the early days, and founded their own
hegemony. These rivers are heavily forested for a few miles back from
their banks, but in between them there are huge open areas of (short
grass) savannah, as flat as tennis courts, with some clumpy copses of
trees on them. In these live some Amerindian tribesmen (Arawak and
Carib) very few of whom have even a single store-bought possession.
Behind this belt, the land begins to rise into foothills, and there are
mighty cataracts on the rivers. The whole country is clothed in a dense
mat of "jungle" or T-E-F, often growing in four tiers one under the
other, and constituting some of the tallest and most magnificent forest
in the world. Here there are no Djukas, no Amerinds, *and* no paths.
These foothills become increasingly steep, and the rivers run in
narrowing gorges choked with another kind of tangled jungle; then they
rise to these Tumuc-Humac \[so-called\] Mountains. They are one colossal
jumble of low peaks, ridges, and deep gorges extending all the way from
the Roraima range in British Guiana, through Surinam and French Guiana,
and on into Brazilian Guiana. They are uninhabited \[at least by
humans\], unpenetrated, and unused by anybody, and they have been
crossed only once—in 1921 by a massive expedition led by a Dr. Stahel,
which had to burn all its canoes on entering the gorges, to prevent its
laborers from running home, and then build new ones, on the other side,
to get out. On this other side, the whole business is reproduced in
reverse,

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

back down to navigable big rivers without cataracts, and with strips of
"gallery-forest" bordering their banks.

When we were in that country, a very pale-skinned girl of great beauty
was brought into the capital (Paramaribo) by some Djukas who had found
her wandering about in the forest just above one of the cataracts. She
was put under the care of this same Dr. and Mrs. Stahel, since he was
the senior government biologist and his wife a trained ethnologist. In
time, her story came out. She belonged to a tribe of people all
pale-skinned like herself, who lived on the open savannahs *beyond*, or
at the back of the Tumuc-Humacs on the Brazilian side. She implied that
her people never even met the other Amerinds who dwelt along the rivers,
but traded with them by leaving goods in cleared areas in the forest.
She had run away and gotten lost.

Later that same year, the French, Netherlands, and Brazilian governments
decided that they had better make a start in finding out where their
borders really lay and how they joined. A large expedition was mounted
and took 3 months to get back into these savannahs, going round the easy
way. There they found this girl's people; and, sure enough, they were
almost white, never went to the rivers, and had only one food plant
which they stuck in the ground only when a large tree fell in the
forest. Most extraordinary of all, they had never heard of white men,
*or* black men, and did not even have a word for "sea" in their
language. Yet, several thousand of them were living under 200 miles from
the Atlantic Ocean.

From our back window, in a bush-house at a gold mine in the foothill
forest of Surinam, we looked out in a direction that, on the best and
largest maps, had not one single place name for over 2000 miles, all the
way to the Matto Grosso. And all of *that* is covered by a great blanket
of greenery like a vast bedspread—a little bumpy and sometimes raised
into mild humps, as if a sleeper had one flexed knee, but otherwise
absolutely homogeneous and quite impenetrable. Most of it is three
layers thick, and on an average 150 to 250 feet tall.

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

This is the condition over the whole Amazon and Congo Basins. It
pertains also to a great extent in the great peninsula of Indo-China,
and to a lesser extent in Central America and the Colombia-Ecuador
Northwest Pacific forest; it used to do so in the Tupi around Rio de
Janeiro \[but there it is now almost all cleared\]; it pertains all the
way from Senegambia to Guinea in west Africa back from the coast; again
from Nigeria to the Nile and south to Angola; in Mozambique, and up the
lowland east coast of Africa; in a strip down the east side of
Madagascar; in bits of southern peninsular India and in Ceylon; all over
inner Assam and over into the adjacent Chinese and Burmese territories;
throughout a great part of Malaya, Sumatra, Borneo, the Celebes, parts
of Java, and many of the smaller Indonesian islands; almost all over New
Guinea; and in a fair-sized patch on Cape York in Queensland, Australia.
None of this, apart from the borders of the waterways, is even mapped.
Most of it has never been penetrated, not to say explored; and a very
great part of it is just not visited at all or used in any way, even by
what local people there may be around its peripheries.

Yet people talk about the human race having to harvest the sea to
prevent mass starvation; having to colonize other planets; cut down
their birth rate \[a very good idea, but for other reasons\]; or
complain that there is "no land left to exploit." True, you have to be
frightfully careful when you clear these wild places of their natural
vegetative cover, because the soil may go with it; but our technology is
quite capable of obviating this, *if* \[and this is a very big IF\]
they'd only study vegetation per se in advance.

Almost the same applies to the limited one seventh of the land surface
of our earth that we do inhabit and produce our food on. The greater
part of this also lies fallow, and a very substantial part \[the good
Lord be praised\] is also still forested. A lot of this forest is not
used, seldom visited and, over wide areas, not mapped or even explored.
You should take a drive around our own country some time. I did two
years ago and it is amazing. Whole expeditions—and properly equipped at
that—go into the mountains of Arizona and just don't come

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

out. Helicopters go in to look for them and don't come out either. The
forestry department has no decent maps of anything but the outside edges
of some of our national forests; the Panamint Mountains in Nevada are
unexplored and even game wardens admit that runaway camels of the Civil
War period may still be living in them; there is the area described in
Chapter 6 \[the Klamath in northern California; 17,000 square miles in
area\] with only two roads through it, and which has never been properly
surveyed. In Oregon, Washington and, of course, in all the provinces of
Canada, there are enormous—nay, rather, absolutely vast—areas of forest
that have never even been penetrated. There are no proper maps of the
multi-thousand-square-mile bottomlands of the
Ohio-Missouri-Mississippi-Yazoo river systems; just roads on road maps.
Parties get lost in Maine, and no taxes have ever been collected in
parts of the southern Smokies. There are people who have nothing to do
with the United States not 30 miles from New York, on the Jersey Pine
Barrens; and there are "hillbillies" 70 miles from New York, 90 per cent
of whom have never even seen a *radio*—not a TV set, mind you. But let's
turn the picture over and have a look at the other side.

The dredging up of a 5-foot, bright blue, Coelacanth fish—a creature of
a group thought to have been extinct for 70 million years—with a vivid
yellow eye, 4 inches across, was more than a mere surprise to
zoologists; and that came out of a sea \[not even an ocean, albeit\].
Much worse has happened on land. Just 6 months before the time of
writing (1960) a large herd of the Woodland Bison (*Bison bison
athabasca*) were located in the Canadian Northwest Territories only
about 100 miles from the reservation on which the \[until then
supposedly\] last remnants of their breed had been maintained for over
half a century south of Lake Athabasca. These enormous oxen are
leftovers from the last ice-advance. The point I am trying to make here
is, they were found right alongside a place where a mission station has
been in operation for over a century, and not more than 50 miles from a
new road, along which I drove in a standard model car while my partner
typed beside me. The Woodland Bison is really an enormous ox,

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

<span id="img_map16"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP XVI. THE
WORLD](tn/map16.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map16.jpg.md)  
MAP XVI. THE WORLD  
</span>

**MAP XVI. THE WORLD**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The most important feature of the land-surface of the earth to animals
(and thus to men) is the type of vegetation that clothes it. There are
seven major types—the equatorial closed-canopy forests; the open
orchards and tropical savannahs; the scrublands and hot deserts; the
steppes, prairies, and parklands of the temperate zones; the
closed-canopy deciduous and coniferous forests of the higher latitudes;
and the tundras and barrenlands of the polar circles. These girdle the
earth, in that order, from equator to poles, in successive belts, but
all of them waver to north and south and expand or contract,
continuously, and in a variety of ways. These variations are due solely
to the influence of the major ocean currents. Altitude has no effect on
this belting; but on mountains the succession is repeated vertically,
irrespective of latitude. ABSMs appear to occur only in mountainous
regions and almost exclusively in those which lie in the forest belts.
The one exception is eastern Eurasia.

</div>

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

but it is neither as big nor as fantastic as the creature that turned up
in Indo-China in 1938, which I have already referred to several times.

This beast, the Kouprey (*Bos sauveli*), is the second biggest of the ox
family—second only to the Gaur *(Bos gaurus*) of India. It now turns out
to be quite common. They have large curving horns like Chillingham
Cattle, but the males' horns are *tasseled*, starting about a foot from
their tips. When this huge beast was first reported, "scientists" \[our
old friends, the orthodox, nontraveling, Anglo-Saxon zoologists\] first
called the whole thing a lie, and then said that, if they did exist,
they must be "a cross between two other species." \[Species of what, as
usual unspecified, of course, in total disregard of their own contention
that hybridization does not give rise to new forms.\] Now that this
incredible beast is properly known, it has even been suggested that it
is a relative of the extinct west Eurasian Aurochs (*Bos primigenius*)
from which our Western cattle are descended; and that it may even have
been domesticated by the Khmers who built Angkor-Vat! Really, one
sometimes becomes depressed!

The over-all point that I am trying to make is that, while we know
nothing of a very large part of the land surface of

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

our earth, we know even less of its inhabitants—vegetable, animal, and
even, it sometimes appears, human. And yet people who have never set
foot in so much \[vegetative\] as a wood, have the brazen effrontery to
state that thus-thus-and-thus, or anything, or something, can't exist.
Such statements are not pathetic; they are not just sad; they are
downright dangerous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[399:\*](abs22.htm#fr_53.md) It is interesting to
note—and the fact should be noted—that Linnaeus, the founder of modern
systematic nomenclature, actually gave a name to an ABSM, which he
called *Homo nocturnus*; i.e., The Man of the Night.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[405:\*](abs22.htm#fr_54.md) For the exact
definition of these see my *Follow The Whale*, page xviii, Boston,
Little, Brown, 1956.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 19. Sundry Objectionable Facts](abs23.md)
