[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs26)  [Next](abs28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

**Appendix B**

**The Importance of Feet**

The study of footprints and foot-tracks—the difference between which was
discussed earlier in this book—form the subject of a very precise
science called *Ichnology*. This discipline is employed in quite a
number of fields, notably in police work and in palaeontology. The
identification of the tracks of living animals in snow and mud has, of
course also been an art in hunting since time immemorial, and it is of
great interest to the field naturalist. Its more psychological aspects
were also discussed when we first introduced the matter of ABSM tracks.
We should now consider the details of this discipline.

Tracks \[the word I shall use from now on, unless dealing specifically
with a single print\] are caused by gravity. The first requirement is
that the object on top that presses down be composed of a denser
material than that upon which it is pressed, but this does not mean that
tracks will invariably result. Thus, a body made of steel if rolled
across a sheet of lead need not leave tracks. There appears here another
factor—that of weight—which results in the beginning of the erection of
a complicated formula. Above a certain weight the upper body will leave
tracks, but the point at which it starts to do so is also dependent upon
the compressibility of the under body, or surface. Then again, tracks
can be either pressed or punched into a substance: in other words
energy, in addition to mere gravity, may be exerted. In this case the
point at which an impression begins varies according to quite a number
of factors which fortunately need not concern us since they lie in
realms of engineering that do not apply to

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

purely biological matters. Nevertheless, one must bear in mind that
there is a considerable difference in appearance between a print made by
pressing and one made by punching an object downward into a surface. The
former will be found to be surrounded by little cracks all running
inward to the "gutter" of the print, while the latter will be surrounded
by a sort of levee or ridge.

One of the easiest ways to spot an artificially made print is to find
such an *impact ridge* around a print where there is no cause for it
under the natural conditions pertaining on the terrain. By this is
meant, where the creature \[and this does not apply to machines\] had no
cause to *jump*. Jumping results in the application of "weight" to the
normal gravity and so is equivalent to "punching." Thus a creature
running, rather than walking, will leave differently formed individual
prints, and when going downhill, they will be quite other than when it
is going uphill. Already the matter becomes, as you may readily agree,
complicated. But there are several further complexities.

Perhaps the most notable is the area of the object which makes any print
and, in the case of animals, the number of such objects \[i.e. hands,
feet, tail, or other appendages\] employed in so walking, running,
hopping, jumping, or otherwise progressing. The other most important
factor is naturally the nature of the material or surface into which the
tracks are impressed. This is itself an enormously complicated subject.

Tracks may be left in gravels or sands, all of which are of course much
denser than any animal foot that passes over them. This is due to their
particulation or "looseness." They are dry, and such substances range
widely in consistency from what are called screes, of sometimes enormous
boulders piled against the sides of mountains, to dry plaster of Paris.
Much finer substances have now been artificially developed but in Nature
we need not concern ourselves with anything much finer than what we call
a fine dried silt, which is a little coarser than dry plaster.

There are two other types of solids in which imprints may be left. These
are, first, materials, such as lead, that are themselves malleable or
what is commonly called "soft" and, secondly

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

"solutions" in the widest sense of that word. This means, popularly
speaking, *wet*. We need not overly concern ourselves with the first
since such substances may be regarded as nonexistent in Nature—that is
to say in the nonhuman world. The second is of course the most important
type of material in which the tracks of animals appear—and this goes for
snow, which in many respects holds an intermediate position, since,
dependent upon temperature, it may be either a particulated material, or
a mere wet mixture. Prints can thus be left in three kinds of
substances—(1) dry, as sands, (2) wet, as in muds, or (3) snow, which
has to be separately classified.

There are those, such as the technologists of police laboratories and
road-construction engineers, who know so much about the factors just
named and the results of making impressions in various substances that
it would really startle you. On another hand, certain palaeontologists
have made profound

op studies of this subject, and most notably in connection with the
interpretation of fossil footprints of early amphibians, reptiles,
mammals, and birds. The findings of all three groups of specialists of
course coincide for, as I say, Ichnology is a very precise science.
However, most unfortunately, totally insufficient application has been
made of their findings in ABSMery. Also, there has been an extraordinary
lack of appreciation of the basic theorem of Ichnology which is, simply
stated, that a print can be left only by an object that exactly
"mirrors" it—a term that should be self-explanatory. This brings us to
the questions arising from the conformation of vertebrate animals' feet.

For some reason—and there may well be no real reason—it just so happens
that the first creatures with backbones to crawl out of water on to land
dispensed with all but five of the rays (digits) on the four appendages
they retained. This gave all of us land vertebrates a basic pentadactyl
pattern—i.e. four "legs" each with five "fingers" or toes. True, there
are some animals like whales that have somehow again reduplicated the
number of phalanges in their digital extremities. This is, actually, one
of the most extraordinary things in zoology as it flies in the face of
one of the basic precepts of

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

genetics; namely, that a characteristic once lost cannot be resuscitated
from the same source. \[The additional phalanges of the Cetaceans are
phylogenetically developed by reduplication.\] This basic five-fingered
and five-toed pattern speaks much for the unitary origin of all land
vertebrates—the amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.

Many forms of all these major groups have at one time or another lost
one or more phalanges on various digits, whole digits, or even whole
limbs. The snakes, for instance, have lost everything. The results may
be most readily seen in the \[mirrored\] prints left by the hands and
feet of the various types; and from such prints a great deal about their
makers may, by inference from known types, be reconstructed. This brings
us to the classification of feet and specifically of mammalian
extremities. Happily we do not have to go into this vast question and
may concentrate upon those of the Primates—i.e. the *Order* to which we
belong, together with the apes, monkeys, lemuroids, and a few more
abstruse types like the Feathertails.

The Primate foot \[as opposed to their hands, which we may also from now
on ignore\] is pentadactyl—i.e. five-toed- but is otherwise of a variety
of forms. These forms may be classified in various ways but two sets of
factors are of particular interest to us. The first is whether they are
what is called wholly *plantigrade* or not; the second, whether the big,
great, or first toe is opposed to or lies alongside and points in the
same direction as \[and/or is bound to\] the other toes. A plantigrade
foot means that its owner stands and walks with the whole under surface,
from the tips of its toes to its heel—which is to say the last bone of
the ankle—on the ground. Some Primates, such as the tiny Tarsiers, do
not do this, the ankle bones being greatly elongated. Men (Hominids),
Apes (Pongids), and most Monkeys (Simioids) are plantigrade. Further,
none of these three groups of higher Primates have long enough nails to
produce clawlike excrescences which touch the ground and leave
noticeable marks though those of some Cynocephaloids (i.e. Baboons and
Macaques) may do so

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

when they are running or galloping. There are few—if any, as a matter of
fact—other mammals that do *not* leave claw marks. Then again, claws and
nails although having a similar origin anatomically, are not identical
structures: but this also need not, fortunately, concern us further.

In dealing with Primate footprints we are therefore primarily concerned
with the nature and position of the big or great toe. Among the
photographs is one showing a wide variety of Primate feet. From this it
will be seen that the only one that does not have an opposed big toe is
the Hominid group. Nonetheless, this digit in Hominids also varies
considerably in the degree to which it is set off from the other four
toes. From both the prints found in the cave at Toirano in Italy and
from the skeleton of a whole foot found in the Crimea, we now know that
the big toe of the Neanderthalers was rather widely separated. There are
people living today who have feet not unlike those of Neanderthalers
—notably certain Amerinds from the extreme southern end of South America
(see a photograph in an article by Dr. Carleton S. Coon, in *Natural*
*History*, January, 1961) and some Australoids. However, there is no
indication, even among those which we know, of any evidence whatsoever
of a truly "opposed" big toe, among any Hominid.

One known fact about abnormalities among human feet is nonetheless of
some significance to our story. This is that shown in the two
photographs of a strange type in which the second toe is longer than the
first, sometimes more massive, and also widely separated from the
remaining three toes. This is the more odd in that the second and third
toes of normal Modern Man are partially webbed. If a foot, normal or
abnormal, of this nature developed \[or even merely occurred\] one would
have supposed that the second and third toes \[together\] would have
become widely separated from, on the one hand the big toe, and on the
other, the remaining two. When this abnormality occurs, both the big and
the second toes tend to curl downward and inward not unlike those of the
*Meh*-*Teh*. But they are still not opposed.

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

<span id="img_46800"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/46800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46800.jpg)</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

\(1\) HUMAN Adult (West Caucasoid). Imprint in clay mold. (2) HUMAN
Adolescent, 14½ years (West Caucasoid). Wet imprint of left foot on hard
surface. (3) HUMAN CHILD, 10½ years (West Caucasoid). Wet imprint of
left foot on hard surface. (4) HUMAN Infant, 21/2 years (West
Caucasoid). Wet imprint of left foot on hard surface.

\(5\) HUMAN Adult (Cromagnon Man). From clay floor of cave in France.
(6) HUMAN Adult (Southern Amerind). From mud of river bank Chishue,
Patagonia.

\(7\) SUBHUMAN (Neanderthaler). From moist clay floor of cave, Toirano,
Italy.

\(8\) ABSM (Guli-yavan type). From a sketch of track in mud, Kirghiz
S.S.R.

\(9\) ABSM (Meh-Teh). From photo of cast made from photo of print in
snow, by Eric Shipton. (10) APE (unknown form). Sketch made by Charles
Cordier in the Congo (over-all, 30 centimeters). (11) APE (Lowland
Gorilla). From photo of cast of foot. (12) APE (Chimpanzee). Outline of
extended foot from plaster cast.

</div>

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

<span id="img_46900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/46900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/46900.jpg)</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

\(13\) HUMAN Adult (Bushman). From a sketch made from a cast. (14) ABSM
(Sasquatch). From tracing of deep print in firm wet clay. (15) ABSM
(Dzu-Teh). Drawn by author under supervision of Gerald Russell. (16)
ABSM (?) (Kakundakari). Sketch made by Charles Cordier in the Congo.
(Over-all, 10 centimeters)

\(17\) HUMAN (Malayan Negrito). From photo of cast. (18) ABSM (Sedapa).
Traced from print found in Danau Bento Swamp, Sumatra, by Dr. Jacobson.
(19) ABSM (Teh-lma). From sketch made by the author, under supervision
of Gerald Russell. (20) ABSM (Apamandi). Sketch made by Charles Cordier
in the Congo. (Over-all, 20 centimeters)

\(21\) APE (Orang-utan). Outline of extended foot from plaster cast.
(22) APE (Orang-utan). Imprints of knuckles and foot, ex Huevelmans.
(23) APE (Silvery Gibbon). Outline of extended foot from plaster cast.
(24) MONKEY (Old Male Rhesus). Drawn from live specimen, ex Osman Hill.

</div>

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

Let us now analyze or try to analyze the prints left by the four types
of ABSMs. These, we will arrange in the following order: (1) the
Proto-Pigmies, (2) the *Almas*, (3) the Neo-Giants, and (4) the very
different *Meh-Teh* type. It will be seen from the sketches of the
outstanding types of known human feet \[accompanying this Appendix\]
that those of the living pigmy human types such as the Negrillos and
Negritos show a distinct tendency toward a very short broad foot with
rather large \[in proportion\] and widely splayed toes *and a* *very
constricted* or narrow heel. It is hardly even a "step" from them to the
*Sedapas*, *Teh-lmas*, and other alleged pigmy ABSMs. Such a tiny,
human-type, plantigrade, flat foot does not however begin to approach
the form of the various bears, and not even the Malayan Sun Bear
(*Helarctos*).

Coming to the prints allegedly left by what I have called the *Alma*
type, one finds that they are hardly in any respect different from those
of the Neanderthalers left in the cave in Italy. This, in turn,
perfectly accords with the now expressed belief of the Russian
scientists that the former are but living representatives of the latter.
Despite their relatively low plantar index \[i.e. the number of times
their width goes into their length\] they are hardly at all nonhuman: in
fact, they can be matched by the prints left by not a few Modern Men
living today and most notably by persons who have never worn shoes or
other footgear. We hardly have to discuss these tracks any further,
except to mention that such have been rumored from many places other
than eastern Eurasia—such as, I may say, northwest North America, South
America, and Africa. But how are we to tell whether such prints—if they
ever really existed—were left by some wild thing or by local men,
walking without footgear and happening to have Neanderthaloid-type feet?

Our real problems begin with the Neo-Giants. Here, I want first to try
and wipe away a lot of dross. It has been said, and repeatedly, that
such tracks and prints have been found all over northern Indo-China, and
on northward through the arc formed by the uplands and mountains of
Szechwan via

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

the Tsin Lings to Manchuria. The same—up to 20-inch-long humanoid-type
prints—are also said to have been found in the Matto Grosso and in
Patagonia in South America. This may be so but after, lo, these many
years, I have been completely unable to obtain any photograph or even
sketch of one that is stated to have been made on the spot. I have
several "sketches" made by members of expeditions to these places but
sketches made in retrospect after questioning and mostly in my apartment
in New York, but nothing "original." The only areas from which I have
been able to obtain such firsthand photos or sketches, *and* plaster
casts has been from British Columbia and northern California.

These prints at first look wholly human and, I may say, a bit
ridiculous. However, on further analysis they display other qualities.
As may be seen from the accompanying sketch, they show one or two
extremely odd characteristics that are definitely not typically human.
As photographs of whole tracks of these monsters have shown, they walk
with their feet pointing straight forward: not pigeon-toed, like bears,
or in any way out-turned like most men. Thus, they must flex about \[or
across\] a line that forms an arc at right angles to that line of travel
behind the toes. Then this means that, although the whole foot is
enormous and at first looks very long, it is really a very *short* and
broad one \[with an index of only 1.61\].

A friend of mine, Mr. Fred Laue, long in the shoe business, has worked
out the trade equivalents of these proportions. Working from one of our
plaster casts with an over-all length of 15¾" and a width of 7", a No.
21 shoe would be needed but no less than 13 sizes in width greater than
the widest shoe made—i.e., a EEE. Second, it means that the curious
double inner pad under the ball of the foot has something to do with the
basal joint of the big toe and not with the end or outer end of the
first metacarpal. If this is so, and the foot bends or flexes along the
arc that runs between the two pads all the other toes are not just
extraordinarily but so exceptionally long that they cannot be of the
typically human form. But, if they are that long, why don't they splay
or, alternatively,

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

<span id="img_47200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/47200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/47200.jpg)</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

(Top row, left) ASIATIC BROWN BEAR (Ursus arctos). Left hind and right
fore foot imprints. (Top row, right) NORTH AMERICAN BLACK BEAR (Euarctos
americanus). Left hind and right fore foot imprints.

(Center row, left) PUMA (mountain lion) (Profelis concolor). Right hind
foot. (Fore and hind prints of the large cats are very similar; so also
are all prints of the Great Cats.) (Center row, right) NORTH AMERICAN
PORCUPINE (Erethizon dorsatum). Left hind and right fore foot imprints.

(Bottom row, left) THE FAMOUS FOOTPRINTS OF CARSON CITY JAIL. The
outlined portion was "restored" by Dr. Harkness. This was a left foot
print in sandstone. The tracks were not found in the jail yard but some
miles distant. (Bottom row, right) EXTINCT GROUND SLOTH (Mylodon).
Skeleton of a left foot seen from the side.

</div>

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

why does not the mud in which the tracks were left well or squeeze up
between them as it does with even a normal human foot?

In all the tens of thousands of prints that have now been found and
examined of these creatures this has never been observed to have
occurred. The only thing that I know of that could prevent this—and at
the same time produce such a sharp left-to-right ridge under the flexure
of the toes—is an almost complete *web between all of them*. Thus,
although the Neo-Giant prints at first look almost completely human they
are not. They have a double first subdigital pad; they are extremely
short and broad for their size; and, the second to fifth toes seem to be
conjoined. The significance of these points should by now be
appreciated.

This leaves us with the most abominable problem of all—the
*Meh-Teh*-type prints—and abominable this is, indeed. These simply do
not fit into any pattern. They are definitely not Pongid in that the big
toe though enormous is not truly apposed. Similarly, they are no more
Hominid in that said big toe *is* "set off." However the second toe
looks for all the world like a semi-apposed digit. Such a condition is
not known in any mammal. As we already pointed out, the development of
such a condition is somewhat more likely to be able to be undertaken by
a Pongid \[with an already offset and apposed big toe\] than by a
Hominid without one. These prints are *not*

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

those of a string of foxes all jumping into the same hole in the snow as
we by now know all too well; also, and this has perhaps not yet been
sufficiently stressed, the prints show very clear indication of a rather
complex musculature which, although so far unknown in any other animal,
accords perfectly with what would be expected if one developed such a
foot and was bipedal.

Most but by no means all of the *Meh-Teh* tracks have been found in
snow. The others have been in mud and sometimes first in one and then in
the other in a continuous line. This absolutely and positively disposes
of another proposition that has constantly been put forward; namely,
that the prints were made by a comparatively small creature and were
then subsequently enlarged by melting of the snow with or without
regelation. Considerable work has now been done on this phenomenon
\[John Napier writes me that he carried out experiments in the Juras in
the winter of 1960-61. Unfortunately his findings will not be available
in time for inclusion here.\] It is true that small prints may become
large ones in this way, and it is an extraordinary fact that the tracks
seem or appear in some uncanny way to grow to fit them. By this I mean
that, optical illusion or whatever, the stride seems to grow. This of
course is physically impossible whereas exactly the reverse should occur
because, as the prints get bigger and bigger, their peripheries must get
closer together. I observed this most closely at my farm by excluding
all from going near a set of tracks made by my small wife wearing
close-fitting boots in fresh firm snow from the house to the
trash-disposal affair beyond our lawn. In a few days her prints had
grown to enormous proportions and looked incredibly sinister and as seen
from an upper floor window appearing for all the world like those of a
positive giant—and with a giant stride. Actual measurement however
showed that the stride had of course remained as originally laid down.
Nevertheless, none of these things, actual or illusory can occur in
*mud*.

The Meh-Teh tracks and prints are, in fact, by far the most puzzling of
all, and especially since such persons as Shipton,

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Bordet, and others
obtained clear photographs of them taken from directly above. Here is
obviously a bipedal creature of considerable size and weight that
inhabits the Himalayas and the ranges north of the Tibetan Plateau. It
was the original "Abominable Snowman" and it comes out as the last
"abominable enigma."

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

<span id="img_47600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![THE FAMILY TREE OF
MAN AND THE PONGIDS, WITH THE ABSMs INSERTED](tn/47600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/47600.jpg)  
THE FAMILY TREE OF MAN AND THE PONGIDS, WITH THE ABSMs INSERTED  
</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Appendix C. Where We Come In](abs28)
