[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs23)  [Next](abs25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

**20. Certain Abominable Conclusions**

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Just saying that something does not exist neither disproves that it
does, nor does it make the thing go away. Explaining something away is
not the same as explaining it.*

</div>

We have now done with fantasy and come, as I stated at the end of the
last chapter, to *Fact*. This is a trilogy composed of reports,
evidence, and objects. One might suppose that from this point on it will
be plain sailing. Alas, this is very far from the case for there are
even more pitfalls along the road through this field than there are in
the bewildering world of make-believe, ignorance, and prejudice that we
have just waded through. And these traps are much more deadly because
they at first appear to be quite logical.

Saying that something does not exist proves nothing. Showing what
something is *not*, does not prove what it is. Even proving what a thing
is does not exclude the possibility of the existence of other things.
Then, there are the old saws about having not gone to China and thereby
proving statistically that China does not exist; and the corollary, that
Tibet is China because you can prove that it is not any other country. A
full understanding of such matters, and of paralogic in all its forms,
is essential to a proper understanding of our problem because it rules
not only in that negative world of skepticism which we have just been
through but is also very prevalent in the positive world into which we
are now going to plunge. This is the realm of newsmen, policemen, and
lawyers —and ABSMs at this time are still a police job.

Policemen are true experts in the processes of paralogic and in the
classification, behavior, and ecology of its exponents. They are

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

also specialists in the study of another terrifying breed—that of
witnesses. It is logical to suppose that the only way to solve a crime
is to catch the culprit, but this is not the final answer to such a
problem. Still less is it the *only* solution that is possible of any
crime. In the case of ABSMs it is often said that the only way to prove
their existence is to catch one. This is a valid statement, but not a
true one; and on several counts. I warn you, we are now heading into a
real jungle.

ABSMs are not yet objects for scientific research. In science there is
supposed to be a high standard of ethics but no place for sentiment in
its wider and proper sense. By this, I mean that truly scientific
research is supposed not only to be completely honest, but utterly
devoid of all prejudice. It is concerned solely with facts and in it
there is supposed to be no place for fancies, which is to say, credos.
Scientific evidence is supposed to be in the form only of proven fact,
and the basis of its methodology is the criterion that all such facts
must be reproducible on demand by anybody, anywhere, and at any time.
Only then may beliefs or opinions be expressed—which is to say,
hypotheses put forward and theories erected. These, in turn, then have
to be proved.

This puts a tremendous strain on *evidence* in science, and it is in
appraising evidence that scientific methodology most often breaks down.
Here the line between fact and fancy is sometimes hazy, and that is
where scientists, being only human, display their greatest tendency to
prejudice. Nothing is more aggravating than coming across convincing
evidence that your pet theory is fancy rather than fact; and proof that
this is so, sometimes sends even the truest scientist off his rocker. It
is his faith that is shaken and the world has until very recently run on
faith, not on facts. It may be clearer now just why I stepped aside in
the last chapter to discuss a number of matters which may not have
appeared to have had much direct bearing upon our main theme.

Anybody can tell a story; but, true or false, once told, that story
itself becomes a "fact." If this is presented as fiction, there is no
further trouble, but if it is put forward as *fact*, we

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

run into complications. Immediately we want to know who said so, and on
what grounds. Is there any evidence, and, if so, can it be proved; which
means can it be reproduced or, if it is a physical object, produced? And
this raises the question: how do we go about appraising evidence once we
have been informed of its existence?

The ABSM reports, as given above in Chapters 1-14, are claimed by all
those who told them to be fact, but there are many who have stated that
they are fancy, if not pure fantasy. Both opinions are permissible but
it is incumbent upon both parties to prove their case, and here we run
into some pretty legalities and a realm quite outside that of scientific
research, because evidence, proof, and even physical objects turn out to
be just as difficult and elusive as stories, and research through these
channels cannot as yet be directed at the ABSMs themselves. We are still
in the realm of *search*; and although this may be prosecuted in what is
called a scientific manner, it is, as I say, primarily a police job and
one that should be run on crime-detection lines. Further, analysis of
evidence and appraisal of witnesses must be conducted by methods laid
down by the legal profession, otherwise it will become bogged down in a
morass of paralogic.

Thus, there are two ways in which both the asserters and the deniers of
ABSM stories can go about proving their contentions. Both can bring
acceptable evidence to prove that they are right or that the other party
is wrong. This may, in the latter case, sound like proof by default, but
this is a very peculiar case and at present in a really unusual stage of
prosecution. There is chicanery afoot on both sides, and in both ways.
Certain reports of ABSMs have been outright fakes, others pure mistakes;
but so have certain of the attempted disproofs of them. We are dealing
here not only with human credibility and fallibility but with outright
"crime" in the intellectual sense, in that paralogic has been
deliberately employed by one party at least: namely, the skeptics or
deniers of the facts.

The zoologists who took it upon themselves to act as spokesmen for
established science as a whole, introduced this at the

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

outset. Having stated flatly that the whole thing was a lie, they put
forward what they expected us to believe was evidence in the form of the
"China does not exist" bit. Their method was to collect as universal a
poll as they could of zoologists and others who would affirm that such a
thing as any ABSM was *impossible*, and they then proceeded to say that,
since this opinion was unanimous and \[in their opinion\] nobody else
was qualified to express any other opinion on the matter, it *was*
impossible, and therefore a lie. Balked in this when the other party
furnished better evidence *for* ABSMs, they then applied the "Tibet is
China" proposition by amassing evidence that visible signs of ABSMs—and
in particular the tracks in snow in the Himalayas—were *not* anything
except those of bears; whereby, *ergo*, they *were* bears. But there
they ran into the impasse described at the end of the last chapter. The
proof of their paralogical "evidence" not only simply would not stand
up, it turned out to be damning to their whole contention and opinion.
Had the zoologists carefully followed scientific methodology instead of
prejudice, and produced a valid case supported by acceptable and
provable evidence, the business would have remained legitimately
debatable. As it is, they did not do so, and, what is more, they threw
all their eggs in one basket, for they would not admit any possibility
of any ABSM existing.

Actually, this aided the search in many ways, most notably by virtually
closing the matter to further debate. From then on, the entire onus of
proof devolved upon them, the scientific skeptics, and today they are
faced not only with disproving the existence of ABSMs, and the validity
of *all* the stories about them, plus the credibility of the persons who
told them, and the evidence they produced, but also, at the same time,
they must *prove* their own position. All of this is more significant
than the general public realizes, for it brings a lot else besides mere
ABSMs into question.

If the proponents of any discipline clearly demonstrate that they are
unreliable, or worse, dishonest in their own specialty, their opinions
and pronouncements in all others become suspect. If, moreover, their
line is a closed bailiwick, is specialized,

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

and is therefore incomprehensible to others, it becomes very highly
suspect. How are we to know just what is going on? If zoologists can be
so viciously obtuse about this subject, just how right are they about
things that they *do* claim to know? It is not a pleasant thought; and
it casts aspersions upon other disciplines.

Anthropologists very sensibly kept mum about the whole ABSM business
till a very late date. Whether ABSMs might be undiscovered human tribes,
Tibetan outcasts, hermits, or some kind of animal, or whether they might
be living remnants of otherwise extinct sub-men, or sub-hominids, they
refrained from stating. They let the zoologists bounce about out on
their limb. But once the "Now-you-can-see-for-yourself-it's
only-a-bear-or-a-monkey" story broke, they went to work quietly and
without fanfare. This is not to say that either all anthropologists, or
the science as a whole \[which is something quite different\],
immediately stood up and cheered for the "pro" side. Quite the contrary;
most of them made noises every bit as grouchy as the zoologists, and
some of them became just as puerile, for it hit them too on a raw spot,
and right in their own compound. Luckily for them, however, they had
never said that such a thing was *impossible*; though this was not for
any lack of thinking so. The idea was so completely unholy to them that
they had never even considered the necessity for saying anything at all.
Meanwhile there were, luckily, those among their ranks who took a
completely different and truly scientific view of the whole business,
and it is primarily to these specialists that we turn for guidance in
appraising the evidence that is produced by the honest searchers for the
truth.

The first thing we have to do in assessing the whole question of ABSMs
is to make a clear distinction between "reports" and "objects." Both are
in their way facts, but the two are otherwise in altogether different
categories. A report, whether written down or not, cannot really be
proved; an object does not have to be proved, though it may need
explanation. A great part of ABSMery is regrettably reportorial in
nature. Its most outstanding defect is our lack of ability

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

to assess the validity of these reports, let alone their contents. There
are lots of reports floating around, some even in very solid print, the
mere origin of which cannot be discovered. Nor is this all. There are
some most definite statements that have been copied over and over in
recent times, the origin of which apparently cannot be traced. In this
respect I should mention the widely known report attributed to "a famous
British explorer named Hugh Knight" which is almost a linchpin in the
whole Himalayan ABSM story. This is a classic, and has been repeated in
almost every article on the subject for years; yet, I have to state
flatly that, despite long probing, I have been completely unable to find
the original statement; or, what is more, have any of us who are
sincerely interested in this matter even been able to ascertain whether
anybody named Hugh Knight ever really existed. In other words, we have
not only to question, probe, and assess the reporters, but also those
who report on reporters. And there is often no real way to assess either
of them.

The most we can hope for is some assurance that a person was
*considered* to be reliable. But this term has a very wide connotation.
The most upright people tell outright lies on occasion, sometimes
deliberately and with the best intentions, as in intelligence work;
while anybody can go mad or even *be* mad, though the fact is never
known. Then again, any reporter can make a mistake, while there are all
sorts of influences at work that may cause anybody to fabricate stories
or to convert, divert, or twist stories that they, in turn, have heard.
The whole business is, in fact, more than a psychological jungle.

However, there is one thing that can be done with "reports." This is to
subject them—when you have enough of them—to various statistical
analyses. Statistics are at least impersonal \[if not always reliable\],
and they do not really need to take any account of the reporter, his
reputation, or his veracity. If you get enough reports on anything, from
diverse enough locations in time and space, and \[on correlating them\]
find one or more agreements, above a certain number, you wilt know that
you have identifiable factors in operation. Coincidence

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

is a strange thing, but it eventually runs out, statistically, and
simply by the law of averages. Thus, if foot-tracks with five very
unique characteristics are reported from ten different countries for
over 200 years, you may fairly safely, and scientifically, say that
there is a cause other than sheer mendacity on the part of those who
reported them. Footprints with one odd feature, turning up in 5
countries over a 5-year period, might be explicable by coincidence or be
the outcome of an initial story read by persons who happened to be in
each of those 5 countries. Foot-tracks with 5 oddities spread over 50
countries in over 500 years is another matter altogether. The assessment
of the reports on ABSMs is not of itself so significant; rather it is
the remarkable similarities, in certain circumstances or in certain
areas \[vegetational provinces, for instance\], and throughout time,
that are so.

Somewhat similarly our approach to folk-tales has changed considerably
during the past century. From being regarded almost as historical
record, their value first dropped not only to nil but beyond, into the
realm of the misleading. Then it started to mount again to a position of
esteem, and today, there is a tendency to take folklore under very
serious consideration, for a great deal of it has proved on proper
analysis, and in the light of new methods of interpretation, to be valid
history, simply expressed in another format, or upon a logic other than
our \[Western\] currently accepted one. The ancients did not, and living
primitive peoples *do* not, subscribe to our ways of thinking. They
simply have not developed them, but they nevertheless attempted and
still attempt to record facts. For instance, the migration of swallows
was once "explained" in northern lands by asserting that they all went
down to the bottoms of ponds and slept in the mud during the winter.
Today we know this to be nonsense but the fact that they all went away
in the fall and that they later return remains true, and has been
proved. Thus, if the Chinese long ago stated that there were men-bears
or bear-men in Szechwan and eastern Tibet, it did not mean that they
said there were crosses between men and bears to be

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

found there but, simply, that there was a kind of creature thereabouts
that could best be described as being halfway between a man and a bear
in appearance. It was—and still is —called a *Gin-Sung*; and by all
accounts looks very much like a large, broad-shouldered man wearing the
skin of a bear, otherwise known as the *Dzu-Teh*.

This brings us to another category of recorded evidence; namely, the
truly historical. This is the field of bibliographical research (or
search) and constitutes another wilderness of bewildering confusion.
Again it has been Bernard Heuvelmans who has led the way into this
further jungle. Those who have followed have been most assiduous and the
outcome has been startling. The Bibliography appended to this book does
not really give any indication of the volume of reference to ABSMery in
its widest sense because I have been forced to omit the details of whole
categories, and lump them under a single item. This published material
varies enormously and is spread over a really immense period of time and
throughout a very wide variety of literatures. The greatest volume of
reference is in the category of the travelogue, but most of this is
casual, passing, and usually brief. Quite a number of the authors did
not even realize the significance of what they were recording. The
second largest category is that of ethnological, ethnographic, and
socio-anthropological works, some of which are positively crammed with
reports and comments on the basic question of ancient and extinct
humanoids, varying all the way from alleged lower animals with human
characteristics to very definite humans with characteristics of lower
animals. Most of these are presented as MLF but, when viewed in another
light, are manifestly straightforward accounts of the previous existence
of creatures in the area of ABSM type.

Purely biographical evidence, of course, merges with what I call the
secondhand account; namely, one derived from the statements of others.
Much of the information recorded in modern travelogues is of this
nature; the author stating that he was told by so-and-so that, at
such-and-such a place, in the year this-that-or-the-other, a person or
persons said they

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

saw something. The assessment of such statements is really quite
impossible, because anybody can say that he was told almost anything,
without running the risk of being called a liar. What is more, he can
start out by saying that the person who told him was obviously making it
all up in the first place. Nonetheless, the statistical method of
analysis may again be employed here; and by doing so, some very strange
things come to light.

Firsthand reports, especially when published over the signatures of a
"big name," whose activities are well-known, and can be traced, are
quite a different matter. These, even when not supported by any form of
pictorial or concrete evidence, have been the principal stimulants to
the whole ABSM business. In this category must be placed many travelers
in what are called modern times, who have left published records in
which they make definite statements that they either saw an ABSM, its
tracks, droppings, or other parts, or who said they heard it or
inspected such corollary evidence as the moving of cairns on
mountaintops. The most astonishing aspect of the roster of such
reporters is not so much their actual number, but the proportion that
they form of *all* travelers who visited the countries concerned.
Equally surprising is the almost universally high standing and
reputation for probity of these reporters. This is particularly
noticeable among those who have written of the Himalayan region. Almost
everyone who has been there has reported something concrete and definite
about ABSMs, be they geographers like Ronald Kaulbach, mountaineers like
Eric Shipton and Sir Edmund Hillary, <span
id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_53) doctors, anthropologists, political and
forestry officers, and all manner of other specialists such as have
already been mentioned. At this juncture, I should point out that few of
the scientific "skeptics" have ever been within sight of the Himalayas
and indeed most of them have never been out of Europe or America.

Northern California is a very forceful case in point. There the matter
goes to extremes because even local people who

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

have been born in the forests concerned, seem never to have ventured
more than a few hundred feet into those forests, yet they may solemnly
state that anything alleged to have been seen therein by those who
*have* penetrated them is either a lie or the product of a hoax. The
situation was frankly preposterous when I visited that area in 1959.
Intelligent people who had lived all their lives not 30 miles from where
the tracks of the *Oh-Mahs* were turning up night after night in the mud
on a new road, not only refused to go and look at them, but were quite
violent in their denunciation of the road builders who were moving their
families out because of them, calling them fakers, liars, and other much
less pleasant things. People in the nearby town of Eureka were at the
same time in an uproar because their local newspaper had printed
straight accounts of what these road builders had said. The citizens
denounced the editor, and even the local police issued deprecatory
statements about him.

The truth is that many people do not want such reports, and, more
precisely, they do not want to have to read any as fact. Given as
fantasy, they are quite prepared to accept them. Yet, there are several
things that almost all firsthand reporters seem to have in common. These
are integrity, a reputation for honesty, and above all, provable
firsthand experience of the country concerned, to say nothing of the
matters reported. The skeptics, on the other hand, are almost without
exception—if not entirely so—persons who have never been near the scene
of events, while quite a number of them prove to have a reputation for a
prejudicial outlook, hidebound ideas, an ax to grind, or a desire for
self-publicity. Unfortunately neither party is, except in a very few and
exceptional cases, scientifically trained, or especially experienced in
those matters and disciplines most needed for a proper interpretation of
the facts observed. This does not, of course, apply to the Russians,
Mongolians, and Chinese because the only people we have heard from on
the subject in print from those quarters *have* been scientists, and
they seem in most cases to have been deliberately seeking scientific
evidence of this matter.

In assessing firsthand accounts, therefore, I personally tend

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

to give the benefit of any doubts to the reporters, and more especially
when this is bolstered by either direct concrete evidence or the
statistical method of analyzing details of their stories. In fact, I
just refuse to call such people as Ronald Kaulbach, Gerald Russell, and
Professor Porshnev, liars; and I just as forcibly refuse to question the
details of their observations. How dare anybody do so, who does not have
their training and experience and who, above all, has never been to the
area where they made their observations? Most of the skeptics are
actually crackpots, yakking away in a vacuum of make-believe. They do
not have the facts; they often don't even read or examine them; they are
not trained to interpret them; and they have preconceived notions, often
on everything. Moreover, these are usually quite erroneous, even
deliberately so.

This ends my reportorial contribution to the subject of ABSMery, but I
find that I have a few pages left over. I shall therefore employ these
for some comment and even some opinions. I am constantly—and quite
legitimately—asked what I personally make of all this. Frankly, I
welcome an opportunity to reply and perhaps to sound off a little.
Straight reporting is, to me, the only really satisfactory occupation
that there is; but there are times, I must admit, when one gets the itch
to not just comment but to pontificate. After so many years in this
morass, the business looks this way to me:

First, it is my humble opinion that ABSMery is not only a valid but a
concrete subject for investigation. Unlike such wholly unsubstantial
things as, say, poltergeists or even such unapproachable ones as UFOs,
they have always seemed to me to be not only quite possible but
extremely probable. In fact, the longer I live, the more I read, and
particularly the farther I travel, the more convinced I become that they
do exist. However, I have a strong personal feeling that they \[as a
whole, or as an item of existence\] have been not only grossly
misunderstood but misinterpreted

My central belief is in a way just like that of the skeptics—to wit:
that there is really nothing odd about the whole business. In this,

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

however, my reasons for such an attitude are almost diametrically
opposite to those of said skeptics. They say that there is "no problem"
because all the tracks are made by bears or other known animals; I, on
the other hand, would affirm that there is no problem because we have
ample evidence of all manner of sub-men and sub-hominids in the past;
have living examples of many Primitive humans still in existence; and
still know very little of a major part of the surface of our planet. For
these reasons—and because of the discovery of all manner of huge forms
of life right up till the time of writing and even on our own continent
(*vide*: the new herd of Woodland Bison)—I cannot see any possible valid
argument *against* the continued existence of ABSMs. This attitude has
naturally been enhanced by my good fortune in having been able to wander
all over the earth since childhood and actually to see for myself the
real conditions pertaining in many lands. I *know* that most of the
lands in the world are still more than half empty of humanity, and are
simply unexplored, in any real sense.

This notion, of course, conflicts absolutely with general world opinion,
ranging upward to the topmost echelons of the United Nations. I'm sorry,
but, with all due deference to world organizations and to all sincere
persons in every field, I have to give it as my considered opinion that
it is rubbish. Indeed, we humans—i.e. Modern Man or *Homo sapiens* as we
have chosen to call ourselves—are rapidly approaching the Malthusian
limit but this is not for lack of space. Nor is it primarily because we
are a disease-ridden bunch of semi-educated breeding machines, lacking
sufficient know-how and mass technical skills. To the contrary, it is
almost solely due to the fact that we are basically a *gregarious*
species of primate mammal. There have been famines in Russia when you
could hardly walk across the street for the droves of fat ducks. A
"famine" can have sundry meanings, some of them having nothing to do
with *famine*. To the Russian peasants of bygone years it meant simply a
breakdown in the supply of bread.

But, you may say, countries such as China and India are

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

different. Surely they have famines there so ghastly that men eat mud.
For all their monstrous population and poverty, there are in both lands
still lush and enormous areas that are not agriculturally used.
Certainly the report that "wild people" had been found in the southern
Chinese upland *Massif* should have been sufficient to demonstrate this.
Nor are our highly industrialized Western countries any different. I
need not reiterate the examples that I have already given of the extent
and number of true wildernesses on our own continent.

Thus, there is actually more than enough room for all manner of as yet
uncaught and unidentified creatures—even of very large size—to be
running around completely unknown to us, and sometimes right on our
doorsteps. Proof of this contention need not be sought beyond the case
histories, aforementioned, of the Okapi, the Lado Enclave "White Rhino"
or Cotton's Ceratothere, the Kouprey, and the Woodland Bison. Therefore,
the *possibility* of even a dozen kinds of ABSMs being around, and in
not inconsiderable quantities, is not impossible: it is quite probable.
Personally, I think that it is a certainty, and from my half a lifetime
of studies of Nature in operation, and especially of the distribution of
her life-forms, I believe that it is almost necessary—in order to fill
all her niches; something, it seems, she must always do.

By the same token, and at the same time harking back to a previous
statement, I feel that the whole business of ABSMery has been
misinterpreted even by zoologists and anthropologists, in that both
continue to subscribe to some unwritten and invalid set of rules that
grew up sometime in the last century about what *can* and *cannot* be,
plus what is and what isn't. Actually, if you come to review what *is*
known and accepted about the rarer, odder, most obscure, and unknown
races of people that *do* still exist today, you will find that they are
really legion, and that we already have pretty fair candidates for not a
few of the smaller ABSMs. Where we are to draw a line between these
Primitives and outright relic races of sub-men and sub-hominids, I have
not the slightest idea. Personally I cannot draw any such line, and I
don't know upon what criteria to try to do so.

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

My notion is that, if only we could all clear our minds of our many
preconceived ideas about what is possible and what isn't, and then take
a hard look at what we know *is*, we would find that there is really no
"problem" here. We are dealing with Hominids, ranging all the way from
Modern Men who don't wash much to, maybe, creatures so primitive that
they have never known speech, fire, or even tools. Nobody any longer
denies that such creatures once existed, and nobody denies that
Gorillas, Chimps, and Mias still exist, though we class them as
altogether more primitive than Hominids. If the latter have survived,
why not the former?—more especially when those former undoubtedly had at
least the glimmerings of what we call co-ordinated "intelligence" as
well as purely animal wits, or instincts.

Thus, my answer—and I do not mind how far out on however slim a limb I
go in saying this—is that I think there are at least three main types of
ultra-primitive men, and/or sub-men, and/or sub-hominids, still alive
today. These I would say are, first, sundry pigmy types of very
near-human or completely human composition; second, some remaining
Neanderthaler types in eastern Eurasia; and, third, some very primitive
and large creatures almost absolutely without any "culture" in any sense
of that term, in northwestern North and Central America, perhaps in
South America, the eastern Sino-Tibetan uplands, and in Indo-China.
Then, I am even more sure that there still remains something else.

This is the great, bestial, *Meh-Teh*; the unwitting originator of the
whole business; the original "Abominable Snowman"; and the most
mysterious, though best-known, of all. As I have said repeatedly, I
don't know any more than anybody else what this might be, but I'll bet
not just the proverbial dollars, but any gold bars I might acquire to
stale doughnuts that it exists, and all over a very wide area. From what
has been reported about it, and even more from an analysis of its tracks
and footprints, it is my conviction that it is the remnant of a most
ancient side-branch of both our own and the apes’ family tree and more
likely from the twig of the apes than from our lot.

<span id="page_450">p. 450</span>

I have not by any means said all that I could say, and I have really
reported only a small part of what I might on this matter, while my
files keep growing even as I write, but I shall say no more. My personal
opinions probably will not and certainly should not influence those of
others. I have tried to give all the facts possible within the compass
of a book, and all I ask now is that you draw your own conclusions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[444:\*](abs24.htm#fr_56) Hillary's early
reports, that is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents of Appendices](abs25)
