[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs20)  [Next](abs22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

**17. In the Beginning …**

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

It's a funny thing, but all histories start by saying "In the Beginning
…" and then proceed to describe all sorts of things that happened
before.

</div>

In almost every book that I have written, I have found myself, sooner or
later, disposed to interject a remark which, above all others that I
ever heard, left the greatest impression on me. This was made to me by a
V.I.P. in a distant and unvisited part of West Africa—a Paramount Chief.
Having fixed me almost to a point of hypnotization with his enormously
wise and expressive eyes, he stated solemnly: "The best place to begin
all stories is at the beginning." Then he shut up and waited. As
Paramount Chief of the region he was endowed with the status of Chief
Justice both as an executive of the Government of the Protectorate and
as paramount native Justice of the Peace; he was ultimate arbiter of all
law; and, in Africa, this means deciding upon the validity or otherwise
of stories. The Chief knew human nature.

It would seem that this positively cosmic piece of advice must have been
offered long before the dawn of history, for all peoples seem to have
taken it to heart. There simply is not a history—religious or
secular—that does not start with something like "In the beginning …" The
Bible gets off to a flying start in this respect, beginning, in its
original form, "In the beginning, the Lord created heaven and earth …"
With this, hardly anybody, and not only Jews and Christians, disagrees.
All the other great religious histories start in much the same way.
However, whether historians begin like this or, in the more secular
fields, with the beginning of their nation as *the* original \[and
everybody claims this prerogative\] people, one

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

<span id="img_map14"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![MAP XIV. THE
WORLD](tn/map14.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/map14.jpg.md)  
MAP XIV. THE WORLD  
</span>

**MAP XIV. THE WORLD**

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

Today, the entire land surface of the earth, apart from Antarctica, the
Greenland icecap, and a number of islands, mostly in the polar regions,
is officially "inhabited" by Modern Man. Actually, he lives on
considerably less than a tenth of the total land surface. Modern Man is
divided into two very distinct groups—the Primitives and the
Non-Primitives. The former consist of the Australoids of Australia and,
in part, Melanesia; the Bushmen of Southwest Africa <span
id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_48.md); the little Negrillo Pigmies of central
Africa <span id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_48.md); and the Negrito Pigmies of
the Andaman Islands, the Malay Peninsula, and the Philippines. <span
id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_48.md) There are three divisions of the
Non-Primitives—the Mongoloid, the Caucasoid, and the Negroid. Of the
first, there are five subdivisions; of the second, three; and of the
third, two, but with another group—the Hamitic—derived from intermixture
with one of the Caucasoid groups. Currently, the West Caucasoids and the
Sudanese Negroids have greatly extended their range, notably to the
Americas.

</div>

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

immediately or very shortly encounters a most odd circumstance. It
transpires that, regardless of the fact that almost everybody is agreed
that the Almighty started the whole works, there was an enormous length
of time (or elapsed time) before We appear on the scene—usually by God's
design, but sometimes just out of the blue. This is passing strange but
you will find it if you dig back far enough into any statement made by
any people about their origins.

Humanity seems universally to have attempted to adopt the Chief's
admonition, but in the majority of cases to have run into a profound
difficulty. The usual way around this was the declaration of spontaneous
creation, either, as among those whom we consider to be the more
advanced thinkers, by the One Power, or, as among those we say are of
lower intellect, by a pantheon. This gets rid of the problem as to what
went on before *time* started, as well as what was before this earth was
formed. There is only one conflict in all this and that is between one
group—and it is actually far the larger one, though this is seldom
realized—that contends that neither time nor space have any beginning or
possible ending, and another which contends that they did have a
definite beginning and may have an absolute end. This latter party
asserts that

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

before the beginning there was but God. These are abstruse matters of
the higher philosophy but, as we shall see, they have a most profound
bearing on our very pragmatic concerns.

The Bible in a way attempts a rational confluence of these two otherwise
opposed points of view, by stating first that everything is indeed a
willful act of God, but that it was, as concerns this earth and us, only
an interlude in eternity. It then gets down to specific facts about this
latter as, really, quite a separate subject. Thus it has two beginnings;
the first cosmic; the second, terrestrial. But then again, unlike almost
all other religious histories, it starts off still a third time with the
beginning of *Man*—and by this is meant what we call *Homo sapiens*; not
just the Hominids. On this last business, it is rather specific.

Now, this sort of thing crops up also in just about all historical
\`beginnings," even down to those given by the most primitive and
ancient peoples who have ever left a record of their ideas. It is really
a most odd fact and one which seems, to us, utterly illogical; namely
that, if asked how it all started, everybody invariably says that thus
or thus characters, who are usually claimed as the tellers' ancestors,
came to the land and smote the horrible creatures which were already
there, eliminating them and thus starting EVERYTHING. Sometimes the
whole business gets really complicated as is so very pertinently
explained in the Bible. For this I turn to a good friend of mine —a
brilliant young scholar; the Rabbi Yonah N. ibn Aharon, B.D., S.T.M.—who
has provided me with the following properly classical rendering of the
appropriate passages from the Book, together with those pertinent
commentaries that only true scholarship can provide. He says:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

The earliest Biblical reference to genetic variation within the human
family is in the sixth chapter of Genesis, where we read: "And it was
when Man began to multiply on the face of the Earth and daughters were
born unto them; and the Sons of Those from upon High (Jerusalem text:
those who are worshipped) saw the daughters of Man, for they were
good-looking, and they took unto themselves wives from among such as
they might care to choose. And Yehovah said, My power can never benefit
the perverted ones who have made themselves human; and their days shall

</div>

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

(number) one hundred twenty years. In those days there were (already)
nephilim in the land; (it was) thereafter that the Sons of Those from
upon High came unto the daughters of Man, and there was born to them
those Giborim who were ever after considered to be a divine people
(lit.—the people of the Name)."

Nephilim is often translated "giants," but the commentators tell us that
they were so called because men would fall (nophel) on their faces with
fright at the sight of them. (cf. Ibn Ezra, B.K.) The giborim, who are
later on referred to as giborei tsayid, are reputed to have been "as
tall as a tree," in contrast to the shambling nephilim (cf. Yoma).
Giborei tsayid means "The Mighty Ones of the Hunt."

Our main concern must, however, rest with the creatures who terrified
the Israelites during the Exodus from Egypt and their period of
wandering in the Sinai desert. These were the Sheidim—the Destroyers—who
had been known to the Patriarchs (Abraham, Isaac and Jacob) as the
Seirim—the Hairy Ones.

The best scriptural description of their characteristics may be drawn by
inference from the account given in Genesis 27 of the manner in which
Rebecca connived to win the Rights of the First-born for her youngest
son Jacob, as against the prerogatives of his twin brother Esau, who is
described as "coming forth first from the womb 'reddish with a great mat
of hair' " (as thick as a wig, as Rashi puts it). Esau grew up as a
hunter, very much ashamed of his deep red covering, which earned him the
nickname Edom, or Reddy, as the vernacular might have it. The
implication of the text at every turn is that, although ostensibly
Jacob's twin brother, Esau was no true son of Rebecca. It would appear,
at least that she felt that way about it, because she forced Jacob to
seek the blessing of his father, Isaac, whose weak sight made possible
the success of the ruse. To this end, Rebecca, slew two young goat-kids
(lambs, according to some sources), and clad Jacob, whom the text
describes as her "smaller" (not "younger" as one would expect) son,
across the back of his neck and around the wrists in their hide (Genesis
27:19 ff.). Thus prepared, Jacob went into the presence of Isaac, his
father. It is from this interview that we learn most about the Hairy
Ones, insofar as specifically Judaic sources are concerned.

Jacob was successful in passing himself off for Esau on three counts:
(1) his apparent hairiness, which we have just accounted for; (2) his
voice, and (3) the odor of his clothing. Jacob's speech, when he entered
his father's chamber and identified himself as Esau, is thought by many
not fully to have convinced the wily Isaac, but this impression is based
on a misreading of the text. Isaac is quoted as saying "the hands are
the

</div>

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

hands of Esau, but the voice is the voice of Jacob." In reality, the
passage reads, "the hands are the hands of Esau, and the voice of Jacob
is higher pitched (than that of the one who stands before me)"—kal kol
(as the passage is actually written) instead of kol  kol, the popularly
accepted reconstruction.—Indeed, the commentators bear out this
interpretation when they tell us that Jacob counterfeited the voice of
Esau by growling from deep within his throat (cf. Klei yakar, etc.). The
outdoorsman odor of his clothing was achieved through more obvious
means, for Rebecca simply appropriated the cast off garments left over
from Esau's last visit. The stench, we are told, was akin to that of "a
field of rotten potatoes." <span id="fr_52"></span>[\*](#fn_49.md)

A composite physiological picture of the Hairy Ones shows us that they
were Hominids, and, indeed, were close enough to modern man to be
capable of intermarrying with other human races. They had long arms, and
a mass of reddish hair covering their bodies, darker about the head than
below; they attained a height of about 4½ feet (par for those days, I'm
told) "like the stone hounds of Aram." Beneath the shaggy exterior, the
bone structure was clearly evident, particularly on the legs, which were
short and very straight, the elbow, neck, and heel joints being
unusually large.

The habitat of this race is definitely known to have been restricted to
the Sinai Peninsula; there are similar beings known to have lived in the
South of Egypt, but the history of the Hairy Ones (as the R\`aya M'himna
remarks) was apparently bound up closely with that of the Israelites,
who had to cross their territory to get to Egypt; and, inasmuch as the
Israelites were relatively poor farmers, they were dependent on the
Egyptian trade for their sustenance in years of famine, until the time
of the Babylonian invasions. This limited habitat will, at any rate,
account for the fact that the Hairy Ones never harassed the Egyptian
homeland. But, just as they threatened war against Jacob after their
candidate had been defeated in the election of a Nomad chieftain (which
was, after all, the political role of the Patriarchy), they had no
intention of allowing the Israelites to dwell in peace after the latter
had made good their escape from Pharaoh. So intense was their onslaught
that, within days of the Exodus, the Israelites were forced to dig
trenches, and cover them with branches so as to protect themselves from
the stone-throwing barrage of the Hairy Ones. One tactic which the
latter favored was to cover themselves with pieces of foliage, or sand,
so as to camouflage their whereabouts; the Israelites hoped to do the
same for their dwelling-places (succoth). The Bible is

</div>

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

understandably quiet about this humiliating state of affairs in the
passages which relate to the miraculous deliverance from the Egyptians;
and, we may add, the "air-drop" of a special food concentrate called
manna, that kept the people from starving after their supply of Egyptian
roast Iamb had run out on them, leaving them to the mercy of the Hairy
Ones, to whom they were ready to offer their children in return for
foodstuffs (S. Retsinuatha IV, ¶16c).

As soon as things settled back to normal, however, the God of Israel
decided to assert his power against the Hairy Ones. His real reason for
doing this is that, in the days before He ever thought of speaking to
Moses, they had rejected him as their deity, in favor of a certain
Azazel. Thus, no sooner was the Holy Sanctuary completed, than Yehovah
gave orders to Aaron, the High Priest, who, as we read in Leviticus
16:7, "took two of the Hairy Ones, and caused them to stand before the
Lord. And Aaron put tags on the Hairy Ones, one tag for Yehovah and one
tag for Azazel. And Aaron made an offering of the Hairy One which he had
tagged for Yehovah; and the one which had been tagged for Azazel
remained alive in the presence of Yehovah, who sent it off to Azazel
(who lived in) the desert, that it might atone (for the sins of Israel,
according to the commentators)." Lest the casual reader mistake the
*seirim* of this passage for the "hairy goats" (seirei \`izim) of the
verses immediately preceding it—as did the famous but unhappily
incompetent modern scholar S. L. Gordon—Leviticus Rabba, the most
ancient of the exegetical works of Judaism, spells it out for him:
"These seirim are none other than the Destroyers, the sons of Esau." The
similar meaning of seirim and sheidim is among the ten best cases of
authenticated synonymity in the Hebrew language.

Thus, it may be understood that the "scapegoats" so glibly mentioned in
the English translations, and in countless works on anthropology and
psychology, were, in fact, manlike creatures, with considerable
biological, if not spiritual and intellectual affinity to the rest of
mankind, and that Aaron, acting under orders from Above, committed an
act which, to our mortal eyes, looks like something very close to human
sacrifice. The commentators are agreed in admitting this, but, as is the
case with Jacob's deception of Isaac, they do not debate the morality of
Aaron's obedience to the will of the Most High. The sacrificial rite was
symbolic of Israel's complete subjugation to its God, and a repudiation
of the power of the worshippers of Azazel, of whom the people had become
so much afraid that they were sacrificing their produce to that deity at
Yehovah's expense. Israel must turn out the Beast within, and sever
itself from the sons of Esau, born of the same woman (Zohar).

</div>

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

Perhaps the most poignant affirmation of this need, and the best
scriptural justification of the views expressed in this essay, is to be
found in the lines of Moses' great poem, the Ha‘azinu, as given in
Deuteronomy 32:13, where he says of the "generation of Egypt," meaning
his contemporaries:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"They have sacrificed to the Destroyers,  
       (who come) not from on High;  
 Those from on High, they have failed to recognize,  
 For these New Ones have come from close by.  
 Your fathers (O, Israel!) did not thus abominate themselves!"

</div>

And the word for abominate, in the Hebrew text, contains the same root
letters as the word Seirim—an unmistakable play on words, and a fitting
end to this discussion.

</div>

To which I would add that it is even more of a coincidence \[perhaps\]
that the newspaperman, Henry Newman, should, three millennia later, have
by pure mistake named certain similar creatures by an antonym in our
language—for an object abominated is abominable.

I give this most curious, and in some ways wondrous sidelight prominence
here for several reasons. First, because it is from the Bible, the very
tenet of our faith. Second, because it is, as far as I can see, an
absolutely unassailable example of the only modern credo that tries
seriously to cope with what otherwise may be, and often has \[I believe
erroneously\] been considered to be evidence of an uncompromisable
conflict between our science and our religion. Myths, Legends, and
Folklore \[hereafter called MLF\] may be laughed at or cast aside as the
hallucinated maunderings of uneducated and often unthinking man; or, as
in some quarters today, they may be elevated to a position of gross
reality just as if they were about the only things that we can really
rely on. Neither attitude is realistic or warranted. A lot of myths are
straight history; a lot of history is pure myth. In the field of
religion, and not just theology, there has always been a very widespread
misunderstanding of the simple and obvious fact that most *religious*
histories are clearly bipartite—being, on the one hand, philosophical;
and, on the other, entirely pragmatic. The Bible, as

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I have tried to
point out above, is thus duplex in content; and, moreover, on the purely
pragmatic level it is really three quite separate secular histories—that
of the Universe, of the Earth, and of Modern Man. The Philosophical
ground-floor is not, of course, our concern here: nor are the origin or
history of the universe or this planet. What we are concerned with is
the origin of man. On this matter Darwin had neither the first nor the
last word.

I personally consider these pragmatic and secular parts of the Bible to
be straight history written by sundry groups of the first peoples to use
their brains, the first to try to investigate their environment, and the
first to make some logical sense out of it. The Semitic peoples,
starting, if we may use language as the criterion, with the Chaldeans,
were certainly contemporary with and probably preceded—even if they did
not actually play a part in the origination of—both the
Harappa-Mohenjo-daro culture of the Indus Valley and that of the
Egyptians of the Nile. They certainly seem to have been the first to
leave written records. However, in their day, the greater part of the
world was a pretty wild place and many things that have long since
vanished were then still at that time right in their own back yard. By
this I mean that they had primitive races \[perhaps hairy\] living at
their very doorsteps, just as New Yorkers today still have mink,
raccoons, and opossums wandering about the parks immediately over the
rivers that separate Manhattan from Long Island and the mainland. Thus,
anything they have to say about such leftovers then still extant, is
thoroughly worth-while studying and analyzing.

From the preceding statements extracted from the Book of Genesis, I can
but infer that in the peninsula of Sinai \[see-nigh\] there still lived
at the time of the Exodus (1317 B.C.), a not inconsiderable number of
hairy fellows of hominid genetical background, even up to throwing
stones and breeding with the Israelites but who were at the same time
advanced enough to have some primitive form of religion with a "god." I
refuse to disbelieve these passages in the Old Testament: *ergo*, I must
accept them as historic and thus that these types

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

existed. If they did so, it is, once again, no good just sitting back
and saying "I don't believe it," or "So what?" or even just sitting
back. It behooves us to get to work and at least speculate what they
might have been, and why; and what happened to them. The same may be
said for exactly similar types of creatures that appear, just as
matter-of-factly, in early passages of almost every other secular
history. And they do so appear.

I do not propose to go into the details of MLF. Not only is it not
specifically our province but it is, except to specialists, incredibly
boring; in fact almost as boring as having to wade through the names and
perquisites of gods in multiple pantheons. Also, with respect to ABSMs
or ABSM-like creatures, the whole business becomes unutterably
monotonous for, from all over the world, the stories told are nothing
but almost word-for-word repetitions of the modern reports that I have
already given aplenty—giant, funny, or pigmy foot-tracks; tiny,
man-sized, or giant hairy people; high-pitched whistles or gibberings;
abducting of young human females usually followed by their release; and
an almost invariable smiting or eradication of such types "In the
beginning." The whole dreary business is a bore but it does still have
very great significance, for it means that almost everywhere \[apart
from Australasia, Oceania, and Antarctica, as far as we know\]
sub-humans if not sub-hominids inhabited the whole earth prior to the
arrival of the first *Homo* *sapiens* persons who proceeded to oust them
or at least take over their territory.

In ferreting out *noticias*—as the Spanish so aptly put it—of the
existence of these sub-humans in all the welter of written, transcribed,
spoken, and remembered MLF, one does, however, have to be extremely
careful to observe one basic fact. This is the very clear distinction
made by most peoples—though little so by Caucasoids of the West during
the past few hundred years—between three types of *Beings*; exclusive of
the all-pervading Spirit, or God. These are: (1) *Divine* *Entities*,
being representatives of God, gods, demi-gods, or disembodied
noncorporeal personalities of another world but which may appear in this
one and influence it. These are entities

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

in their own right that, while being able to assume human form or "enter
into" humans, do not change their own identities. (2) *Disembodied*
*Spirits* of various kinds. These may be the souls of people, dead or
alive, mass-produced ancestors, spirits of animals, plants, stones, or
anything else, either collective \[generic\] or individual, together
with all manner of *lares* and *penates*. To most peoples these are just
as real as living people, animals, or plants. (3) Unknown or as yet
undiscovered but live, corporeal things.

ABSMs have always fallen very clearly and distinctly into the third
class. Nowhere in the world is there any doubt about this. If asked, the
"benighted natives" will usually say something like the Nepalese at
Pangboche when asked by Stonor about the *Meh-Teh* alleged to have been
seen the year before. The answer he got was "How could they \[i.e. any
of Nos. 1 or 2\] leave footprints?"

I have a fancy that a somewhat extensive galaxy of alleged creatures in
the folklore of Western Europe is of this same most pragmatic nature. If
you come to look into what was said about Fairies, Pixies, Trolls,
Titans, Vampires, Ghouls, Gnomes, Imps, Bogies, Brownies, Elves,
Leprechauns, Satyrs, Ogres, and Fauns \[as diametrically opposed to
"ghosts," "specters," "apparitions," "spirits," "phantoms," "wraiths,"
"spooks," "banshees," "lemures," or "lorelei," which were definitely of
Class 2\], you will find that they may all be summed up by the classic
line from the somewhat bawdy old English song that begins "There *are*
fairies at the bottom of *our* garden"

Creatures, usually hairy, generally malignant, only rarely benevolent,
but perfectly capable of breeding, as well as communicating with human
beings, form the basis of these tales. And *note*, they come in four
convenient sizes. The same may be said for all similar types known by
whatever other languages all over Europe, North Africa, and a great part
of what is today Russia. There seem, indeed, to have been "in the
beginning" ABSMs of just the usual four types—pigmy; man-sized \[and
specifically of the Neanderthaler kind\]; giant; and the bestial
*Meh-Teh* with its abominable feet \[cloven?\] and pointed head.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

Anthropologists have shown that most Australopithecines were tiny things
like the modern Pigmies, while their cousin *Zinjanthropus* for all its
enormous jaw development and molar teeth \[its canines and incisors were
tiny\] was itself a little creature. There were undoubtedly "Little
People" all over the place in ancient times. As to their having been
"Giants in those days" we don't really know about western Eurasia, or
Europe as we call it. We have a huge jaw from Germany \[named *Homo
heidelbergensis*\] and the preposterously thick cranium of the thing
alleged to have been found at Piltdown. In the Orient we have both
*Meganthropus* from Java, along with *Pithecanthropus robustus* from the
same area, and *Gigantopithecus* from southern China. Thus there were
definitely "giants" available in southeast Asia and these could quite
well have crossed over to the New World, along with hosts of other large
animals before or during the Pleistocene ice-advances, and then have
filtered on down to the Matto Grosso and the Guiana Massif. If there
ever was a giant in Ethiopian Africa, it *could* just possibly have been
of this stock; but we also have other very rugged-looking types there in
so-called *Homo rhodesiensis*, fragments from Algeria (*Atlanthropus*),
and from Tanganyika (another *Meganthropus*) which might have provided
ABSM material on that continent. We discussed the candidates for the
man-sized types in the last chapter—primitive modern men in Indo-China,
and Neanderthalers in Eurasia. The matter of the bestial *Meh-Teh* type
has also been investigated. This leaves us with a few vague rumors from
Africa, North America, and the Indo-Chinese Block.

The masses of reports from Eurasia, ranging, as we have seen from the
Caucasus to Manchuria, appear to have a distinct cohesion though to be
of more than one *specific* type. It is interesting to note that this
was the land of the Neanderthalers per se \[Rhodesian and Solo Man only
look somewhat Neanderthaloid\], and the descriptions of the ABSMs seen
there in no way conflict with our findings on that branch of the human
stock. Likewise, the MLF that pertain to such concrete entities \[i.e.
Class 3 above\] from this whole block of territory

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

provide us with as good a reconstruction of Neanderthal sub-man as any
anthropological institution has yet concocted.

In other words, modern and historical reports of ABSMs; the findings of
palaeoanthropology from bones and artifacts; and MLF, all converge and
literally combine—yet on a precise regional basis, perfectly in accord
with both ethnography and phytogeography. This is the clincher; so let
us examine these two aspects of the matter.

As currently defined the major branches of the human (*Homo sapiens*
subsp.) species are distributed as illustrated on the world map on page
[376](#page_376) ([Map XIV](abs22.htm#img_map16).md). They fall into four
pretty clearly defined lumps; one with five major divisions; one with
four subdivisions; and the others with two. Spotted about, but very
sparsely, are also the remnants of two other basic and more primitive
groups both now nearly extinct—namely, the Bushmen and the Pigmies. \[Of
course, there are also the recent wanderings of the western Caucasoids
and Negroids but these I have ignored as not being in any way germane to
our story.\] From this map one may see more or less how the world was
about the time of Columbus, and before the expansion of Europe had
really gotten under way. Armed with this, one may then proceed to
consider ABSMs in MLF, and in point of current fact. Both classes of
data fall exactly into a single pattern.

The status of both these folk-tales and current reports of ABSMs in the
Americas is too confined and obvious to need much comment. One needs the
more detailed vegetational map (see [Map III](abs09.htm#img_map03).md) to
elucidate the regional features. The northern tree-line clearly divides
the Asiatic or Arctic Mongoloids \[i.e. the Eskimos\] from the North
Amerinds. ABSM reports from this continent fall into two classes: those
of giants right across the top and then down the western mountains;
second, the much vaguer mumblings about "the little red men of the
bottomlands" from the Mississippi drainage.

There is undoubtedly a great deal more ABSMery about South America but
the reports of it are scattered through the voluminous local presses of
its many countries, while our knowledge of the beliefs of and the
factual information possessed

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

by the indigenous Amerindian peoples is sadly limited as yet. Just as in
Central America however, cases have apparently gotten on to
police-blotters with some regularity, and several reliable travelers
have made reports. Among these are three that Bernard Heuvelmans has
sent me.

In 1956, the geologist Audio L. Pich found on the Argentinian side of
the Andes at a height of over 16,000 feet enormous human-like tracks,
with prints about 17 inches long. In 1957, the Brazilian newspaper
*Ultima Hora* of Rio de Janeiro stated that similar footprints had been
found in La Salta Province of Argentina, and went on to say that a
newspaperman found the people of a village named Tolor Grande in a
turmoil, due to eerie calls at night emanating from the Curu-Curu
Mountains. These are said to be the habitat of a dread creature called
the *Ukumar-zupai*. In 1958, *La Gazeta* of Santiago, Chile, of May 6,
published a report of an "ape-man" seen 50 miles from a place called
Rengo by a party of campers. Several other witnesses are also quoted,
and one Carlos Manuel Soto swore out an affidavit on May 13, which
includes the statement that "I saw an enormous man covered with hair in
the Cordilleras." It was also stated that the local police had
investigated.

Turning now to the Old World, we find quite a different situation. Let
me first dispose of Ethiopian Africa, something that I have really
already done in that I tried to point out in Chapter 9 that, apart from
the vague Tano giant and the *Muhalu*, which seems pretty definitely to
be a pongid \[just as the natives have always asserted\], there is
nothing to report but the widespread notion that pigmy races were once
much more widely distributed; and still are so today, while some of
these are so very primitive indeed as to be hairy. Most African peoples
have a large and splendid pantheon of gods, and they also almost
universally believe forcefully in another whole world of disembodied
spirits of all kinds, but they make the clearest distinction between
both of these and mere unknown animals, of which they still speak
aplenty. If any of

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

these were hominids, Africans would be the first people to say so. They
don't.

This leaves us with the continents of Eurasia and Orientalia for, as we
have said, there is nothing to report from Australia, Melanesia, or
Polynesian Oceania.

But here comes a rather ticklish matter. [Map XIV](#img_map14.md) which
displays the distribution of modern men prior to the expansion of Europe
has one most astonishing feature. This is the almost exact coincidence
of the distribution of the Caucasoids and Mongoloids with that of the
true continents (see [Map XV](abs22.htm#img_map15).md) and with certain
major boundaries between Vegetational Belts (see [Map
XVI](abs22.htm#img_map16).md). The coincidence would seem impossible did we
not know that Man, being an animal, is just as confined by the limits of
the environment in which he evolved as is any other animal; while the
major factor in any environment is the *form* of its vegetation.
However, this is not the ticklish matter.

Both the Mongoloids of the Old World and the Caucasoids are subdivided
into three major lots, though all of course merge to some extent. But,
if you dig back into the origins of all three branches of the
Caucasoids, you will almost without exception find that they are known
to have, said to have, or believed to have originally come from central
Asia. There appear to be remnants of some really original Europeans in
the Basques; of the Middle Easterners, in such isolated spots as the
Canary Islands, the Atlas Mountains, and Abyssinia; and of the
Easterners or Indians, in the southern part of that peninsula; but
everywhere we look, we find a residue of Mongoloid penetrations or
immigrations going back for millennia. The Semitic peoples alone would
appear to have stayed where they originally evolved and to have rebuffed
these Mongoloid hordes; an aspect of history that is of the utmost
significance. Since the Caucasoid seems to be rather strongly dominant
to the Mongoloid type, that type soon disappears physically when it
slops over its own precise borders—*vide*, the purely Caucasoid
appearance of the Slays and of the still later Magyars today. However,
while they may appear to disappear

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

physically, their MLF usually linger on and become rooted in the lands
they conquered or swamped. This has been most particularly the case in
Europe; much less so in the Middle East; and surprisingly little in
India, despite the many great Mongol invasions thereto and their long
periods of dominance there.

In studying the traditions of Eurasia, we must therefore regard the area
in two parts—the first that of Europe and central Asia to Korea; the
second, that of the Middle East or Semitic world. Likewise, when we come
to Orientalia, we have to make an absolutely clear distinction between
Caucasoid India on the one hand, and the lands of the South or Oceanic
Mongoloids on the other. There is, then, the added complication
presented by the fact that the Northern or Arctic Mongoloids of the Old
World also have clear traditions of ABSMs along with beliefs in a great
number of such related creatures of the past, which they share with
those of the Central Mongoloids *and* the Europeans. Throughout this
whole vast area there is an almost universal "belief," amounting to a
true folk memory—and which may in many cases almost be accepted as
historical fact—of previous, now extinct, inhabitants of the land, who
were sub-human.

Also, there is really no clear line drawn between these historical
traditions and reality as we have pieced it together from archaeological
and anthropological diggings and delvings. Nor is there any clear
demarcation between sub-men and full men, in that lots of peoples seem
never to have quite decided whether interbreeding was permissible or
even possible. Since primitive *man* would presumably try to breed with
anything sufficiently like himself on purely biological and instinctive
grounds, the line may never really have existed in the first place, and
therefore there may always have been crossbreeds \[such as have been
found in caves in Palestine between Modern Man and Neanderthalers\] and
thus of all manner of degrees of "man-ness" and "sub-man-ness."

It is interesting to note that MLF about such \[and thus about what we
call ABSMs\] have everywhere shrunk back progressively through time from
the initial centers of civilization.

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> To put it crudely:
they disappeared progressively—first as accepted fact to become folklore
locally but still fact over the border; then they became a legend
locally, and folklore over the border, but remained fact "in far
countries"; finally, they became mere myths locally but, going outward,
first a legend, then folklore, and finally something only rumored as
still existing in very far-off lands. This is only logical, for the
earlier inhabitants of the land were either exterminated, absorbed, or
driven out; and, as the centers of more advanced culture began to merge,
the poor sub-hominids, then the sub-men, and finally even primitive true
men had to keep moving out until they got into isolated pockets—mostly
forested mountains where they were finally hunted out—or withdrew into
the great uninhabited and unusable uplands. Anthropological history is
absolutely clear and precise on this process, and the whole history of
MLF marches along beside it throughout Eurasia.

The situation in the Middle East, that is from Mauretania to the Pamirs
and south to the borders of Ethiopia and Orientalia (see [Map
XIV](abs22.htm#img_map16)—the Central Caucasoids.md) was somewhat similar,
but appears to have taken place on an earlier time scale, and to have
been more rapid. The reasons for this are twofold. First, the "Modern
Men" of this natural province appear to have been the first to become
civilized and organized; but, second and much more important, this whole
area suddenly dried up climatically just about the time civilization
began, and it has continued to do so ever since. In fact, this
desiccation may have been the primary *cause* of the development of
civilization as a whole in the first place, for it must have acted as a
tremendous spur to human efforts to survive. Sub-men and really
primitive peoples seem to have been disposed of in very short order in
this province on both these accounts and also because there were no
great forested mountain blocks or uninhabited uplands for them to
retreat to, either in it or for long stretches around it. The Sinai
Peninsula was one of the few that there were, and we have seen what was
there in the passages quoted from the Bible earlier in the chapter. Yet
again if you look at this same map

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

you will perceive the very significant fact that ABSMs are reported from
the Caucasus, the mountains of northern Persia, and the Pamirs; while
very strong traditions and even some historical records (see Pliny) of
their previous presence lingered on in Morocco till Roman times and in
extreme southern Arabia till much later. The truth of the matter is that
the primitives, sub-men, and others of the Middle East had nowhere to
retreat to but deserts where they could not live; they could not cross
the Mediterranean on the one hand or the Arabian Sea on the other to get
to forested Europe or India; and when they went south \[if they did\]
toward Ethiopian Africa, they ran head on into a large and most vigorous
population who would just not admit them—the Negro peoples.

Today we find an immense amount of evidence—see Chapters 13 and 14—that
not a few real primitives and/or sub-men (i.e. in both cases
colloquially, ABSMs) seem to have managed to survive in the vast unused
mountain blocks that cover the lands of the Central Mongoloids
throughout central Asia; and it is possible that they may still be
spread over the even less-known and practically unpenetrated uplands of
the North Mongoloids in Siberia. However, the Russians only absorbed
this immense subcontinent in the 19th century and they simply have not
even yet been able to explore it fully; any more than we have parts of
Alaska, the Yukon, British Columbia, and the Canadian Northwest
Territories. This is a land of continuous—and particularly
difficult—coniferous forest, actually forming the largest continuous
plant growth on the surface of the earth. We may expect many surprises
from there, more especially as there is plenty of already known ML *and*
F among its inhabitants that is most pertinent.

The situation in Orientalia is similarly obvious; or, at least, it
should be by this time. To take India first: as the human population
grew—and it started to do so enormously at a very early date—the
primitives and others had to get out. Here they had a fairly wide
choice. First and most obvious were the forested uplands of the southern
part of India itself and the island of Ceylon beyond; second, they had
the mighty

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Himalayan ranges
hard by; and third, they had the Indo-Chinese Massif to retire to. Now,
it seems that they went in all these directions for the legendary and
recorded history of India is full of references to primitives in the
southern Peninsula and in the mountains of Ceylon, until quite recent
times \[see especially, Bernard Heuvelmans' book for those in the
latter\]. Then, there are still some very primitive peoples in those
areas; and these, like the Senoi of Malaya, in turn have traditions
about even more primitive and often hairy people who preceded them. With
characteristic pragmatism they do *not*, however, report them as still
existing. Hence, no ABSMs, in India proper, today that is.

The Himalayas may be regarded as being "in India" and they certainly are
in Orientalia. We have already heard quite enough of current ABSMs in
that province, but we should add that MLF and all the rest about them
there is, and always has been, rife throughout the entire country.
Further, there are all manner of odds and ends of peoples still living
in complete isolation in the area; as witness the so-called "Chaldeans"
of Messrs. Jill Crossley-Batt and Dr. Irvine Baird, and the incredible
"Jungli Admis" of McIntyre, whose account of which goes as follows:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

There are some curious specimens of humanity to be found dwelling among
the forests about the Chilpa, called "Razees," compared with whom the
villagers are quite civilised. These villagers described \[them as\]
"Junglee Admi" (i.e. wild men of the woods), as they termed them to me,
and as being almost on a par with the beasts of the wilds they inhabit,
subsisting on what they can secure with their bows and arrows, and by
snaring.

My old friend Colonel Fisher, senior Assistant Commissioner of Kumaon,
gave me the following short account of these interesting barbarians.
"They were the original inhabitants of the country about there, but the
persecutions to which they were subjected by the Kumaon Rajas, and
especially by their neighbours the Goorkhas, were so cruel, that they
abandoned their hamlets and retired into the wildest and least inhabited
parts of the country, and lived on wild roots, fruits, and fish, and
game, and lost all recollection even of their language. I was told by
the Rajwar of Askote, they themselves have entirely disappeared from
Kumaon, though there may be a few yet on the banks of the Sarda in our
territory, or the thick

</div>

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

jungles on the Nepal side of the river. The last time I saw a man and
woman of the tribe was at Askote in 1866, and they were caught for my
special benefit. We gave them a few rupees, but they seemed to value
them as much as apes! They would eat anything given to them; and both
the man and the woman wore long hair down the back, and used leaves
stitched together for clothing." From this, the condition of these
remnants of an almost lost race appears to have been still much the same
as, we may suppose, was that of Adam and Eve after the fall.

</div>

In this area tradition, rumor, ethnology, and proved reality all come
together into one inextricable web of history, so that one cannot really
draw any hard and fast lines between them. One has to steer a very
steady course, bearing in mind, the very dangerous rocks of theology,
mysticism, and our Classes 1 and 2, of \[believed-in\] noncorporate
*Entities*. The area is also positively crawling with outcasts, hermits,
religious initiates and now with displaced Tibetans, Communists,
mountaineers, and goodness only knows what other types. Also, there are
five kinds of bears in that country, several species of large monkeys,
and at least two kinds of alleged ABSMs. However, in the minds and
opinions *of the locals*, as the ethnologists quoted above so clearly
state, there is really no confusion whatsoever about all this vis-à-vis
the ABSMs. They have it quite clearly in mind which class of entity or
creature is which, and the *Dzu-Teh* of Tibet, and their own *Meh-Tehs*
and *Teh-lmas*—and the old tales and belief about them—form a distinct
and clear-cut class of their own.

So we are left with the fringe lands of the South or Oceanic Mongoloids
or what is often called Southeast Asia. This, as may be seen from [Map
XIV](#img_map14.md), coincides exactly with the remaining part of
Orientalia but for its two overseas extensions to the island of
Madagascar to the west, and out into the Pacific to the east to
encompass the Micronesians. Among these peoples are the Japanese, the
south Koreans, the Chinese proper \[as opposed to the Manchus\], the
Indo-Chinese, which is to say Vietnamese, Laotians, Siamese, Cochins,
Burmese and all their associated peoples, and the Malays and assorted
Indonesians including the Filipinos. \[The division

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

between these and the Melanesians and Australoids is not precisely along
Wallace's Line, but somewhat east of it.\] Here again we encounter all
the same confluences and confusions between the findings of the physical
palaeoanthropologists, the ethnographers, the philologists, native myth,
legend, folklore, tradition, history, and current ABSMery In fact, this
is par excellence just as we said above "the great mix-up." Although it
is the homeland of the South or Oceanic Mongoloids, it has also been for
untold millennia a sort of doorway between the West and the East. Just
about everybody \[apart from the Amerinds\] have at one time or another
streamed through here, either one way or the other, and most of them
seem to have left some remnants of themselves as well as of their
cultures, their beliefs, and their traditions, scattered all over the
place.

First, there were undoubtedly sub-hominids here in the form of the
Pithecanthropines; then sub-humans in the form of the Neanderthal-like
Solo so-called men of Java; then a race of pigmies that everybody says
were hairy and lacked proper speech; then what may be called Modern
Pigmies—*vide* the Semang of Malaya, and others on the Andaman Islands
and in the Philippines; next, small dark and possibly primitive
Caucasoids of the last Vedda, then Dravidian types; next, another lot of
peoples who have been called glibly the Oceanic Negroids, who have ended
up as the Melanesians. Meantime, the true Australoids, or "Blackfellows"
of Australia, seem once to have dwelt thereabouts before moving down
into their southern land and becoming isolated. Next, came three quite
distinct lots of Mongoloids, ending with the modern Malayans,
Indonesians, and Siamese. And just to completely confound the issue, a
group of very advanced Caucasoids passed right through from west to
east, and on into the Pacific to form the Polynesians. There are
moreover, as I say, traces of all of these passings to be found all over
Malaya and Indonesia. Moreover, there is still ample room for primitives
and ABSMs all over this continent, i.e. Orientalia, apart from Java
where the population is too great. The Indo-Chinese Massif is an
enormous unknown and mountainous forest country;

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

the peninsula of Malaya has great wildernesses; and Sumatra and Borneo
are, in a manner, still empty. Even in overcrowded China there are large
mountainous areas that the Peoples' Republic has not yet got around to
organizing. Here it is not, however, worth-while even starting to
discuss MLF. The sheer volume of these is too great; and that which
deals with ABSMs seems to have no ending, and this is concentrated in
some areas, but singularly lacking in others \[such as Borneo\], as I
have pointed out. Moreover, it trails off in all directions, both in
time and space, into living primitives—like the poor so-called "Hairy
Ainu" of Hokkaido—and into types that even omniscient Chinese Communist
officials seem unable to classify.

It should by now be fairly obvious that these abominable MLF stories
cannot be ignored and may often add very considerably to our knowledge
of both the past and the present status of ABSMery. Were there but one
single case in all of it that did not jibe with the established precepts
of vegetational distribution, general geography, anthropology,
ethnography, *or* modern reports, we might have to think again and
reappraise it—if not doubt it: but there is not so much as *one* single
inconsistency in the lot. Thus, we must accept all of it as evidence for
the previous existence of primitive races of modern men, of sub-men, and
of sub-hominids. In doing this we have to remember only three sets of
facts.

The first is that all men are xenophobes. The second is that almost all
men believe almost as fervently and completely in a nonmaterial world as
they do in the material one. Third, that the three great major divisions
of Modern Man \[who inhabit most of the earth today\] *are* different.
These differences are to some extent physical in their most basic
aspects, such as spirally curled hair in the Negroids, partially curled
or "wavy" hair among Caucasoids, and straight hair among the Mongoloids;
but most of the other standard physical criteria break down—such as the
degree of eversion of the lips, skin color, comparative length of limbs,
and so forth. However, there is no doubt whatsoever that the three do
differ—and radically—emotionally.

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

Emotion has nothing to do with intrinsic instinct or intelligence,
aptitude, or ability: it concerns only the way in which things are done.
In this, the three main types of modern men behave according to the
nature of their original environment. The Mongoloids, developed on
endless plains with nothing but a horizon to look at, are
"contemplative"; the Negroids, developed in a land of violent colors,
contrasts, changes, and multiple life, are "emotional"; the Caucasoids,
having everywhere struggled upward amid a welter of physical problems,
like wildly varying seasons, endless mountain ranges, rivers and arms of
the sea to be crossed, ice ages, and so forth, are basically
"mechanistic" or what they choose to call "practical." The Australoids,
the Bushmen, and the little Pigmies are frankly quite beyond our ken.
All three of the last seem to live and operate in a world so strange
that we push most of its precepts into a vague realm that we have named
parapsychology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[376:\*](abs21.htm#fr_51.md) <span id="page_377">p.
377</span> \[Not on map due to scale.\]

<span id="fn_49"></span>[380:\*](abs21.htm#fr_52.md) Curiously, this crops
up repeatedly—in Canada, the Himalayas, and in Central Eastern Eurasia.
However, the potato was unknown in the old world prior to A.D. 1500.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. Some Basic Facts](abs22.md)
