[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legendary
Creatures](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](abs29)  [Next](abs31.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1931882584/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002G9UG0W/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Abominable Snowmen*, by Ivan T. Sanderson, \[1961\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

**Appendix E**

**Sir Edmund Hillary's Scalp—**

**A News Story from Nepal**

This is, as of the time of writing, the most recent and the most
outstanding story in ABSMery. Also, it has received a great play in the
world press, resulting in all manner of strange and curious asides. It
has also turned out to be quite a saga on several counts, with both
overtones of foolishness and undertones of a rather ominous nature. The
whole thing became a farce if not an outright hoax.

Sir Edmund Hillary, "Conqueror of Everest," left in 1960 for Nepal, and
the Chinese border, on a grandiose expedition with novel equipment and,
eventually, a retinue of no less than 600. The expressed objects of this
expedition were twofold: first, to study human physiology under
conditions of altitude and, secondly, to gather information on what Sir
Edmund euphemistically called "*The Yeti*." This expedition was
sponsored and paid for by the World Book Encyclopedia Company of the
Field Enterprises Corporation of Chicago. Among its personnel were Mr.
Marlin Perkins, Director of the Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago, widely
known to Americans for his long-lasting television series entitled "Zoo
Parade" over NBC network for 10 years, and a certain Mr. Lawrence Swan
of San Francisco State College, described as a "Himalayan fauna expert."

In December, 1960, the press announced that Sir Edmund and these two
gentlemen, together with the British reporter, Desmond Doig who speaks
the Sherpa dialect, and the headman of a village named Khumh-Dzhungh
(called Khumjung earlier) and himself named Kunyo Chumbi, were arriving

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

in the United States by air. This they did, landing in Chicago in the
early part of that month. It was announced that they were bringing with
them a scalp (see Chapter 15), alleged by its owners the
Khumh-Dzhungh-ers, to be that of a *yeti*. Further, the daily newspapers
said that this was going to be put on exhibit in Chicago for examination
by a panel of scientists on the 16th of that month. The names of some of
these scientists were given.

At this point, Sir Edmund, acting as mouthpiece for the sponsors,
announced that he felt he had definite evidence as to what this scalp
had been made from, and that hairs pulled from the scalp would be given
to all those in the invited group who wished them and who had proper
laboratory facilities for examining them and comparing them with hairs
of other animals. Unfortunately there was a heavy snowstorm over most of
the United States at that date which made it impossible for any of the
invited to attend the showing, but Dr. Philip Herskovitz of the Chicago
Natural History Museum made the promised hairs available—along with
other hairs marked "Animal X"—to various people. Sir Edmund appeared on
television along with a scalp on a revolving table and the most
excellent Kunyo Chumbi who did a little dance.

Asked on one of these shows \[Dave Garroway's morning news show,
"*Today*"\] taped on the 13th at which I was present in the studio in
New York, whether he thought ABSMs existed, Sir Edmund replied that he
thought that they had once done so, but that they had for some time been
extinct. Asked how, then, he could explain having himself several times
reported finding *fresh* tracks of some large, bipedal, creature, in the
upper snows of the Himalayas, with a strange foot that looked more
humanoid than anything else, he replied that he did not know! A further
showing of the scalp had been announced for the morning of December 16,
and the same scientists were invited, now that the snow was over.
However, on the morning of the 14th, the party suddenly decided to fly
on to England with the scalp, and no American savants therefore obtained
sight of it. However, no less than 8 square inches of the skin of the
scalp were cut off here

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

and sent to various laboratories for them to make serological \[blood\]
comparisons. Strangely, all these samples were too small for any such
analysis to be made.

The group then turned up in Paris where a full-dress showing was
arranged at the Musée d'Histoire Naturelle, under Prof. Millot of
Coelacanth fish fame. Sundry experts and "experts" there examined it,
but Sir Edmund was gracious enough to consent to appear on a television
program with Bernard Heuvelmans, and at that time gave him some hairs
and small pieces of skin that he cut from the scalp with a penknife. In
the meantime, the writer had received some samples marked as coming from
this "Khumjung scalp" \[though not of the "Animal X"\]. Both of us got
out our microscopes and then went to museums and begged a few hairs from
sundry animals indigenous to the Himalaya and Tibet (see list in
Appendix D). Both of us almost immediately came to the conclusion that
the hairs were from a Caprine (i.e. a goatlike animal). It was Bernard
who tracked down the exact kind. This turned out to be an animal named
the Himalayan Serow (*Capricornis sumatrensis thar*) . Checking back, I
was constrained to agree with him. *Life* Magazine came out with an
article a week later, in which it was stated that this was the animal
from which the scalp had been made according to Hillary. \[Even more
strangely, it had been rumored that this intelligence was not going to
have been released until February 17.)

During these machinations, something else came to light. This was that
Sir Edmund was carrying with him a *second* scalp. This he had had made
for him earlier in 1960 by a Sherpa, from a circle of skin taken from
the rump of a Serow that he had shot. It had been molded on a wooden
block, like that used by milliners, just as we had made a similar
conical cap from the scrotum of a Hereford bull in New Jersey 2 years
previously. No previous mention of the existence of this second \[new\]
scalp had up until then been made. When it was, all sorts of doubts
naturally arose.

If Sir Edmund was carrying such an object, that he *knew* definitely had
been made from the pelt of a Serow, how did

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

anybody know but that *all* the hairs handed out by him had been taken
from *that* scalp. Next, everybody wanted to know —but could not
ascertain—whether the other, older-looking scalp was also made from the
same animal, and if so (1) whether it was the one for long owned and
displayed by the village of Khumh-Dzhungh for several years, and from
which hairs had been taken and examined microscopically by Prof. Teizo
Ogawa of Tokyo University Japan, or (2) whether it had been also freshly
made and then smoked to look old. It was alleged to be that of a yeti.

Investigation into these matters brought to light the rather astonishing
fact that the scalp \[genuine or not\] that that village had owned (1)
was a fake in any case, having been made in imitation of one owned by
their rivals—the villagers of Dhyangh-Bodzhei \[Thyanboche, as it is
commonly written\], (2) that both were said by their owners not to be
scalps "*of* yetis" but to have been made "*in imitation of* yetis," and
(3) that they were not held in much regard, were not "religious relics,"
or even considered particularly valuable. Nevertheless, it appears that
the sponsors of Sir Edmund's expedition had had to leave a sizable
deposit in Nepal against the temporary removal of this object, and there
was a time limit put on its return. \[Sir Edmund failed to make this
deadline.\] Further, this relic was said to be considered so valuable
that it was not allowed out of the country without the estimable Kunyo
Chumbi, who had to travel with it and keep a constant eye on it. Yet,
and this is the really odd part, priceless as it was "cracked up" to be,
no less than 8 inches of it were calmly chopped off in the United States
alone to send to laboratories; while hairs seem to have been pulled out
by everybody; more pieces were shaved off in Paris by Sir Edmund himself
and more, apparently, in London.

The whole thing was avowedly, and from the outset, a pure publicity
stunt—the scalp and the nice Sherpa being no more than props—but it also
had a vicious connotation. This expedition had gone off with great
fanfare and in a blaze of publicity which included an article by \[or at
least under the name of\] Sir Edmund Hillary in the New York Sunday
*Times*,

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

stating that he believed in the existence of what he still persists in
calling "*the* yeti." In this article he indicated that, although it was
a secondary objective of his work, he was going to get the answer … or
else.

He did not, and for several obvious reasons. First, he had hardly gone
before he was back; second, he went right through the natural habitat of
all ABSMs to his own icy peaks; third, he had a small army with him,
which might well scare even complacent humans into moving to the next
valley; fourth, he had no anthropologists or trained zoologists along,
let alone a professional collector or anybody else who knew anything
practical about the vegetated parts of the country. The result was that
he failed, and his sponsors were faced with only two alternatives—admit
it, or "prove" that ABSMs don't \[and never did\] exist. Some
irresponsible public relations person appears to have chosen the latter
course and solemnly thought that he could get away with it.

The hairs and bits of skin handed out by the Hillary outfit have been
compared with the hairs of Serows and some other animals, and the blood
with a number of others. This work has been prosecuted in a dozen
laboratories. The hairs have also been compared with microphotographs of
those taken from the real Khumh-Dzhungh scalp obtained firsthand by
Prof. Teizo Ogawa. The results are not satisfactory in that those
obtained by Prof. Ogawa at Kumhjung do not match those from other
villages in Nepal.

The old-looking scalp that Hillary displayed was definitely made from
the skin of a Serow but (1) was it the "real" Khumh-Dzhungh scalp and
(2) is that "real" in any case? Rather naturally, any hairs handed out
by him would be those of Serow, since he had a Serow skin cap in his
suitcase. The whole thing was devised to debunk the "yeti," and thus all
ABSMs. However, it not only fell fiat; it brought forth some astonishing
statements.

The first was that Hillary thinks the fresh footprints \[that he had
himself several times reported\] were all made by a "string" of foxes
all jumping, with all four feet, into the same hole in the snow made by
their leader, which holes subsequently

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

all melted, evenly and exactly for miles. This of course is quite
ridiculous in any case but is utterly negated with regard to tracks left
in mud which, of course cannot melt. Secondly, Sir Edmund, when pressed,
admitted that despite all this he still could not explain the noises
said to have been heard by many people and attributed to ABSMs.

Thus, the whole affair achieved nothing; not even, we suspect, the
objectives desired by the public relations council of the sponsors. At
the same time, it left an opening for a most "interesting" comment. This
was issued by *Tass*, the official Soviet news agency, and goes as
follows:

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

**Wednesday, Jan. 11, 1961. END OF A MYTH**. No Snow Man Had Ever
Existed. The Scalp and Footprints Were a Fox's. Exposures of the
Newspaper *Nazione*.

The hirsute scalp, originally alleged to belong to the Snow Man (Yeti)
and brought with great pomp from Nepal to the United States and Europe,
has started on its return trip to the Himalayas after being studied by
experts in Chicago, Paris and London.

When placed in the experts' hands by its custodian, an elder in the
village of Khumdjo Chumbi, and Edmund Hillary, the head of the Himalayan
Scientific Expedition, the scalp was found to be not the main argument
in proof of the existence of the Snow Man, but rather the Coffin of that
myth.

Before sending the scalp back, Hillary announced that the experts'
report on the subject would be published this month in Chicago. Hillary
said that in general he felt that a reasonable and logical answer had at
last been found to the problem of the Snow Man.

What is the answer? It was expounded to representatives of the Western
press by the well-known biologist Lawrence Stone <span
id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_57.md) who participated in Hillary's Himalayan
Expedition. Stone said that the investigation had established that the
scalp brought from the Khungdjung Monastery was a fox or goat's scalp
and had never belonged to any "abominable Snow Man." Stone also spoke of
the results of the study made of the Snow Man's footprints. He said that
he himself had been confident that they were really the marks of the
Snow Man until he was presented with clear proof that they had been
formed by four foxes’ footprints which had merged in the melting snow.
Stone concluded by saying that the legend of the Snow Man had made an
amusing story and that he regretted to have to kill it.

</div>

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

<div style="font-family: Helvetica, Arial, Geneva, sans-serif">

But, he said, the time had come for the true facts to be made known and
they were that no Snow Man had ever existed.

The story might end at this point—were it not for the despatch from
Katmandu sent in by the Special Correspondent of the Floerentine <span
id="fr_61"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) newspaper Nazione, Corrado Piccinelli and
published in that paper the other day. In it he says that while Hillary
was supposed to be looking for the Snow Man, he was actually spying on
China. The Italian journalist makes fun of those who believe or pretend
to believe that the famous New Zealand mountain climber headed that
large expedition because he was concerned to find proof of the existence
of the Snow Man. The Italian journalist writes:

"It isn't that at all. What is really the case is that his scientific
expedition of 600 men \[!\] is there chiefly to draw up exact maps of
that inaccessible region, due to the absence of such maps until now …
and finally to establish the truth of the rumour that communist China
has fired rockets, missiles and sputniks."

It would appear, then, that the footprints on the untrampled snows of
the Himalayan peaks belongs to creatures even craftier than the fox.
(*Izvestia*. In full.)

</div>

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[488:\*](abs30.htm#fr_60.md) Lawrence Swan.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[489:\*](abs30.htm#fr_61.md) i.e. Florentine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](abs31.md)
