[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uh04)  [Next](uh06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000BD19YW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Union Haggadah*, ed. by The Central Council of American Rabbis
\[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_x">p. x</span>

<span id="img_dish"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![SEDER
DISH](tn/dish.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/dish.jpg)  
SEDER DISH  
</span>

<span id="page_xi">p. xi</span>

### Rites and Symbols of the Seder

<span class="smallcaps">The Seder</span> service is marked with special
concern for the children. A striking contrast is offered between the
ceremonies of this service of the Passover Eve and the conduct of the
usual meal, so that the child is sure to ask for an explanation, and
thus to give the coveted opportunity to tell the story of Israel's
deliverance, and to impress the lesson of faith in Cod, the Defender of
right and the Deliverer of the oppressed. These symbols aim to put us in
sympathy with our forefathers of the generation of the Exodus; to feel
the trials of their embittered life of bondage and the joy of their
subsequent triumph of freedom.

<span class="smallcaps">Wine</span>. As in all Jewish ceremonials of
rejoicing, such as the welcoming of the Sabbath and the festivals, the
solemnizing of marriages, and the naming of a child, so at the Seder,
wine is used as a token of festivity. Mead, apple-cider, any fruit
juice, or especially unfermented raisin wine, is commonly used at the
Seder service.

<span class="smallcaps">The Four Cups</span>. Each participant in the
service is expected to drink four cups of wine. Even the poorest of the
poor who subsist on charity were enjoined to provide themselves with
wine for the four cups. This number is determined by the four divine
promises of redemption made to Israel in Exodus VI: 6-7: *V’hotzesi*,
*V’hitzalti*, *V’goalti* and *V’lokaḥti,* that is, bringing out of
bondage, deliverance from servitude, redemption from all dependence in
Egypt, and selection as " the people of the Lord". The first cup serves
for Kiddush as on other holy days and on Sabbath; the second is taken at
the conclusion of the first part of the Seder; the third follows the
grace after the meal, and the last comes at the end of the second part
of the Seder.

<span id="page_xii">p. xii</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The Cup of Elijah</span>. The fifth promise of
God (*V’hevesi*) to bring Israel into Canaan, which follows the four
promises of redemption, gave rise to the question of the need of a fifth
cup of wine in the Seder. Popular belief left the decision of all mooted
questions of law and ritual to the prophet Elijah, the central hero of
Jewish legend. The popular mind believed this great champion of
righteousness and of pure worship of God to be immortal, and viewed him
as the coming forerunner of the Messiah, whose task it will be—among
other things—to announce the good tidings of peace and salvation, to
effect a union of hearts between parents and their children, to comfort
the sorrowing, to raise the dead, and to establish the divine kingdom of
righteousness on earth.

The fifth cup, the need of which was left to his decision, came to be
known as the Cup of Elijah; and gave rise to the custom of opening the
door during the Seder service, that the long expected messenger of the
final redemption of mankind from all oppression might enter the home as
a most welcome guest. Our fathers were thus helped, in times of darkness
and persecution, to keep in mind the Messianic era of freedom, justice,
and good-will. Stripped of its legendary form, it is still the hope for
the realization of which Israel ever yearns and strives.

<span class="smallcaps">Matzo</span>. The unleavened bread or the bread
of affliction reminds us of the hardships that our fathers endured in
Egypt, and of the haste with which they departed thence. Having no time
to bake their bread, they had to rely for food upon sun-baked dough
which they carried with them.

<span class="smallcaps">Watercress</span> or <span
class="smallcaps">Parsley</span>. Either of these greens is suggestive
of the customary oriental relish

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

and is used as a token of gratitude to God for the products of the
earth. The purpose of dipping it in salt water or vinegar is to make it
palatable.

<span class="smallcaps">Moror</span>. The bitter herb—a piece of
horseradish—represents the embittered life of the Israelites in Egypt.

<span class="smallcaps">Ḥaroses</span>. This mixture of apples, blanched
almonds, and raisins, finely chopped and flavored with cinnamon and
wine, was probably originally a condiment. Owing to its appearance, it
came to be regarded as representing the clay with which the Israelites
made bricks, or the mortar used in the great structures erected by the
bondmen of Egypt.

<span class="smallcaps">The Roasted Shank-Bone</span> is an emblem of
the Paschal lamb.

<span class="smallcaps">The Egg</span> (roasted) is the symbol of the
free-will burnt-offering brought on every day of the feast, during the
existence of the Temple in Jerusalem.

<span class="smallcaps">Aphikomon</span>. *Aphikomon* is derived from
the Greek, meaning <span class="smallcaps">after-meal</span> or <span
class="smallcaps">dessert</span>. The origin of this custom must be
traced to the Paschal lamb which was eaten on Passover night. It was
customary to reserve a small portion of the lamb to be eaten at the
close of the meal. When sacrifices had ceased, a piece of the matzo was
eaten instead. The *Aphikomon*, hidden early in the Seder, is left to
the end of the meal, in order that the children may be kept alert during
the entire service. In connection with this, a sort of game of paying
forfeits originated. The head of the family good-naturedly takes no note
of the spiriting away of the *aphikomon* by the children, who do not
surrender it until the master of the house is forced to redeem it by
some gift, in order that the meal may be concluded.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Directions for Setting the Table](uh06)
