[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uh24)  [Next](uh26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000BD19YW/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Union Haggadah*, ed. by The Central Council of American Rabbis
\[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

<span id="img_lamb"></span> ![](img/lamb.jpg)

### Survivals of the Ancient Passover

#### A. THE SAMARITAN PASSOVER.

The observance of the Passover by the Samaritan sect, native to Samaria,
the central region of Palestine, casts much light upon this institution
in biblical times. James A. Montgomery gives this interesting outline of
the function:

"The solemnity is a veritable Haj, or pilgrim feast. The whole community
proceeds to the place of sacrifice on Mount Gerizim, allowing abundance
of time for the preparations. The tents are pitched, and all eagerly
await the appointed hour, which occurs at sunset,—for so the Samaritans
interpret the phrase 'between the evenings'. <span
id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) A number of lambs have been carefully
selected from those born in the preceding Tishri, and of these so many
as will suffice for the worshippers are destined for the sacrifice,
generally from five to seven, although others are at hand in case anyone
of them is ritually unfit. Some hours before the sacrifice two fires are
started in the trenches; in one of them a caldron is heated for boiling
the water necessary to fleece the lambs, in the other a mass of fuel is
kindled to make the oven for roasting the lambs. All these preparations
are in the hands of young men, <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*\*](#fn_19)
who sometimes are clad in blue robes. Coincident with the starting of
the fire, the service begins and

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

this is kept up until the lambs are put into the oven; it consists in
the reading of the Passover lections from Exodus, and ancient Passover
hymns. A certain number of representative men render the antiphons. In
the service all turn toward the Kibla, the top of Gerizim. At sunset the
sacrifice takes place, not on an altar but in a ditch; the throats of
the lambs are deftly cut by a young man, not by the priest. The ritual
inspection then takes place, the sinews of the legs are withdrawn, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[\*](#fn_20) the offal removed, and the lambs fleeced
by aid of the hot water. The lambs are then spitted with a long stick
run through their length, and are conveyed to the heated oven, over
which they are laid, the spits protruding on either side, while above
them is laid a thick covering of turf to seal the oven. The process of
roasting takes three or four hours, during which time the worshipers may
rest, the service being mostly intermitted. When it is deemed the proper
time, the lambs are withdrawn, and present a blackened and repulsive
aspect. A short service then ensues, the congregation now appearing with
their loins girt up and their staves in their hands, <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*\*](#fn_21) and when the service is over, veritably
'eat in haste', for they fall ravenously upon the coal-like pieces of
flesh, devouring it and taking plattersful to the women and children,
who remain in the tents. When all the flesh is consumed, the bones,
scraps, wool, are carefully gathered up, and thrown into the still
smoldering fire, until all is consumed, 'so that none of it remain till
the morrow'. After the meal ablutions take place, and the ceremony is
concluded with further prayers and chants. According to the
prescriptions of Numbers IX, the 'Second Passover' is allowed.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

"In close connection with the Passover is the feast of Unleaven, or
Massot, which is reckoned as the second sacred feast, being
distinguished from the Passover, although coincident with it, according
to the language of the Law. On the 13th of the month a careful search is
made for all leaven, which is scrupulously removed, and from the 14th
day till the 21st no leaven may be eaten. The 21st is the great day of
this feast, and on it they make pilgrimage to Gerizim, reading through
the book of Deuteronomy on the way and at the village Makkada, where
they finally halt."

<span class="small">The Samaritans, pp. 38-40.</span>

#### B. THE PASSOVER AS OBSERVED BY THE FALASHAS.

The Jews of Abyssinia, known among their neighbors as Falashas,
according to Dr. Jacques Faitlovitch, who has visited them and has
pleaded their cause before the Jews of Europe and America, celebrate the
Passover "for seven days, and during this time they eat only unleavened
bread and do not drink any fermented drinks. Several days before the
feast, the homes are carefully cleaned, all articles of clothing are
properly washed, and all vessels and utensils thoroughly scoured and
cleaned like new. Three days before Passover, they stop eating leavened
bread and take nothing but dried peas and beans, and on the eve of
Passover they abstain from all food until after the sacrifice of the
paschal lamb. On this day, a little before the setting of the sun, all
assemble in the court of the synagogue, and in the name of the entire
community, the sacrificer offers the paschal lamb upon the altar. The
ceremony is observed with great pomp; the ritual prescribed in the Bible
for this sacrifice is followed punctiliously, and after the sacrifice is
slaughtered and roasted, the meat is eaten with

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

unleavened bread by the priestly assistants. It is in this manner that
the festival is inaugurated. On the following days they assemble in the
Mesgid ('the place of prayer') at fixed hours, observing a special
ritual and reciting various prayers and biblical texts having reference
to the Exodus of the Israelites from Egypt.

<span class="small">American Jewish Year Book, 5681. p. 89.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_18"></span>[143:\*](uh25.htm#fr_18) Exodus XII: 6.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[143:\*\*](uh25.htm#fr_19) Cf. Exodus XXIV: 5.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[144:\*](uh25.htm#fr_20) Genesis XXXII: 32.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[144:\*\*](uh25.htm#fr_21) Exodus XII: 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Passover and Christendom](uh26)
