[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](uh25)  [Next](uh27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B000BD19YW/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Union Haggadah*, ed. by The Central Council of American Rabbis
\[1923\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

<span id="img_egypt03"></span> ![](img/egypt03.jpg)

### Passover and Christendom

#### A. PASSOVER AND EASTER.

The Jewish Passover, in modified form, became the leading festival of
the Christian Church. The English name Easter "is derived from Eostre or
Ostara, the Anglo-Saxon goddess of Spring, to whom the month answering
to our April and called Eostre-monath, was dedicated. This month, Bede
says, was the same as the *mensis paschalis* 'when the old festival was
observed with the gladness of a new solemnity'". In other European
languages the name of the festival is derived through the medium of
Latin and Greek from the Hebrew *pesaḥ*. The early Christians continued
to observe the Jewish festivals, but invested them with new meanings.
Thus the Passover, with the new conception added to it of Christ as the
true Paschal Lamb and the first fruits from the dead, continued to be
observed, and became the Christian Easter. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_22.md) However, it is incorrect to speak of
Pesaḥ as the Jewish Easter, for while Pesaḥ celebrates the deliverance
of Israel from slavery, Easter commemorates the death and the legendary
resurrection of the Christ.

The Seder, too, has exerted great influence upon Christianity. In his
book on Jewish Contributions to Civilization, p. 91, Joseph Jacobs
writes: "The central

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

function of the Church service, the Mass, (or in Protestant Churches,
the Communion), derives its 'elements' in the last resort, from the wine
and unleavened bread used at the home service of the Passover; and
Bickel (in "The Lord's Supper and the Passover Ritual") has shown that
the original ritual of the Mass is derived from that of the Seder
service."

#### B. PASSOVER AND PREJUDICE.

By a strange irony of fate the Passover season, the Spring-time of
nature and of freedom, became the signal for the most furious attacks
upon the Jews by their Christian neighbors. Unacquainted with Jewish
customs and beliefs, many of them maintained an antagonistic and
distrustful attitude toward the Jews. Any malicious superstition about
Jewish rites found open ears among the ignorant rabble. Hence the care
taken in preparing the matzos, and the use of red wine in the Seder
service became fruitful sources of wild speculation. These things
rendered the coming of the Passover a time of dread and anguish for the
Jewish people.

#### C. BLOOD ACCUSATION.

The distinguished Frenchman, Anatole Leroy Beaulieu, writes feelingly
about "that senseless charge which, for centuries, has cost the lives of
so many Israelites in every country, although at no time has it been
possible to fasten the slightest guilt upon a single Jew.

"In Russia, Poland, Roumania, Bohemia and Hungary, the common people
believe that the Jews need Christian blood for the preparation of their
unleavened bread, the Passover matzos. In the villages, even in the
cities in Eastern Europe, where beneath a thin veneer of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

modern culture, so often are found the ideas and beliefs of the Middle
Ages, the peasant and the laborer have no doubt that the Jews require
the blood taken from Christian veins in order to celebrate their
Passover. He does not know, this Magyar peasant or Russian moujik, that,
according to the testimony of Tertullian and of Minucius Felix, the same
absurd and odious charge was brought against the early Christians by the
pagans, who, in their malicious thirst for damaging information, no
doubt mistook for a real sacrifice the mystical immolation of the Lamb
of the Eucharist. No sooner has a Christian child disappeared, no sooner
have the police discovered the corpse of a young boy or girl in the
river or in the town-moat, than the public voice accuses the knife of
the 'schaechter', the Jewish butcher, even though the body may not bear
a single mark of violence. This is so well known that murderers have
been seen dragging the bodies of their victims through the alleys of the
Jewish quarters, confident, thereby, to divert the suspicion and fury of
the crowd."

<span class="small">Israel among the Nations, pp. 36-7. See also Prof.
H. L. Strack's article on Blood Accusation in the Jewish Encyclopedia,
vol. II, pp. 260 ff.</span>

#### D. CHRISTIAN PROTESTS.

Though we live in the bright sunlight of liberty, many of our brethren
still dwell in lands of darkness and are still made victims of malice
and hatred. The blood libel has been frequently employed against them by
their enemies as a means of inciting the ignorant mobs to riots and
pogroms. During the notorious Beilis trial, in 1912, the leading British
authors, editors, scientists, statesmen and heads of all the Christian
denominations issued the following statement:

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

"We desire to associate ourselves with the protests signed in Russia,
France, and Germany by leading Christian Theologians, Men of Letters,
Scientists, Politicians, and others against the attempt made in the City
of Kieff to revive the hideous charge of Ritual Murder—known as the
'Blood accusation'—against Judaism and the Jewish people.

"The question is one of humanity, civilization, and truth. The 'blood
accusation' is a relic of the days of witchcraft and 'black magic', a
cruel and utterly baseless libel on Judaism, an insult to the Western
culture, and a dishonor to the Churches in whose name it has been
falsely formulated by ignorant fanatics. Religious minorities other than
the Jews, such as the early Christians, the Quakers, and Christian
Missionaries in China, have been victimized by it. It has been denounced
by the best men of all ages and creeds. The Popes, the founders of the
Reformation, the Khaliff of Islam, statesmen of every country, together
with all the great seats of learning in Europe, have publicly repudiated
it."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[147:\*](uh26.htm#fr_22.md) See the article on
Easter in the Encyclopedia Britannica, XIth edition, vol. VIII, pp.
828-829.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Reform Judaism and Passover](uh27.md)
