[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](choc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875481558/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Occultism*, by Paul Carus, \[1907\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### PREHISTORIC CONNECTIONS.

The evidences that indicate a Western origin of Chinese civilisation are
very strong, and it seems that the first Chinese settlers must have come
in prehistoric times from a country that was closely connected with the
founders of Babylonian culture. There is an unmistakable resemblance
between cuneiform writing and Chinese script, so as to make it quite
probable that they have been derived from a common source. We have,
further, the sexagenary cycle corresponding to the use of the number
sixty in Babylonia, and many similarities in astronomical names and
notions. Moreover, the Chinese divide the circle into three hundred and
sixty degrees as did the Babylonians, a system which has been adhered to
in the West down to modern times.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

<span id="img_08200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![GREAT CELESTIAL
GLOBE OF THE PEKING OBSERVATORY](tn/08200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08200.jpg)  
GREAT CELESTIAL GLOBE OF THE PEKING OBSERVATORY  
</span>

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

The Prometheus legend seems to come from the same source (presumably
Akkad) as the story of the Chinese "Fire Man," Sui-Jen. The Babylonian
story of Tiamat as to the formation of the world is repeated in the
legend of P‘an-Ku, the personification of the ancient abyss.

Finally the yih system of the yang and the yin is paralleled in at least
one Semitic tribe by the similar divining method of the Urim and
Thummim. Though in the latter case the loss of details prevents us from
having any evidence of a historical connection, the similarity of the
purpose, as well as the duality of the elements of the oracle cannot be
denied.

If none of these indications is conclusive when considered separately,
we can not disregard them when all are taken together.

Further bearing in mind that there is an ancient tradition in China of a
settlement having been made by a tribe coming from the Far West, we may
very well assume the ancestors of the Chinese to be a detachment of the
founders of the Babylonian civilisation, either Sumerians or Akkadians,
and that they left their home in prehistoric times presumably even
before the first Semitic invasion or soon afterwards. They were perhaps
that portion of the people who would not submit to the new condition of
things and preferred exile to absorption by a victorious enemy.

Our proposition that even in prehistoric times a connection must have
existed between all civilised nations of the East and of the West, will
be further borne out by the additional evidence furnished by a
comparative study of the several calendar systems, as based upon the
sun's course through the zodiac, and it is remarkable that it includes
even the Mayas of Central America. …

 

 

 

 
