[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsf18)  [Next](tsf20.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0806504560/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Sacred Fire*, by B.Z. Goldberg, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

### CHAPTER II

### LOVE THE FORCE OF REBELLION

THE immediate causes of religious revolts are many and various. Often
they lie outside the field of religion. They may be rooted in politics,
economics, or social conditions, but invariably they come to assume a
theologic aspect. The passions of a people that cannot be aroused by
political controversy or economic strife will yield to the religious
appeal. Invariably also, there will be indulgence in sex during or
following the rebellion. Whatever the object of the revolt and the
theology of the sect, the new group will be found to concern itself
primarily with the exercise of the sexual function. The sect may
liberate the love impulse from the chains imposed upon it by the parent
religion. It may also add to the chains, throwing love into the dungeon.
The religious insurrection may be positively or negatively charged with
sex, but charged it is bound to be.

Out of the rebellions against Moses grew the orgy of worship to Baal
Peor. Out of the concept of renewed revelation came a system of polygamy
and heavenly marriages. Out of the desire to return to man's original
state of purity and sinlessness came the sexual liberties of the
Adamites. Out of the Gnostic movements concerning the godhead came
orgies of overwhelming eroticism. In fact,

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

almost every new sect has brought in its wake a wave of sexuality. Even
the hard, dry Protestant Reformation, with its economic causes rooted in
the Peasants’ War and in the rise of the Third Estate, and its theologic
struggle with the papacy, still contained the seed of a new attitude
toward woman and the sexual that only later crystallized.

#### II

What is it that has given an erotic phase to every revolt in religion?
Here again, there may be many and varied causes, inherent in every case.
But there are also basic reasons, rooted in the psychology of the people
constituting the sect and in the character of the rebellion. The man who
leads in a religious movement is generally a highly sexed individual. He
who starts a religious revolt or who immediately falls in with the rebel
is necessarily of a deeply religious nature. He is the emotional type,
the kind of an individual who finds no satisfaction in his drab life and
who seeks an escape through ecstasy.

Sex is an emotion very closely associated with the state of ecstasy. The
religious type is also the sex type. And just as the religious leader,
or the apostle of the leader, must have an outlet for his emotions in
general, he is particularly in need of an outlet for his sexual emotion.
For the highly sexed man is never satisfied with the sexual outlets
provided by society. He will ever seek such experiences as lie beyond
the field of ordered sex life. The religious will seek communion and
ecstasy by way of the sexual impulse.

We therefore find most religious leaders definitely engrossed in sex to
a degree not met with in ordinary individuals. Every religious leader
must pay his respects,

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

his tax to the sexual question. Like Mohammed or Brigham Young, he is
concerned with justifying his own sexual appetite, or like Paul, he is
seeking to uproot the sexual impulse in the hearts of his followers.
Again, he may open the floodgates of sexuality for all, giving free vent
to the emotions of man on the basis of sex, as did the founders of the
Gnostic and various other esoteric sects. They who follow the leaders in
such religious revolts are made of the same stuff. Theirs is the
restless, emotional spirit. Theirs is the inner lack of satisfaction and
the persistent pang of sex hunger never fully satisfied. Theirs is the
overwhelming desire to flee from the drudgery of life and to lose
themselves in the boundless waves of ecstasy.

Yet another reason exists for the eroticism found in every esoteric
religious movement. It is inherent in the mechanism of the movement, in
the force that is driving it ahead into the world and into the heart of
man. It is the trend of the revolt. Every appeal against the existing
order in religion is an appeal against the additions of time and a
return to the original, basic state of the faith. Jesus came, not to
break the Law, but to fulfill it. Luther posted his theses upon the door
of the church, not to sever his relations with Christianity, but to save
it from the falsifications of late-comers. He called his followers to
the very basis of Christianity, to the Bible itself. The Adamites wanted
to go back over all the steps of civilization since Adam. The newer the
sect, the further back it goes to seek for fundamentals. And the further
it explores, the closer it comes to the faith of Old Anthropology Adam,
to the religion of the primitive man, the religion that was saturated
with sex.

The sect, then, is an attempt to return to the origin of

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

religion, which is so intimately bound up with love. And as the
sectarian descends the ladder of religious evolution, he also descends
the steep pathway of erotic symbolism. While he is removing layer after
layer of theology, dogma, and precept, digging down to the core of his
faith, he is also removing the fineries that the love sentiment has
added during its sojourn in the sacred shrine. Coming down to
fundamental religion, the rebel is also descending to frank sex, the
inseparable companion of primitive religion. The sect is, in
consequence, a reversal to type, a return to the primitive state of
sexuality in faith—sex, free, open, unashamed, and boundless, for the
joy of man and the exaltation of his god.

<span id="img_32900"></span> ![A Gnostic gem](img/32900.jpg.md)  
A Gnostic gem

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. The Revolt Against Religion](tsf20.md)
