[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sacred
Sexuality](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](tsf17)  [Next](tsf19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0806504560/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Sacred Fire*, by B.Z. Goldberg, \[1930\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span id="page_317">p. 317</span>

# BOOK FOUR

# THE SPIRIT OF REVOLT IN RELIGION

<span id="page_318">p. 318</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="50%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>". . . <em>and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto them, ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?</em>"<br />
                              —Numbers.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

### CHAPTER I

### REBELS IN THE FAITH

#### I

THEY who had been slaves in Egypt were now camping in freedom in the
wilderness. No longer were they huddled together in the miserable huts
behind the pyramids. No longer were they awakened at daybreak by the
shrill siren, a summons to be busy finding straw for their bricks. Gone
was the knout of the slavedriver and almost forgotten were the tortures
by the publicans of Pharaoh. The great king himself lay buried beneath
the sands of the Red Sea, in just punishment for his unwillingness to
allow the children of Israel to serve their God.

They who once had been slaves were now as free as a people could ever
be. They were liberated from all bonds of civilization and from the
encumbrances of organized society. They were even unbound by toil and
labor. Their sustenance came down from the sky ready for consumption.
The angels of heaven fought their wars. Their only duty was to mind
Moses and to march along to the Promised Land, where each would rest
under his own vine and fig tree.

And yet, they who once were slaves were not happy in their freedom.
There was a grumbling in the camp of the freed man. There was a pointing
of fingers to the tent on the top of the hill. For upon its summit was
the camp

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

of Moses, the son of Amram, who had led them out of slavery, but who
refused to set them free. He who had come to them in the name of liberty
now spoke to them of law and order. He who had taught them to break the
chains was chaining them to commandments and law. The rebel against the
king of Egypt was establishing a kingdom of his own, a royalty of
priesthood. There was a spirit of rebellion against the leader of the
rebels.

The groans of dissatisfaction found a ready listener in Korah, the
cousin of Moses. Korah could still remember Uncle Amram, playing with
him and his cousins, Moses and Aaron, in the shadow of the pyramids.
Little had he suspected that this stuttering cousin of his would ever
become so great. And yet Korah saw him now, forging ahead, first in the
court of Pharaoh, then among his own people, taking the office of
prophet to himself and giving the priesthood to his brother, Aaron.

Moses was not satisfied with making himself ruler over the people. He
wanted to monopolize their God as well. They all had seen the cloud of
fire in which Jehovah descended upon the mount of Sinai. All had heard
Him read the ten commandments. When Jehovah had something to say, He
spoke to the entire congregation. How did Moses come to talk exclusively
in the name of God and to lift himself above the assembly of the Lord?

Not only did Moses rob the people of their God, but he instituted laws
in the Lord's name, laws that were of his own creation, that served to
make the priest thrive on the fat of the land. Suppose there was a widow
with two little orphans, and she had only a small piece of land. When
she was about to plow, she could not use the ox and the mule together;
when she was about to sow, she must

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

observe the Mosaic regulation; and when she was ready to harvest the
grain, she was again bound by a Mosaic law. The greater part of the
fruit she did succeed in obtaining was taken from her in tithes to the
priest, to the levite, and to the temple. The poor widow could never
make her ends meet were she to follow the law of Moses—of Moses, not of
the Lord—laws that he had made just as had the pharaoh, in whose court
he had been raised and whose rule he had helped to destroy.

And so Korah rose against Moses and took with him many of the leaders of
the tribes. There was a great rebellion in the wilderness, and the end
of the revolt is known to all. Fire came down from heaven and devoured
some of the rebels, while the earth swallowed the rest. Tongues of flame
and the mouth of the earth put an end to Korah and those that stood with
him. Jehovah himself showed His hand at this critical moment in the life
of His people. He was with Moses, His servant, to whom He had first
spoken from the burning bush.

Korah and his followers were destroyed, but not so was the spirit of
rebellion. All the people saw the horrible end of the rebels, yet they
would not submit. There was another complaint over a scarcity of water;
another minor revolt against the manna, the delectable food that came
down from the sky. And again a conflagration was necessary to break the
spirit of the revolting mass. They had neither respect nor pity for
Moses, who was alone now, deserted by his closest friends, even his
sister Miriam and his brother., Aaron. Instead of feeling kindly toward
the lonely old man, the rebels accused him of doing away with his own
brother, in a plot with Eliezer, his nephew.

The spirit of rebellion flickered on to the exasperation of

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses and Jehovah
until it was finally relieved by an outbreak of sexual activity. As the
Israelites arrived in the valley of Shitim, they plunged themselves into
the worship of Baal Peor. For once, they broke completely away from the
laws of Moses and the commands of his God. For once, they were truly
free, inwardly free. A people "holy and pure" descended into the depths
of sin and completely lost itself in one wild orgy of sexual pleasure.
The extent of the orgy may be gleaned from the legends about the elder
Zimri, who was found in union with a temple priestess by Pinchos, a
grandson of Aaron. Zimri, according to the legend, had four hundred and
twenty-four coitions with the same priestess on the one day.

This outburst was followed by a bloody civil war, the devotees of
Jehovah slaughtering all who were caught paying homage to Baal. Thus, in
sex and in blood was drowned the spirit of rebellion, the spirit of the
Israelites in the wilderness. The revolt had run its course, and a
submissive people patiently listened to the exhortation of a tired
leader. Moses soon passed quietly out of existence. The people returned
to their drab existence and monotonous routine, following a mediocre
leader. Their spirit was broken. The dramatic moment had passed. The
curtain had been drawn.

#### II

It was only through a physical accident that Korah lost his rebellion
against Moses. Had he succeeded, we might now be reading different
stories about him and Moses in the chronicles of the Hebrews. Had he
succeeded, he would have established, in the course of time, a theocracy
or oligarchy of his own. It would not have been long,

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

then, before insurrections against the domination of Korah broke but,
and they who were rebels by nature would rise against their leader,
saying: "All the people are holy. Why do you lift yourself above the
assembly?"

For in every generation there is the spirit of revolt. It breaks through
like the spring from beneath the rocks. Religion ever has its inception
in spontaneity. It wells up in the prophet, priest, or religious leader,
suddenly, unconsciously. God appears in the burning bush, or upon a tree
in the wilderness, or in a dream at night. When man has had his vision,
he comes to his fellows in the name of God, but also in the voice of his
innermost soul. This is the revelation, the inspiration, the divine
element in the faiths of man.

But religion is not only divine; it is also human. This great source of
energy is soon directed into channels that would make a better people
and a better world. Religion is not only to be believed, but primarily
to be lived. It thus becomes a social institution. From its original
status as a bond between man and man, it develops into a bond upon man
and man. To Charles A. Elwood, religion is "one of the oldest means of
control in human societies, an effective means of preventing too wide a
variation in conduct in individuals." It is but another steam roller in
the hand of an exacting society, exerting pressure upon the asphalt of
humanity. It crushes the individual who stands out from his own people
and transforms the odd, angular, variable humans into one thick, smooth,
flat humanity.

Once religion is to serve society, it must itself be socialized. The
spontaneous call of man to his God and the divine reply are
institutionalized and subjected to steam-rolling.

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There are so many
books in the canon; all others, even of the same period, are apocryphal.
Not a word may be added to the Bible nor a line subtracted from it.
There are so many dogmas to believe, so many commands and precepts to
follow. Even prayer has been supervised, stereotyped, and
institutionalized. There are set devotions for set occasions. One can no
longer approach his God in his own personal, intimate way. He must speak
in words prepared for him by priest or leader. Religion, man's ladder
from earth to heaven, has dropped the rungs. One can no longer climb
upon it; he must remain at the foot, while the adept priest ascends for
him.

No wonder, then, that there are rebellions in religion no less than in
other forms of social organization. Religion has always blessed the
meek, the humble, the obedient, promising them the Kingdom of God, in
heaven if not on earth. But it has always had difficulty with the
independent spirit, the true men of God. These do not wait at the foot
of Sinai for what a Moses will bring down to them. They will not be
persuaded by argument or won over by promise of reward. They will not
even be cowed by threats of punishment, here or hereafter. They are the
men of Korah, the non-conformists of every age who spread the spirit of
religious revolt. It is they who assemble themselves against the Moses
and the Aaron of their day, protesting: "All the congregation are holy;
. . . God is everywhere, accessible to everyone. Why do you set yourself
up as leader and lift yourself above the assembly?" These are the rebels
of the Lord against the rule of man in the worship of God.

As in the case of Korah, it is very often chance, accident, that decides
the fate of the revolt. Had Korah been

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

successful, his name would have been written high in the annals of
faith. Because he lost, an unfriendly chronicler told his tale and set
him forth as an object lesson for a disobedient humanity. If the
rebellion fails, it is left for the historian to deal with it. If it
succeeds, the movement is bound to grow. The rebellious group will soon
sectate itself from the parent religion, developing into a sect and
growing into a faith of its own. In time, it may even rival the religion
from which it sprang. But as it grows, it necessarily becomes
socialized, institutionalized, building up canon and dogma and precept.
The very same man who led the revolt against authority places himself in
a position of power. Seeking to free man from his yoke of
institutionalized religion, he only changes the yokes. The soul of man
has not been set free. So other non-conformists will rise in rebellion
against the non-conformist of an earlier day. History repeats itself.
Every age has its spirit of revolt and its religious rebellion.

<span id="img_32500"></span> ![A symbol of life](img/32500.jpg)  
A symbol of life

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Love the Force of Rebellion](tsf19)
