[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ama05)  [Next](ama07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="img_08500"></span>

[![SECTION OF MONSOLUS FRIEZE, COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS. BRITISH
MUSEUM.](tn/08500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08500.jpg)  
SECTION OF MONSOLUS FRIEZE, COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS. BRITISH
MUSEUM.  

# CHAPTER V

### MODERN AMAZONS OF THE CAUCASUS

FROM age to age memories of the Amazons persistently clung to the
Pontus, to the whole of the Caucasian range of mountains and the regions
immediately beyond, or those coming within their influence. Many writers
held that some sections of the broken Themysciran state had after the
debacle taken refuge among the higher mountains, and there, in security
if not in solitude, carried, more or less in its entirety, the
traditional mode of life. To give colour to this there were the
generally prevailing reports of fighting women in those regions. When
Mithridates V., King of Pontus, made war on the Roman colonies in Asia
Minor, between 100 and 98 B.C., he had in his vast army strong bodies of
auxiliaries from Scythia and Sarmatia, who were looked upon as
barbarians both by friend and foe. After the battles, it is said, the
Romans found among the heaps of slain women clothed in armour and with
arms; in their hands. Appianus the historian, in his account of this
war, touches upon the matter and raises the interesting question whether
the term was not already becoming generalised. According to him: "There
were found among the prisoners and the hostages several women whose
wounds were

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

as great and dangerous as those of the men. These women were said to be
Amazons, either because the auxiliary troops belonged to nations
neighbouring on Amazonia, or because the barbarians gave that name to
all warlike women."

More than three centuries later the traditions and habits still lingered
on hereabouts. Gibbon tells us that in the theatrically gorgeous
procession on the occasion of the Emperor Aurelian's triumph in 274
A.D., there marched ten heroines of the Gothic nation, taken in arms,
and exhibited to the Roman populace as "Amazons." It is in recording
this fact that the great sceptic wrote, like Appianus, with remarkable
hesitancy: "It is *almost* impossible that a society of Amazons should
ever have existed in the Old or New World." From such a quarter we might
well have looked for more downright utterance. There was, however,
enough of mystery to justify caution, even to the extent of the
un-Gibbon-like italics.

For instance, Jacob Reineggs, in a description of the Caucasus written
in 1796, says that the Circassians in his day declared that before their
own forefathers had come to the Black Sea, the land was in the
possession of the "emmetsh," with whom they were at war. The women
"admitted no men among them, but, full of warlike spirit, associated
with themselves any women who cared to share their wanderings and to
join their heroic guild." Which seems to describe a nomadic tribe
composed of the flotsam and jetsam of social wreckage in this veritable
cockpit of conflicting races. Schober, in his account of Asiatic Russia,
places the women further afield, for he heard rumours that the "Emazuhn"
still inhabited the mountains of

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Great Tartary, and though they in his day, it
seems, no longer indulged in constant fighting, they were accomplished
hunters, and kept their husbands in a condition of subserviency. On the
other hand, we are told that the Kalmuks, an Asiatic Russian tribe of
Mongol extraction, and therefore possibly acquainted with the Emazuhn of
whom Schober speaks, applied the term "aëmetzaine" to strong women full
of vigour. Whether the word was philologically and intentionally
descriptive we are not informed. It may have been derivative, a later
corruption of the Greek or, more correctly speaking, Greecised term
amazon; in fact, the name of a type may have been applied to an
individual, as seems to have been done in the days of Mithridates. In
any case, the long persistence of a word in a special locality, varying
slightly though it does, and applying to a particular race or to a type
of women, cannot lightly be set aside. It may mean merely the survival
of a legend, but may also indicate that there is some justification for
the legend-makers, and this the local history seems to confirm.

At all events, rumours of this kind repeated by travellers in or writers
dealing with these regions from the Middle Ages down to quite the end of
the eighteenth century certainly point in such a direction. Sir John
Mandeville, who looms large in the company of the quaint raconteurs,
wrote of the Amazons as of an existing nation in his day, and says,
among a plethora of other things, that they kept the lost ten tribes of
Israel shut up in a valley surrounded by mountains. It must have been
pretty obvious even to the credulous knight that there were serious gaps
in those chains of mountains, and that the vigilance

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

of the good women was far from being above reproach, since the Amazonian
*coralle* had not perceptibly checked the wandering propensities of the
Hebrews. For there were, even in those days, opposing camps, who placed
the lost tribes in Abyssinia and others on the banks of the Ganges, a
confusion probably due to the haziness prevailing among the mediæval
geographers, but also suggested by racial peculiarities in those distant
lands. But it is interesting to find the Nestorians of Mesopotamia
claiming that they represent the lost tribes, while the Jews of the
Caucasus have always persisted that they were descendants of the ten
tribes, those of Georgia holding that they were taken prisoner by
Nebuchadnezzar, and those from other districts declaring that they were
carried away from Palestine by Shalmaneser. All of which points to the
singular mixing of races hereabouts, while the connection of the women
with the lost tribes also has its significance. The Amazons were
Scythians, and, as we know, one of the most persistent of the traditions
concerning these matters is that the Scythians (those forefathers of the
whole Teutonic family, and consequently of the Angle and the Saxon) were
the true representatives of the lost ten tribes. Remembering the old
forms of worship among the Jews and their later backsliding devotion to
Ashtoreth, Queen of the Heavens, and that among the scattered remnants
of old tribes the Cabala, or traditional lore, would prevail over the
written law, and no doubt give rise to certain of the mystic
extravagances that arose elsewhere, its secrets kept alive by an elect
band of initiated, we see here again an association of the armed women
guards with religious ritual.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

Many as are the questions that a perusal of Mandeville's tale raises, a
much more reliable author, John Cartwright, who had travelled
extensively in the East and wrote an account of his experiences in 1603,
speaks of Armenia with its great plains encompassed by rows of
mountains, those spurs of the Taurus and Caucasus ranges. The people he
found to be "industrious in all kinds of labour," and then he adds, as
though byway of contrast: "their women very skilful and active in
shooting and managing any sort of weapon, like the fierce Amazons in
antique times and the women at this day which inhabit the Mountain
Xatach in Persia." This reminds us irresistibly of Herodotus's remarks
on the Sauromatœ. Then that adventurous character, Sir John Chardin,
who, beginning life as plain jean Chardin, son of a Paris jeweller,
enjoyed a most picturesque career in the East, and ended his days
peacefully in England as a protégé of Charles II., says that when he was
in Georgia in 1671 the Amazons had only recently invaded an outlying
position of the kingdom somewhere to the north-west. From what he says
it would seem to have been a tribe similar to that referred to by
Hippocrates when he declares that a body of Scythians dwelt immediately
to the north of the Palus Mæotis, which sea he places entirely in
Europe. Their women, says the great physician, were red, rode astride on
horseback, using the bow and arrow even when riding at full speed, went
to war, and did not marry until they had killed three men; so that it
was only natural that the Greeks should call them Androchtones. When
they had garnered the three masculine scalps, these amiable girls gave
up warfare and hunting, to settle clown to a quiet married

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

life. They seared their right breasts with red-hot irons, and as a
consequence their right arms grew exceptionally powerful. Which account
affords another interesting link connecting the Themysciran women, the
Sauromatœ females of man-like habits described by Herodotus, the
Sauromatœ Gynœcocratumeni of Pliny, and the modern feminine warriors of
these savage parts.

As for Chardin, he confesses that he had not seen the Amazonian country,
which he considered formed part of Tartary, but while in Georgia he
heard much about it and its inhabitants, and was even shown the woollen
costume of peculiar cut belonging to a big woman, which was said to have
been taken from an Amazon killed in the late wars. Discussing the whole
subject with the young Prince of Georgia, they agreed that there was
nothing improbable in the stories about women fighting on horseback.
Women warriors, and nations governed by aggressive queens, were too well
known in those parts to give rise to much astonishment; and as for
riding, most of the maids and matrons were good horsewomen, and they
always rode astride like men. The prince was of opinion that the recent
invaders must have been nomadic Scythians, but he did not appear to have
heard of the Greek traditions.

Indeed, this phenomenon of fighting women was widespread, extending
through Armenia and the Kurd country to Syria and parts of Arabia, as
well as north of the Sea of Azof and eastward into Tartary. Of the
southerly Amazonian females we hear constantly in connection with the
conquests of Mahomet's early successors. Ockley tells us that at the
first siege of Damascus the Moslem women who were guarding the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

camp of invaders were captured, and insulting terms proffered to them by
the Greeks. But the women, being encouraged by two Hamzarite companions,
supposed to be descendants of the Amalekites, resistance was at once
organised. Arming themselves with tent-poles, and forming a close ring,
they kept the enemy at bay, breaking the skulls or limbs of any who
advanced too near. Even mounted men could make no impression, for the
tent-poles were longer than lances, and easily broke the horses' legs,
bringing steed and cavalier to the ground. The fight was gallantly kept
up until the Moslem horsemen came galloping up to the relief, and then
the women helped their own troops in following up and routing the
discomfited Greeks. So ended this affair: but it is evident that had
they not been relieved, they might well have made their escape in the
darkness; and had their own friends been slaughtered, could have
wandered off to sheltering hills, and there formed a women's community.

Then we have an incident of a different kind at the second siege, when
one of the Arab leaders was brought into camp mortally wounded by a
poisoned arrow. His wife, a daughter of the Himiar tribe, seized his bow
and arrows, and sallying forth, joined in the battle, and succeeded in
putting out an eye of the noble Thomas, the Greek Governor of Damascus.
Still she continued her onslaught, fighting all day, and venturing so
far in the fray under the walls that, her darts exhausted, she was
captured during a sortie, but subsequently rescued. Again and again she
proved a rallying-point to the besiegers. Such actions were of constant
occurrence, both on the side of the attacking forces and the attacked,
but they caused little surprise,

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

for these bold creatures were "accustomed from their youth to mount the
horse, ply the bow, and launch the javelin." And much the same was said
of the tribes to the north.

Probably the most circumstantial account of the late survivals in the
Caucasian regions is given by Father Angelo Lamberti in his careful
*Relation de la Colchide*, published in 1654, as the result of his long
stay in the country. The good priest declines to discuss the whole
question of an Amazon state or race, but says that when he was in
Mingrelia the king of that country was notified that a large body of
troops had left the Caucasus, and splitting up into three divisions, one
party went into Muscovy, and the other two set about attacking local
tribes. They were beaten off, and among the dead were found a great
number of women, who had taken an active part in the fighting. They were
all in armour, which was beautifully wrought and decorated with a true
feminine love of elegance. This armour comprised helmets, breastplates,
jambieres, cuissards, etc., all constructed of iron plates so skilfully
put together that the wearers retained perfect freedom of movement.
Attached to the breastplates were short skirts of woollen material dyed
a bright red. Their half-boots were ornamented with brass discs strung
on threads of exquisitely plaited goats' hair. The women carried bows
and arrows, the latter having long gilded shafts, the heads being of
iron, not pointed or barbed in the usual style, but in the form of a
sharp cutting edge, like the blade of a knife or a pair of scissors.
Their cutting edge was placed at right angles to the shaft. These must,
therefore, have been only short-flight darts, intended for

 

<span id="img_09200"></span>

[![FRIEZE OF TEMPLE OF APOLLO FROM PHIGALEIA.](tn/09200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09200.jpg)  
FRIEZE OF TEMPLE OF APOLLO FROM PHIGALEIA.  

 

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

use at close quarters, and having a severing or slashing rather than a
piercing action. This form of the arrowhead is so extraordinary that it
is rather suggestive of a modified form of the crescent-headed arrow, so
much heard of in the East as a mystic weapon of great power.

Rama, the demigod-hero of the Ramayana, did wonderful deeds with his
irresistible crescent-shaped arrows. So did Rajah Arjuna, as related to
us in the Maha Bharata. It is true that the latter lost his life through
one of these, but it was the only weapon that caused him harm. It was
shot, too, by his own son, the rajah who dwelt in a magnificent palace
encircled by walls of gold in the city of Manipur, itself walled about
by battlemented ramparts of silver. He was a man who had converse with
diverse dealers in magic, such as the King of Serpents. When he sped the
sacred arrow in anger against his unknown father, it severed Arjuna's
head, which, however, was subsequently reunited to the body, and life
restored, thanks to the jewel borrowed from the King of Serpents. In all
these cases the crescent arrows were sacred weapons. Indeed, this form
of the dart was symbolical, and was used in sacrifices by the large
following of lunar deities in the East. Sin, the second of the great
Babylonian gods, was a moon god, and his terrible daughter, Ishtar, wore
the crescent as her symbol. And, as we know, there were sanctuaries to
moon gods in the fastnesses of the Caucasus, where human sacrifices were
offered even in late days. Thus it looks as though the weapons described
by Father Lamberti were actually survivals in a degraded form. Lamberti
says that various pieces of armour and

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

feminine gear were brought in, but apparently the king's offer of a
handsome reward to any one who would bring him a real live Amazon proved
ineffective. Nevertheless, it is said that the women were constantly at
war with the Kalmuks, who, as we have seen, respected their valour and
called them aëmetzaines.

These rumours continued quite late, and even in the middle of the
nineteenth century we hear of fighting women. A notable instance is that
of a kind of modern Thalestris, a certain Kurdish chieftainess known as
the "Black Virgin," who at the opening of the Crimean War headed a body
of 1000 cavalry, and having paraded before the Sultan's palace at
Constantinople, went off to fight under Omar Pasha against the Russians
on the Danube.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI: Amazons of Europe](ama07)
