[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ama10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

# CHAPTER X

### CONCLUSION

EVEN when divested of adventitious adornments, there remains a
remarkable body of evidence as to the widely prevailing belief in the
existence of countries, districts, or islands populated solely by women.
Such a phenomenon cannot be entirely ignored by the student of human
nature, and is, indeed, worthy of some painstaking inquiry. From the
very outset it is clear that the Greek myth is not sufficient to account
for all the stories, though it is, of course, indisputable that these
legends have largely coloured most of the tales that have reached us.
But that narrow and somewhat egoistic view which sought to trace back
everything to Grecian influence is quite inadequate to explain the
traditions found to exist in every quarter of the globe. We cannot admit
the theory that these legends or customs have been spread by migrations.
Nor can we accept the ideas put forward by Robert Southey, Sir Clement
Markham, and Mr. E. J. Payne to the effect that the hardships imposed on
women in savagedom caused revolts resulting in the formation of feminine
"tribes," living apart, fighting, and only having voluntary intercourse
with men, as an all-embracing explanation. We must seek deeper than such
theories as these will take us.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

It is possible to divide roughly the legends and traditions into three
main classes. We have: (1) Women living apart in colonies, but having
occasional communications with the outside world on a peaceful footing.
(2) Women banded together as a fighting organisation. (3) Nations ruled
over by queens, and mainly, or to a considerable extent, governed by
women. Varied as are the stories which we have reviewed in the foregoing
chapters, it will be seen that they all fall into one or other of these
divisions. Now, if we examine the matter, we shall see that all three
are simple outcomes of different stages in social evolution. Of course,
we find them often profoundly modified by local conditions. They are so
far healthful signs inasmuch as they are different manifestations of
life rather than of stagnation, showing a striving after some form of
ideal, however benighted, amidst the discomforts of periods of
transition. We may see the three stages following each other, by no
means always in the same sequence: a hyper-cultivation of one phase or
another, frequent blendings, and much irregularity of survival. Which is
quite what might be expected if we accustom ourselves to look upon the
phenomena as usually the spontaneous outcome of local needs.

It must be admitted that as society emerges from savagedom into
barbarism on the road towards civilisation, the burthens of the
respective sexes are readjusted, and not without considerable friction
and discomfort. Man ceases to be merely a fighting and hunting animal;
he becomes the larder-filler in a wider sense. Now, this often involved,
and, indeed, does still involve, gathering harvests and collecting foods

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

or food values of one kind or another far from home. Sometimes the whole
tribe will move from winter to summer quarters with this object in view.
We find this typified in its most exaggerated form by the nomadic
communities. But to go no great distance, we find this kind of thing
largely prevailing to this day in Switzerland, in Norway, in certain
parts of Italy and Corsica, chiefly, though not entirely, among
shepherds and cattle-keeping folk. But often enough it is the men alone,
with the growing lads, who go off on active work, leaving the homes to
the safe-keeping of the women, with a sprinkling of old men and small
boys. Corsica offers a curious combination of phenomena bearing on this
point. First, we find that there is a winter migration of the shepherd
people from the interior to the coast villages, and a summer migration
away from the malarious coast to the mountain villages and grassy
slopes, which often leads to a strange numerical inequality of the sexes
in the different villages. Secondly, the island is annually invaded by a
swarm of Italian able-bodied men and youths, chiefly from the districts
surrounding Lucca, who come to till the vineyards and do other heavy
agricultural work which the native Corsican deems beneath his dignity.
Thousands of the Lucchessi come, generally in squads of five, remain for
about three months, and then return to their homes. They invariably
arrive without their womankind, so that their villages practically
become feminine communities during these regularly recurring periods of
absence.

A similar state of affairs is known to have existed among many tribes of
the Caucasus. Quite late in

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

the day Father Lamberti found that the Suani men, a brave, strongly
built mountain tribe, and extremely poor, came down every summer to work
in the plains at the foot of the Caucasus, taking back to their families
in their isolated homes food, copper, and certain other raw materials
for their modest industrial enterprises. Fishing as an industry
frequently leads to the same conditions; indeed, even now during the
herring season temporary feminine communities are formed on the coast of
Scotland by the fish-cleaners, who remain hard at work dealing with the
catches between the visits of the fleets. It is some such natural
explanation that occurs in regard to Marco Polo's story of the Male and
Female isles, thus coinciding also with what. we gather from Lord
Macartney's account of the Zaporavna Cossacks and the Dnieper island. We
can easily understand that such conditions, if accentuated beyond the
ordinary course owing to local exigencies, would give rise to
misapprehension among the ill-informed, or among people of other ways of
living, who are by habit of thought and actual training intolerant of
any divergence from the normal.

Then, again, these conditions, which exist chiefly among communities
living in mountainous districts, forests, and small islands, would lead
to developments in other directions. The women would of necessity
cultivate the arts of governance and of warfare, for obviously the
maleless villages would be more open to attack, and would often call for
not merely bravery on the part of the women, but of cunning in the
method of defence and counter-attack. Something of this conflict of
sentiment and method is revealed to us by

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Quintus Smyrnus in his account of the struggle
between the Greeks and Amazons before Troy. The warrior feeling is
expressed by Hippodamia, who, excited by the brave deeds of Penthesilea
and her companions, calls upon the Trojan maids and matrons--

"Come, friends, let us too in our hearts conceive  
A martial spirit such as now inflames  
Our warriors fighting for their native walls;  
For not in strength are we inferior much  
To men; the same our eyes, our limbs the same;  
One common light we see, one air we breathe;  
Nor different is the food we eat. What then  
Denied to us hath Heaven on man bestowed?  
O let us hasten to the glorious war!"

\[paragraph continues\] But Theano, "for her prudence famed," deprecates
such a move--

"Till the foe hath closely girt our towers  
We shall not need the aid of female hands."

\[paragraph continues\] Which shows how old these ever-new problems are.
Forgotten for a season, they are rediscovered and proclaimed as
startling novelties or divine revelations, only to be inevitably brought
within the compass of reason by the hard logic of facts, and the Theanos
prevails.

No doubt in certain stages of society the whole tribe moves, and the
women, especially if of a hardy mountain or forest stock, would
naturally share all forms of activity with the men within the measure of
their strength, and the more skilful of them would be found in the
fighting ranks with the male warriors. Thus it comes about that
historians and travellers tell us now of unisex organisations, and then
of women in Asia, Europe, Africa, and America--using the bow and arrow,
the sling and the lance, aiding and abetting their husbands and brothers
in martial exploits.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

\[paragraph continues\] As we have in effect already observed, the
*juste milieu* is never a strong point in feminine nature, and so
fighting woman becomes in very deed an "unholy terror," something
particularly abhorrent to those who are fresh from casting off the
fetters of barbarism. The ratio between fighting men and women would
constantly vary under the influence of seasons or tribal evolution, and
so tend to further accentuate error of judgment, giving rise to robust
myths.

Great, too, is the influence of religious ideas. Marco Polo says that
the dwellers in his dual islands observed the ordinances of the Old
Testament. This segregation of women during periods of childbirth may be
traced as having been a matter of common occurrence in all times and
places. We have much evidence of this among the Hebrews and their
neighbours, and also in modern times among races far apart. The Toda
dairy folk of the Nilgeri Hills, whose most strange pre-nuptial custom
is extremely suggestive of ceremonies attending the worship of Astarte
of old and of the Indian goddesses Kali and Durgan to this day, build
special huts for expectant mothers, such huts being placed away from the
villages and all paths used by man and the sacred herds. They may not
join the community again until after having undergone a purificatory
ceremony. So too with the Waiknas of the Mosquito coast, a retreat being
"prepared for them in the depths of the woods, where they are not
allowed to emerge for a stated period--that accomplished, a public
lustration of mother and infant takes place." Where moon-worship
prevails, this custom is apt to be very much exaggerated, the
[segregation](errata.htm#0) going

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

right through the tribe, in obedience to the supposed lunar influence on
physiological conditions. This idea was at the base of the religious
ceremonies in which only one sex could take part, and which we find
among barbarians and even the highly civilised Greeks and Romans, but
which, in the more primitive states, would cause the sexes to divide up
temporarily into unisex tribes. The Amazons of Asia, we are told, were
worshippers of Artemis (Astarte), who had her great mysteries only to be
witnessed by women, as well as ceremonies in which both sexes mingled in
secret and openly.

Fortune of war is another of those important influences which must be
taken into account. With both savage and barbarian the slaying of all
male prisoners is a common practice dictated by policy more than
revenge, and if only the conquest is sufficiently thorough the drastic
measures bring about a peculiar state of affairs. Men and women of the
Carib tribe were found by the early voyagers to use different languages.
The Caribs themselves explained this by saying that they were originally
a mainland nation, and that they had invaded the islands and slain all
the men, and after a time had married the women. This idea of conquest
is also perhaps portrayed in the Maha Bharata by those incidents that we
have described. Even more striking is the incident of the siege of
Damascus, under Khaled, lieutenant of Abu Becker, the first Caliph, when
the Moslem women were surrounded by the enemy and succeeded in beating
them off. It is easy to realise that had their mankind been destroyed
the plucky dames might have succeeded

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

in securing their retreat to the hills, and there formed a "woman's
tribe," which would either have endured for a brief space before melting
into the surrounding population, or under stress have been artificially
kept up for a generation or two. That ring of tent-pole-wielding
Hamzarite women camp-followers affords a perfect example of the
accidental formation of such a tribe in the making, though another turn
in the fortune of war diverted the probable sequence into a happier
channel.

Another phase is more than hinted at in the adventures of the Argonauts
in Lemnos, as given to us by the Rhodian Apollonius. Admitting a certain
amount of tribal pride and organisation among the women, it is
conceivable that the male and female "nations" would be some time before
effecting reconciliation and merging into one tribe. But in such cases,
as in those where, as we may allow did occasionally occur, the women
struggling from savagedom to barbarism went off to form their own camps
or "nations," the final result was inevitable, for, as Mr. Payne says, a
day comes when the women have to surrender on the men's own terms. An
amusing enough illustration of this is taking place in the United
States, where, some thirty years ago, a Mrs. M‘Whirter, of Waco,
announced that she had been inspired by the Almighty, and told to leave
her husband, for it was sinful to live with man. The inspired prophetess
found many willing disciples to adopt her creed, abandoning husbands,
sons, fathers, brothers. So a new Women's Commonwealth sprang into
being; a colony in due course was founded at Belmont, Texas, which was
subsequently

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

removed to Washington State. All went well for many years, then came a
change, the eligible dames and damsels one by one forsaking their
convictions; for, as one of the most recent brides candidly confessed,
though "brought up in the belief that it was a sin to marry," when they
met the "inevitable he" they were "just crazy over him," and thus the
unnatural commonwealth breaks up to-day in America under the influence
of the selfsame forces that acted thousands of years ago in Asia Minor.

As regards the alleged difference of languages used by opposite sexes,
we must not attach too much importance to the matter, either in
connection with the Caribs or any other people, for this state of
affairs is often seen to prevail, mainly, it would almost appear, as an
anti-matriarchal precaution, "superior" man having his own language for
ruling and religious purposes. This is not unknown in the East, and some
traces of it are to be found among the Indians of Peru. The ruling
classes in all quarters of the globe often used a different language to
that of the populace, and not always (as was the case with the Normans
in England) as the result of conquest. The Incas had a language in which
many words were secretly symbolical: thus Cuzco (or more correctly
Cozco) to the ruled was merely the name of the Emperor's capital, but to
the initiated it meant the umbilicus, which, having regard to the
traditions of the race, was peculiarly significant--a device which has
always been of immense service in welding together special castes,
priestly classes, secret societies, and kindred organisations involving
the

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

observance of vows, with accompanying solidarity of interests, duties,
and privileges.

Of the matriarchal stage of civilisation much might be said in this
connection. It undoubtedly played a useful part, and must not be thought
to have necessarily implied inferiority in the position of man. In fact,
it may often be taken as evidencing the peculiarly migratory character
of the male, who could not throw off his wandering habits or needs,
although developing an unconscious desire for acquiring a "local
habitation and a name," if not for himself at least for his offspring,
and thus by the safest way in a most primitive society ensuring
hereditary proprietorship in "chattels," lands, and totems. Dr.
Livingstone found that among the Banyai the wives were the predominant
partners, and the children of the unions belonged to the mothers'
families. It was only by buying the wives (not an easy matter with them)
that the children became the property of the father and his tribal
section. Arrived at a certain stage on the road of evolution, such a
condition, and all that it implied, would become odious to the male
state, though such a feeling need not always be extended to a queen
ruling over men, even of a warlike nation. There have been many strong
women sovereigns, and we may take instances from one of our Amazon
regions: such as the Queen of Sheba, who governed the rich and powerful
country as an autocrat. That this traditional loyalty to a queen
lingered in the locality we know not only from the Portuguese
missionaries of the sixteenth century, but from what happened in the
last century during our own

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Abyssinian Expedition (1866), when the Wallo
Galla country, where Magdala was and Sheba had been, was found to be
ruled over by two rival and warlike queens, each with a long following
of devoted male subjects.

It is not without deep meaning that while the Greeks held their warfare
against the Amazons as among the most noteworthy and honourable of their
feats of arms, the Indians only dreaded the odium of defeat, looking for
no glory as a possible outcome of their fighting the female warriors.
Yet the Greek ideal of womanhood was far inferior to that shown in early
Indian traditions. The truth is, the Amazons symbolised all that was
dangerous to man and State to the Greeks, something to be feared but
fought and conquered; while to the Indians it meant merely a different
phase of society, to be overcome rather by an intellectual revolution
than by force of arms. So while the Greek fought and boasted of his
successes, the Indian swept away the unnatural state by force of
religious argument, and no doubt persecution. The difference shown in
dealing with this troublesome matter (as it was to both) is all the more
remarkable because the great Eastern Epic is not without its tales of
many bloody conquests both in the military and religious fields.

Reviewing the whole subject, it seems clear that it is to religious
influences that we must trace the existence of many, and probably the
most startling, traditions concerning bands of women warriors and women
societies. It reveals one of the most sombre sides of the human
intellect. We have to go to the dark Caucasus to find the origin of the
Greeks' Amazons. Here it was that Prometheus, who had

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

stolen fire from heaven and placed divine truths at the service of
mankind, was fettered to the rocks, exposed to the torture of the eagle
until that bird, the emblem of priestcraft, was slain by Hercules. This
was merely a symbolical presentation of what was actually taking place.
For here too, as Strabo reveals, the Albanians had a sanctuary dedicated
to the moon-god, a temple wherein men were sacrificed by a spear-thrust,
the priests watching the fall and gush of blood for purposes of
divination, after which the body was removed to a stated spot so that
the people might take an active share in the sacrifice by trampling on
the scapegoat and purifying themselves thereby. Farther to the
north-east, at Phanagoria, near the Palus Mæotis, he also tells us, was
a shrine to Venus Apatura, the Deceitful, who, having secured the aid of
Hercules, allured her admirers one by one into a cave, where they were
killed by the sturdy sons of Jupiter and Alcmena.

It is difficult not to see in this a local tradition with a Greek gloss,
for we know how they loved to allegorise facts and to Greecise barbarian
gods. Is not Venus in this instance Astarte? that Ashtoreth whom men
knew as "Queen of the Heavens" and worshipped in such ghastly fashions
as goddess of fertility? And is not Hercules her consort, the great
Baal, giver of life and lord of fire, with his club-like thunderbolt?
The whole story has the appearance of an allegorical description of some
religious mysteries. By one of those peculiar, but easily
understandable, workings of the human mind, worship was mainly
propitiatory, linked up with the idea of sacrifice, which often led to
such terrible conclusions.

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

Two main notions, it should be observed, underlay the theory and
practice of sacrifice: the expiatory act and the propitiatory offering.
In an animistic stage of development, the spirit pervaded everything.
The tree-god was in the tree, the corn-god in the corn, formed part of
it, and so on with the mountain, the glen, the lake, the spring, stream,
and sea. Therefore, when man cut down a tree, bruised and ate corn, slew
the buffalo for food, he was sacrificing the gods and had to offer
thanksgiving, apology, and amends. So the flesh that was fed by the
bruised corn and the slaughtered ox-god had in its turn to be bruised
and slashed, hence the necessity for the ceremonial victim or the
scapegoat. Then, as religion was in a sense exclusive, understood by,
and concerned more directly the god-king or priest-king and the
regal-priestly caste, it was for them to intercede, to offer the
personal sacrifice, and later to seek for the scapegoat. While at first
the god-king was himself sacrificed on the altar to the end that the
people as a whole should thrive, later we find the priest-king
delegating that inconvenient honour. So the king lamenting his sins, and
in the agony of his contrition, caused many of his chosen people to die
under the sacerdotal lash or knife, and thus by vicarious floggings or
spilling of blood made atonement for his shortcoming.

To this day the transition stage is strangely exemplified in Tibet, for
at Lhassa a scapegoat is annually selected from among members of the
lowest caste; he is known as the *logon gyalpo*, or "carrier of one
year's ill-luck." This unhappy wretch is allowed a term of licence,
during which he may go about the town doing practically as he pleases,
but always

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

carrying a yak's tail, which he waves over the heads of people to chase
away evil from them and take their sins on his own head; then, amidst
the ringing of bells, he is driven from the town with kicks and blows,
after which he is allowed a certain time of grace, during which he may
make good his escape; but he is generally so badly used that almost
invariably he is overtaken and killed. What chiefly arrests our
attention is the fact that the doomed man draws lots with one of the
Grand Lhamas as to which of the two shall be the victim. Although, as
far as man's memory runneth, there never was any doubt whatever as to
the ultimate result, the formality of this mock lottery, a simulacrum of
an appeal to a Power ruling the destinies of men, is pregnant with
meaning, taking us back, indeed, to that exclusive form of worship of
which we have written.

As one result of this exclusiveness we frequently find a strange
diversity of interpretation of religious beliefs among the privileged
classes and the masses. Thus we trace the most exalted spirituality
among the ancient Egyptians side by side with seemingly grotesque
materialistic religious observances. Among the black savages and the
copper-coloured barbarians we have evidence of lofty ideals of a Supreme
Creator and of a Heavenly Hereafter, understood but by the elect of the
ruling and priestly castes, while to the people religion is often of the
grossest character. We see this in its most degraded form as recorded by
John Cartwright of the Kurds, who "do adore and worship the devil, to
the end that he may not hurt them or their cattle," or, as Father Bouché
writes of the West African, whose devotion to his fetish (the

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

native *oricha*: "he who sees" or "listens to" prayers) is defended by
the black man on the ground that the Beneficent Creator is very far off,
but the demons too near at home, with power to do harm. Under such
conditions the propitiatory sacrifice is the rule. Either the offended
god has to be appeased, or more often the evil spirit put into a good
temper by an offering. As the tree puts forth branches, the seed begets
the waving corn and its grain crop, so to ensure prosperity--which in
its essential meant multiplication, fertility--life, or its equivalent,
had to be given up. Hence the hanging of victims to trees; the fettering
of them to mountains to be pierced by the darts of the sun and the fire
from the clouds and eaten by those aerial Mercuries, the vultures and
eagles; the casting. of sacrifices into rivers that crop-fattening
floods might follow, or into the sea to the end that fish might be
plentiful and the elements kind; the spilling of human blood in temples;
the anointing of living bodies or sticks or stones; and the mutilations
and [renunciations](errata.htm#1) of various kinds and in differing
degrees.

The Hindu carries this theory of penance so far that the mere repetition
of prayers, ceremonial observances, accompanied by sacrifices, no matter
by whom undertaken or for what purpose, gained an irresistible power for
the persevering ascetic over heaven and earth, gods and demons. Not only
holy men, but gods and, on the other hand, evil necromancers obtained
such dominion by penance. Which unites them on the one side with the
Egyptians and their theory in the efficacy of the sacred books as
talismans and of the use of the mystic "Words of Power," on the other
with the magicians and their "Abracadabra"

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

and formularies. But, if we only go back far enough, we find that these
"Words of Power" of any kind can only be secured by deeds of austerity,
in the form either of personal penance or vicarious atonement, and
propitiatory offerings of sacrifices. Herodotus says that the Egyptians
beat themselves after offering sacrifices to Isis; but Strabo tells us
of far more significant human sacrifice in the Caucasus, and darkly
reveals two other forms at Phanagoria; for we know that both death and
even more terrible kinds of self-sacrifice were offered to Astarte and
to Baal. A point of which we are bound to take note is raised by Mr. J.
G. Frazer, who suggests that Astarte became a moon goddess as the result
of an error, or rather a confusion in art representation. He points out
that in the Semitic language the moon is masculine, and says that it is
through the very early influence of Egyptian art in Assyria that the
moon was associated with the Eastern goddess. Both Isis and Hathor are
sun goddesses, usually depicted as adorned with the sun disc between two
cows' horns placed on their heads. Often the horns are shown alone, and
this may have given rise to the notion that the disc was the full moon
and the horns the crescent moon. So, he holds, Astarte was given the
horns of the crescent moon. While giving this all due weight, we must
not forget that Astarte and her congeners were the consorts of Baal and
his congeners, and regarded as the goddess of the night sky. The
peculiar appearance of the moon in its last phase, with the darkened
disc seemingly resting in the bright crescent cup; its total
disappearance, to be followed by a reappearance of a small curved fillet

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

 

<span id="img_19300"></span>

[![ARMED WOMEN, WITH THE KING AT THEIR HEAD, GOING TO
WAR.](tn/19300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/19300.jpg)  
ARMED WOMEN, WITH THE KING AT THEIR HEAD, GOING TO WAR.  

 

which gradually grew, led to its being regarded as feminine, as abundant
folklore testifies.

The Babylonian trinity consisted of Anu, the Creator; Sin, the sun god;
and Ishtar, the moon goddess, who wore the crescent. As the planet was
credited with influence on fertility generally, we have one reason for
certain specialised sacrificial ceremonies connected with the worship of
that goddess in her many manifestations, from the grim Ishtar to the
more gentle, though often cruel, Venus. Some hint of this we have in
relation to the Amazons of the Caucasus, who, according to Strabo, spent
two months of each spring on a neighbouring mountain which formed the
boundary between their own territory and that of the Gargarenses, who
also ascended the mountain, so that, in obedience to ancient custom,
they might perform common sacrifices. They met "in secret and in
darkness," as might be expected from worshippers of Astarte. Evidence of
other forms of self-sacrifice seem to be referred to in the legends of
the American Amazons, *e.g.* (1) those who, in order to obtain the
fertility talismans, had to wound their own bodies and offer their
blood; (2) the whole Amazon tribe disappearing in a hole in the earth,
led by an armadillo. Again, we have the tale of the infant placed in a
bag and squeezed into a new and beautiful shape. As de Gubernatis has
shown, the sack has two symbolical meanings: it is the night, or the
clouds hiding the sun--therefore death; and it also denotes the act of
devouring, another form of death. But night and death, though a conflict
with the sun and light, are merely means to renewed life. The American
Amazon sacrifices her boy so that he

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

may have a beautiful rebirth, and, as we know, the saintly youth goes
through a second form of sacrifice, being thrown into the lake and
metamorphosed into a fish, that other symbol of life-giving power, and
as such is worshipped by the women and finally again sacrificed. This
sacrifice, it will be remembered, was effected by means of entanglement
in a net woven from the hair of women. Now, in many places the worship
of the moon goddess entailed abandonment of the female body within the
dark temples to all strangers who might come, or in lieu thereof the
milder offering of their tresses.

We are told in the Maha Bharata that Shantanu, descendant of Chandra,
the great moon god of Northern India, married the incarnated Ganges.
This beneficent river goddess had assumed human shape as a penance,
probably in order to obtain greater power, and on her earthly pilgrimage
she had met seven minor gods, who told her a most piteous tale. By an
unlucky chance, these mystic seven had come between a holy hermit and
his sacrifice, and he, being a man with enormous accumulated power as
the result of long-continued acts of austerity, had, with the usual
irascibility of the self-righteous, cursed them with the terrible doom:
"Be born among men." So Ganges, taking pity on them, married Shantanu,
and the seven sons of the royal and divine pair were the seven gods. As
each was born, his earthly destiny having thus been fulfilled, she threw
him into the mighty stream, whence he straightway entered heaven.

Here, it would seem, is a clear allusion to offers of human sacrifices
to the fertilising goddess-river.

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

\[paragraph continues\] It corresponds with what we know of the great
Nile Sed ceremonials of the Egyptian flood time. Greatly modified, we
find it again in the marriage of the Doge of Venice with the Adriatic,
the Doge casting into the waves a symbolical ring that he might gain
dominion over them; and yet again in the blessing of the waters, whether
it be by priests in the Mediterranean or by czars on the Neva; or again
by the offerings freely given by fishermen, which may take the form of
the silver coin placed by Yorkshire boatmen in the corks of their nets,
or the casting of the Adonis gardens into the waves by Sicilians and
others. All these are sacrifices meant to repay the rivers (or the sea)
for their gifts of food and prosperity to the people, sacrifices which
in the case of the Ganges were afterwards softened into the custom of
throwing the dead, or their ashes, into the sacred waters, so that they
might be born again into a higher sphere, and in that of the Nile by the
substitution of flowers for the maidens.

Herodotus has a curious story about the Libyan Auseans, who dwelt on the
shores of Lake Titonis. Their maidens once a year held a feast in honour
of Minerva. This we may take to be Neith or Nit,--that is, Night,--whom
the Egyptians regarded as one of the trio of primitive gods, as the
Mother, Nature, or in some sense the First Principle, and whom they
depicted as a nude black female, arched over, resting on finger-tips and
toes, bespangled with stars to represent the vault of heaven. At these
celebrations it was the custom for the girls "to draw up in two bodies
and to fight with staves and clubs." The loveliest maiden was clad in

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

armour, of Greek design in the days of the chronicler, who wonders, but
cannot guess, what manner of defensive gear they had worn before they
came into contact with the Hellenes. Those of the girls who fell in the
fight were declared to be "false maidens." Herodotus goes on to say that
the Auseans held that Minerva (Neith) was the daughter of Neptune and
Lake Titonis, and was adopted by Jupiter. The whole of this is
suggestive of religious celebrations carrying out the idea of conflict
between two elements or powers, good and evil, with the underlying
notion of the benefits to be derived from sacrifice. The Ausean genesis
of Neith is a tale of opposing influences, some life phenomena observed
as the outcome of the blending of salt and fresh water under the action
of the sun. It was appropriate enough that the ceremonies connected with
the birth of the grim primitive Neith should be an affair of the armed
guard of maidens and associated with strife between light and darkness,
the triumph of the true devotees and the slaying of the false.

In another quarter Father Lamberti records that a tribe in the northern
parts of the Caucasus, living in elevated fortified villages, did not
bury their dead, but placed their bodies in hollow trees, and hung the
deceased's clothing on the branches. Now, both the Asiatic Adonis and
the Egyptian Osiris were originally tree gods, and their bodies were
concealed in trees, so that it came about that human sacrifices were
hung on trees. We find allusion to this custom in the Maha Bharata,
where we are told that the Aswamedha horse led Rajah Arjuna to a land
wherein

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

men and women grew on trees, hanging therefrom, flourishing for a day
and then dying. The same story occurs in connection with the women's
island of El-Wak-Wak, the fruits crying out "Wak-wak" when they were
ripe and then dying. Burton suggests that these trees were the calabash,
"that grotesque growth, a vegetable elephant, whose gourds, something
larger than a man's head, hang by a slender filament." This fruit of the
calabash or baobab, the "monkey bread," contains an acid pulp which
plays no insignificant part in the matter of provisioning; so here, as
with the pine tree of Adonis and the palm of Osiris, and possibly the
oak of the Caucasus, all food trees, we have an explanation of the
arboreal hangings. It is at the base of the whole philosophy of the
widespread worship of the Tree of Life--often the Tree of Death, death
being the preliminary of renewed life.

Something of this necessity for sacrifice we find, too, in connection
with the ancient religious observances of India, as we have been
reminded by our notes on the Arddhanarishwara of the Caves of Elephanta.
Both Shiva and Parvati are mountain-born and associated with human
sacrifice--he actively, she passively. Shiva, "he of whom increase is,"
is the "Lord of the Mountains," whose seat is Mount Kailasa and whose
haunts are the Himalayas, those grim ranges which the ancients regarded
as the easternmost spur of the Caucasus, and which brought forth his
consort, Parvati, "Daughter of the Mountains." He is a modified
reincarnation of the hoary Vedic Rudra, "God of Storms," and although
his emblems are the crescent moon of increase and

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

the trident form of the fertilising thunderbolt, yet he also wears the
deadly cobra and is decked with collars of snakes and human skulls.

Vestiges of human sacrifices are still extant in the seclusion of the
Himalayas and other Indian mountain chains. For instance, among the
Todas of the Nilgiris, where certain sacred herds migrate from one dairy
to another, the Kaltmuk, or boy attendant, or acolyte, is fed with rich
food when he reaches the new dairy (which corresponds to the term of
licence accorded to the Tibetan *logon gyalpo*, and to other graces
extended to scapegoats), and then, being led forth by the
priest-dairyman, is heaped with curses, so that all ill-luck threatening
the cattle, dairy, or priests may be transferred to his shoulders. This
done, with many ceremonial formalities clarified butter is poured on the
boy's head, and he is left alone. The priests return to the dairy: so
does the boy, but at leisure, and he has to pass part of the night
outside the hut, creeping in when all are asleep, and slipping out again
before break of day. No one pays any attention to him until the
morning's work is over, for he is not supposed to exist; then the
priests go through a form of ritual for the removal of the curses from
his head, and so the Kaltmuk is free to return to his duties.

But there can be little doubt that this second ceremonial is an
innovation; originally the boy did not return after the sundown
anointing. In other cases, it is over certain stones away from the
dairies that either butter-milk or clarified butter is poured, and we
may conjecture that these were altars for

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

human sacrifices, as the anointing is never observed when calves or
bullocks are sacrificed either for purposes of augury or as offerings to
the ghosts of the departed. Ghee was commonly poured over sacrificial
victims, and ancient Indian religious books tell us that the vampire
snake-worshipping women and other magicians of the forests anointed
their own bodies with the fat of victims when they began their
incantations. The same thing, we have seen, occurred in the Congo, in
connection with Voodooism, and probably occurred in the Andes. As for
Shiva, while he wields that life symbol the trident, and that other the
cobra, he also grasps the *pasha*, or sacrificial noose, with which
victims were strangled, and of which certain sects made such ghastly
use, approximating to the practices of the Amur Tatars and the women
royal guards of the White Nile.

Of the Amazons' part in such practices as these we have much other
evidence. As we have already remarked, in early stages of civilisation
the king is usually a god-king, and later a priest-king. It was a high
office, but, as we have seen, one often fraught with awful consequences;
for the divine ruler passed to the other world self-immolated, or by the
assistance of his priestly attendants, who often were women. Thus we see
the Behr king on the White Nile surrounded by a female guard, strangled
when on his death-bed. This form of "happy dispatch" for honoured
persons was widely prevalent. It still survives in a degraded form among
the "Fish-Skinned" Tatars of the Amur. These degenerate nomads, who live
on fish and dress in fish skins, habitually strangle their old folk with
certain suggestive

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

ritual. Drums are beaten, and all persons leave the camp except the
victim and two near relatives, who act as executioners, or rather
sacrificers. The grim work is carried out in the tent while the drums
are being beaten outside. That women guards took part in such ceremonial
death-scenes has been shown, and their semi-sacerdotal office is evident
in many ways. Snelgrave reports that in his day the King of Dahomey,
though not secluded, yet kept aloof from his people and even his
courtiers. His chiefs and others during audiences, having prostrated
themselves and kissed the ground, whispered whatever they wished to
reach the royal cars into those of an old woman, who went to the king,
transmitted the message, and then returned with the answer. Which shows
another stage in the intervention of the privileged councillor between
the sacred person and the supplicant. Then, as we know, the petty King
of Abeokuta, also on the west coast of Africa, was guarded by women,
while in the same region the King of Yoruba formerly possessed a female
guard, and the executioner "wives" of the King of Wydah were 5000 in
number.

Turning in another direction, we find the same thing presenting itself
at Pataliputra in the Punjab, and we hear of Indian rajahs going out
hunting surrounded by armed female warriors, corresponding in this
particular with the King of Dahomey and his picked Elephant Huntresses.
In Bantam it appears to have been the custom for the women royal guards
to elect from among their own sons a new king in default of a direct
heir. All this we may compare to Megasthenes' account, who says that the
women

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

guards at Pataliputra were at liberty to kill the king if found drunk,
the executioner marrying the successor.

Throughout all this we may note differences of detail, but the mission
of these women as a buffer class between the claimant to superhuman
attributes and his people is clear enough. How illuminating, therefore,
to find this phenomenon of organising a special guard of women repeating
itself in Eastern China in the fifth and sixth decades of the nineteenth
century, as though spontaneously evolved from the exigencies of the
case. When those misnamed "Princes of Peace," the Tae-pings, inaugurated
a vast religious movement, they declared that they were expecting a
sacred leader. To them appeared that "Celestial Virtue," Tien-wang, and,
claiming both divinity in his own person as second son of God and
dominion over the world as regent of the Celestial King, it seemed to
follow naturally that he should be protected by a bodyguard of women
warriors. And although the religious movement quickly assumed a
political phase, the fanatical aspect only increased as the Celestial
King and his female guard swept through the land, carrying fire and
sword in every direction in the name of peace and goodwill.

It is remarkable that the ancients in writing of the African Amazons,
and American Indian traditions, describe the warrior women as a "white"
race. It has been argued from this that both the African and American
Amazons must have been emigrants from Europe or Asia. But assuming that
there was foundation for the reports, the fact would be capable of quite
another interpretation. It would point, indeed, to an exclusive class.
As Sir Richard

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Burton rightly says, though in a different
connection: "Rank makes some difference in colour; the higher it is the
fairer the skin. . . . Even amongst the negroes of Central Africa we
find the chief lighter-tinted than his subjects." To the black or
copper-coloured a slight lessening in shade means "white." Tradition,
therefore, seems to indicate, at all events in the earlier stages, the
existence of an exclusive caste of warrior women both in Africa and
America, and with some associated idea of self-sacrifice. They were,
like the Lenâpé "Woman" tribe of North America, and the mutilated beings
of Central and South Africa, as well as of Asia Minor in ancient times,
somewhat in the position of scapegoats.

Captain John Adams, writing about the Congo (in 1823), says: "One of the
conditions by which a female is admitted into the order of priesthood is
leading a life of celibacy and renouncing the pleasures of the world."
This renunciation was certainly the prevalent idea as regards the
Dahomeyan Amazons in the early days, and perhaps also, so far as regards
the queen, in the regions of the White Nile. At least one of the
Portuguese missionaries declares that the queen of the Abyssinian
Amazons was looked up to by her neighbours as a goddess, and the same
was said of the mysterious foundress of that equally mysterious second
great will-o'-the-wisp golden city of the continent, Dobayba, about
which Vasca Nuñez de Balboa and his successors on the Isthmus of Darien
heard so much and dared many perils in vain to seek. Certain legends
said that Dobayba was a mighty female who lived at the beginning of
time, mother of the god who created the sun, moon, and

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

all things--in fact, the supreme Nature goddess. Others asserted that
she was a powerful Indian princess who had held sway among the
mountains, built a beautiful city, enriched with gold, and gained
widespread renown for her wisdom and military prowess. After her death
she was regarded as a divinity and worshipped in a golden temple.
Traditions were persistent of a rich concealed temple, where
neighbouring caciques and their subjects made pilgrimage, carrying
offerings of gold and slaves to be sacrificed. Neglect of these rites
brought drought, most dreaded of Nature's punishments. Farther south we
hear much the same tale of the Brazilian warrior women (who were "whiter
than other women") in Nuño de Gusman's letter to the Emperor Charles V.

Nevertheless, the vestal state is by no means essential to the religious
idea. Angelo Mosso, writing of the Minoan age in Crete, finely says:
"Priestesses were mothers and maidens who initiated the Greek race into
the religion of beauty." That, however, was in an advanced stage. Often
the sacerdotal state might, indeed, enjoin abstention from marriage, yet
demand personal sacrifice. This was unquestionably the case with the
followers of Astarte. There appears to be a hint of that state of
affairs in the curious traditions recorded by Strabo which we have
already cited, and again in the legend of the American Amazons, who took
to the hill caves with only one old man, to whom they ministered. The
"marriage" to the King of Dahomey, and at Wydah, would have a ceremonial
import if we regard these monarchs as priest-(descendants of tribal
god-) kings. And in this

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

connection we may take note of Sir Richard Burton's description of the
eighteen Tansi-no, or fetish women, of Dahomey, who had charge of the
king's grave. These women, who were accompanied by a band playing on
horns and rattles (always and everywhere associated with magic and
incantations), were called the "King's Ghosts," and were said to be of
the blood royal. These were the terrestrial counterparts of the
sacrificed female retinue who accompanied the dead king into the grave.
The mere fact that the Dahomeyan dynasty was a modern one does not
invalidate such arguments, for the kings and the people were inheritors
of the immemorial customs. Another interesting point is that these black
Amazons, when they took their walks abroad, were always preceded by a
small girl ringing a bell, so that common mortals should make way for
the privileged women, reminding us irresistibly of the vestal
processions in classic times. Nor must we forget that tradition said the
Amazons from the Thermodon dwelt within the sanctuary at Ephesus.
Pausanias makes distinct mention of this, though he contradicts the
story that the sanctuary had actually been founded by them. Putting
aside all question of Themysciran Amazons, it would seem from this
statement quite clear that some of the priestesses and female attendants
must have had a reputation for more or less martial qualities: they were
at once the ministrants and the guards. That Artemis herself still
retained her Eastern reputation as a warrior appears not improbable when
we consider that at Aulis in Attica there were two statues to her, one
in the guise of a huntress, while in the other she was represented as
grasping

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

two torches, which symbolised not the holding aloft of the pure flame of
the nobler passions (generally represented by a single torch), but the
brandishing of war signals.

Two matters may be touched upon lightly: the association of the Amazons
with sun and moon worship and with cannibalism. Strabo is our authority
for the sanctuary to the moon god in the Caucasus and the shrine to
Venus Apatura, while we know the Greeks all declared the Amazons
worshipped Artemis (Astarte) and carried crescent-shaped shields. In
Africa such records as we have connect the women warriors with the sun
god, as evidenced by their use of snake skins, alligator and tortoise
emblems, and their alliance with Horus; but Ptolemy refers to the Moon
Mountain in Central Africa, apparently in the regions where the
Abyssinian and White Nile Amazons were placed. In America we find the
association with moon-worship both through the legends and the
greenstone fertility amulets. In the mountains of the upper reaches of
the Amazon River, however, we find great peaks crowned by temples
bearing symbols both of the sun and moon, and other mountains called the
Mansion of the Sun, the Seat of the Sun, and so on.

The connection with cannibalism is rather more vague except in so far as
it concerns the Far East. Certain Greek writers say that the Amazons of
the Thermodon drank out of human skulls, and many of the Asiatic legends
refer to the dwellers in female colonies as eaters of men. But this
expression of "eaters of men" may generally be taken as a figure of
speech, on the one hand paying a doubtful tribute

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

to women's wiles, and on the other referring picturesquely to their
fighting powers. An army that carries all before it "eats up" the enemy,
just like a cloud of locusts. In this sense, to "eat up" men is to slay,
to wipe out, although it must be allowed that the figurative may
originally have been truly descriptive. This is undoubtedly the case so
far as Africa is concerned. The usual Greek qualifying epithet applied
to the women was the milder "slayer of men." The Eastern legends--those
related of Ceylon, of the great Indian forests, and of the imaginary
El-Wak-Wak--clearly allude to anthropophagy as a habitual practice of
the women. We have trace of this in at least one of the American tales,
where we are told of a mother placing her sick boy in a bag and crushing
him into a beautiful shape, which is suggestive of something more than
ordinary human sacrifice, for placing in a bag is often a synonym for
"devouring." Cannibalism existed in all this part of the continent, nay,
still persists there, while one tribe possesses the remarkable habit and
secret of removing bones from corpses and then dwarfing and desiccating
them. There are traditions, too, in the Andes of human sacrifices for
the purpose of ceremonial anointings, a practice which must have been in
force prior to the days of the Incas, for we are told that this
mysterious race was opposed to all such customs. It must be remembered
that cannibalism had a religious import, though it may have originated
in various parts of the world from motives of economic pressure. It was
not, however, always a matter of satisfying appetite, the cravings of a
depraved habit, or even an exhibition of revenge;

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

there was the idea that by eating the enemy his strength was
incorporated, and even the dead man's ghost enlisted as a kind of
secondary guardian spirit. For the same reason the skulls of enemies
were kept, and placed high on poles, above huts, and so on, as Herodotus
reports of the savage Tauri, and even fed, as by the "Head-Hunters" of
Borneo, who stuck cheroots between the parched lips to keep these
ghastly guardians in good humour.

As a rule, however, the armed Amazons seemed to be ranged against
cannibalism. In Greek tradition the Amazons not only fought and overcame
the man-eating gryphons, but, according to some, helped Hercules in his
struggles with the Hydra, and farther back assisted Dionysus against the
giants. As to the early African Amazons, we also see them waging war
against the savage black races, who, on the testimony of even late
Arabic authors, we know, "ate men"; and this warfare was carried on,
Pigafetta tells us, by the Congo Amazons and the giant anthropophagists
down to the end of the sixteenth century.

It is curious to find that where rumours of fighting Amazons are most
persistent we have abundant proof of primitive savagery lingering on.
The fabulous Isle of the East, inhabited by women, where human
sacrifices prevailed, was called El-Wak-Wak because "Wak-wak" was the
only word uttered by the ceremonial victims. The Western African women,
in their endeavours to reach Egypt, had to pass through a land peopled
by cannibal tribes bearing the repeat names Nem-Nems, Gnem-Gnems, the
Niam-Niams of to-day, who call their neighbours the

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Akka Tikki-Tikki. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) In the Amazon valley and the Andes such
duplication is common as regards topographical names--for instance, the
Huar-huari and Pina-pina rivers, Lake Titikaka; the mountain Sara-sara;
Chapi-chapi village; and there is also the Inje-inje tribe, who are
extremely retiring forest folk, still in the stone age of development,
and are supposed to use only the one word "inje" doubled, with different
inflexions to express all their wants and feelings, in this resembling
the tree-grown puellæ Wakwakiensis. This repetition in all kinds of ways
is a favourite form of emphasis with primitive people, just as it is
with small children.

In passing, we may note the fact that in the three great centres of
Amazonian traditions--in Asia, Africa, and America--though we have
mention of mountains and forests, the real seats of activity are on
extensive alluvial plains. Such situations have always been cradles of
new nations and of social revolutions, for it is in these rich granaries
that peoples mingle, man multiplies, where interests clash, giving rise
to upheavals and abnormalities, until a new order of affairs has been
evolved.

That there was some justification for the legends there can be no
reasonable doubt. The very diversity met with in regard to them is
strongly in favour of some solid foundation having existed; because, if
we consider them critically, they answer to some need of humanity. If we
take into account the tendency,

 

<span id="img_20800"></span>

[![PUBLIC PROCESSION OF THE KING'S WOMEN, ETC.](tn/20800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/20800.jpg)  
PUBLIC PROCESSION OF THE KING'S WOMEN, ETC.  

 

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

on the one hand, to exaggerate, and on the other the frailty of mankind
in the matter of giving and receiving evidence, we have much still left.
We know that the Greeks loved the declamatory form; the Orientals revel
in the superlative. We have seen the pitfalls that beset the inquiring
explorers in America, and we have a similar note of warning from West
Africa, where Father Bouché says: "Native interpreters aim less at being
very accurate than at not displeasing the white man. They do not fail to
flatter him by giving translations which they know he desires, or rather
which they are aware will fall in with his views."

Even apart from what we may be permitted to call these amenities of the
"traitrous translators'" art mistakes may arise innocently enough from
sheer confusion of tongues, a blundering all too easy in matters both
great and small, as daily experience sufficiently demonstrates. Take as
an instance a little incident that came under the writer's own
observation. A very small boy was in the habit of calling a particularly
favoured lady of his acquaintance his "clean friend," to her immense
delight but to the scandalised bewilderment of the child's parents. Then
it was discovered that the youngster had been translating Italian into
English through the medium of French. "Propria" became "propre," and, of
course, "propre" meant "clean," therefore "il mia propria amica" ("mine
own particular friend") became his "clean friend." Assuredly perfectly
logical, and not without a certain poetical symbolism of speech all the
more pleasing for its very spontaneous unconscious cerebration, yet
which,

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

under different circumstances, might have proved grotesquely misleading.
We are all--savages, barbarians, and civilised--little children in this
transmutation of thought into concrete phrase, with the help of all too
unstable words and the evasive flux of grammatical rules. Yet admitting
all this, and allowing it to have due weight in its application to our
particular study, we may conclude that the legends should be credited to
a large extent.

Let us clearly bear in mind our original three divisions of the subject.
Of the third we need say little, for the matriarchal stage of
civilisation has to be accepted in many quarters; and of great and
little nations governed by women who not seldom were great fighters
before the Lord, history repeatedly attests. We will only allude to this
as a possible source of confusion, the outstanding deeds of a queen and
her women captains being tacked on to or mixed up with the traditions of
some more or less transitory women's camp. Into this category the Damute
Amazons evidently, and the Bohemian Valasca probably, fall.

We have, then, the two first divisions. That, through the exigencies of
social organisation, women and young children had, and still have in a
minor degree, to live alone periodically and for many months on end, is
proved by actual experience. Local conditions may have occasionally
emphasised this peculiarity, which would easily be evolved into a theory
of an autonomous female community. It may be conceded that these
conditions, combined with a rebellion against male tyranny under the
stress of struggling from savagedom to higher

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

things, may frequently have led to revolts and temporary pacts among
women, who lived apart and only admitted men as an act of toleration or
policy. Such "nations" and "tribes" were probably enough also brought
about as the result of conquest, the conquerors having slain all males,
and, for a time, which would vary according to local social progress and
especially topographical peculiarities, failed to subdue the females.
Where there were mountains difficult of access, or dense forests,
probably with swamp-isolated islands, no doubt the women with their
children would preserve their savage aloofness all the longer, and
would, having almost certainly a previous acquaintance with warfare, be
able to give a very good account. of themselves as warriors, whether
acting purely on the defensive or actively retaliating on the enemy.
Under these circumstances, communication between the sexes would arise
only gradually, and be of a spasmodic, even of a clandestine nature,
until the inevitable day came when the women surrendered to the men on
the latter's own terms; for such is the predestined fate of all such
"commonwealths," ancient or modern. But, given a mountainous country, or
a district covered by primeval forest, and obstinate resistance, the
women tribe would soon be regarded as something outside of nature,
either to be cursed or fought, and almost certainly to be looked upon
with a mixture of dread and veneration.

This brings us to the fighting organisation. Now, both the temporary
colonies of women evolved by natural everyday causes, and those feminine

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

camps brought about by an abnormal concatenation of circumstances, would
obviously have to organise for defence in savage and barbaric stages of
evolution; and where the women had been accustomed to aid and abet their
men in warfare, which is generally the case among nomadic tribes and
mountaineers or forest dwellers, this organisation might be carried very
far indeed. There were, then, we may conclude, women banded together to
defend their homes, and others who joined the ranks, or even led men in
warfare. But the fighting organisations as such were not the outcome of
unisex "nations," they belong to the domain of religion. The god-king
would have his armed guard, and these, we have seen, were often armed
women, either because of the form of the worship or because of their
fierceness, and such guards were, at all events in the earlier periods,
a sacrificial body; and then the priest-king would strengthen his
guards, converting them from his jailers, or perhaps more correctly from
those who assisted him in his personal self-immolation, into ministrants
of his own personal cult and policy, as exemplified by the King of Wydah
and his thousands of "wives" who executed the royal sentences. When such
guards grew numerous, it must often have become a matter of convenience
and expediency to assign them special quarters, or even provinces, thus
forming the nations, as we are told was the case in the Congo, and seems
probable in connection with some of the sanctuaries in the Caucasus and
Asia Minor. In such cases the women warriors would naturally come in
time to form castes--or perhaps we had better say a privileged

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

circle within the nation--and not a "nation" by themselves. They formed
part of the social economy, and were not outside of it, though they
might appear to be so when coming into contact with other races. And so
we shall conclude by rejecting the idea of a long-sustained women's
state, or even tribe (allowing for the exception of a transitory
accident), while accepting the "women's islands" in a modified form, and
the fighting Amazons as religious, or regal-religious, bodies.

Even thus stripped of much of the marvellous, the problem is intensely
interesting. While teaching us the fundamental unity of nature,
manifested not less in the tendency to fall into error and distort
half-truths until they degenerate so far as to seemingly sanction
ghastly practices, than in its aspirations to higher things, it happily
points to the immense strides accomplished in the march of progress.
Onrushing waves necessarily involve the disconcerting phenomena of
reflux eddies, which seem to tell of the elusive nature of hope, so that
we are often cast down as we reflect on present conditions and contrast
them with the near past, mellowed as such views are into a haunting
beauty by the glamour of blurring sentiment. Nevertheless, if our
retrospective glance is sufficiently comprehensive, the evidence of
secured progress is unmistakable, and so we are heartened to look
forward to a bright future that assuredly will not be ours, but to which
humanity is heir, and whose advent we may all in some measure contribute
to hasten.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[208:1](ama11.htm#fr_6) According to Arab
traditions, Gian ben Gian was the gigantic king of the jinns, founder of
the pyramids, who, having rebelled against God, was defeated by Lucifer
before his fall. The jinns then became mischievous spirits of the dark
and of lonely places.
