[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I. Prolegomena and General Introduction to the Book on Painting
Index](dvs000)  
  [Previous](0009)  [Next](0011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 10.

### INTRODUCTION.

I know that many will call this useless work  <span
id="fr_9"></span>[7](#fn_9) ; and they will be those of whom Demetrius
 <span id="fr_10"></span>[8](#fn_10) declared that he took no more

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

account of the wind that came out their mouth in words, than of that
they expelled from their lower parts: men who desire nothing but
material riches and are absolutely devoid of that of wisdom, which is
the food and the only true riches of the mind. For so much more worthy
as the soul is than the body, so much more noble are the possessions of
the soul than those of the body. And often, when I see one of these men
take this work in his hand, I wonder that he does not put it to his
nose, like a monkey, or ask me if it is something good to eat.

 <span id="fr_11"></span>[9](#fn_11)

### INTRODUCTION.

I am fully concious that, not being a literary man, certain presumptuous
persons will think that they may reasonably blame me; alleging that I am
not a man of letters. Foolish folks! do they not know that I might
retort as Marius did to the Roman Patricians  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[10](#fn_12) by saying: That they, who deck themselves
out in the labours of others will not allow me my own. They will say
that I, having no literary skill, cannot properly express that which I
desire to treat of  <span id="fr_13"></span>[11](#fn_13) ; but they do
not know that my subjects are to be dealt with by experience rather than
by words  <span id="fr_14"></span>[12](#fn_14) ; and \[experience\] has
been the mistress of those who wrote well. And so, as mistress, I will
cite her in all cases.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[13:7](0010.htm#fr_9) : 3. questa essere opera
inutile. By opera we must here understand libro di pittura and
particularly the treatise on Perspective.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[13:8](0010.htm#fr_10) : 4. Demetrio. "With
regard to the passage attributed to Demetrius", Dr. H. MÜLLER STRÜBING
writes, "I know not what to make of it. It is certainly not Demetrius
Phalereus that is meant and it can hardly be Demetrius Poliorcetes. Who
then can it be--for the name is a very common one? It may be a clerical
error for Demades and the maxim is quite in the spirit of his writings I
have not however been able to find any corresponding passage either in
the 'Fragments' (C. MULLER, *Orat. Att.*, II. 441) nor in the
Supplements collected by DIETZ (*Rhein. Mus.*, vol. 29, p. 108)."

The same passage occurs as a simple Memorandum in the MS. Tr. 57,
apparently as a note for this '*Proemio*' thus affording some data as to
the time where these introductions were written.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[14:9](0010.htm#fr_11) : In the original, the
Proemio dì prospettiva cioè dell'uffitio dell'occhio (see No. 21) stands
between this and the preceding one, No. 9.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[14:10](0010.htm#fr_12) 21: *Come Mario disse ai
patriti Romani*. "I am unable to find the words here attributed by
Leonardo to Marius, either in Plutarch's Life of Marius or in the
Apophthegmata (*Moralia*, p.202). Nor do they occur in the writings of
Valerius Maximus (who frequently mentions Marius) nor in Velleius
Paterculus (II, 11 to 43), Dio Cassius, Aulus Gellius, or Macrobius.
Professor E. MENDELSON of Dorpat, the editor of Herodian, assures me
that no such passage is the found in that author" (communication from
Dr. MULLER STRUBING). Leonardo evidently meant to allude to some well
known incident in Roman history and the mention of Marius is the result
probably of some confusion. We may perhaps read, for Marius, Menenius
Agrippa, though in that case it is true we must alter Patriti to Plebei.
The change is a serious one. but it would render the passage perfectly
clear.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14:11](0010.htm#fr_13) 26: *le mie cose ....
che d'altra parola*. This can hardly be reconciled with Mons.
RAVAISSON'S estimate of L. da Vinci's learning. "*Leonard de Vinci etait
un admirateur et un disciple des anciens, aussi bien dans l'art que dans
la science et il tenait a passer pour tel meme aux yeux de la
posterite.*" *Gaz. des Beaux arts*. Oct. 1877.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[14:12](0010.htm#fr_14) 28: See Footnote 26

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11.](0011)
