[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[I. Prolegomena and General Introduction to the Book on Painting
Index](dvs000)  
  [Previous](0012)  [Next](0014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 13.

Among all the studies of natural causes and reasons Light chiefly
delights the beholder; and among the great features of Mathematics

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

the certainty of its demonstrations is what preeminently (tends to)
elevate the mind of the investigator. Perspective, therefore, must be
preferred to all the discourses and systems of human learning. In this
branch \[of science\] the beam of light is explained on those methods of
demonstration which form the glory not so much of Mathematics as of
Physics and are graced with the flowers of both  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[13](#fn_15) . But its axioms being laid down at great
length, I shall abridge them to a conclusive brevity, arranging them on
the method both of their natural order and of mathematical
demonstration; sometimes by deduction of the effects from the causes,
and sometimes arguing the causes from the effects; adding also to my own
conclusions some which, though not included in them, may nevertheless be
inferred from them. Thus, if the Lord--who is the light of all
things--vouchsafe to enlighten me, I will treat of Light; wherefore I
will divide the present work into 3 Parts  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[14](#fn_16) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16:13](0013.htm#fr_15) : 5. Such of Leonardo's
notes on Optics or on Perspective as bear exclusively on Mathematics or
Physics could not be included in the arrangement of the *libro di
pittura* which is here presented to the reader. They are however but
few.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[16:14](0013.htm#fr_16) : 10. In the middle
ages--for instance, by ROGER BACON, by VITELLONE, with whose works
Leonardo was certainly familiar, and by all the writers of the
Renaissance Perspective and Optics were not regarded as distinct
sciences. Perspective, indeed, is in its widest application the science
of seeing. Although to Leonardo the two sciences were clearly separate,
it is not so as to their names; thus we find axioms in Optics under the
heading Perspective. According to this arrangement of the materials for
the theoretical portion of the *libro di pittura* propositions in
Perspective and in Optics stand side by side or occur alternately.
Although this particular chapter deals only with Optics, it is not
improbable that the words *partirò la presente opera in 3 parti* may
refer to the same division into three sections which is spoken of in
chapters 14 to 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 14.](0014)
