[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[III. Six Books on Light and Shade Index](dvs002)  
  [Previous](0148)  [Next](0150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 149.

The light which falls on a shaded body at the acutest angle receives the
highest light, and the darkest portion is that which receives it at an
obtuse angle and both the light and the shadow form pyramids. The angle
*c* receives the highest grade of light because it is directly in

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

front of the window *a b* and the whole horizon of the sky *m x*. The
angle *a* differs but little from *c* because the angles which divide it
are not so unequal as those below, and only that portion of the horizon
is intercepted which lies between *y* and *x*. Although it gains as much
on the other side its line is nevertheless not very strong because one
angle is smaller than its fellow. The angles *e i* will have less light
because they do not see much of the light *m s* and the light *v x* and
their angles are very unequal. Yhe angle *k* and the angle *f* are each
placed between very unequal angles and therefore have but little light,
because at *k* it has only the light *p t*, and at *f* only *t q*; *o g*
is the lowest grade of light because this part has no light at all from
the sky; and thence come the lines which will reconstruct a pyramid that
is the counterpart of the pyramid *c*; and this pyramid *l* is in the
first grade of shadow; for this too is placed between equal angles
directly opposite to each other on either side of a straight line which
passes through the centre of the body and goes to the centre of the
light. The several luminous images cast within the frame of the window
at the points *a* and *b* make a light which surrounds the derived
shadow cast by the solid body at the points 4 and 6. The shaded images
increase from *o g* and end at 7 and 8.

 <span id="fr_69"></span>[67](#fn_69)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[88:67](0149.htm#fr_69) : The diagram belonging
to this chapter is No. 2 on Plate . In the original it is placed between
lines 3 and 4, and in the reproduction these are shown in part. The semi
circle above is marked *orizonte* (horizon). The number 6 at the left
hand side, outside the facsimile, is in the place of a figure which has
become indistinct in the original.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 150.](0150)
