[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[VII. On the Proportions and on the Movements of the Human Figure
Index](dvs007)  
  [Previous](0366)  [Next](0368) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 367.

### OF THE AGREEMENT OF THE PROPORTION OF THE LIMBS.

And again, remember to be very careful in giving your figures limbs,
that they must appear to agree with the size of the body and likewise to
the age. Thus a youth has limbs that are not very muscular not strongly
veined, and the surface is delicate and round, and tender in colour. In
man the limbs are sinewy and muscular, while in old men the surface is
wrinkled, rugged and knotty, and the sinews very prominent.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### HOW YOUNG BOYS HAVE THEIR JOINTS JUST THE REVERSE OF THOSE OF MEN,

### AS TO SIZE.

Little children have all the joints slender and the portions between
them are thick; and this happens because nothing but the skin covers the
joints without any other flesh and has the character of sinew,
connecting the bones like a ligature. And the fat fleshiness is laid on
between one joint and the next, and between the skin and the bones. But,
since the bones are thicker at the joints than between them, as a mass
grows up the flesh ceases to have that superfluity which it had, between
the skin and the bones; whence the skin clings more closely to the bone
and the limbs grow more slender. But since there is nothing over the
joints but the cartilaginous and sinewy skin this cannot dry up, and,
not drying up, cannot shrink. Thus, and for this reason, children are
slender at the joints and fat between the joints; as may be seen in the
joints of the fingers, arms, and shoulders, which are slender and
dimpled, while in man on the contrary all the joints of the fingers,
arms, and legs are thick; and wherever children have hollows men have
prominences.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 368.](0368)
