[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[VIII. Botany for Painters and Elements of Landscape Painting
Index](dvs009)  
  [Previous](0452)  [Next](0454) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 453.

All trees seen against the sun are dark towards the middle and this
shadow will be of the shape of the tree when apart from others.

The shadows cast by trees on which the sun shines are as dark as those
of the middle of the tree.

The shadow cast by a tree is never less than the mass of the tree but
becomes taller in proportion as the spot on which it falls, slopes
towards the centre of the world.

The shadow will be densest in the middle of the tree when the tree has
the fewest branches.

 <span id="fr_225"></span>[223](#fn_225)

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

Every branch participates of the central shadow of every other branch
and consequently \[of that\] of the whole tree.

The form of any shadow from a branch or tree is circumscribed by the
light which falls from the side whence the light comes; and this
illumination gives the shape of the shadow, and this may be of the
distance of a mile from the side where the sun is.

<span class="margnote"> Light and shade on groups of trees
(453-457).</span>If it happens that a cloud should anywhere overshadow
some part of a hill the \[shadow of the\] trees there will change less
than in the plains; for these trees on the hills have their branches
thicker, because they grow less high each year than in the plains.
Therefore as these branches are dark by nature and being so full of
shade, the shadow of the clouds cannot darken them any more; but the
open spaces between the trees, which have no strong shadow change very
much in tone and particularly those which vary from green; that is
ploughed lands or fallen mountains or barren lands or rocks. Where the
trees are against the atmosphere they appear all the same colour--if
indeed they are not very close together or very thickly covered with
leaves like the fir and similar trees. When you see the trees from the
side from which the sun lights them, you will see them almost all of the
same tone, and the shadows in them will be hidden by the leaves in the
light, which come between your eye and those shadows.

### TREES AT A SHORT DISTANCE.

 <span id="fr_226"></span>[224](#fn_226) When the trees are situated
between the sun and the eye, beyond the shadow which spreads from their
centre, the green of their leaves will be seen transparent; but this
transparency will be broken in many places by the leaves and boughs in
shadow which will come between you and them, or, in their upper
portions, they will be accompanied by many lights reflected from the
leaves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_225"></span>[227:223](0453.htm#fr_225) : The three diagrams
which accompany this text are placed, in the original, before lines
7-11. At the spots marked *B* Leonardo wrote *Albero* (tree). At *A* is
the word *Sole* (sun), at *C Monte* (mountain) at *D piano* (plain) and
at *E cima* (summit).

<span id="fn_226"></span>[228:224](0453.htm#fr_226) 29: The heading
*alberi vicini* (trees at a short distance) is in the original
manuscript written in the margin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 454.](0454)
