[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0522)  [Next](0524) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 523.

### OF A MODE OF DRAWING A PLACE ACCURATELY.

Have a piece of glass as large as a half sheet of royal folio paper and
set thus firmly in front of your eyes that is, between your eye and the
thing you want to draw; then place yourself at a distance of 2/3 of a
braccia from the glass fixing your head with a machine in such a way
that you cannot move it at all. Then shut or entirely cover one eye and
with a brush or red chalk draw upon the glass that which you see beyond
it; then trace it on paper from the glass, afterwards transfer it onto
good paper, and paint it if you like, carefully attending to the arial
perspective.

### HOW TO LEARN TO PLACE YOUR FIGURES CORRECTLY.

If you want to acquire a practice of good and correct attitudes for your
figures, make a square frame or net, and square it out

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

with thread; place this between your eye and the nude model you are
drawing, and draw these same squares on the paper on which you mean to
draw the figure, but very delicately. Then place a pellet of wax on a
spot of the net which will serve as a fixed point, which, whenever you
look at your model, must cover the pit of the throat; or, if his back is
turned, it may cover one of the vertebrae of the neck. Thus these
threads will guide you as to each part of the body which, in any given
attitude will be found below the pit of the throat, or the angles of the
shoulders, or the nipples, or hips and other parts of the body; and the
transverse lines of the net will show you how much the figure is higher
over the leg on which it is posed than over the other, and the same with
the hips, and the knees and the feet. But always fix the net
perpendicularly so that all the divisions that you see the model divided
into by the net work correspond with your drawing of the model on the
net work you have sketched. The squares you draw may be as much smaller
than those of the net as you wish that your figure should be smaller
than nature. Afterwards remember when drawing figures, to use the rule
of the corresponding proportions of the limbs as you have learnt it from
the frame and net. This should be 3 braccia and a half high and 3
braccia wide; 7 braccia distant from you and 1 braccio from the model.

 <span id="fr_250"></span>[248](#fn_250)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_250"></span>[261:248](0523.htm#fr_250) : Leonardo is
commonly credited with the invention of the arrangement of a plate of
glass commonly known as the "vertical plane." Professor E. VON BRUCKE in
his *"Bruchstucke aus der Theorie der bildenden Kunste,"* Leipzig 1877,
pg. 3, writes on this contrivance. *"Unsere Glastafel ist die sogenannte
Glastafel des Leonardo da Vinci, die in Gestalt einer Glastafel
vorgestellte Bildflache."*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 524.](0524)
