[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0529)  [Next](0531) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 530.

### OF JUDGING YOUR OWN PICTURES.

We know very well that errors are better recognised in the works of
others than in our own; and that often, while reproving little faults in
others, you may ignore great ones in yourself. To avoid such ignorance,
in the first place make yourself a master of perspective, then acquire
perfect knowledge of the proportions of men and other animals, and also,
study good architecture, that is so far as concerns the forms of
buildings and other objects which are on the face of the earth; these
forms are infinite, and the better you know them the more admirable will
your work be. And in cases where you lack experience do not shrink from
drawing them from nature. But, to carry out my promise above \[in the
title\]--I say that when you paint you should have a flat mirror and
often look at your work as reflected in it, when you will see it
reversed, and it will appear to you like some other painter's work, so
you will be better able to judge of its faults than in any other way.
Again, it is well that you should often leave off work and take a little
relaxation, because, when you come back to it you are a better judge;
for sitting too close at work may greatly deceive you. Again, it is good
to retire to a distance because the work looks smaller and your eye
takes in more of it at a glance and sees more easily the discords or
disproportion in the limbs and colours of the objects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 531.](0531)
