[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0654)  [Next](0656) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 655.

### THAT SCULPTURE IS LESS INTELLECTUAL THAN PAINTING, AND LACKS MANY CHARACTERISTICS OF NATURE.

<span class="margnote"> Painting is superior to sculpture (655.
656).</span>I myself, having exercised myself no less in sculpture than
in painting and doing both one and the other in the same degree, it
seems to me that I can, without invidiousness, pronounce an opinion as
to which of the two is of the greatest merit and difficulty and
perfection. In the first place sculpture requires a certain light, that
is from above, a picture carries everywhere with it its own light and
shade. Thus sculpture owes its importance to light and shade, and the
sculptor is aided in this by the nature, of the relief which is inherent
in it, while the painter whose art expresses the accidental aspects of
nature, places his effects in the spots where nature must necessarily
produce them. The sculptor cannot diversify his work by the various
natural colours of objects; painting is not defective in any particular.
The sculptor when he uses perspective cannot make it in any way appear
true; that of the painter can appear like a hundred miles beyond the
picture itself. Their works have no aerial perspective whatever, they
cannot represent transparent bodies, they cannot represent luminous
bodies, nor reflected lights, nor lustrous bodies--as mirrors and the
like polished surfaces, nor mists, nor dark skies, nor an infinite
number of things which need not be told for fear of tedium. As regards
the power of resisting time, though they have this resistance  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[297](#fn_299) , a picture painted on thick copper
covered with white enamel on which it is painted with enamel colours and
then put into the fire again and baked, far exceeds sculpture in
permanence. It may be

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

said that if a mistake is made it is not easy to remedy it; it is but a
poor argument to try to prove that a work be the nobler because
oversights are irremediable; I should rather say that it will be more
difficult to improve the mind of the master who makes such mistakes than
to repair the work he has spoilt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[329:297](0655.htm#fr_299) 19: From what is
here said as to painting on copper it is very evident that Leonardo was
not acquainted with the method of painting in oil on thin copper plates,
introduced by the Flemish painters of the XVIIth century. J. LERMOLIEFF
has already pointed out that in the various collections containing
pictures by the great masters of the Italian Renaissance, those painted
on copper (for instance the famous reading Magdalen in the Dresden
Gallery) are the works of a much later date (see *Zeitschrift fur
bildende Kunst*. Vol. X pg. 333, and: *Werke italienischer Master in den
Galerien von Munchen, Dresden und Berlin*. Leipzig 1880, pg. 158 and
159.)--Compare No. 654, 29.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 656.](0656)
