[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0659)  [Next](0661) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 660.

### THAT PAINTING DECLINES AND DETERIORATES FROM AGE TO AGE, WHEN PAINTERS HAVE NO OTHER STANDARD THAN PAINTING ALREADY DONE.

<span class="margnote"> On the history of painting (660.
661).</span>Hence the painter will produce pictures of small merit if he
takes for his standard the pictures of others. But if he will study from
natural objects he will bear good fruit; as was seen in the painters
after the Romans who always imitated each other and so their art
constantly declined from age to age. After

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

these came Giotto the Florentine who--not content with imitating the
works of Cimabue his master--being born in the mountains and in a
solitude inhabited only by goats and such beasts, and being guided by
nature to his art, began by drawing on the rocks the movements of the
goats of which he was keeper. And thus he began to draw all the animals
which were to be found in the country, and in such wise that after much
study he excelled not only all the masters of his time but all those of
many bygone ages. Afterwards this art declined again, because everyone
imitated the pictures that were already done; thus it went on from
century to century until Tomaso, of Florence, nicknamed Masaccio, showed
by his perfect works how those who take for their standard any one but
nature--the mistress of all masters--weary themselves in vain. And, I
would say about these mathematical studies that those who only study the
authorities and not the works of nature are descendants but not sons of
nature the mistress of all good authors. Oh! how great is the folly of
those who blame those who learn from nature  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[298](#fn_300) , setting aside those authorities who
themselves were the disciples of nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[332:298](0660.htm#fr_300) 22: *lasciando stare
li autori*. In this observation we may detect an indirect evidence that
Leonardo regarded his knowledge of natural history as derived from his
own investigations, as well as his theories of perspective and optics.
Compare what he says in praise of experience (Vol II; *XIX*).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 661.](0661)
