[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XII. Architectural Designs Index](dvs014)  
  [Previous](0750)  [Next](0752) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 751.

The pavilion in the garden of the Duchess of Milan.

The plan of the pavilion which is in the middle of the labyrinth of the
Duke of Milan.

 <span id="fr_28"></span>[362](#fn_28)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_28"></span>[34:362](0751.htm#fr_28) : This passage was
first published by AMORETTI in *Memorie Storiche* Cap. X: Una sua opera
da riportarsi a quest' anno fu il bagno fatto per la duchessa Beatrice
nel parco o giardino del Castello. Lionardo non solo ne disegno il
piccolo edifizio a foggia di padiglione, nel cod. segnato Q. 3, dandone
anche separatamente la pianta; ma sotto vi scrisse: Padiglione del
giardino della duchessa; e sotto la pianta: Fondamento del padiglione
ch'e nel mezzo del labirinto del duca di Milano; nessuna data e presso
il padiglione, disegnato nella pagina 12, ma poco sopra fra molti
circoli intrecciati vedesi = 10 Luglio 1492 = e nella pagina 2 presso ad
alcuni disegni di legumi qualcheduno ha letto Settembre 1482 in vece di
1492, come dovea scriverevi, e probabilmente scrisse Lionardo.

The original text however hardly bears the interpretation put upon it by
AMORETTI. He is mistaken as to the mark on the MS. as well as in his
statements as to the date, for the MS. in question has no date; the date
he gives occurs, on the contrary, in another note-book. Finally, it
appears to me quite an open question whether Leonardo was the architect
who carried out the construction of the dome-like Pavilion here shown in
section, or of the ground plan of the Pavilion drawn by the side of it.
Must we, in fact, suppose that "*il duca di Milano*" here mentioned was,
as has been generally assumed, Ludovico il Moro? He did not hold this
title from the Emperor before 1494; till that date he was only called
*Governatore* and Leonardo in speaking of him, mentions him generally as
"*il Moro*" even after 1494. On January 18, 1491, he married Beatrice
d'Este the daughter of Ercole I, Duke of Ferrara. She died on the 2nd
January 1497, and for the reasons I have given it seems improbable that
it should be this princess who is here spoken of as the "*Duchessa di
Milano*". From the style of the handwriting it appears to me to be
beyond all doubt that the MS. B, from which this passage is taken, is
older than the dated MSS. of 1492 and 1493. In that case the Duke of
Milan here mentioned would be Gian Galeazzo (1469-1494) and the Duchess
would be his wife Isabella of Aragon, to whom he was married on the
second February 1489. J. P. R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 752.](0752)
