[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XII. Architectural Designs Index](dvs014)  
  [Previous](dv20065)  [Next](dv20067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 759.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### *G. Description of an unknown Temple.*

Twelve flights of steps led up to the great temple, which was eight
hundred braccia in circumference and built on an octagonal plan. At the
eight corners were eight large plinths, one braccia and a half high, and
three wide, and six long at the bottom, with an angle in the middle; on
these were eight great pillars, standing on the plinths as a foundation,
and twenty four braccia high. And on the top of these were eight
capitals three braccia long and six wide, above which were the
architrave frieze and cornice, four braccia and a half high, and this
was carried on in a straight line from one pillar to the next and so,
continuing for eight hundred braccia, surrounded the whole temple, from
pillar to pillar. To support this entablature there were ten large
columns of the same height as the pillars, three braccia thick above
their bases which were one braccia and a half high.

The ascent to this temple was by twelve flights of steps, and the temple
was on the twelfth, of an octagonal form, and at each angle rose a large
pillar; and between the pillars were placed ten columns of the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

same height as the pillars, rising at once from the pavement to a height
of twenty eight braccia and a half; and at this height the architrave,
frieze and cornice were placed which surrounded the temple having a
length of eight hundred braccia. At the same height, and within the
temple at the same level, and all round the centre of the temple at a
distance of 24 braccia farther in, are pillars corresponding to the
eight pillars in the angles, and columns corresponding to those placed
in the outer spaces. These rise to the same height as the former ones,
and over these the continuous architrave returns towards the outer row
of pillars and columns.

 <span id="fr_53"></span>[387](#fn_53)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_53"></span>[65:387](0759.htm#fr_53) : Either this
description is incomplete, or, as seems to me highly probable, it refers
to some ruin. The enormous dimensions forbid our supposing this to be
any temple in Italy or Greece. Syria was the native land of colossal
octagonal buildings, in the early centuries A. D. The Temple of Baalbek,
and others are even larger than that here described. J. P. R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Palace Architecture.](dv20067)
