[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIV. Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology Index](dvs016)  
  [Previous](dv20107)  [Next](0797) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 796.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### I.

### ANATOMY.

### A general introduction

I wish to work miracles;--it may be that I shall possess less than other
men of more peaceful lives, or than those who want to grow rich in a
day. I may live for a long time in great poverty, as always happens, and
to all eternity will happen, to alchemists, the would-be creators of
gold and silver, and to engineers who would have dead water stir itself
into life and perpetual motion, and to those supreme fools, the
necromancer and the enchanter.

 <span id="fr_79"></span>[413](#fn_79)

And you, who say that it would be better to watch an anatomist at work
than to see these drawings, you would be right, if it were possible to
observe all the things which are demonstrated in such drawings in a
single figure, in which you, with all your cleverness, will not see nor
obtain knowledge of more than some few veins, to obtain a true and
perfect knowledge of which I have dissected more than ten human bodies,
destroying

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

all the other members, and removing the very minutest particles of the
flesh by which these veins are surrounded, without causing them to
bleed, excepting the insensible bleeding of the capillary veins; and as
one single body would not last so long, since it was necessary to
proceed with several bodies by degrees, until I came to an end and had a
complete knowledge; this I repeated twice, to learn the differences
\[59\].

 <span id="fr_80"></span>[414](#fn_80)

And if you should have a love for such things you might be prevented by
loathing, and if that did not prevent you, you might be deterred by the
fear of living in the night hours in the company of those corpses,
quartered and flayed and horrible to see. And if this did not prevent
you, perhaps you might not be able to draw so well as is necessary for
such a demonstration; or, if you had the skill in drawing, it might not
be combined with knowledge of perspective; and if it were so, you might
not understand the methods of geometrical demonstration and the method
of the calculation of forces and of the strength of the muscles;
patience also may be wanting, so that you lack perseverance. As to
whether all these things were found in me or not  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[415](#fn_81) , the hundred and twenty books composed
by me will give verdict Yes or No. In these I have been hindered neither
by avarice nor negligence, but simply by want of time. Farewell \[89\].

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_79"></span>[107:413](0796.htm#fr_79) 23: The following
seems to be directed against students of painting and young artists
rather than against medical men and anatomists.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[108:414](0796.htm#fr_80) : Lines 1-59 and 60-89
are written in two parallel columns. When we here find Leonardo putting
himself in the same category as the Alchemists and Necromancers, whom he
elsewhere mocks at so bitterly, it is evidently meant ironically. In the
same way Leonardo, in the introduction to the Books on Perspective sets
himself with transparent satire on a level with other writers on the
subject.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[108:415](0796.htm#fr_81) 84: Leonardo
frequently, and perhaps habitually, wrote in note books of a very small
size and only moderately thick; in most of those which have been
preserved undivided, each contains less than fifty leaves. Thus a
considerable number of such volumes must have gone to make up a volume
of the bulk of the '*Codex Atlanticus*' which now contains nearly 1200
detached leaves. In the passage under consideration, which was evidently
written at a late period of his life, Leonardo speaks of his Manuscript
note-books as numbering 12O; but we should hardly be justified in
concluding from this passage that the greater part of his Manuscripts
were now missing (see *Prolegomena*, Vol. I, pp. 5-7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 797.](0797)
