[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIV. Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology Index](dvs016)  
  [Previous](0797)  [Next](0799) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 798.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

### THE ORDER OF THE BOOK.

This depicting of mine of the human body will be as clear to you as if
you had the natural man before you; and the reason is that if you wish
thoroughly to know the parts of man, anatomically, you--or your
eye--require to see it from different aspects, considering it from below
and from above and from its sides, turning it about and seeking the
origin of each member; and in this way the natural anatomy is sufficient
for your comprehension. But you must understand that this amount of
knowledge will not continue to satisfy you; seeing the very great
confusion that must result from the combination of tissues, with veins,
arteries, nerves, sinews, muscles, bones, and blood which, of itself,
tinges every part the same colour. And the veins, which discharge this
blood, are not discerned by reason of their smallness. Moreover
integrity of the tissues, in the process of the investigating the parts
within them, is inevitably destroyed, and their transparent substance
being tinged with blood does not allow you to recognise the parts
covered by them, from the similarity of their blood-stained hue; and you
cannot know everything of the one without confusing and destroying the
other. Hence, some further anatomy drawings become necessary. Of which
you want three to give full knowledge of the veins and arteries,
everything else being destroyed with the greatest care. And three others
to display the tissues; and three for the sinews and muscles and
ligaments; and three for the bones and cartilages; and three for the
anatomy of the bones, which have to be sawn to show which are hollow and
which are not, which have marrow and which are spongy, and which are
thick from the outside inwards, and which are thin. And some are
extremely thin in some parts and thick in others, and in some parts
hollow or filled up with bone, or full of marrow, or spongy. And all
these conditions are sometimes found in

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

one and the same bone, and in some bones none of them. And three you
must have for the woman, in which there is much that is mysterious by
reason of the womb and the foetus. Therefore by my drawings every part
will be known to you, and all by means of demonstrations from three
different points of view of each part; for when you have seen a limb
from the front, with any muscles, sinews, or veins which take their rise
from the opposite side, the same limb will be shown to you in a side
view or from behind, exactly as if you had that same limb in your hand
and were turning it from side to side until you had acquired a full
comprehension of all you wished to know. In the same way there will be
put before you three or four demonstrations of each limb, from various
points of view, so that you will be left with a true and complete
knowledge of all you wish to learn of the human figure <span
id="fr_83"></span>[417](#fn_83) .

Thus, in twelve entire figures, you will have set before you the
cosmography of this lesser world on the same plan as, before me, was
adopted by Ptolemy in his cosmography; and so I will afterwards divide
them into limbs as he divided the whole world into provinces; then I
will speak of the function of each part in every direction, putting
before your eyes a description of the whole form and substance of man,
as regards his movements from place to place, by means of his different
parts. And thus, if it please our great Author, I may demonstrate the
nature of men, and their customs in the way I describe his figure.

And remember that the anatomy of the nerves will not give the position
of their ramifications, nor show you which muscles they branch into, by
means of bodies dissected in running water or in lime water; though
indeed their origin and starting point may be seen without such water as
well as with it. But their ramifications, when under running water,
cling and unite--just like flat or hemp carded for spinning--all into a
skein, in a way which makes it impossible to trace in which muscles or
by what ramification the nerves are distributed among those muscles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_83"></span>[111:417](0798.htm#fr_83) 35: Compare [Pl.
CVII](pl107.htm#img_pl107). The original drawing at Windsor is 28 1/2 X
19 1/2 centimetres. The upper figures are slightly washed with Indian
ink. On the back of this drawing is the text No. 1140.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 799.](0799)
