[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XV. Astronomy Index](dvs018)  
  [Previous](0903)  [Next](0905) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 904.

### OF THE SPOTS ON THE MOON.

Others say that the moon is composed of more or less transparent parts;
as though one part were something like alabaster and others like crystal
or glass. It would follow from this that the sun casting its rays on the
less transparent portions, the light would remain on the surface, and so
the denser part would be illuminated, and the transparent portions would
display the shadow of their darker depths; and this is their account of
the structure and nature of the moon. And this opinion has found favour
with many philosophers, and particularly with Aristotle, and yet it is a
false view--for, in the various phases and frequent changes of the moon
and sun to our eyes, we should see these spots vary, at one time looking
dark and at another light: they would be dark when the sun is in the
West and the

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

moon in the middle of the sky; for then the transparent hollows would be
in shadow as far as the tops of the edges of those transparent hollows,
because the sun could not then fling his rays into the mouth of the
hollows, which however, at full moon, would be seen in bright light, at
which time the moon is in the East and faces the sun in the West; then
the sun would illuminate even the lowest depths of these transparent
places and thus, as there would be no shadows cast, the moon at these
times would not show us the spots in question; and so it would be, now
more and now less, according to the changes in the position of the sun
to the moon, and of the moon to our eyes, as I have said above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 905.](0905)
