[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVI. Physical Geography Index](dvs019)  
  [Previous](0957)  [Next](0959) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 958.

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### OF THE FLOW AND EBB.

All seas have their flow and ebb in the same period, but they seem to
vary because the days do not begin at the same time throughout the
universe; in such wise as that when it is midday in our hemisphere, it
is midnight in the opposite hemisphere; and at the Eastern boundary of
the two hemispheres the night begins which follows on the day, and at
the Western boundary of these hemispheres begins the day, which follows
the night from the opposite side. Hence it is to be inferred that the
above mentioned swelling and diminution in the height of the seas,
although they take place in one and the same space of time, are seen to
vary from the above mentioned causes. The waters are then withdrawn into
the fissures which start from the depths of the sea and which ramify
inside the body of the earth, corresponding to the sources of rivers,
which are constantly taking from the bottom of the sea the water which
has flowed into it. A sea of water is incessantly being drawn off from
the surface of the sea. And if you should think that the moon, rising at
the Eastern end of the Mediterranean sea must there begin to attract to
herself the waters of the sea, it would follow that we must at once see
the effect of it at the Eastern end of that sea. Again, as the
Mediterranean sea is about the eighth part of the circumference of the
aqueous sphere, being 3000 miles long, while the flow and ebb only occur
4 times in 24 hours, these results would not agree with the time of 24
hours, unless this Mediterranean sea were six thousand miles in length;
because if such a superabundance of water had to pass through the
straits of Gibraltar in running behind the moon, the rush of the water
through that strait would be so great, and would rise to such a height,
that beyond the straits it would for many miles rush so violently into
the ocean as to cause floods and tremendous seething, so that it would
be impossible to pass through. This agitated ocean would afterwards
return the waters it

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

had received with equal fury to the place they had come from, so that no
one ever could pass through those straits. Now experience shows that at
every hour they are passed in safety, but when the wind sets in the same
direction as the current, the strong ebb increases  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[504](#fn_170) . The sea does not raise the water
that has issued from the straits, but it checks them and this retards
the tide; then it makes up with furious haste for the time it has lost
until the end of the ebb movement.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_170"></span>[194:504](0958.htm#fr_170) 23: In attempting to
get out of the Mediterranean, vessels are sometimes detained for a
considerable time; not merely by the causes mentioned by Leonardo but by
the constant current flowing eastwards through the middle of the straits
of Gibraltar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 959.](0959)
