[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIX. Philosophical Maxims. Morals. Polemics and Speculations
Index](dvs022)  
  [Previous](1209)  [Next](1211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1210.

<span class="margnote"> Against writers of epitomes.</span>Abbreviators
do harm to knowledge and to love, seeing that the love of any thing is
the offspring of this knowledge, the love being the more fervent in
proportion as the knowledge is more certain. And this certainty is born
of a complete knowledge of all the parts, which, when combined, compose
the totality of the thing which ought to be loved. Of what use then is
he who abridges the details of those matters of which he professes to
give thorough information, while he leaves behind the chief part of the
things of which the whole is composed? It is true that impatience, the
mother of stupidity, praises brevity, as if such persons had not life
long enough to serve them to acquire a complete knowledge of one single
subject, such as the human body; and then they want to comprehend the
mind of God in which the universe is included, weighing it minutely and
mincing it into infinite parts, as if they had to dissect it!

Oh! human stupidity, do you not perceive that, though you have been with
yourself all your life, you are not yet aware of the thing you possess
most of, that is of your folly? and then, with the crowd of sophists,
you deceive yourselves and others, despising the mathematical sciences,
in which truth dwells and the knowledge of the things included in them.
And then you occupy yourself with miracles, and write that you possess
information of those things of which the human mind is incapable and
which cannot be proved by any instance from nature. And you fancy you
have wrought miracles when you spoil a work of some

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

speculative mind, and do not perceive that you are falling into the same
error as that of a man who strips a tree of the ornament of its branches
covered with leaves mingled with the scented blossoms or fruit.......
 <span id="fr_312"></span>[646](#fn_312) as Justinus did, in abridging
the histories written by Trogus Pompeius, who had written in an ornate
style all the worthy deeds of his forefathers, full of the most
admirable and ornamental passages; and so composed a bald work worthy
only of those impatient spirits, who fancy they are losing as much time
as that which they employ usefully in studying the works of nature and
the deeds of men. But these may remain in company of beasts; among their
associates should be dogs and other animals full of rapine and they may
hunt with them after...., and then follow helpless beasts, which in time
of great snows come near to your houses asking alms as from their
master....

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_312"></span>[303:646](1210.htm#fr_312) 48: *Givstino*,
Marcus Junianus Justinus, a Roman historian of the second century, who
compiled an epitome from the general history written by Trogus Pompeius,
who lived in the time of Augustus. The work of the latter writer no
longer exist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1211.](1211)
