[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XX. Humorous Writings Index](dvs024)  
  [Previous](1277)  [Next](1279) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1278.

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

### A FABLE.

The privet feeling its tender boughs loaded with young fruit, pricked by
the sharp claws and beak of the insolent blackbird, complained to the
blackbird with pitious remonstrance entreating her that since she stole
its delicious fruits she should not deprive it of the leaves with which
it preserved them from the burning rays of the sun, and that she should
not divest it of its tender bark by scratching it with her sharp claws.
To which the blackbird replied with angry upbraiding: "O, be silent,
uncultured shrub! Do you not know that Nature made you produce these
fruits for my nourishment; do you not see that you are in the world
\[only\] to serve me as food; do you not know, base creature, that next
winter you will be food and prey for the Fire?" To which words the tree
listened patiently, and not without tears. After a short time the
blackbird was taken in a net and boughs were cut to make a cage, in
which to imprison her. Branches were cut, among others from the pliant
privet, to serve for the small rods of the cage; and seeing herself to
be the cause of the Blackbird's loss of liberty it rejoiced and spoke as
follows: "O Blackbird, I am here, and not yet burnt by fire as you said.
I shall see you in prison before you see me burnt."

### A FABLE.

The laurel and the myrtle seeing the pear tree cut down cried out with a
loud voice: "O pear-tree! whither are you going? Where is the pride you
had when you were covered with ripe fruits? Now you will no longer shade
us with your mass of leaves." Then the pear-tree replied: "I am going
with the husbandman who has cut me down and who will take me to the
workshop of a good sculptor who by his art will make me take the form of
Jove the god; and I shall be dedicated in a temple and adored by men in
the place of Jove, while you are bound always to remain maimed and
stripped of your boughs, which will be placed round me to do me honour.

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

### A FABLE.

The chesnut, seeing a man upon the fig-tree, bending its boughs down and
pulling off the ripe fruits, which he put into his open mouth destroying
and crushing them with his hard teeth, it tossed its long boughs and
with a noisy rustle exclaimed: "O fig! how much less are you protected
by nature than I. See how in me my sweet offspring are set in close
array; first clothed in soft wrappers over which is the hard but softly
lined husk; and not content with taking this care of me, and having
given them so strong a shelter, on this she has placed sharp and
close-set spines so that the hand of man cannot hurt me." Then the
fig-tree and her offspring began to laugh and having laughed she said:
"I know man to be of such ingenuity that with rods and stones and stakes
flung up among your branches he will bereave you of your fruits; and
when they are fallen, he will trample them with his feet or with stones,
so that your offspring will come out of their armour, crushed and
maimed; while I am touched carefully by their hands, and not like you
with sticks and stones."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1279.](1279)
