[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025)  
  [Previous](1338)  [Next](1340) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1339.

Like a whirling wind which rushes down a sandy and hollow valley, and
which, in its hasty course, drives to its centre every thing that
opposes its furious course ...

No otherwise does the Northern blast whirl round in its tempestuous
progress ...

 <span id="fr_365"></span>[671](#fn_365)

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

Nor does the tempestuous sea bellow so loud, when the Northern blast
dashes it, with its foaming waves between Scylla and Charybdis; nor
Stromboli, nor Mount Etna, when their sulphurous flames, having been
forcibly confined, rend, and burst open the mountain, fulminating stones
and earth through the air together with the flames they vomit.

Nor when the inflamed caverns of Mount Etna  <span
id="fr_366"></span>[672](#fn_366) , rejecting the ill-restained element
vomit it forth, back to its own region, driving furiously before it
every obstacle that comes in the way of its impetuous rage ...

Unable to resist my eager desire and wanting to see the great ... of the
various and strange shapes made by formative nature, and having wandered
some distance among gloomy rocks, I came to the entrance of a great
cavern, in front of which I stood some time, astonished and unaware of
such a thing. Bending my back into an arch I rested my left hand on my
knee and held my right hand over my down-cast and contracted eye brows:
often bending first one way and then the other, to see whether I could
discover anything inside, and this being forbidden by the deep darkness
within, and after having remained there some time, two contrary emotions
arose in me, fear and desire--fear of the threatening dark cavern,
desire to see whether there were any marvellous thing within it ...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_365"></span>[394:671](1339.htm#fr_365) : 1339. It may be
inferred from the character of the writing, which is in the style of the
note in facsimile Vol. I, p. 297, that this passage was written between
1470 and 1480. As the figure 6 at the end of the text indicates, it was
continued on another page, but I have searched in vain for it. The
reverse of this leaf is coloured red for drawing in silver point, but
has not been used for that purpose but for writing on, and at about the
same date. The passages are given as Nos. 1217, 1218, 1219, 1162 and No.
994 (see note page 218). The text given above is obviously not a
fragment of a letter, but a record of some personal experience. No. 1379
also seems to refer to Leonardo's journeys in Southern Italy.

<span id="fn_366"></span>[395:672](1339.htm#fr_366) 13: Mongibello is a
name commonly given in Sicily to Mount Etna (from Djebel,
Arab.=mountain). Fr. FERRARA, *Descrizione dell' Etna con la storia
delle eruzioni* (Palermo, 1818, p. 88) tells us, on the authority of the
*Cronaca del Monastero Benedettino di Licordia* of an eruption of the
Volcano with a great flow of lava on Sept. 21, 1447. The next records of
the mountain are from the years 1533 and 1536. A. Percy neither does
mention any eruptions of Etna during the years to which this note must
probably refer *Memoire des tremblements de terre de la peninsule
italique, Vol. XXII des Memoires couronnees et Memoires des savants
etrangers. Academie Royal de Belgique*).

A literal interpretation of the passage would not, however, indicate an
allusion to any great eruption; particularly in the connection with
Stromboli, where the periodical outbreaks in very short intervals are
very striking to any observer, especially at night time, when passing
the island on the way from Naples to Messina.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1340.](1340)
