[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025)  
  [Previous](1347)  [Next](1349) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1348.

Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord. The Lord Ippolito, Cardinal of
Este at Ferrare.

Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord.

I arrived from Milan but a few days since and finding that my elder
brother refuses to

 <span id="fr_376"></span>[682](#fn_376)

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

carry into effect a will, made three years ago when my father died--as
also, and no less, because I would not fail in a matter I esteem most
important--I cannot forbear to crave of your most Reverend Highness a
letter of recommendation and favour to Ser Raphaello Hieronymo, at
present one of the illustrious members of the Signoria before whom my
cause is being argued; and more particularly it has been laid by his
Excellency the Gonfaloniere into the hands of the said Ser Raphaello,
that his Worship may have to decide and end it before the festival of
All Saints. And therefore, my Lord, I entreat you, as urgently as I know
how and am able, that your Highness will write a letter to the said Ser
Raphaello in that admirable and pressing manner which your Highness can
use, recommending to him Leonardo Vincio, your most humble servant as I
am, and shall always be; requesting him and pressing him not only to do
me justice but to do so with despatch; and I have not the least doubt,
from many things that I hear, that Ser Raphaello, being most
affectionately devoted to your Highness, the matter will issue *ad
votum*. And this I shall attribute to your most Reverend Highness'
letter, to whom I once more humbly commend myself. *Et bene valeat*.

Florence XVIIIa 7bris 1507. E. V. R. D.

your humble servant Leonardus Vincius, pictor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[402:682](1348.htm#fr_376) : This letter
addressed to the Cardinal Ippolito d'Este is here given from Marchese G.
CAMPORI'S publication: *Nuovi documenti per la Vita di Leonardo da
Vinci. Atti e Memorie delle R. R. Deputazioni di Storia patria per la
provincie modenesi e parmenesi, Vol. III.* It is the only text
throughout this work which I have not myself examined and copied from
the original. The learned discoverer of this letter--the only letter
from Leonardo hitherto known as having been sent--adds these interesting
remarks: *Codesto Cardinale nato ad Ercole I. nel 1470, arcivescovo di
Strigonia a sette anni, poi d'Agra, aveva conseguito nel 1497 la pingue
ed ambita cattedra di Milano, la dove avra conosciuto il Vinci, sebbene
il poco amore ch'ei professava alle arti lasci credere che le proteste
di servitu di Leonardo piu che a gratitudine per favori ricevuti e per
opere a lui allogate, accennino a speranza per un favore che si aspetta.
Notabile e ancora in questo prezioso documento la ripetuta signatura del
grande artista 'che si scrive Vincio e Vincius, non da Vinci come si
tiene comunemente, sebbene l'una e l'altra possano valere a significare
cosi il casato come il paese; restando a sapere se il nome del paese di
Vinci fosse assunto a cognome della famiglia di Leonardo nel qual
supposto piu propriamento avrebbe a chiamarsi Leonardo Vinci, o Vincio
(latinamente Vincius) com'egli stesso amo segnarsi in questa lettera, e
come scrissero parecchi contenporanei di lui, il Casio, il Cesariano,
Geoffrey Tory, il Gaurico, il Bandello, Raffaelle Maffei, il Paciolo.
Per ultimo non lascero d'avvertire come la lettera del Vinci e assai ben
conservata, di nitida e larga scrittura in forma pienemente
corrispondente a quella dei suoi manoscritti, vergata all'uso comune da
sinistra a destra, anziche contrariamente come fu suo costume; ma
indubbiamente autentica e fornita della menzione e del suggello che
fresca ancora conserva l'impronta di una testa di profilo da un picciolo
antico cammeo.* (Compare No. 1368, note.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1349.](1349)
