[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025)  
  [Previous](1350)  [Next](1352) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

### 1351.

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

<span class="margnote"> Drafts of a letter to Giuliano de' Medici
(1351-1352).</span>\[Most illustrious Lord. I greatly rejoice most
Illustrious Lord at your...\]

I was so greatly rejoiced, most illustrious Lord, by the desired
restoration of your health, that it almost had the effect that \[my own
health recovered\]--\[I have got through my illness\]--my own illness
left me-- --of your Excellency's almost restored health. But I am
extremely vexed that I have not been able completely to satisfy the
wishes of your Excellency, by reason of the wickedness of that deceiver,
for whom I left nothing undone which could be done for him by me and by
which I might be of use to him; and in the first place his allowances
were paid to him before the time, which I believe he would willingly
deny, if I had not the writing signed by myself and the interpreter. And
I, seeing that he did not work for me unless he had no work to do for
others, which he was very careful in solliciting, invited him to dine
with me, and to work afterwards near me, because, besides the saving of
expense, he

 <span id="fr_380"></span>[686](#fn_380)

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

would acquire the Italian language. He always promised, but would never
do so. And this I did also, because that Giovanni, the German who makes
the mirrors, was there always in the workshop, and wanted to see and to
know all that was being done there and made it known outside ...
strongly criticising it; and because he dined with those of the Pope's
guard, and then they went out with guns killing birds among the ruins;
and this went on from after dinner till the evening; and when I sent
Lorenzo to urge him to work he said that he would not have so many
masters over him, and that his work was for your Excellency's Wardrobe;
and thus two months passed and so it went on; and one day finding Gian
Niccolo of the Wardrobe and asking whether the German had finished the
work for your Magnificence, he told me this was not true, but only that
he had given him two guns to clean. Afterwards, when I had urged him
farther, be left the workshop and began to work in his room, and lost
much time in making another pair of pincers and files and other tools
with screws; and there he worked at mills for twisting silk which he hid
when any one of my people went in, and with a thousand oaths and
mutterings, so that none of them would go there any more.

I was so greatly rejoiced, most Illustrious Lord, by the desired
restoration of your health, that my own illness almost left me. But I am
greatly vexed at not having been able to completely satisfy your
Excellency's wishes by reason of the wickedness of that German deceiver,
for whom I left nothing undone by which I could have hope to please him;
and secondly I invited him to lodge and board with me, by which means I
should constantly see the work he was doing and with greater ease
correct his errors while, besides this, he would learn the Italian
tongue, by means of which be could with more ease talk without an
interpreter; his moneys were always given him in advance of the

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

time when due. Afterwards he wanted to have the models finished in wood,
just as they were to be in iron, and wished to carry them away to his
own country. But this I refused him, telling him that I would give him,
in drawing, the breadth, length, height and form of what he had to do;
and so we remained in ill-will.

The next thing was that he made himself another workshop and pincers and
tools in his room where he slept, and there he worked for others;
afterwards he went to dine with the Swiss of the guard, where there are
idle fellows, in which he beat them all; and most times they went two or
three together with guns, to shoot birds among the ruins, and this went
on till evening.

At last I found how this master Giovanni the mirror-maker was he who had
done it all, for two reasons; the first because he had said that my
coming here had deprived him of the countenance and favour of your
Lordship which always... The other is that he said that his
iron-workers' rooms suited him for working at his mirrors, and of this
he gave proof; for besides making him my enemy, he made him sell all he
had and leave his workshop to him, where he works with a number of
workmen making numerous mirrors to send to the fairs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_380"></span>[407:686](1351.htm#fr_380) : 1351. 1353.It is
clear from the contents of this notes that they refer to Leonardo's
residence in Rome in 1513-1515. Nor can there be any doubt that they
were addressed to Leonardo's patron at the time: Giuliano de' Medici,
third son of Lorenzo the Magnificent and brother of Pope Leo X (born
1478). In 1512 he became the head of the Florentine Republic. The Pope
invited him to Rome, where he settled; in 1513 he was named patrician
with much splendid ceremonial. The medal struck in honour of the event
bears the words MAG. IVLIAN. MEDICES. Leonardo too uses the style
"Magnifico", in his letter. Compare also No. 1377.

GlNO CAPPONI (*Storia della Repubblica di Firenze*, Vol. III, p. 139)
thus describes the character of Giuliano de' Medici, who died in 1516:
*Era il migliore della famiglia, di vita placida, grande spenditore,
tenendo intorno a sè uomini ingegnosi, ed ogni nuova cosa voleva
provare.*

See too GREGOROVIUS, *Geschichte der Stadi Rom*, VIII (book XIV. III,
2): *Die Luftschlösser fürstlicher Grösse, wozu ihn der Papst hatte
erheben wollen zerfielen. Julian war der edelste aller damaligen Medici,
ein Mensch von innerlicher Richtung, unbefriedigt durch das Leben,
mitten im Sonnenglanz der Herrlichkeit Leo's X. eine dunkle Gestalt die
wie ein Schatten vorüberzog.* Giuliano lived in the Vatican, and it may
be safely inferred from No. 1352 l. 2, and No. 1353 l. 4, that Leonardo
did the same.

From the following unpublished notice in the Vatican archives, which M.
Eug. Müntz, librarian of the Ecole des Beaux arts, Paris, has done me
the favour to communicate to me, we get a more accurate view of
Leonardo's relation to the often named GIORGIO TEDESCO:

*Nota delle provisione* (sic) *a da pagare per me in nome del nostro
ill. S. Bernardo Bini e chomp<sup>a</sup> di Roma, e prima della
ill<sup>ma</sup> sua chonsorte ogni mese d. 800.*

A L<sup>do</sup> da Vinci per sua provisione d. XXXIII, e più d. VII al
detto per la provisione di Giorgio tedescho, che sono in tutto d. 40.

From this we learn, that seven ducats formed the German's monthly wages,
but according to No. 1353 l. 7 he pretended that eight ducats had been
agreed upon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1352.](1352)
