[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[X. Studies and Sketches for Pictures and Decorations Index](dvs011)  
  [Previous](0662)  [Next](0663) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

### *X.*

### *Studies and Sketches for Pictures and Decorations.*

*An artist's manuscript notes can hardly be expected to contain any
thing more than incidental references to those masterpieces of his work
of which the fame, sounded in the writings of his contemporaries, has
left a glorious echo to posterity. We need not therefore be surprised to
find that the texts here reproduced do not afford us such comprehensive
information as we could wish. On the other hand, the sketches and
studies prepared by Leonardo for the two grandest compositions he ever
executed: The Fresco of the Last Supper in the Refectory of Santa Maria
delle Grazie at Milan, and the Cartoon of the Battle of Anghiari, for
the Palazzo della Signoria at Florence--have been preserved; and, though
far from complete, are so much more numerous than the manuscript notes,
that we are justified in asserting that in value and interest they amply
compensate for the meagerness of the written suggestions.*

*The notes for the composition of the Last Supper, which are given under
nos.* 665 *and* 666 *occur in a MS. at South Kensington, II2, written in
the years* 1494-1495. *This MS. sketch was noted down not more than
three or four years before the painting was executed, which justifies
the inference that at the time when it was written the painter had not
made up his mind definitely even as to the general scheme of the work;
and from this we may also conclude that the drawings of apostles' heads
at Windsor, in red chalk, must be ascribed to a later date. They are
studies for the head of St. Matthew, the fourth figure on Christ's left
hand--see [Pl. XLVII](pl047.htm#img_pl047), the sketch (in black chalk)
for the head of St. Philip, the third figure on the left hand--see [Pl.
XLVIII](pl048.htm#img_pl048), for St. Peter's right arm--see [Pl.
XLIX](pl049.htm#img_pl049), and for the expressive head of Judas which
has unfortunately somewhat suffered by subsequent restoration of
outlines,--see [Pl. L](pl050.htm#img_pl050). According to a tradition,
as unfounded as it is improbable, Leonardo made use of the head of Padre
Bandelli, the prior of the convent, as the prototype of his Judas; this
however has already been contradicted by Amoretti "Memorie storiche"
cap. XIV. The study of the head of a criminal on [Pl.
LI](pl051.htm#img_pl051) has, it seems to me, a better claim to be
regarded as one of the preparatory sketches for the head of Judas. The*

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

<span id="img_v133400"></span>

[![](tn/v133400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v133400.jpg)

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

*Windsor collection contains two old copies of the head of St. Simon,
the figure to the extreme left of Christ, both of about equal merit
(they are marked as Nos.* 21 *and* 36*)--the second was reproduced on
[Pl. VIII](pl008.htm#img_pl008) of the Grosvenor Gallery Publication in*
1878. *There is also at Windsor a drawing in black chalk of folded hands
(marked with the old No.* 212; *No. LXI of the Grosvenor Gallery
Publication) which I believe to be a copy of the hands of St. John, by
some unknown pupil. A reproduction of the excellent drawings of heads of
Apostles in the possession of H. R. H. the Grand Duchess of Weimar would
have been out of my province in this work, and, with regard to them, I
must confine myself to pointing out that the difference in style does
not allow of our placing the Weimar drawings in the same category as
those here reproduced. The mode of grouping in the Weimar drawings is of
itself sufficient to indicate that they were not executed before the
picture was painted, but, on the contrary, afterwards, and it is, on the
face of it, incredible that so great a master should thus have copied
from his own work.*

*The drawing of Christ's head, in the Brera palace at Milan was perhaps
originally the work of Leonardo's hand; it has unfortunately been
entirely retouched and re-drawn, so that no decisive opinion can be
formed as to its genuineness.*

*The red chalk drawing reproduced on [Pl. XLVI](pl046.htm#img_pl046) is
in the Accademia at Venice; it was probably made before the text, Nos.*
664 *and* 665, *was written.*

*The two pen and ink sketches on [Pl. XLV](pl045.htm#img_pl045) seem to
belong to an even earlier date; the more finished drawing of the two, on
the right hand, represents Christ with only St. John and Judas and a
third disciple whose action is precisely that described in No.* 666,
*Pl.* 4. *It is hardly necessary to observe that the other sketches on
this page and the lines of text below the circle (containing the
solution of a geometrical problem) have no reference to the picture of
the Last Supper. With this figure of Christ may be compared a similar
pen and ink drawing reproduced on page* 297 *below on the left hand; the
original is in the Louvre. On this page again the rest of the sketches
have no direct bearing on the composition of the Last Supper, not even,
as it seems to me, the group of four men at the bottom to the right
hand--who are listening to a fifth, in their midst addressing them.
Moreover the writing on this page (an explanation of a disk shaped
instrument) is certainly not in the same style as we find constantly
used by Leonardo after the year* 1489.

*It may be incidentally remarked that no sketches are known for the
portrait of "Mona Lisa", nor do the MS. notes ever allude to it, though
according to Vasari the master had it in hand for fully four years.*

*Leonardo's cartoon for the picture of the battle of Anghiari has shared
the fate of the rival work, Michaelangelo's "Bathers summoned to
Battle". Both have been lost in some wholly inexplicable manner. I
cannot here enter into the remarkable history of this work; I can only
give an account of what has been preserved to us of Leonardo's scheme
and preparations for executing it. The extent of the material in studies
and drawings was till now quite unknown. Their publication here may give
some adequate idea of the grandeur of this famous work. The text given
as No.* 669 *contains a description of the particulars of the battle,
but for the reasons given in the note to this text, I must abandon the
idea of taking this passage as the basis of my attempt to reconstruct
the picture as the artist conceived and executed it.*

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

*I may here remind the reader that Leonardo prepared the cartoon in the
Sala del Papa of Santa Maria Novella at Florence and worked there from
the end of October 1503 till February 1504, and then was busied with the
painting in the Sala del Consiglio in the Palazzo della Signoria, till
the work was interrupted at the end of May 1506. (See Milanesi's note to
Vasari pp. 43--45 Vol. IV ed. 1880.) Vasari, as is well known, describes
only one scene or episode of the cartoon--the Battle for the Standard in
the foreground of the composition, as it would seem; and this only was
ever finished as a mural decoration in the Sala del Consiglio. This
portion of the composition is familiar to all from the disfigured copy
engraved by Edelinck. Mariette had already very acutely observed that
Edelinck must surely have worked from a Flemish copy of the picture.
There is in the Louvre a drawing by Rubens (No. 565) which also
represents four horsemen fighting round a standard and which agrees with
Edelinck's engraving, but the engraving reverses the drawing. An earlier
Flemish drawing, such as may have served as the model for both Rubens
and Edelinck, is in the Uffizi collection (see Philpots's Photograph,
No. 732). It seems to be a work of the second half of the XVIth century,
a time when both the picture and the cartoon had already been destroyed.
It is apparently the production of a not very skilled hand. Raphael
Trichet du Fresne, 1651, mentions that a small picture by Leonardo
himself of the Battle of the Standard was then extant in the Tuileries;
by this he probably means the painting on panel which is now in the
possession of Madame Timbal in Paris, and which has lately been engraved
by Haussoullier as a work by Leonardo. The picture, which is very
carefully painted, seems to me however to be the work of some unknown
Florentine painter, and probably executed within the first ten years of
the XVIth century. At the same time, it would seem to be a copy not from
Leonardo's cartoon, but from his picture in the Palazzo della Signoria;
at any rate this little picture, and the small Flemish drawing in
Florence are the oldest finished copies of this episode in the great
composition of the Battle of Anghiari.*

*In his Life of Raphael, Vasari tells us that Raphael copied certain
works of Leonardo's during his stay in Florence. Raphael's first visit
to Florence lasted from the middle of October 1504 till July 1505, and
he revisited it in the summer of 1506. The hasty sketch, now in the
possession of the University of Oxford and reproduced on page 337 also
represents the Battle of the Standard and seems to have been made during
his first stay, and therefore not from the fresco but from the cartoon;
for, on the same sheet we also find, besides an old man's head drawn in
Leonardo's style, some studies for the figure of St. John the Martyr
which Raphael used in 1505 in his great fresco in the Church of San
Severo at Perugia.*

*Of Leonardo's studies for the Battle of Anghiari I must in the first
place point to five, on three of which--[Pl. LII](pl052.htm#img_pl052)
2, [Pl. LIII](pl053.htm#img_pl053), [Pl. LVI](pl056.htm#img_pl056)--we
find studies for the episode of the Standard. The standard bearer, who,
in the above named copies is seen stooping, holding on to the staff
across his shoulder, is immediately recognisable as the left-hand figure
in Raphael's sketch, and we find it in a similar attitude in Leonardo's
pen and ink drawing in the British Museum--[Pl.
LII](pl052.htm#img_pl052), 2--the lower figure to the right. It is not
difficult to identify the same figure in two more complicated groups in
the pen and ink drawings, now in the Accademia at Venice--[Pl.
LIII](pl053.htm#img_pl053), and [Pl. LIV](pl054.htm#img_pl054)--where we
also find some studies of foot soldiers fighting. On the sheet in the
British Museum--[Pl. LII](pl052.htm#img_pl052), 2--we find, among
others, one group of three horses galloping forwards: one*

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

*horseman is thrown and protects himself with his buckler against the
lance thrusts of two others on horseback, who try to pierce him as they
ride past. The same action is repeated, with some variation, in two
sketches in pen and ink on a third sheet, in the Accademia at Venice,
[Pl. LV](pl055.htm#img_pl055); a coincidence which suggests the
probability of such an incident having actually been represented on the
cartoon. We are not, it is true, in a position to declare with any
certainty which of these three dissimilar sketches may have been the
nearest to the group finally adopted in executing the cartoon.*

<span id="img_v133700"></span>

[![](tn/v133700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v133700.jpg)

*With regard, however, to one of the groups of horsemen it is possible
to determine with perfect certainty not only which arrangement was
preferred, but the position it occupied in the composition. The group of
horsemen on [Pl. LVII](pl057.htm#img_pl057) is a drawing in black chalk
at Windsor, which is there attributed to Leonardo, but which appears to
me to be the work of Cesare da Sesto, and the Commendatore Giov. Morelli
supports me in this view. It can hardly be doubted that da Sesto, as a
pupil of Leonardo's, made this drawing from his master's cartoon, if we
compare it with the copy made by Raphael--here reproduced,*

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

*for just above the fighting horseman in Raphael's copy it is possible
to detect a horse which is seen from behind, going at a slower pace,
with his tail flying out to the right and the same horse may be seen in
the very same attitude carrying a dimly sketched rider, in the
foreground of Cesare da Sesto's drawing.*

<span id="img_v133800"></span>

[![](tn/v133800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v133800.jpg)

*If a very much rubbed drawing in black chalk at Windsor--[Pl.
LVI](pl056.htm#img_pl056)--is, as it appears to be, the reversed
impression of an original drawing, it is not difficult to supplement
from it the portions drawn by Cesare da Sesto. Nay, it may prove
possible to reconstruct the whole of the lost cartoon from the mass of
materials we now have at hand which we may regard as the nucleus of the
composition. A large pen and ink*

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

*drawing by Raphael in the Dresden collection, representing three
horsemen fighting, and another, by Cesare da Sesto, in the Uffizi, of
light horsemen fighting are a further contribution which will help us to
reconstruct it.*

<span id="img_v133900"></span>

[![](tn/v133900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/v133900.jpg)

*The sketch reproduced on [Pl. LV](pl055.htm#img_pl055) gives a
suggestive example of the way in which*

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

*foot-soldiers may have been introduced into the cartoon as fighting
among the groups of horsemen; and I may here take the opportunity of
mentioning that, for reasons which it would be out of place to enlarge
upon here, I believe the two genuine drawings by Raphael's hand in his
"Venetian sketch-book" as it is called--one of a standard bearer
marching towards the left, and one of two foot-soldiers armed with
spears and fighting with a horseman--to be undoubtedly copies from the
cartoon of the Battle of Anghiari.*

*Leonardo's two drawings, preserved in the museum at Buda-Pesth and
reproduced on pages 338 and 339 are preliminary studies for the heads of
fighting warriors. The two heads drawn in black chalk (pg. 338) and the
one seen in profile, turned to the left, drawn in red chalk (pg. 339),
correspond exactly with those of two horsemen in the scene of the fight
round the standard as we see them in Madame Timbal's picture and in the
other finished copies. An old copy of the last named drawing by a pupil
of Leonardo is in MS. C. A. 187b; 561b (See Saggio, Tav. XXII). Leonardo
used to make such finished studies of heads as those, drawn on detached
sheets, before beginning his pictures from his drawings--compare the
preparatory studies for the fresco of the Last Supper, given on [Pl.
XLVII](pl047.htm#img_pl047) and [Pl. L](pl050.htm#img_pl050). Other
drawings of heads, all characterised by the expression of vehement
excitement that is appropriate to men fighting, are to be seen at
Windsor (No. 44) and at the Accademia at Venice (IV, 13); at the back of
one of the drawings at Buda-Pesth there is the bust of a warrior
carrying a spear on his left shoulder, holding up the left arm (See
Csatakepek a XVI--lk Szazadbol osszeallitotta Pvlszky Karoly). These
drawings may have been made for other portions of the cartoon, of which
no copies exist, and thus we are unable to identify these preparatory
drawings. Finally I may add that a sketch of fighting horse and foot
soldiers, formerly in the possession of M. Thiers and published by
Charles Blanc in his "Vies des Peintres" can hardly be accepted as
genuine. It is not to be found, as I am informed, among the late
President's property, and no one appears to know where it now is.*

*An attempted reconstruction of the Cartoon, which is not only
unsuccessful but perfectly unfounded, is to be seen in the lithograph by
Bergeret, published in Charles Blanc's "Vies des peintres" and reprinted
in "The great Artists. L. da Vinci", p. 80. This misleading pasticcio
may now be rejected without hesitation.*

*There are yet a few original drawings by Leonardo which might be
mentioned here as possibly belonging to the cartoon of the Battle; such
as the pen and ink sketches on [Pl. XXI](pl021.htm#img_pl021) and on
[Pl. XXXVIII](pl038.htm#img_pl038), No. 3, but we should risk too wide a
departure from the domain of ascertained fact.*

*With regard to the colours and other materials used by Leonardo the
reader may be referred to the quotations from the accounts for the
picture in question given by Milanesi in his edition of Vasari (Vol. IV,
p. 44, note) where we find entries of a similar character to those in
Leonardo's note books for the year 1505; S. K. M. 12 (see No. 636).*

*That Leonardo was employed in designing decorations and other
preparations for high festivals, particularly for the court of Milan, we
learn not only from the writings of his contemporaries but from his own
incidental allusions; for instance in MS. C. l5b (1), l. 9. In the
arrangement of the texts referring to this I have placed those first, in
which historical personages are named--Nos. 670-674. Among the
descriptions of Allegorical subjects two texts lately found at Oxford
have been included, Nos. 676 and 677. They are particularly interesting
because they are accompanied by large sketches which render the meaning
of the texts perfectly clear. It is very intelligible that in other
cases, where*

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

*there are no illustrative sketches, the notes must necessarily remain
obscure or admit of various interpretations. The literature of the time
affords ample evidence of the use of such allegorical representations,
particularly during the Carnival and in Leonardo's notes we find the
Carnival expressly mentioned--Nos. 685 and 704. Vasari in his Life of
Pontormo, particularly describes that artist's various undertakings for
Carnival festivities. These very graphic descriptions appear to me to
throw great light in more ways than one on the meaning of Leonardo's
various notes as to allegorical representations and also on mottoes and
emblems--Nos. 681-702. In passing judgment on the allegorical sketches
and emblems it must not be overlooked that even as pictures they were
always accompanied by explanations in words. Several finished drawings
of allegorical compositions or figures have been preserved, but as they
have no corresponding explanation in the MSS. they had no claim to be
reproduced here. The female figure on [Pl. XXVI](pl026.htm#img_pl026)
may perhaps be regarded as a study for such an allegorical painting, of
which the purport would have been explained by an inscription.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 663.](0663)
