[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[III. Six Books on Light and Shade Index](dvs002)  
  [Previous](0109)  [Next](0110) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

### *III.*

### *Six books on Light and Shade.*

*Linear Perspective cannot be immediately followed by either the*
"prospettiva de' perdimenti" *or the* "prospettiva de' colori" *or the
aerial perspective; since these branches of the subject presuppose a
knowledge of the principles of Light and Shade. No apology, therefore,
is here needed for placing these immediately after Linear Perspective.*

*We have various plans suggested by Leonardo for the arrangement of the
mass of materials treating of this subject. Among these I have given the
preference to a scheme propounded in No.* III, *because, in all
probability, we have here a final and definite purpose expressed.
Several authors have expressed it as their opinion that the Paris
Manuscript* C *is a complete and finished treatise on Light and Shade.
Certainly, the Principles of Light and Shade form by far the larger
portion of this MS. which consists of two separate parts; still, the
materials are far from being finally arranged. It is also evident that
he here investigates the subject from the point of view of the Physicist
rather than from that of the Painter.*

*The plan of a scheme of arrangement suggested in No.* III *and adopted
by me has been strictly adhered to for the first four Books. For the
three last, however, few materials have come down to us; and it must be
admitted that these three Books would find a far more appropriate place
in a work on Physics than in a treatise on Painting. For this reason I
have collected in Book V all the chapters on Reflections, and in Book VI
I have put together and arranged all the sections of MS.* C *that belong
to the book on Painting, so far as they relate to Light and Shade, while
the sections of the same MS. which treat of the* "Prospettiva de'
perdimenti" *have, of course, been excluded from the series on Light and
Shade.*

 <span id="fr_55"></span>[53](#fn_55)

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[67:53](dv10115.htm#fr_55) III: This text has
already been published with some slight variations in Dozio's pamphlet
*Degli scritti e disegni di Leonardo da Vinci*, Milan 1871, pp. 30--31.
Dozio did not transcribe it from the original MS. which seems to have
remained unknown to him, but from an old copy (MS. H. 227 in the
Ambrosian Library).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 110.](0110)
