[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[IX. The Practice of Painting Index](dvs010)  
  [Previous](0481)  [Next](0482) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

### *IX.*

### *The Practice of Painting.*

*It is hardly necessary to offer any excuses for the division carried
out in the arrangement of the text into practical suggestions and
theoretical enquiries. It was evidently intended by Leonardo himself as
we conclude from incidental remarks in the MSS. (for instance No* 110*).
The fact that this arrangement was never carried out either in the old
MS. copies or in any edition since, is easily accounted for by the
general disorder which results from the provisional distribution of the
various chapters in the old copies. We have every reason to believe that
the earliest copyists, in distributing the materials collected by them,
did not in the least consider the order in which the original MS.lay
before them.*

*It is evident that almost all the chapters which refer to the calling
and life of the painter--and which are here brought together in the
first section (Nos.* 482-508*)--may be referred to two distinct periods
in Leonardo's life; most of them can be dated as belonging to the year*
1492 *or to* 1515. *At about this later time Leonardo may have formed
the project of completing his Libro della Pittura, after an interval of
some years, as it would seem, during which his interest in the subject
had fallen somewhat into the background.*

*In the second section, which treats first of the artist's studio, the
construction of a suitable window forms the object of careful
investigations; the special importance attached to this by Leonardo is
sufficiently obvious. His theory of the incidence of light which was
fully discussed in a former part of this work, was to him by no means of
mere abstract value, but, being deduced, as he says, from experience (or
experiment) was required to prove its utility in practice. Connected
with this we find suggestions for the choice of a light with practical
hints as to sketching a picture and some other precepts of a practical
character which must come under consideration in the course of
completing the painting. In all this I have followed the same principle
of arrangement in the text as was carried out in the Theory of Painting,
thus the suggestions for the Perspective of a picture, (Nos.* 536-569*),
are followed by the theory of light and shade for the practical method
of optics (Nos.* 548--566*) and this by the practical precepts or the
treatment of aerial perspective (*567--570*).*

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

*In the passage on Portrait and Figure Painting the principles of
painting as applied to a bust and head are separated and placed first,
since the advice to figure painters must have some connection with the
principles of the treatment of composition by which they are followed.*

*But this arrangement of the text made it seem advisable not to pick out
the practical precepts as to the representation of trees and landscape
from the close connection in which they were originally placed--unlike
the rest of the practical precepts--with the theory of this branch of
the subject. They must therefore be sought under the section entitled
Botany for Painters.*

*As a supplement to the* Libro di Pittura *I have here added those texts
which treat of the Painter's materials,--as chalk, drawing paper,
colours and their preparation, of the management of oils and varnishes;
in the appendix are some notes on chemical substances. Possibly some of
these, if not all, may have stood in connection with the preparation of
colours. It is in the very nature of things that Leonardo's incidental
indications as to colours and the like should be now-a-days extremely
obscure and could only be explained by professional experts--by them
even in but few instances. It might therefore have seemed advisable to
reproduce exactly the original text without offering any translation.
The rendering here given is merely an attempt to suggest what Leonardo's
meaning may have been.*

*LOMAZZO tells us in his* Trattato dell'arte della Pittura, Scultura ed
Architettura (Milano 1584, libro II, Cap. XIV): "Va discorrendo ed
argomentando Leonardo Vinci in un suo libro letto da me (?) questi anni
passati, ch'egli scrisse di mano stanca ai prieghi di LUDOVICO SFORZA
duca di Milano, in determinazione di questa questione, se e piu nobile
la pittura o la scultura; dicendo che quanto piu un'arte porta seco
fatica di corpo, e sudore, tanto piu e vile, e men pregiata". *But the
existence of any book specially written for Lodovico il Moro on the
superiority of Painting over sculpture is perhaps mythical. The various
passages in praise of Painting as compared not merely with Sculpture but
with Poetry, are scattered among MSS. of very different dates.*

*Besides, the way, in which the subject is discussed appears not to
support the supposition, that these texts were prepared at a special
request of the Duke.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 482.](0482)
