[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[VII. On the Proportions and on the Movements of the Human Figure
Index](dvs007)  
  [Previous](0307)  [Next](0308) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225720/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

### *VII.*

### *On the Proportions and on the Movements of the Human Figure.*

*Leonardo's researches on the proportions and movements of the human
figure must have been for the most part completed and written before the
year* 1498; *for LUCA PACIOLO writes, in the dedication to Ludovico il
Moro, of his book* Divina Proportione, *which was published in that
year:* "Leonardo da venci ... hauedo gia co tutta diligetia al degno
libro de pictura e movimenti humani posto fine".

*The selection of Leonardo's axioms contained in the Vatican copy
attributes these words to the author:* "e il resto si dira nella
universale misura del huomo". (*MANZI, p. 147; LUDWIG, No. 264*).
*LOMAZZO, again, in his* Idea del Tempio della Pittura Milano 1590, cap.
IV, *says:* "Lionardo Vinci ... dimostro anco in figura tutte le
proporzioni dei membri del corpo umano".

*The Vatican copy includes but very few sections of the* "Universale
misura del huomo" *and until now nothing has been made known of the
original MSS. on the subject which have supplied the very extensive
materials for this portion of the work. The collection at Windsor,
belonging to her Majesty the Queen, includes by far the most important
part of Leonardo's investigations on this subject, constituting about
half of the whole of the materials here published; and the large number
of original drawings adds greatly to the interest which the subject
itself must command. Luca Paciolo would seem to have had these MSS.
(which I have distinguished by the initials W. P.) in his mind when he
wrote the passage quoted above. Still, certain notes of a later
date--such as Nos. 360,*

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *362 and 363, from
MS. E, written in 1513--14, sufficiently prove that Leonardo did not
consider his earlier studies on the Proportions and Movements of the
Human Figure final and complete, as we might suppose from Luca Paciolo's
statement. Or else he took the subject up again at a subsequent period,
since his former researches had been carried on at Milan between 1490
and 1500. Indeed it is highly probable that the anatomical studies which
he was pursuing zvith so much zeal between 1510--16 should have led him
to reconsider the subject of Proportion.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 308.](0308)
