[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XII. Architectural Designs Index](dvs014)  
  [Previous](dv20064)  [Next](0759) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### *F. The Project for lifting up the Battistero of Florence and setting it on a basement.*

*Among the very few details Vasari gives as to the architectural studies
of Leonardo, we read: "And among these models and designs there was one
by way of which he showed several times to many ingenious citizens who
then governed Florence, his readiness to lift up without ruining it, the
church of San Giovanni in Florence (the Battistero, opposite the Duomo)
in order to place under it the missing basement with steps; he supported
his assertions with reasons so persuasive, that while he spoke the
undertaking seemed feasable, although every one of his hearers, when he
had departed, could see by himself the impossibility of so vast an
undertaking."*

 <span id="fr_52"></span>[386](#fn_52)

*In the MS. C. A. fol. 293, there are two sketches which possibly might
have a bearing on this bold enterprise. We find there a plan of a
circular or polygonal edifice surrounded by semicircular arches in an
oblique position. These may be taken for the foundation of the steps and
of the new platform. In the perspective elevation the same edifice,
forming a polygon, is shown as lifted up and resting on a circle of
inverted arches which rest on an other circle of arches in the ordinary
position, but so placed that the inverted arches above rest on the
spandrels of the lower range.*

*What seems to confirm the supposition that the lifting up of a building
is here in question, is the indication of engines for winding up, such
as jacks, and a rack and wheel. As the lifting apparatus represented on
this sheet does not seem particularly applicable to an undertaking of
such magnitude, we may consider it to be a first sketch or scheme for
the engines to be used.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_52"></span>[63:386](dv20065.htm#fr_52) : *This latter
statement of Vasari's must be considered to be exaggerated. I may refer
here to some data given by* LIBRI, Histoire des sciences mathematiques
en Italie (II, 216, 217): "On a cru dans ces derniers temps faire un
miracle en mecanique en effectuant ce transport, et cependant des
l'annee 1455, Gaspard Nadi et Aristote de Fioravantio avaient
transporte, a une distance considerable, la tour de la Magione de
Bologne, avec ses fondements, qui avait presque quatre-vingts pieds de
haut. Le continuateur de la chronique de Pugliola dit que le trajet fut
de 35 pieds et que durant le transport auquel le chroniqueur affirme
avoir assiste, il arriva un accident grave qui fit pencher de trois
pieds la tour pendant qu'elle etait suspendue, mais que cet accident fut
promptement repare (Muratori, Scriptores rer. ital. Tom. XVIII, col.
717, 718). Alidosi a rapporte une note ou Nadi rend compte de ce
transport avec une rare simplicite. D'apres cette note, on voit que les
operations de ce genre n'etaient pas nouvelles. Celle-ci ne couta que
150 livres (monnaie d'alors) y compris le cadeau que le Legat fit aux
deux mecaniciens. Dans la meme annee, Aristote redressa le clocher de
Cento, qui penchait de plus de cinq pieds (Alidosi, instruttione p.
188-- Muratori, Scriptores rer. ital., tom. XXIII, col. 888.--Bossii,
chronica Mediol., 1492, in-fol. ad ann. 1455). On ne concoit pas comment
les historiens des beaux-arts ont pu negliger de tels hommes." J. P. R.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 759.](0759)
