[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XIV. Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology Index](dvs016)  
  [Previous](dv20106)  [Next](0796) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

### *XIV.*

### *Anatomy, Zoology and Physiology.*

*Leonardo's eminent place in the history of medicine, as a pioneer in
the sciences of Anatomy and Physiology, will never be appreciated till
it is possible to publish the mass of manuscripts in which he largely
treated of these two branches of learning. In the present work I must
necessarily limit myself to giving the reader a general view of these
labours, by publishing his introductory notes to the various books on
anatomical subjects. I have added some extracts, and such observations
as are scattered incidentally through these treatises, as serving to
throw a light on Leonardo's scientific attitude, besides having an
interest for a wider circle than that of specialists only.*

*VASARI expressly mentions Leonardo's anatomical studies, having had
occasion to examine the manuscript books which refer to them. According
to him Leonardo studied Anatomy in the companionship of Marc Antonio
della Torre* "aiutato e scambievolmente aiutando."*--This learned
Anatomist taught the science in the universities first of Padua and then
of Pavia, and at Pavia he and Leonardo may have worked and studied
together. We have no clue to any exact dates, but in the year 1506 Marc
Antonio della Torre seems to have not yet left Padua. He was scarcely
thirty years old when he died in 1512, and his writings on anatomy have
not only never been published, but no manuscript copy of them is known
to exist.*

*This is not the place to enlarge on the connection between Leonardo and
Marc Antonio della Torre. I may however observe that I have not been
able to discover in Leonardo's manuscripts on anatomy any mention of his
younger contemporary. The few quotations which occur from writers on
medicine--either of antiquity or of the middle ages are printed in
Section XXII. Here and there in the manuscripts mention is made of an
anonymous "adversary"* (avversario) *whose views are opposed and refuted
by Leonardo, but there is no ground for supposing that Marc Antonio
della Torre should have been this "adversary".*

*Only a very small selection from the mass of anatomical drawings left
by Leonardo have been published here in facsimile, but to form any
adequate idea of their scientific*

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

*merit they should be compared with the coarse and inadequate figures
given in the published books of the early part of the XVI. century.*

William Hunter, the great surgeon--a competent judge--who had an
opportunity in the time of George III. of seeing the originals in the
King's Library, has thus recorded his opinion: "I expected to see little
more than such designs in Anatomy as might be useful to a painter in his
own profession. But I saw, and indeed with astonishment, that Leonardo
had been a general and deep student. When I consider what pains he has
taken upon every part of the body, the superiority of his universal
genius, his particular excellence in mechanics and hydraulics, and the
attention with which such a man would examine and see objects which he
has to draw, I am fully persuaded that Leonardo was the best Anatomist,
at that time, in the world ... Leonardo was certainly the first man, we
know of, who introduced the practice of making anatomical drawings" (Two
introductory letters. London 1784, pages 37 and 39).

The illustrious German Naturalist Johan Friedrich Blumenback esteemed
them no less highly; he was one of the privileged few who, after Hunter,
had the chance of seeing these Manuscripts. He writes: Der Scharfblick
dieses grossen Forschers und Darstellers der Natur hat schon auf Dinge
geachtet, die noch Jahrhunderte nachher unbemerkt geblieben sind*" (see*
Blumenbach's medicinische Bibliothek*, Vol. 3, St. 4, 1795. page 728).*

These opinions were founded on the drawings alone. Up to the present day
hardly anything has been made known of the text, and, for the reasons I
have given, it is my intention to reproduce here no more than a
selection of extracts which I have made from the originals at Windsor
Castle and elsewhere. In the Bibliography of the Manuscripts, at the end
of this volume a short review is given of the valuable contents of these
Anatomical note books which are at present almost all in the possession
of her Majesty the Queen of England. It is, I believe, possible to
assign the date with approximate accuracy to almost all the fragments,
and I am thus led to conclude that the greater part of Leonardo's
anatomical investigations were carried out after the death of della
Torre.

Merely in reading the introductory notes to his various books on Anatomy
which are here printed it is impossible to resist the impression that
the Master's anatomical studies bear to a very great extent the stamp of
originality and independent thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 796.](0796)
