[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XVII. Topographical Notes Index](dvs020)  
  [Previous](1000)  [Next](1001) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

### *XVII.*

### *Topographical Notes.*

*A large part of the texts published in this section might perhaps have
found their proper place in connection with the foregoing chapters on
Physical Geography. But these observations on Physical Geography, of
whatever kind they may be, as soon as they are localised acquire a
special interest and importance and particularly as bearing on the
question whether Leonardo himself made the observations recorded at the
places mentioned or merely noted the statements from hearsay. In a few
instances he himself tells us that he writes at second hand. In some
cases again, although the style and expressions used make it seem highly
probable that he has derived his information from others-- though, as it
seems to me, these cases are not very numerous--we find, on the other
hand, among these topographical notes a great number of observations,
about which it is extremely difficult to form a decided opinion. Of what
the Master's life and travels may have been throughout his sixty-seven
years of life we know comparatively little; for a long course of time,
and particularly from about 1482 to 1486, we do not even know with
certainty that he was living in Italy. Thus, from a biographical point
of view a very great interest attaches to some of the topographical
notes, and for this reason it seemed that it would add to their value to
arrange them in a group by themselves. Leonardo's intimate knowledge
with places, some of which were certainly remote from his native home,
are of importance as contributing to decide the still open question as
to the extent of Leonardo's travels. We shall find in these notes a
confirmation of the view, that the MSS. in which the Topographical Notes
occur are in only a very few instances such diaries as may have been in
use during a journey. These notes are mostly found in the MSS. books of
his later and quieter years, and it is certainly remarkable that
Leonardo is very reticent as to the authorities from whom he quotes his
facts and observations: For instance, as to the Straits of Gibraltar,
the Nile, the Taurus Mountains and the Tigris and Euphrates. Is it
likely that he, who declared that in all scientific research, his own
experience should be the foundation of his statements (see XIX
Philosophy No. 987--991,) should here have made an exception to this
rule without mentioning it?*

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *As for instance
in the discussion as to the equilibrium of the mass of water in the
Mediterranean Sea--a subject which, it may be observed, had at that time
attracted the interest and study of hardly any other observer. The acute
remarks, in Nos. 985--993, on the presence of shells at the tops of
mountains, suffice to prove--as it seems to me--that it was not in his
nature to allow himself to be betrayed into wide generalisations,
extending beyond the limits of his own investigations, even by such
brilliant results of personal study.*

*Most of these Topographical Notes, though suggesting very careful and
thorough research, do not however, as has been said, afford necessarily
indisputable evidence that that research was Leonardo's own. But it must
be granted that in more than one instance probability is in favour of
this idea.*

*Among the passages which treat somewhat fully of the topography of
Eastern places by far the most interesting is a description of the
Taurus Mountains; but as this text is written in the style of a formal
report and, in the original, is associated with certain letters which
give us the history of its origin, I have thought it best not to sever
it from that connection. It will be found under No. XXI (Letters).*

*That Florence, and its neighbourhood, where Leonardo spent his early
years, should be nowhere mentioned except in connection with the
projects for canals, which occupied his attention for some short time
during the first ten years of the XVIth century, need not surprise us.
The various passages relating to the construction of canals in Tuscany,
which are put together at the beginning, are immediately followed by
those which deal with schemes for canals in Lombardy; and after these
come notes on the city and vicinity of Milan as well as on the lakes of
North Italy.*

*The notes on some towns of Central Italy which Leonardo visited in
1502, when in the service of Cesare Borgia, are reproduced here in the
same order as in the note book used during these travels (MS. L.,
Institut de France). These notes have but little interest in themselves
excepting as suggesting his itinerary. The maps of the districts drawn
by Leonardo at the time are more valuable (see No. 1054 note). The names
on these maps are not written from right to left, but in the usual
manner, and we are permitted to infer that they were made in obedience
to some command, possibly for the use of Cesare Borgia himself; the fact
that they remained nevertheless in Leonardo's hands is not surprising
when we remember the sudden political changes and warlike events of the
period. There can be no doubt that these maps, which are here published
for the first time, are original in the strictest sense of the word,
that is to say drawn from observations of the places themselves; this is
proved by the fact--among others--that we find among his manuscripts not
only the finished maps themselves but the rough sketches and studies for
them. And it would perhaps be difficult to point out among the abundant
contributions to geographical knowledge published during the XVIth
century, any maps at all approaching these in accuracy and finish.*

*The interesting map of the world, so far as it was then known, which is
among the Leonardo MSS. at Windsor (published in the* 'Archaeologia'
*Vol. XI) cannot be attributed to the Master, as the Marchese Girolamo
d'Adda has sufficiently proved; it has not therefore been reproduced
here.*

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

*Such of Leonardo's observations on places in Italy as were made before
or after his official travels as military engineer to Cesare Borgia,
have been arranged in alphabetical order, under Nos. 1034-1054. The most
interesting are those which relate to the Alps and the Appenines, Nos.
1057-1068.*

*Most of the passages in which France is mentioned have hitherto
remained unknown, as well as those which treat of the countries
bordering on the Mediterranean, which come at the end of this section.
Though these may be regarded as of a more questionable importance in
their bearing on the biography of the Master than those which mention
places in France, it must be allowed that they are interesting as
showing the prominent place which the countries of the East held in his
geographical studies. He never once alludes to the discovery of
America.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1001.](1001)
