[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Age of Reason](../index) 
[Index](index)   
[XXI. Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes Index](dvs025)  
  [Previous](1335)  [Next](1336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486225739/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Da Vinci Notebooks at Intangible Textual Heritage*

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

### *XXI.*

### *Letters. Personal Records. Dated Notes.*

*When we consider how superficial and imperfect are the accounts of
Leonardo's life written some time after his death by Vasari and others,
any notes or letters which can throw more light on his personal
circumstances cannot fail to be in the highest degree interesting. The
texts here given as Nos.* 1351--1353, *set his residence in Rome in
quite a new aspect; nay, the picture which irresistibly dwells in our
minds after reading these details of his life in the Vatican, forms a
striking contrast to the contemporary life of Raphael at Rome.*

*I have placed foremost of these documents the very remarkable letters
to the Defterdar of Syria. In these Leonardo speaks of himself as having
staid among the mountains of Armenia, and as the biographies of the
master tell nothing of any such distant journeys, it would seem most
obvious to treat this passage as fiction, and so spare ourselves the
onus of proof and discussion. But on close examination no one can doubt
that these documents, with the accompanying sketches, are the work of
Leonardo's own hand. Not merely is the character of the handwriting his,
but the spelling and the language are his also. In one respect only does
the writing betray any marked deviation from the rest of the notes,
especially those treating on scientific questions; namely, in these
observations he seems to have taken particular pains to give the most
distinct and best form of expression to all he had to say; we find
erasures and emendations in almost every line. He proceeded, as we shall
see, in the same way in the sketches for letters to Giuliano de' Medici,
and what can be more natural, I may ask, than to find the draft of a
letter thus altered and improved when it is to contain an account of a
definite subject, and when personal interests are in the scale? The
finished copies as sent off are not known to exist; if we had these
instead of the rough drafts, we might unhesitatingly*

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

*have declared that some unknown Italian engineer must have been, at
that time, engaged in Armenia in the service of the Egyptian Sultan, and
that Leonardo had copied his documents. Under this hypothesis however we
should have to state that this unknown writer must have been so far one
in mind with Leonardo as to use the same style of language and even the
same lines of thought. This explanation might--as I say--have been
possible, if only we had the finished letters. But why should these
rough drafts of letters be regarded as anything else than what they
actually and obviously are? If Leonardo had been a man of our own time,
we might perhaps have attempted to account for the facts by saying that
Leonardo, without having been in the East himself, might have undertaken
to write a Romance of which the scene was laid in Armenia, and at the
desire of his publisher had made sketches of landscape to illustrate the
text.*

I feel bound to mention this singular hypothesis as it has actually been
put forward (see No. 1336 note 5); and it would certainly seem as though
there were no other possible way of evading the conclusion to which
these letters point, and their bearing on the life of the
master,--absurd as the alternative is. But, if, on a question of such
importance, we are justified in suggesting theories that have no
foundation in probability, I could suggest another which, as compared
with that of a Fiction by Leonardo, would be neither more nor less
plausible; it is, moreover the only other hypothesis, perhaps, which can
be devised to account for these passages, if it were possible to prove
that the interpretation that the documents themselves suggest, must be
rejected a priori; viz may not Leonardo have written them with the
intention of mystifying those who, after his death, should try to
decipher these manuscripts with a view to publishing them? But if, in
fact, no objection that will stand the test of criticism can be brought
against the simple and direct interpretation of the words as they stand,
we are bound to regard Leonardo's travels in the East as an established
fact. There is, I believe nothing in what we know of his biography to
negative such a fact, especially as the details of his life for some few
years are wholly unknown; nor need we be at a loss for evidence which
may serve to explain--at any rate to some extent--the strangeness of his
undertaking such a journey. We have no information as to Leonardo's
history between 1482 and 1486; it cannot be proved that he was either in
Milan or in Florence. On the other hand the tenor of this letter does
not require us to assume a longer absence than a year or two. For, even
if his appointment (offitio) *as Engineer in Syria had been a permanent
one, it might have become untenable--by the death perhaps of the
Defterdar, his patron, or by his removal from office--, and Leonardo on
his return home may have kept silence on the subject of an episode which
probably had ended in failure and disappointment.*

From the text of No. 1379 we can hardly doubt that Leonardo intended to
make an excursion secretly from Rome to Naples, although so far as has
hitherto been known, his biographers never allude to it. In another
place (No. 1077) he says that he had worked as an Engineer in Friuli.
Are we to doubt this statement too, merely because no biographer has
hitherto given us any information on the matter? In the geographical
notes Leonardo frequently speaks of the East, and though such passages

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

*afford no direct proof of his having been there, they show beyond a
doubt that, next to the Nile, the Euphrates, the Tigris and the Taurus
mountains had a special interest in his eyes. As a still further proof
of the futility of the argument that there is nothing in his drawings to
show that he had travelled in the East, we find on [Pl.
CXX](pl120.htm#img_pl120) a study of oriental heads of Armenian
type,--though of course this may have been made in Italy.*

If the style of these letters were less sober, and the expressions less
strictly to the point throughout, it miglit be possible to regard them
as a romantic fiction instead of a narrative of fact. Nay, we have only
to compare them with such obviously fanciful passages as No. 1354, Nos.
670-673, and the Fables and Prophecies. It is unnecessary to discuss the
subject any further here; such explanations as the letter needs are
given in the foot notes.

The drafts of letters to Lodovico il Moro are very remarkable. Leonardo
and this prince were certainly far less closely connected, than has
hitherto been supposed. It is impossible that Leonardo can have remained
so long in the service of this prince, because the salary was good, as
is commonly stated. On the contrary, it would seem, that what kept him
there, in spite of his sore need of the money owed him by the prince,
was the hope of some day being able to carry out the project of casting
the 'gran cavallo'.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1336.](1336)
