[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar08)  [Next](gar10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE ZENDAVESTA.

The Zendavesta, literally "text and comment," is the doctrine of
Zoroaster (*Zarathrustra*), comprised in eight parts, written at
different periods, but of which the earliest have been assigned to the
date of B.C. 1200-1000. In its present form it was collected by
Ardeshir, the founder of the Sassanian dynasty, from oral tradition, at
the time when he re-established the ancient religion of Persia.

In this revelation the Supreme Being is called "Boundless Time"
(*Zarvana Akarana*), because to him no beginning can be assigned; he is
so surrounded by his own glory, and so far exalted beyond all human
comprehension, that he can only be the object of silent veneration. The
beginning of creation was made by means of *Emanations*. The first
emanation of the Eternal One was Light, whence issued Ormuzd
(*Ahuramazda*), the King of Light. Ormuzd is styled the Firstborn of
Boundless Time; and the "Ferouer" of him, or Pre-existing Soul (type or
idea in Platonic phrase), had existed from all eternity within the
primitive Light. By means of his "Word," Ormuzd created the pure world
of which he is the preserver and the

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

judge. Next, he created in his own image the six *Amshaspands*, who
stand about his throne, and are his agents with the lower spirits, and
with mankind, whose prayers they offer up to him, and to whom they serve
for models of perfection. These Amshaspands, of whom Ormuzd is the
first, thus making up the mystic number *seven*, are of both sexes, and
the Gnostics adopted them, as we shall see further on, into their own
systems, with the same distinction of sex. The next series of emanations
were the *Izeds*, twenty-eight in number, of whom Mithras is the chief.
Like the superior order, they watch over the purity and happiness of the
world, of which they are the genii and guardians. The principal names
amongst them are Vohu-mano, Mazda, Asha, Vayu (Ventus), Geusurvi (Soul
of the Earth), Sraosha (who exactly answers, in point of duties, to the
Grecian Hermes and Jewish Gabriel, for he carries the mandates of
Ormuzd, and conveys up to him the souls of the righteous).

The third series, the *Ferouers*, are in number infinite. These are the
Thoughts or "Ideas" conceived in the mind of Ormuzd before he proceeded
to the creation of things. They are the protectors of mankind during
this mortal life, and will purify their souls on the Day of the
Resurrection.

The creation of these chiefs, with their angelic hosts, had become
necessary. Ahriman, the Second-born of the Eternal One--like Ormuzd, an
emanation from the Primal Light, and equally pure, but ambitious and
full of pride--had become jealous of the Firstborn. On this account the
Supreme Being condemned him to inhabit for twelve thousand years the
space that is illumined by no ray of light--the black empire of
Darkness. This interval will suffice to decide the struggle between
Light and Darkness, between Good and Evil. Ahriman, in order to oppose
his rival, created in his turn three series of evil spirits,
corresponding in number, and antagonistic in office, to each one of the
good, and, like them, male and female. The first series is that of the
*Arch-Devs*, chained each one to his respective planet, and of whom the
chief is Astomogt, "the two-footed Serpent of lies." These Devs are the
authors of all evil, both physical and moral, throughout the universe.

Ormuzd, after a reign of three thousand years, then created

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

the Animal World in six periods, creating first light--a faint image of
the Light celestial--then water, earth, plants, beasts, and lastly, man.
Ahriman had concurred in the creation of earth and water, for *Darkness*
being already inherent in these two elements, Ormuzd was unable to
exclude its nature from them.

Ormuzd had produced by his *Word* a being the type and source of
universal life for all creation; this being was called *Life*, or the
*Bull* (the same word in Zend stands for both). This creature Ahriman
contrived to destroy, but out of its scattered seed Ormuzd, through the
agency of the Amshaspand Saphandomad (*Wisdom*), formed the first human
pair, Meschia and Meschiane. This couple Ahriman, by a bribe of fruits
and milk, succeeded in corrupting, having gained over the female first.
Then, to all the good animals made by Ormuzd, he opposed, by his own
creation, as many mischievous and venomous ones. The struggle still goes
on; the Power of Darkness often is the superior, but the pure souls are
assisted and defended by the good genii, and will ultimately triumph.
For when things shall seem at their worst, and Evil all-powerful in the
creation, three prophets shall appear and restore the lost Light. One of
these, Sosioch, shall regenerate the world and restore it to its
pristine excellence. Then comes the general Resurrection, when the good
shall immediately enter into this happy abode--the regenerated earth,
and Ahriman, together with his angels and the wicked, be purified by
immersion in a lake of molten metal, so as to render them fitting
members of the new kingdom. Thenceforth all will enjoy unchangeable
happiness, and, headed by Sosioch, ever sing the praises of the Eternal
One.

The religion of Zoroaster was a reformed version of the ancient creed
held by the inhabitants of Eritene in Bactria. For it is probable that
the first gods of the Aryan race before it split into Indian and Zend,
were the powers of Nature, *Indra*, thunder, *Mithra*, sunlight, *Vayu*,
wind, *Agni*, fire, *Armaiti*, earth, *Soma*, intoxication. The worship
of the last may have been the source of the Dionysia, introduced from
India, as the Greeks themselves always asserted. These powers were
called *Ahuras* and *Devas* indifferently; but Zoroaster reduced all
these

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

powers to the secondary rank of angels, and used the name *Devas* in a
bad sense only. The Zoroastrian was the established religion of the
Persians at the time when they conquered Assyria; and to a great extent
it superseded the material idolatry of the Babylonians, whose gods
Darius and Xerxes melted down without any scruple. But Matter is of
opinion that the College of Magi, established long before the Persian
conquest of Babylon, accepted the new religion upon the change of
masters, retaining nothing of the old besides Astrology and Divination.

It must not be forgotten how large a portion of the Jewish captivity
remained permanently in Assyria--only two tribes, Judah and Levi, having
been sent back to Jerusalem by Cyrus; and Babylon long continued the
seat of a most flourishing Rabbinical school, whilst Judea itself, down
to the time of the Macedonian conquest, remained a province of the
Persian Empire. How important a part of the Persian population at a much
later period were either Jews, or under Jewish influence, appears from
the very remarkable assertion of Josephus, "that his nation were
encouraged to brave all extremities in their final struggle against the
power of Rome by the confident expectation of aid from their brethren
beyond the Euphrates." And three centuries later Ammianus notices that
Julian's invading army came upon a city entirely inhabited by Jews in
the very centre of Persia. After the captivity, the principal literary
establishments of the Jews appear to have been seated in central Asia.
The schools of Nahardea, of Sora, of Punbiditha, were at least as famous
as the schools of Palestine (cf. Jos. Ant. xviii. 12). The latter even
appear to have paid a sort of filial deference to these foundations: the
Chaldee version of the Pentateuch, made by Onkelos of Babylon, was
accepted as the authorised version by all the Jews living in Palestine;
and the Rabbi Hillel, coming from that capital to Jerusalem, was
received by the doctors of the Holy City as an ornament of the same
national school, and this only a few years before the birth of Christ.
From all these circumstances it is easy to perceive how much of the
Zoroastrian element may have pervaded the Jewish religion at the time of
the promulgation of Christianity, when its principal teachers

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

were the Pharisees or "separatists," if, indeed, their doctors did not
actually get their appellation from the word *Pharsi*, "Persian"--an
etymology that has something to recommend it. These doctrines, as then
taught, are set forth in the *Kabbala*, or "Traditions," so called from
*Kabbal*, "to receive"--the main features of which shall be sketched in
the following sections.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Kabbala and the Talmud](gar10.md)
