[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar02)  [Next](gar04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xiii">p. xiii</span>

### INTRODUCTION.

THAT nothing upon the subject of Gnosticism should have hitherto been
attempted in our language except by Dr. Walsh in his very meagre sketch
(long since out of print), seemed to me a sufficient excuse for my
undertaking the same task upon a more comprehensive scale, as well as
upon different principles. Dr. Walsh's performance, entitled 'An Essay
on Coins, Medals, and Gems, as illustrating the progress of Christianity
in the Early Ages,' is little more than an abridgment of some popular
Church History for the period comprehended within its scope, illustrated
from the very scanty store of monuments at his command; whilst his
explanations are, like the source supplying them, based upon grounds
altogether fallacious, and, even to the beginner, obviously
unsatisfactory.

Taking for granted, upon the bare word of their opponents, that the
various Teachers of the Gnosis were mere *heretics*, that is, perverters
of the regular (!) Christian doctrine which they had at first embraced
as a divine revelation, he, like his guides, did not trouble himself any
further to investigate the true origin of their systems, but was content
with roughly sketching their most prominent features; whilst in
explaining their extant productions, he refers all, however diverse in
nature, to the same school, and interprets them according to his own
preconceived and baseless views of their character.

On such a plan as this, neither the doctrines nor the monuments they
have bequeathed to us in such profusion are susceptible of even a
plausible explanation, much less of one capable of satisfying an
unprejudiced and inquiring mind. The method, therefore, of treating the
subject which I have followed in the present work is to begin by
reviewing the great religious systems of the East, flourishing at the
time of the promulgation

<span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span>

of Christianity in those regions, with the influence of these systems
upon the modes of thought and expression of both the missionaries of the
new creed and their opponents; and lastly to establish, upon the
testimony of the Apostle to the Gentiles himself, the *previous
existence* of the germs of Gnosticism in the cities that were the scene
of his most important labours.

In my sketch of these older systems I have done little more than
condense Matter's admirable introduction to his 'Histoire Critique du
Gnosticisme'; but from that point forward have carried on my
investigations according to a theory to which that writer once alludes
approvingly, although, from some unaccountable reason, he has neglected
to follow it out to its legitimate consequences. Restricting himself to
describing in his lucid and elegant style the speculations of the
several heresiarchs, and seeking no further back than the Zendavesta and
Kabbala for the storehouses whence they all must have drawn their first
principles, he falls into the grave error of representing their
doctrines as *novel*, and the pure *inventions* of the persons that
preached them.

That the seeds of the Gnosis were originally of *Indian* growth, carried
so far westward by the influence of that *Buddhistic* movement which had
previously overspread all the East, from Thibet to Ceylon, was the great
truth faintly discerned by Matter, but which became evident to me upon
acquiring even a slight acquaintance with the chief doctrines of Indian
theosophy. To display this in the most incontrovertible manner, the two
systems, each in its highest form of development--that of Valentinus,
and that of the Nepalese Buddhists--are described and confronted for the
sake of establishing their original identity: and throughout these pages
innumerable other points of affinity will be found noticed as they
present themselves. Actual *historical proof* of the same fact will also
be adduced, establishing the important circumstance (but hitherto
entirely unnoticed, or disregarded) that Buddhism had already been
planted in the dominions of the Seleucidæ and the Ptolemies at least as
early as the times of the generation following the establishment of
those dynasties, and was provided for in treaties made between those
Grecian princes and the great

<span id="page_xv">p. xv</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hindoo promoter of
the religion. In the history of the Church it is most certain that
almost every notion that was subsequently denounced as *heretical* can
be traced up to Indian speculative philosophy as its genuine
fountain-head: how much that was allowed to pass current for *orthodox*
had really flowed from the same source, it is neither expedient nor
decorous now to inquire.

In order to obtain a clear view of the principal forms of Gnosticism, as
well as to escape relying upon second-hand information (in this case
more than elsewhere untrustworthy), I commenced the collecting materials
for the present work by carefully perusing the vast 'Panarion' of
Epiphanius--a laborious undertaking, but well repaid by the vivid
picture he presents of the inner state of society under the Lower
Empire, and of the war even at that late period so fiercely waged
between Reason and Faith. The 'Panarion' is a connected history of the
Gnosis in all its developments during the first three centuries--the
author quoting Irenæus for the earlier ages; for the later his account
is of the highest value, having been derived from personal experience,
Epiphanius having in his youth belonged to the Marcosian sect. After his
days nothing new sprung up in the field of Religious philosophy, before
so diversified with the vigorous and more curious flowers (or weeds) of
the Gnosis; the civil now combining with the ecclesiastical power to cut
down and root out all such daring and irregular growths of the human
mind.

Since the first publication of this treatise I have become acquainted
with and minutely studied two authorities of the greatest importance for
the true understanding of Gnosticism--the one for its philosophy; the
other for its tangible remains. 'The Refutation of all Heresies,' of
Hippolytus, written two centuries before the 'Panarion,' gives a view of
the chief schools of the Gnosis, drawn up with the utmost intelligence
united with the most charming candour; qualities sadly to seek in the
other ecclesiastical historians. The Pistis-Sophia,' the only Gnostic
Gospel preserved, throws a light upon the terminology and machinery of
the religion that, before its discovery and publication was perfectly
unattainable. Both

<span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span>

these treatises are of recent discovery, and consequently their
assistance was lost to the previous historians of Gnosticism. I have
therefore availed myself largely of these invaluable resources, which
will be found doing good service in almost every section of the present
work.

After considering the class of speculations that owed their birth to
India, next in importance for her contributions to the *opinions*, still
more to the *monuments* before us, conies Egypt with her primeval creed,
although exhibited in its Romanized and latest phase; and whose
productions are too often confounded with the true offspring of the
Gnosis. These remains are here discriminated; their distinctive
characters are pointed out; and they are arranged under several heads,
according as their object was religious or medicinal. In the
consideration of these remains, Bellermann's classification has been
chiefly followed; according to which the truly Gnostic are regarded as
those only that exhibit the figure of the Pantheus, *Abraxas*, the
actual invention of Basilides, and which gives its name to the class.
The second, *Abraxoids*, includes the types borrowed from different
religions by the other Gnostic teachers. The third, *Abraxaster*,
consists of such as in their nature are purely astrological, and
intended for talismans; deriving their virtues from the stars. In the
first of these classes much space has been devoted to the ingenious
creation of the Alexandrine philosopher, the pantheistic image of the
supreme Abraxas; whose title has hitherto been improperly applied to
monuments some of which are anterior in date to his embodiment in a
visible form; whilst others spring from nations entirely unconnected
with his worship. Of this *eidolon* of the *personage* thereby typified,
of the meaning of his *name* and titles, much information has been
collected, and presented here in a connected form for the benefit of
those interested in learning what can on safe grounds be established in
elucidation of these abtruse questions.

*Mithraicism*, under whose kindly and congenial shelter so much of
Occidental Christianity grew up unmolested, is reviewed in its due
order, and the causes explained of an alliance at first sight so
inexplicable. With this subject are connected the singular resemblance
between the ceremonial of the two, and the transfer

<span id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span>

of so much that was Mithraic into the practice of the orthodox; and many
curious memorials will be found described bearing witness to the reality
of this adaptation.

After the Mithraic, the religion of *Serapis* comes to be considered; a
worship which, besides being the last of the Heathen forms to fall
before the power of Christianity, had previously contributed, as largely
as the Mithraic, to the constitution of the later Gnosticism. It is in
truth a great mistake, the confining the name of "Gnostic" (as is
commonly done) to the sectaries who, boasting of their "superior
lights," declared that they were the only real Christians (as did the
Ophites), and that too in virtue of a creed professedly of their own
devising. Such Gnostics indeed were Christians by their own showing, and
regarded all who differed from them as *heretics:* but at the same time
they based their arguments upon the tenets of Pagan religions; very far
from regarding the latter as the empty fabrications of demons, which was
the persuasion of the orthodox. But although they accepted these ancient
Ethnic legends, it was only because through the help of their
"knowledge" they were enabled to discern the truth enveloped within
these seemingly profane traditions. But the followers of Mithras and of
Serapis had in reality, and long before them, a Gnosis of their own,
communicated in their *Mysteries* to the initiated few; and they opposed
to the predictions of orthodox and Gnostic alike claims and pretensions
lofty as their own. The Emperor Hadrian, a most diligent inquirer into
things above man's nature, got himself initiated into one mystery after
another; nevertheless we shall find him writing from Alexandria that the
worship of Christ and of Serapis was in that city one and the same, and
moreover the sole religion of that immense population. Consequently,
those initiated into the true secrets of the old religion must have
recognised the fact that their deity, whether the Sun or the Soul of the
Universe, was nothing but a *type* of the *One*, the Saviour recently
revealed to them: or else it would appear (which tells equally for our
argument) that the new converts, in order to escape persecution, enjoyed
their own faith under the covert of the national worship, which was
susceptible of a spiritual interpretation quite cognate to their own
ideas,

<span id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span>

and indeed enshrouding the same. As for the worshippers of Mithras,
their whole elaborate system of sacraments and degrees of initiation had
no other object than the securing of spiritual enlightenment and
spiritual blessings. The foundation being the pure teaching of
Zoroaster, its holders were prepared gladly to accept any higher
revelation, and to discover that the greater mystery had been
foreshadowed in the types and ceremonies of the former one. In this way
a man might continue a Mithraicist and yet accept all the doctrines of
Christianity, as the priests of that religion in their last days assured
the incredulous Augustine.

After thus pointing out the various elements which the Apostles of the
Gnosis worked up so ingeniously into one harmonious whole, incorporating
therewith so much of the Christian scheme as fitted to the rest, we come
prepared to the examination of the *Symbols* and *Terminology* by which
these ideas were communicated to the members of the sect who had
attained to the *Arcanum;* the composite *images* or *sigils* "having a
voice for the intelligent, which the vulgar crowd heareth not."

*Astrology* justly claims for her own a large share of the relics
popularly called *Gnostic;* for Gnosticism, from the beginning, had
linked its own speculations to those of the Magians’ national science,
and borrowed as a vehicle for its own peculiar ideas the machinery of
the latter--its Astral Genii, Decani, and Myriageneses. And this truth
was seen by the earliest writers upon Gnosticism, for Hippolytus proves
conclusively, at much length, that the system of the Peratae (a branch
of the Ophites) was nothing more than a barefaced plagiarism from the
rules of Astrology. Under this head I have endeavoured to separate the
purely Astrological talismans from those to which the *illuminati*,
their makers, had given a more spiritual sense. "Astrology, not Christ,
is the author of their religion," says Hippolytus of the sects founded
by Euphrates and Celbes; and proceeds to give extracts from their
writings, held in the highest esteem at the time, which amply bear out
his assertion.

Next pour in, a multitudinous swarm, the stones covered over with long
strings of bare *inscriptions*, genuine offspring of the Kabbala, that
betray the handiwork of the idol-hating Jewish

<span id="page_xix">p. xix</span>

dreamers of Alexandria--spells even then ascribed to Solomon, and which
secured the favour

"Of those demons that are found  
In fire, air, flood, or under ground;  
Whose power hath a true consent  
With planet or with element."

One object I have kept steadily in view throughout the whole of this
investigation--to show how the productions of the different schools are
to be distinguished from each other; and to this particular attention
has been given in describing the numerous remains proceeding from the
several sources just enumerated, that are collected in the accompanying
plates, and thus in some degree to remedy the confusion that reigns at
present in the whole department. My predecessor, Matter, busied himself
only with the doctrines, making use of the monuments merely in
illustration of his remarks; but as my own labours are properly designed
to be subsidiary to his invaluable treatise, I refer the reader to him
for the more complete elucidation of the *philosophy* of Gnosticism, and
give my full attention to its *archæological* side, which he has too
cursorily glanced at, and for which nothing has been done of any
importance since the publications of Chiflet and Montfaucon.

Last to be considered comes the Gnosis in its final and grandest
manifestation, the composite religion of *Manes:* with its wonderful
revival and diffusion over Mediæval Europe; and its supposed connexion
with the downfall of the Templars, of which catastrophe the history and
causes are here briefly sketched; although to form a satisfactory
judgment on the merits of the case is about the hardest problem history
can offer. With their scandal and their fate is coupled the most
singular phenomenon of modern times--the preservation by their
*professed* descendants, the *Freemasons*, of so much symbolism that
appears to be indisputably Gnostic in its origin. For this, however
(unfortunately for the lovers of mystery), a very matter of fact but
doubtless sufficient cause can be assigned, and by valid arguments
established: when the solution of the enigma irresistibly brings to mind
Æsop's apologue of the "Fox and the Mask," and his exclamation of
disappointment after he had at

<span id="page_xx">p. xx</span>

last mustered up sufficient courage to examine the interior of the
awe-inspiring and venerable head. This section is illustrated by all the
information I have been able to glean from different sources upon the
curious subject of *Masons’ Marks*--which, yet existing and in common
use amongst our own craftsmen and equally so amongst the Hindoos in
daily religious observance, can be traced back through Gothic retention,
and Gnostic usage, through old Greek and Etruscan art, to their ultimate
source; and which attest more convincingly than anything else what
region gave birth to the theosophy making such liberal use of the same
*siglæ* in Roman times. To assist inquirers into this point I have been
careful to give references to all the published lists of these Marks
that have come to my knowledge; which same rule I have observed as
regards other monographs upon the several various questions discussed in
the following pages. In this way the shortcomings of myself can be
supplied by those desirous of fuller information: for I am well aware
that my own best qualification for attempting an arduous investigation
like the present, extending over so many and unconnected branches of
learning, lies in a larger practical experience of the monuments
themselves, tangible and literary, than was possessed by those who have
hitherto attempted it. And as it is a most true adage, "Dans le pays des
aveugles le borgne est roi," there is some probability of my labours
proving both novel and interesting to many, who desire to know something
authentic upon the much-talked-of but little understood subject of
Gnosticism.

Related to this religion by their nature are *talismans* and *amulets*
in general; for Gnostic symbols and Gnostic formulæ gave their virtue to
many of the class: being borrowed either directly from the Gnosis, or
from the older creeds out of which the latter was constructed. Their
employment, and the notions generating them, have been here described;
showing the derivation of many of the mediæval examples from the Gnostic
class; and by following out the same principle it has been attempted to
find a key to their cabalistic legends, which may fit them better than
any hitherto offered by their interpreters--*symbols* and *emblems*
being with them those conveying the idea of *death*,

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

which last indeed has of all others furnished the richest store of such
imagery; for thereby the human mind endeavoured to familiarise itself
with the thought of mortality, and by embellishing the idea tried to
reconcile itself to the inevitable. This being a topic of universal
interest, to say nothing of its very important relations to Art, my
collections connected therewith have been somewhat extensive, and
embrace many particulars neglected by Lessing in his curious essay
entitled 'Wie die Alten den Tod gebildet.'

With respect to the *illustrations* of this book, many doubtless will be
surprised as well as disappointed at finding them derived entirely from
monuments of such small apparent importance as *engraved stones;* and,
thinking this part incomplete on that account, may accuse the author of
negligence in not having had recourse to other evidences of a more
public character. But the limitation is in truth the necessary result of
the nature of the things discussed in this inquiry. Secret Societies,
especially the one whose maxim was (as Clemens records) that truly wise
one--

"Learn to know all, but keep thyself unknown;"

erect no *monuments* to attract public attention. They deal but in
*symbols*, to be privately circulated amongst their members in
*passwords* known only to the *illuminati;* or else they embody their
doctrines in mystic drawings, like the Ophite "Diagramma"; or upon
papyri long since committed to the flames. The man of taste, but not an
antiquary, will certainly exclaim against the rudeness of the drawing in
my illustrations; but the truth is that, rude as they look, they in most
cases *flatter* their originals, the extreme barbarism of which it was
often found impossible to reproduce with any hope of leaving the meaning
recognisable. Be it remembered that

"Gratia non habitat, non hoc Cyllenius antro."

Pallas no longer, as in the earlier ages of the art, guided the
engraver's hand, but Siva and Bhavani (ill-disguised as Hermes and Isis)
suggested the designs; or else he was inspired by the Typhonian monsters
which imagined the Genii of Astrology. The religion of *Fear*, under its
various manifestations, now

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

reigned supreme, having banished the beauteous sensuous machinery of the
old Greek Nature-worship, into which nothing that was malignant or
hideous was ever suffered to intrude. The virtue of the *talisman* lay
in the type it carried; and in its own material substance the *manner*
of the exhibition of the potent sigil was altogether unregarded. One of
the most learned men this University has ever produced once remarked to
me that the Gnostic theories reminded him of the visions that float
through the brain of a *madman*--not of a *fool*. Circumstances
following gave a melancholy *force* to this acute and accurate
distinction. Let any imaginative person read my extracts from the
"Revelation" of Marcus, with all its crazy ingenuity in deducing the
nature of the Deity from the properties of numerals; above all, his
exemplification of Infinity by the perpetual multiplication of the
letters contained in other letters making up a name--he will speedily
find his brain begin to whirl, and be reminded of similar phantoms of
numerals recurring in endless series, and the equally endless attempts
to sum them up in order to obtain repose, that fill the head when
suffering from the first approaches of fever before actual delirium
pushes memory from her seat. Or, again, when the febrile disturbance of
the brain is yet slighter, one will sometimes awake out of a dream with
a fleeting sensation of inexpressible happiness arising from the
immediate attainment of Omniscience in virtue of something that has just
been revealed to him; but too soon he finds that ineffable *something*
has fled for ever, all that is left of it being the faint recollection
that it was contained in a *numeral*. And one of the most striking
points in the revelation of the 'Seherin von Prevorst,' so religiously
recorded by Justinus Kerner (and which proves that *all* the wondrous
narrative was not imposture), is her declaration that she could see the
entire history of each year as it closed, with every event, however
trifling, clear and distinct before her mind, all comprehended within
the form of a single *numeral;* and her assertion upon these grounds
that at the Judgment-Day the whole past life of every man will thus be
pictured in a single moment before his mind's eye.

About half the number of the drawings for these illustrations

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

were done by myself from the most interesting specimens that came under
my notice in the course of several years, so that I am able to vouch for
their scrupulous fidelity. Afterwards, when the sudden failure of my
sight prevented my carrying on the drawings, the kindness of the then
owner of most of the originals came to my assistance and furnished the
remainder. Most of them in fact were taken from the large and
unpublished set contained in the ancient Praun Cabinet (formed three
centuries ago), now unfortunately broken up. The Gnostic stones,
however--73 in number--have been since that time purchased for the
British Museum, where they will be found conveniently arranged for
consultation, in the Egyptian Room, which contains the works in
terra-cotta. This my collection of drawings was in truth the occasion of
the present work; for after making out a detailed description of each
specimen, it became easy to put the mass of materials I had collected
for their elucidation into a form available for supporting my
explanations by showing the grounds on which they were based: and in
this way the work has grown up by gradual accretion to its present
dimensions. The theme offers so boundless a variety of interesting
subjects for research, one suggesting another in endless succession,
that it can only be compared to Marcus’ own exposition of the infinite
composition of the Ineffable Name (quoted above), and would alone supply
materials for a whole library of distinct treatises upon its various
subdivisions.

In those few instances where the better style of the original deserved
reproduction by a more artistic hand, I have had recourse to the
services of Mr. R. B. Utting, who has executed the woodcuts with a
spirit as well as an accuracy that leave nothing to be desired.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gnosticism and its Origin](gar04)
