[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar04)  [Next](gar06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### PISTIS-SOPHIA.

This treatise, ascribed to Valentinus (I know not on what authority),
was discovered by Schwartze in a Coptic MS. preserved in the British
Museum. He transcribed the Coptic text and translated it into Latin;
both texts and version were published by Petermann in the year 1853. The
original is copiously interspersed with Greek words and phrases; in
fact, the Coptic was evidently so poor a language as to have no terms of
its own to express any but the most materialistic ideas. The matter of
its professed revelation is set forth also with endless repetitions,
bespeaking a language destitute of relative pronouns, of conjunctions,
and of all the other grammatical refinements necessary for the clear and
concise expression of thought. <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md)

The authorship of this record is assigned by itself in several places to
Philip the Apostle, whom the Saviour bids to sit down and write these
things! This circumstance made me at first conclude it to be the lost
Gospel of Philip quoted by Epiphanius, but the particular anecdote
adduced by him from that gospel is not to be discovered anywhere in
this. But as the original is full of wide lacunae, which often fall in
very interesting places, as if purposely defaced to escape the eyes of
the profane, such an omission is not altogether conclusive against the
identity of the two.

The nature of the book may be briefly sketched as follows. It professes
to be a record of the higher teaching of the Saviour communicated to his
disciples during the *eleven* years he passed with them on earth after
his crucifixion, and when he had returned from his ascension into
heaven. This ascension had been made from the Mount of Olives, where he
received from on high two shining vestures inscribed with five mystic
words (§16), and the names of all the powers whose domains he had to
traverse. He thus (as he relates to the disciples) passes through the
gate of the Firmament, the Sphere of Fate, and the regions

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

of the Twelve Great Æons, all of whom in succession are terror-smitten,
and fall down before him and sing hymns of praise. On arriving at the
thirteenth æon, he finds seated below and weeping the excluded Power
Pistis-Sophia, <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md) who gives her name to
the revelation. She, having once caught a glimpse of the Supreme Light,
was seized with a desire to fly upwards into it: but Adamas, the ruler
of her proper place, being enraged at this act of rebellion against
himself, caused a false light, a veritable *ignis fatuus*, to shine upon
the waters of the subjacent chaos which lured down the hapless aspirant,
and she was inextricably immersed in the abyss, and beset by the spirits
thereof, all eager to deprive her of her native light. The doctrine of
the admixture of light, derived from the Treasure of Light, with
*matter*, its imprisonment therein, and its extraction and recovery by
the appointed "Receivers of the Light," is the pervading idea of this
revelation, to a greater extent even than in the Ophite scheme. As part
of the same notion comes the frequent allusion to the κέρασμος or
chaotic commixture of Light and Matter, to re-organise which is the
special object of the Saviour's descent from above.

At least one half of the book is taken up with the account of the
successive steps by which she ascends through all the Twelve Æons by the
Saviour's aid, and the *confession* she sings at each stage of her
deliverance out of chaos. Each confession is proposed by Jesus to a
disciple for explanation, and is referred to some psalm or other
prophecy containing parallel sentiments; this concordance being
occasionally made out with considerable ingenuity. A remarkable
peculiarity is that all throughout Mary Magdalene is the chief speaker,
and the most highly commended for her spiritual knowledge, though once
she is sharply rebuked by Peter for her presumption in thus perpetually
putting herself forward unbidden--and not giving the *men* a chance to
speak. After Pistis-Sophia has thus regained her lost position, the most
valuable portion of the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

exposition of doctrines commences. The Magdalene asks the great question
as to the final cause of Sin (§ 281), to which Jesus returns a long and
minute description of the composition of the soul of man, which is
fourfold, the divine spark therein (a particle of the Light yet
entangled in the κέρασμος) being encased in a threefold envelope formed
out of the *effluvia* of the rebellious Æons, the tendency of which is
to keep it in subjection to the passions and to themselves, so that when
separated from the body it may not be able to escape out of their
domains, "the regions of mid-space," here represented as places of pain.
These Æons are elsewhere identified with the signs of the Zodiac. Next
cones a detailed account of the Rulers of the regions of torment (§
320), of their *authentic* forms, a crocodile, a bear, a cat, a dog, a
serpent, a black bull, &c., and of their *authentic* names; these last
are not Semitic, but either Coptic or belong, judging from their
terminations, to the mystic language generally used upon the Gnostic
stones. After this we have the several punishments appointed for the
various sins of mankind, and the exact number of years and even of days
required for the expiation of each in its proper dungeon (ταμεῖον).
These places of torment are all enclosed within the Dragon of Outward
Darkness. It is worthy of remark that the serpent, whenever introduced,
is a thing of evil--a sure indication that the book is under the
influence of the Kabbala. The same conclusion is deducible from the
malignity pervading the entire dispensation which it pictures; and the
evident delight it takes in creating and parcelling out the various
punishments, of which heretics naturally get the largest share. The
philosophic Gnostic schemes have no severer penalty for those who do not
listen to them than the want of *Knowledge*, and the subjection to
*Matter*. After purgation in these prisons the souls are put into new
bodies, and begin a new probation upon earth.

The judge of souls is the Virgin of Light, attended by her seven
handmaids. Certain sins, but few in number, are punished by
annihilation, and admit of neither expiation nor atonement. But for all
the rest instant remission is procurable, if the friends of the deceased
celebrate on his behalf the "Mystery (or, Sacrament) of the Ineffable
One." This must be

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

the very earliest notice extant of the belief in the efficacy of the
offering up of a *sacrament* for the redemption of souls. There is a
singular provision made for the salvation of a perfectly righteous man,
but who in his life-time has not enjoyed the opportunity of being
converted. The angels take his departed soul, and carry it through all
the realms of punishment with the utmost rapidity, and then conduct him
before the Virgin of Light, who clothes it in a new body to recommence
its earthly career, to obtain there the advantage of the mysteries and
so become an heir of Light. The nature of the particular Mystery, so
perpetually alluded to in this work, is in no place explained; it is,
however, the highest of the Four and Twenty: for such is the number of
the Mysteries here mentioned, one for each of the grades in its
celestial hierarchy, for the *Five Marks*, for the *Seven Vowels*, for
the *Five Trees* and for the *Seven Amens*. Throughout are interspersed
frequent allusions to the seals, and the *numbers* of the Mysteries,
courses, and divine personages, borrowed partly from the usages of the
Temple, partly from those of the old Egyptian worship. They are repeated
and involved in a multitudinous, inextricable sequence, that to one not
having the key thereto belonging, strongly calls to mind the numerical
vagaries that flit before the mind when slightly delirious: and which
even the plodding German editor confesses, in his preface, often made
his brain whirl as he attempted to transcribe them.

Lastly comes a long fragment (§ 358), headed "a Portion of the Prayers
of Jesus," which tells more directly upon the subject of these
researches than anything that has fallen in my way. The Saviour,
attended by his disciples, standing sometimes on a mountain, sometimes
by the sea, and sometimes in mid-air, addresses prayers to the Father,
prefaced with long formulae of the same character, and often in the same
words, as those covering the more important Gnostic monuments. Some of
these opening invocations are expounded, and seemingly paraphrased, in
the prayers following them, though not in a very satisfactory manner.
Also Jesus celebrates, with many singular formalities, a sacrifice of
wine and water, which, there is reason to believe, is the grand Mystery
or Sacrament so often lauded in the foregoing chapters. The whole closes
with a

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

long exposition by him of the influence of the Æons of the Zodiac upon
the soul of the infant born under each, and of the fortunate or malign
intervention of the planets in such cases. Of the latter the *sacred*
names are communicated apparently as used by the Magi. A few Egyptian
deities, *e.g.* Bubastes and Typhon, are named here, and the Syrian
Barbelo is frequently introduced, as a personage of the very highest
importance, being no less than the *heavenly* mother of the Saviour
himself. His earthly Mother is indeed represented as attending at these
revelations, but she plays a very secondary part therein to the
Magdalene and even to Salome. The last thing to be noticed in this most
remarkable fruit of a crazy, mystic imagination--it is hard to say
whether more Kabbalist, or Magian, or Christian--is the opposed dualism
of many of the Powers introduced as agents in the economy of the
universe: for example, there is an obedient and a rebellious Adamas
(that highest name with the earlier Naaseni), a great and a little
Sabaoth, and similar antitheses to be met with also in the later Ophite
schemes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[14:\*](gar05.htm#fr_0.md) It is intended to issue
an English translation as a supplement to the present work.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[15:\*](gar05.htm#fr_1.md) This banishment of Sophia
from the society of the other Æons is the grand turning-point of the
principal Gnostic schemes, although each assigns a different reason for
her degradation, as in the system of Valentinus, and also that of the
later Ophites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Book of Enoch](gar06.md)
