[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar00)  [Next](gar02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE.

WHEN this work first appeared, three-and-twenty years ago, it became at
once an object of unmerited abuse, and of equally unmerited praise.
Small divines mistaking it for an insidious attempt to overthrow
opinions "as by law established," *spurted* at it with pens dipped in
the milk of the Gospel; whilst, under the very same hallucination,
"Friends of Light" lauded it to the skies--either party equally ignorant
both of the subject, and of the purpose of my labours. One noted
*Zoilus* (whose recollections of Homer would seem to be of the same
*deeply-marked* nature as Ensign Blifil's) is disgusted at my citing
"Aidoneus" as a title of the God of the Shades; another is astonished at
my ignorance in calling Bardanes a *Persian*, whereas he was a native of
*Pontus;* not understanding that my argument was equally valid in spite
of the mistake--Pontus being originally a province of the empire of
Darius, and what is more to the purpose, the actual focus whence
Mithraicism diffused itself over the Roman world.

A still greater cause of outcry against the book was my presuming to lay
presumptuous hands upon the Sacred Ark of Masonry, and openly express my
opinion that the "Free and Accepted" of these times have no more real
connexion with the ancient *Craft*, out of whose terms and forms, like
fig-leaves, they have stitched together *aprons*, wherewith to cover the
real nakedness of their pretension, than the Italian *Carbonari* of
Murat's day had with the trade of *charcoal burners*, whose baskets were
borrowed for the President's throne. King Hiram's skull gnashed his
teeth with rage within the *cista mystica;* and one *valiant* young
Levite of the course of Abia,

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

proceeds thus logically to confute all my assertions: "Athelstan built a
church: he could not build without masons; *argal*, Athelstan was the
founder of Masonry in England.

But enough of this; the same treatment is necessarily in store for the
present edition; it must look for

"Verbera, carnifices, robur, pix, lamina, taedae."

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The one reviewer
of its predecessor who exhibited any acquaintance with the literature of
the subject, felt himself (from his position) "in duty bound" to qualify
his praise by passing the summary judgment "that I had displayed in the
work more of the spirit of a Gnostic than of a Catholic Christian." This
sentence, intended for *condemnatory*, I accept as the highest praise
that could be given to my labours--taking γνωστικός in its strict sense
of "one addicted to knowledge"; and who therefore studies the history
and remains of any opinion for the sole purpose of understanding the
truth; and not for the sake of demonstrating the Truth can only exist
under *one* defined form.

Let me now proceed to state how, in the present edition, I have
endeavoured still further to deserve the appellation attached to me by
the good-natured *Aristarchus*. My Treatise was the only one upon
Gnostic Archaeology (for Dr. Walsh's little book scarce deserves the
name) that had appeared since Chiflet's admirable "Apistopistus"
(1617);--Matter, in his 'Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme (1827), an
excellent analysis of the doctrines of the Gnosis, doing nothing for its
monuments, beyond republishing, on a reduced scale, the engravings of
the "Apistopistus." The only sources of information accessible to me at
the time of writing that edition were the same as those drawn upon by
Matter before me, namely the treatises of *Irenaeus* and *Epiphanius*.
In the interval, I have become acquainted with, and, in order thoroughly
to master, have made complete translations of, two recently discovered
works that throw much light upon many difficult questions in this
investigation. The one is the 'Refutation of all Heresies,' ascribed
either to Origen or Hippolytus; its author being intimately acquainted
with the doctrines which he holds up for

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

detestation, or for ridicule; and (what makes his criticisms of far
higher value to students of the present day) illustrating them by
copious extracts from the then so extensive heretical literature, soon
to be completely exterminated by the triumph of the "orthodox" Faith.

The other aid is the "Pistis-Sophia," sole survivor of the once numerous
family of *Gnostic Gospels;* but fortunately the most important of them
all for our purpose, and the very one for whose escape (in its Coptic
disguise) the archæologist ought to feel most grateful to the ignorance
of the destroyers. For, whereas the other Gnostic teachers appear (as
Hippolytus loves to point out) to build up their systems upon the lines
of various Grecian philosophies, the "Pistis-Sophia" makes known to us
what were the deepest secrets of the so celebrated Egyptian Mysteries,
which are identical with those of the Rabbinical Kabbala, the only
alteration being that of putting them into the mouth of Scripture
personages, in order to adapt them to the prevailing change of ideas.
This book, therefore, from its very nature supplies a kind of
elucidation of contemporary monuments not to be found elsewhere, for the
Christian Fathers discuss only the *doctrines* of their adversaries, not
condescending to notice their application to the uses of everyday life.
It is the latter point that gives such interest to the "Pistis-Sophia"
we gain from it the whole category of *Holy Names*, of such talismanic
virtue; the powers and titles of the actual genii, the constitution of
the soul; and its state after death. But what is yet more curious, the
"Pistis Sophia" exhibits the leading principles of the Kabbala already
established, and applied to the demonstration of the highest truths in
exactly the same manner as these principles were used by the heresiarch,
Marcus, in the third century. And here it may be remarked
parenthetically, that no one really acquainted with the history of
religious opinions, can for a moment imagine that Marcus (a born *Jew*,
be it remembered) was the first *inventor* of the wondrous machinery
which he used in the development of his system, and the 'Manifestation
of Truth,'--he did but apply to a new purpose the rules that he found
already established as authoritative in the Rabbinical

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

schools. For in Religion there is no "new thing"; the same ideas are
worked up over and over again; the gold in the *sovereign* of to-day may
first have circulated in the new-coined *stater* of Crœsus.

Last, in point of time, but equally valuable with any of the fresh
sources that have served me for the completion of this work, must I
gratefully acknowledge the oral teachings of Rabbi Dr.
Schiller-Szinessy--that unchanged representative of the Gamaliels of
old--at whose feet I have sat for many years, listening to his
exposition of the "Holy Zohar." Whatever may be the date of the
*present* form of that transcendental development of the *Torah*--no one
but an *inverted* Jew, totally unread in the *Greek* historians of the
Gnosis, can fail to perceive that its principles and traditions are the
very same as those taught in the schools of Babylon and Tiberias at the
time when Simon Magus and Justinus studied there.

During the many years that have slipped by since its first publication,
I have from time to time re-cast and re-written the entire Treatise,
incorporating with the former contents whatever fresh information,
reading, or chance, might throw in my way. In the same interval, two
other works upon this subject have made their appearance. Dean Mansel's
'Gnostics' is a well-written and accurate summary of all that the Greek
Fathers have left us upon the doctrines of the various sects; but, as
the book is evidently intended for the use of theological students
alone, the author has regarded his subject from a strictly
*professional* point of view; totally ignoring the archæological side of
the question (with which I am chiefly concerned), as being altogether
foreign to the purpose for which he wrote.

On the other hand, Dr. Ginsburg's 'The Kabbala: its Doctrines,
Development, and Literature,' possesses not only the merit of a lucid
exposition of the most abstruse of all *Theosophies*, as contemplated in
the shape to which it has been brought by the refining subtlety of
successive generations of *Rabbins*--but will be found an invaluable
guide to all who attempt the interpretation of talismanic inscriptions.
For example, the Hebrew *radicals*, which express the Names of the
*Sephiroth*, are to be discovered in the strings of Greek

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

consonants, now dumb for want of vowels, which have hitherto baffled the
ingenuity of every reader.

There seems reason for suspecting that the Sibyl of *Esoteric* Buddhism
drew the first notions of her new religion from the analysis of the
*Inner Man*, as set forth in my first edition. I may therefore promise
to myself the gratitude of those "clear spirits" (the Miltonian phrase)
who are busying themselves "by searching to find out God," for now
making known to them a still more profound theosophy, whose revelations
definitely settle hardest problems relating to our mental nature, and
the world beyond the grave. Investigators of the same order as the
*Esoteric Buddhists* will find here a Gospel ready made to their
hand--so full of great truths, so original in its conceptions, that it
would seem to flow from no human source; and must carry conviction of
its divine origin to every mind that shall be adapted by its nature for
the reception of the *good seed*.

In conclusion, I must express my grateful acknowledgments of the
services of my indefatigable friend, Mr. S. S. Lewis, Fellow of Corpus
Christi College; but for whose persuasion, and negotiations with the
publishers, these pages would never have seen the light. Not merely
this, but he has enabled me to overcome an apparently insurmountable
difficulty in the way of the publication--the failure of my sight, which
totally prevented my conducting the work through the press--by taking
upon himself the correction of the proofs: a laborious and irksome task
to any one besides the author; and demanding a sacrifice of time that
can only be appreciated by those, who, like myself, know the
multifarious nature of the engagements by which every hour of his life
is so completely absorbed.

Mr. Joseph Jacobs has furnished a carefully compiled list of authors
quoted in this work, and of the references made to them, which will be
found of use to those who wish to pursue the subject still further.

C. W. KING.

TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE,  
        *August* 26, 1887.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](gar02.md)
