[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar06)  [Next](gar08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### GNOSTICISM IN ITS BEGINNING.

To begin with the received account of the RISE AND PROGRESS of the
Gnostic *philosophy*, for that is its proper appellation, *heresy* being
properly restricted to differences of opinion between members of one
regularly established community, we find that as early as the year A.D.
35, the Samaritans were regarding Simon Magus, as "the Great Power of
God," and he and his disciple Cerinthus, are represented by the
Christian Fathers as the actual founders of Gnosticism, under that
accepted name.

Of the former, Hippolytus gives a history which there is no reason for
not accepting as correct in the main particulars. He was a native of
Gitteh, in the province of Samaria, and commenced his career, and soon
acquired great influence amongst his countrymen, by practising magic
after the "Thrasymedian method" (*i.e.* jugglery, as previously
described by Hippolytus), nay more, by working miracles "through the
agency of devils." Having fallen in love with a beautiful courtezan at
Tyre, he bought her from her owner, and always carried her about with
him, declaring that she was the "Intelligence" (Ἔννοια) that of old was
imprisoned in the body of the Grecian Helen, then of the Lost Sheep, but
now was restored to him for the salvation of the world. Even *before*
the preaching of Christianity he had set up for a teacher of a new
religion, plagiarised from Moses and Heraclitus the "Obscure," based
upon the axiom that *Fire* was the First Principle of all things,
subordinate to which were the "Six Radicals": a curiously compounded
mixture of Judaism and Magism, of which Hippolytus gives a full though
not very intelligible summary. "This Simon, after he had ransomed Helen,
granted salvation unto men by means of his own *knowledge*. For inasmuch
as the angels had governed the world ill by reason of their own
ambitiousness, he pretended that he was come to set all things right;
and having changed his form and made himself like to the Principalities,
the Powers, and the

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Angels, wherefore
it was that he showed himself in the form of man although *not a man* at
all, and had suffered the Passion in Judæa, although he had not really
suffered it; moreover, that he had manifested himself to the Jews as the
Son, in Samaria as the Father, and amongst the Gentiles in other parts
as the Holy Ghost; but he submitted to be called by whatsoever name they
pleased, The Prophets were inspired by the Angels, creators of the
world, when they delivered their prophecies; on which account they that
believe in Simon and Helen pay no regard to them (the Prophets) even in
our times: and they do whatever they please, pretending that they are
redeemed through *his* grace." . . . "Now this same Simon, when he was
by his magic arts deceiving many in Samaria, was confuted by the
Apostles, and having been cursed by them, he afterwards fell from his
reputation and invented these fables. At last, having travelled to Rome,
he again ran against the Apostles, and Peter had many encounters with
him when he was *seducing multitudes* through his magical practices.
Finally, having gone into the land of Persia, he took up his abode under
a plane-tree, and there preached his doctrine. But at last, when he was
on the point of being convicted for an impostor, in consequence of his
making too long a stay in the same place, he gave out that, if he were
buried alive, he would rise again on the third day. And in truth, having
caused a pit to be dug by his disciples, he commanded himself to be
covered over with earth. They therefore did what he commanded them, but
he never came back unto this day, inasmuch as he was not a Christ. Now
this is the story told concerning Simon, from whom Valentinus borrowed
his first ideas, but called them by different names. For 'Mind,' and
'Truth,' and 'the Word,' and 'Life,' and 'the Church,' and 'Man,' the
*Æons* of Valentinus, are confessedly the *Six Radicals* of Simon,
namely, 'Mind, Intelligence, Voice, Name, Reason, and Thought.'"

But to go on with the series of teachers--this counter-apostolical
succession--Simon was followed by Menander, he by Basilides at
Alexandria, who, dying about A.D. 138, was replaced by Valentinus, born
of Jewish parentage in the same city. This last is styled by Irenæus
"Chief of the Gnostics," on account

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of the importance and wide diffusion of his doctrines even during his
own lifetime. In Syria other sects were being founded contemporaneously
with these, taking their names from Marcion and Bardesanes, both of whom
tradition represents as Persians by origin, and consequently *Magian* by
religious training. The latter is by some called a native of Pontus, a
circumstance, however, making no difference as to the source of his
opinions, that region being confessedly the seat of Mithraicism, and
ruled over by a line claiming descent from the first Darius, or a satrap
of his. It is needless to enumerate here the founders of less important
sects, until we come to the uprising of Manes, author of the most daring
and most permanent theosophy of them all, which fought twice over so
long and obstinate a battle with the Catholic faith. This sect, its
origin, and tenets, on account of the curiosity of its doctrines, and
the immense influence that they exerted over the ancient and mediæval
world, will be considered at length in another chapter; as will also the
*Ophites* whose name figures so conspicuously in the history of the
primitive Church.

What has been mentioned above with respect to the countries producing
the founders of all these sects--Egypt, Syria, or Persia--leads us to
expect to find one common principle pervading the systems of all, and
such is most probably the case. The fundamental doctrine held in common
by all the chiefs of the Gnosis was, that the whole creation was not the
work of the Supreme Deity, but of the Demiurgus, a simple *Emanation*,
and several degrees removed from the highest power. To the latter,
indeed, styled by them the "Unknown Father" (or as Simon first
designated him "The Boundless Power," and "The Root of all Things"),
they attributed the creation of the intellectual world--that is, the
Intelligences, the Æons, and the Angels--whilst, to the Demiurgus they
referred the creation or the *World of Matter*, subject to imperfection
from its very nature. But in order clearly to understand the grand
principles underlying these doctrines, it is absolutely necessary to
possess the main features of the older systems from which these same
doctrines were principally borrowed; these systems being that of the
Zendavesta, of the Kabbala (which is little more than a

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

translation of the same), and of the reformed Brahminical religion as
taught by the Buddhist missionaries in the dominions of the
Syro-Macedonians, or picked up in India by Alexandrian merchants
visiting the emporia of Guzerat for the sake of trade.

Although to express their ideas visibly upon their *monuments* (the
elucidation of which is the special object of this treatise) the
Gnostics largely borrowed the images and symbols of the ancient Egyptian
mythology (especially those connected with the Agathodaemon, the Solar
god Iao, and the guide of souls, the jackal-headed Anubis), yet these
figures were employed in a new sense, unless indeed we suppose (what is
probable enough) that their *esoteric* meaning had been from the very
beginning similar to that published by the teachers of the new faith.
This last explanation was in fact the perpetual boast of Valentinus, and
runs through every article of his theosophy as we read it in the
interesting summary given by Hippolytus; and again, it must never be
forgotten, for it is the key to many of the seeming contradictions in
the different systems about to be passed in review, that Greek and Jew
carried with them their ancient quarrel into the new field of the
Gnosis. The former exalts the Bacchic *Serpent*, whilst he makes
*Sabaoth* little better than a demon; the latter continues to abominate
the Serpent as the impersonation of Satan, but his Sabaoth is the "Great
and Good" (as Pistis-Sophia perpetually entitles him), the defender of
the believer's soul against the malignant "Æons of the Sphere," and the
influence of Judaism radiating from its second focus, the school of
Alexandria, was so much more powerful than ordinary readers of history
have ever suspected, that a few remarks upon this very curious subject
will form a useful introduction to our consideration of its later
philosophy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Influence of Judaism on the Ancient World](gar08)
