[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar16)  [Next](gar18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

# PART II.

# THE WORSHIP OF MITHRAS AND SERAPIS.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top">"O voi ch’ avete gl’ intelletti sani,<br />
Mirate la dottrina che s’asconde<br />
Sotto il velame degli versi strani."
<p>"Salve vera Deûm facies, vultusque paterne,<br />
Octo et sexcentis numeris cui litera trina<br />
Conformat sacrum nomen, cognomen et<br />
Omen. (Mart. Capella. Hymn. ad Sol.)</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

ΦΡΗ = ϒΗC = <span id="img_11400"></span> ![](img/11400.jpg) = <span
id="img_11401"></span> ![](img/11401.jpg)

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

## THE WORSHIP OF MITHRAS.

### I. ORIGIN OF MITHRAICISM.

THE innumerable monuments of every kind bequeathed to us by the
widely-spread worship of the deity styled *Mithras*, serve, at the same
time, copiously to illustrate the important contributions of Zoroastrian
doctrine towards the composition of Gnosticism. The Mithraic religion,
according to Plutarch, first made its appearance in Italy upon Pompey's
reduction of the Cilician Pirates, of whom it was the national
worship; <span id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_42.md) a and who, when broken up
into colonists and slaves all over Italy, propagated it amongst their
conquerors. In the new soil the novel religion flourished so rapidly as,
in the space of two centuries, to supersede (coupled with the earlier
introduced Serapis worship) the primitive Hellenic and Etruscan deities.
In fact, long before this final triumph over the sceptical, Pliny
appears disposed to accept Mithraicism, in its essential principle, as
the only religion capable of satisfying a rational inquirer; as may be
deduced from this noble passage (ii. 4): "Eorum medius Sol fervidus,
amplissima magnitudine, nec temporum modo terrarumque sed siderum etiam
ipsorum cœlique Rector. Hanc esse mundi totius animam ac planius mentem,
nunc principale Naturæ regimen ac *Numen* credere decet, opera ejus
æstimantes. Hic lumen rebus ministrat, aufertque tenebras, hic reliqua

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

sidera occultat, illustrat; hic vices temporum annumque semper
renascentem ex usu Naturæ temperat, hic cœli tristitiam discutit, atque
etiam humani nubila animi serenat: hic suum lumen cæteris quoque
sideribus fœnerat; præclarus, eximius, omnia intuens, omnia etiam
exaudiens; at principi literarum Homero placuisse in uno eo video.
Quapropter effigiem Dei formamque quærere imbecillitatis humanæ rear.
Quisquis est Deus, *si modo est alius*, et quacunque in parte, totus est
senses, totus visus, totus auditus, totus animæ, totus animi, totus
sui." Thus, during the second and third centuries of the Roman Empire,
Mithras and Serapis had come almost to engross the popular worship, even
to the remotest limits of the known world. For Mithraicism was
originally the religion taught by Zoroaster, although somewhat changed
and materialized so as better to assimilate itself to the previously
established Nature Worship of the West. Under this grosser form it took
its name from *Mithras*, who in the Zendavesta is not the Supreme Being
(Ormuzd), but the Chief of the subordinate Powers, the Seven
Amshaspands. Mithra is the Zend name for the sun, the proper *mansion*
of this Spirit, but not the Spirit himself. Hence the great oath of
Artaxerxes Mnemon was, "By the light of Mithras," a counterpart of the
tremendous adjuration of our William the Conqueror, "By the Splendour of
God!" But the materialistic Greeks at once identified the Persian Spirit
with their own substantial Phœbus and Hyperion. Thus Ovid has,

"Placat equo Persis radiis Hyperiona cinctum." (Fasti I. 335.)

In this view of his nature Mithras was identified with other types of
the Sun-god, such as the "Phanaces" of Asia Minor, and the "Dionysos" of
Greece; and thereby soon usurped the place of the latter in the long
established Mysteries, the ancient Dionysia. The importance into which
the Mithraica had grown by the middle of the second century may be
estimated from a fact mentioned by Lampridius, that the emperor himself
(Commodus) condescended to be initiated into them. Nay more, with their
penances, and tests of the courage of the neophyte, they may be said to
have been maintained by unbroken tradition through the secret societies
of the Middle Ages, then by the Rosicrucians,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

down to that faint reflex of the latter, the Freemasonry of our own
times. But this curious point must be reserved for the last Section of
this Treatise investigating the nature of the last named societies. My
present object is to point out the gradations by which the Mithraic
principle passed into the Egyptian and semi-Christian forms of
Gnosticism.

The mystic name *Abraxas* (asserted to have been the coinage of the
Alexandrian Basilides) is said to mean either in actual Coptic "Holy
Name" (as Bellermann will have it); or, as seems equally probable, is
merely the Hebrew *Ha-Brachah* "Blessing," Grecised, in the same sense.
That the symbolic figure embodying the idea of the Abraxas god has a
reference to the sun in all its components is yet more evident, as shall
be shown hereafter; similarly, the Brahmins apply their Ineffable Name
*Aum* to the "fierce and all-pervading Sun"; and Macrobius devotes much
curious learning to prove that all the great gods of antiquity, whatever
their names and figures, were no more than various attempts at
personifying the One Deity, whose residence is the sun. It must here be
remembered that Basilides was by no means a *Christian heretic*, as the
later Fathers found it expedient to represent him, but rather as his
contemporary Clemens, relates, a philosopher devoted to the study of
divine things; and thus possibly imbued with such Buddhistic notions as
the intercourse between Alexandria and the cities of Guzerat (then ruled
over by the Jaina kings) may have naturalized both in Egypt and in
Palestine. This metropolis, as the grand emporium for foreign doctrines
as well as foreign wares, supplies the reason for the frequent union of
Mithras with Abraxas in the same stone, proceeding from the Alexandrian
talisman-factory. A curious exemplification is a green jasper
(Marlborough), bearing on one side the normal Zoroastrian device,
Mithras slaughtering the Bull; on the other, the well-known Gnostic
Pantheus. A truly Indian syncretism, which converts all deities from
separate beings into mere deified attributes of one and the same God,
and (for the initiated few, that is) reduces that seemingly unlimited
polytheism into the acknowledgment of the existence of the Supreme
Creator.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

That model of a perfect prince, Severus Alexander, must have imbibed a
strong tinge of the Gnosis (as indeed might have been expected from his
birthplace and style of education), for although upon every *seventh
day* he went up to worship in the Capitol, and also regularly visited
the temples of the other Roman gods, he nevertheless "was intending to
build a temple unto Christ, and to rank Him in the number of the gods."
Which thing Hadrian also is said to have thought of, and actually to
have ordered temples without images to be built in all the chief cities
of the Empire: which same temples, because they contain no gods, are now
called temples raised to Hadrian himself, although in reality he is
reported to have prepared them for the purpose above-named. But he was
prevented from carrying out his design by those who consulted the
oracles (*sacra*), and discovered that, if it should be carried out,
everybody would turn Christian, and thereby the other temples would be
all deserted" (Lampridius i. 43). Indeed, there is every reason to
believe that, as in the East, the worship of Serapis was at first
combined with Christianity, and gradually merged into it with an entire
change of name, though not of substance, carrying along with it many of
its proper ideas and rites, so in the West the Mithras-worship produced
a similar effect upon the character of the religion that took its place.
Seel, in his admirable treatise upon Mithraicism ('Mithra,' p. 287) is
of opinion that "as long as the Roman dominion lasted in Germany, we
find traces there of the Mosaic law: and in the same way as there were
single Jewish families, so were there single Christians existing amongst
the heathen. The latter, however, for the most part, ostensibly paid
worship to the Roman gods in order to escape persecution, holding
secretly in their hearts the religion of Christ. It is by no means
improbable that, under the permitted symbols of Mithras, they worshipped
the Son of God, and the mysteries of Christianity. In this point of
view, the Mithraic monuments, so frequent in Germany, are evidences to
the faith of the early Christian Romans." This same supremacy of the
Mithras-worship in his own times makes the grand scheme of Heliogabalus
prove less insane than it strikes the modern reader at the first
impression. He was intending

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (according to
report) to permit no other worship at Rome than that of his own god and
namesake, the Emesene aerolite, apt emblem of the Sun; "bringing
together in his temple the Fire of Vesta, the Palladium, the Ancilia,
and all the other most venerated relics; and moreover the *religion* of
the Jews and Samaritans, and the *devotion* <span
id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_43) of the Christians." (Lampridius 3.md). To
such a heterogeneous union that numerous section of the Roman public who
shared Macrobius’ sentiments on the nature of all ancient gods, could
have found no possible objection so far as the *principle* was
concerned.

That such a relationship to Christianity was actually alleged by the
partisans of Mithraicism (when in its decline) is proved by the
remarkable declaration of Augustine himself (John I. Dis. 7). "I
remember that the priests of the *fellow in the cap* (*illius pileati*)
used at one time to say, 'Our Capped One is himself a Christian.'" In
this asserted affinity probably lay the motive that induced Constantine
to adopt for the commonest type of his coinage (the sole currency of the
Western provinces), and retain long after his conversion, the figure of
Sol himself, with the legend "To the Invincible Sun, my companion (or
guardian)." A type capable of a double interpretation, meaning equally
the ancient Phœbus and the new Sun of Righteousness, and thereby
unobjectionable to Gentile and Christian alike of the equally divided
population amongst whom it circulated. Nay more, this Emperor when
avowedly Christian, selected for the grandest ornament of his new
Capital, a colossal Apollo, mounted upon a lofty column, which retained
its place until cast down by an earthquake in the reign of Alexius
Comnenus.

Through a similar interchange, the old festival held on the 25th day of
December in honour of the "Birth-day of the Invincible One," and
celebrated by the Great Games of the Circus (as marked in the Kalendar
"viii KAL.IAN. N. INVICTI. C. M. xxiv" <span
id="fr_45"></span>[†](#fn_44).md) was afterwards transferred to the
commemoration of the Birth of Christ, of which the real day was, as the
Fathers

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

confess, totally unknown: Chrysostom, for example, declares (Hom. xxxi.)
that the Birthday of Christ had then *lately* been fixed at Rome upon
that day, in order that whilst the heathen were busied with their own
profane ceremonies, the Christians might perform their holy rites
without molestation.

And Mithras was the more readily admitted as the type of Christ, Creator
and Maintainer of the Universe, inasmuch as the Zendavesta declares him
to be the First Emanation of Ormuzd, the Good Principle, and the
Manifestation of Himself unto the world. Now it was from this very creed
that the Jews, during their long captivity in the Persian Empire (of
which when restored to Palestine they formed but a province), derived
all the angelology of their religion, even to its minutest details, such
as we find it flourishing in the times of the Second Kingdom. Not until
then are they discovered to possess the belief in a future state; of
rewards and punishments, the latter carried on in a fiery lake; the
existence of a complete hierarchy of good and evil angels, taken almost
verbatim from the lists given by the Zendavesta; the soul's immortality,
and the Last Judgment--all of them essential parts of the Zoroastrian
scheme, and recognised by Josephus as the fundamental doctrines of the
Judaism of his own times.

To all these ideas Moses in the Law makes not the slightest allusion;
his promises and threatenings are all of the earth, earthy; he preaches
a religion of *Secularists*, and such a religion was, down to the latest
days of Jerusalem, still maintained by the Sadducees. Now these
Sadducees were the most ancient and respectable families of the nation,
who boasted of keeping the law of Moses pure, and uncontaminated from
the admixture of foreign notions imbibed by the commonalty during their
long sojourn amongst the Gentiles. Nay more, there is some reason to
accept Matter's etymology of the name of their opponents, the Pharisees,
as actually signifying "Persians," being a term of contempt for the
holders of the new-fangled doctrines picked. up from their conquerors.
And this etymology is a much more rational one, and more consistent with
the actual elements of the word, than the common one making it to mean
"Separatists"--an epithet by no means applicable to a party constituting

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

the immense *majority* of the race. It is only necessary now to allude
to the ingenious theory of Bishop Warburton, set forth in his 'Divine
Legation of Moses,' who converts the absence of all spiritualism from
his teaching into the strongest argument for its being directly inspired
from Heaven.

But from whatever source derived, how closely does the Zoroastrian idea
of the nature and office of Mithras coincide with the definition of
those of Christ as given by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
that profound Jewish theologian, who styles Him the "Brightness (or
*reflection*) of his glory, the express *image* <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_45.md) of his person, upholding all things by
the word of his power;" and again, "being made so much better than the
angels as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent *Name* than
they," and here it may be observed that the *Reflection* of the
Invisible Supreme in his First Emanation is a distinguishing feature in
most of the Gnostic systems. Mithras used to be invoked *together* with
the Sun, and thus, being confounded with that luminary, became the
object of a separate worship, which ultimately superseded that of Ormuzd
himself: and this was the only one propagated by the Pontic colonists
and their converts amongst the nations of the West. Secondary deities
often usurp the places of those of the first rank; so Vishnu and Siva
have entirely eclipsed Brahma. Serapis had played the same part with the
Pharaonic gods of Egypt, and yet more striking analogies from modern
creeds are too obvious to require quotation. Through this relationship
of ideas Mithraic symbolism found its way into early Christian art in
many of its particulars. The bas-relief over the portal of the
Baptistery at Parma (a work of the 12th century), has all the aspect of
a Mithraic monument, and certainly its design would be very difficult to
understand from a Scriptural point of view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[115:\*](gar17.htm#fr_43.md) This deity, under
other titles, had ever been the great god of Pontus. As patron of Sinope
he appears under the form of Helios-Dionysos, upon the medallion of
Pharnaces II. In his proper name he was the patron of Trebizond, being
worshipped on the Mount Mithras overhanging that most ancient of Grecian
colonies. For destroying his statue, the fanatic Eugenius, justly
punished by Diocletian, was adopted, in the succeeding times of
superstition, for the tutelary saint of the Byzantine Empire of
Trebizond.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[119:\*](gar17.htm#fr_44.md) This curious
distinction between "religio" and "devotio," is meant to mark the
difference between a national and established creed and one held by
individuals, without any public sanction.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[119:†](gar17.htm#fr_45.md) Signifying that
twenty-four consecutive races of chariots were exhibited on that
occasion in the Circus. Maximus.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[121:\*](gar17.htm#fr_46.md) Ἀπαύγασμα--χαρακτήρ,
the latter word literally "impression of a seal," is the exact
counterpart of the Hebrew title, "Tikkan," the Primal Emanation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Mithraic Sacraments](gar18.md)
