[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar15)  [Next](gar17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

### MACHINERY OF THE GNOSIS.

The *doctrines* of the chief schools of Gnosticism having been fully
described in the preceding sections, the next step in the natural order
of things will be to consider the MACHINERY employed by its teachers to
set forth these new doctrines.

The deities of the ancient mythology continued to hold their place in
the productions of the great sect whose birth-place was Alexandria, and
consequently some insight into the sense in which the novel theosophy
adopted them may be obtained by learning what were the powers and
attributes of these same gods, when their worship held undisputed
possession of the country. On this account, the chief deities of Egypt,
and the figures under which they are recognised, must now be briefly
described--together with their Coptic titles, so often found on these
monuments in strange companionship with the holy names of the Jewish
creed, with the Magian Genii, even with the appellatives of Hindoo
gods--the very terminology of the religion plainly indicating its remote
and multifarious sources.

1\. The great god of Lower Egypt, Phthas (phonetic, Ptah), is
represented in a close-fitting robe, with his feet joined together, and
standing upon a base of *four* steps, called the "Four Foundations," and
which typified the Four Elements, of which he was the grand
artificer--an emblem long afterwards taken in the same acceptation by
the Rosicrucians, sometimes he appears as a dwarf and Priapean;
sometimes as Phtha-Tore with a beetle forehead. His proper attribute is
the Cynocephalus baboon. His four sons, the Cabiri, are painted as
little ugly dwarfs, bearing for badges of office, *a sword, a crocodile,
a serpent, a human head* stuck on a hook. They become in the hierarchy
of the Pistis-Sophia the "Collectors unto Wrath" (ἐριναῖοι), whose
office is to accuse souls in the Judgment. The many-armed Genius
brandishing similar weapons, often found on Gnostic talismans, probably
expresses the same idea in a condensed form.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

2\. Ammon (phonetically, Amen) has a human, and occasionally a ram's,
head, from which rises a parti-coloured plume. He is modified into
"Pan-Mendes," Priapean, and brandishing a whip. In the character of
"Ammon-Chnubis" he has his feet bound together, and wears the horns of a
goat. He is often figured as the serpent, called by the Greeks the
"Agathodæmon." His symbol is the *vase* "Canopus," for so the Greeks
pronounce the name of Chnubis. United with the sun, he becomes
"Ammon-Ra."

3\. The Sun-god, Phre, or Ra, depicted with the head of a hawk,
supporting the solar disc entwined with the serpent Uraeus.

4\. Thoth or Thoyt, ibis-headed, is the "Scribe of the gods." Sometimes
he takes the head of a hawk, and becomes the famous "Hermes
Trismegistus." His symbol is the winged orb, *Tat*, answering to the
*Mir* of the Persians. (He is the prophet Enoch's fourth rebellious
angel, Penumuc, "who discovered unto the children of men bitterness and
sweetness, and pointed out to them every unit of their wisdom. He taught
men to understand writing, and the use of ink and paper. Therefore
numerous have been those who have gone astray, from every period of the
world even to this day. For men were not born for this, thus with pen
and with ink to confirm their faith." \[lxviii. 10. 13.\])

5\. Sochos is depicted with the head of a crocodile, and is also
symbolised by a crocodile with the tail bent.

6\. The Moon-god, Pa-Ioh, (*Pa*, being the Coptic definite article) is
represented having his feet close together; upon his head is a single
lock of hair and the crescent. At other times, this deity is figured
bi-sexual, and casting gold dust over the heavens, that is, bespangling
them with the stars.

7\. Osiris is a human figure distinguished by his lofty conical helmet,
and holding a crook and a whip. The eye is his symbol.

8\. Aroeres (Aroi), the Horus of the Greeks, has a single lock of hair
upon his head. He is figured as being suckled by Isis and again, as
seated upon the lotus; he also occasionally wears the head of a hawk, as
being one character of the Solar god.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> His symbol, the
hawk, appears upon the breast of Isis in a torso in the Borgia
Collection.

9\. Anubis (Anbo) is always jackal-headed, and sometimes has also a
human one head, springing from a separate neck. His Coptic name, ΑΝΒΩ,
may often be observed in Gnostic legends.

10\. Bebon, or Bebys, has the head of a hippopotamus, or a crocodile,
and carries a sword: a figure which used to be taken for Typhon. He
stands for the constellation Ursa Major in the Zodiac of Denderah.

Of *goddesses* the principal are--

1\. Neith: expressed by the Vulture, or else by a female with head of a
vulture, or lion. In the last case she takes the name of Taf-net. She
symbolizes the vault of Heaven.

2\. Athor: with the head of a cow, or else of a woman covered with the
skin of the Royal Vulture. She is denoted hieroglyphically by a hawk
placed within a square.

3\. Isis: a female with horns of a cow, between which rests a disk, the
lunar circle.

4\. Sate: the Grecian Hera, wearing tall plumes on her head, and
sometimes personified with a feather in place of head, stands for
"Truth," in which latter quality she appears regularly at the Judgment
of the Soul.

The Four Genii of the Amenthes, or Hades, are represented with the heads
of a man, jackal, baboon, and hawk, respectively; and are often placed
together like mummy-shaped figures, forming the Canopic Vases.

The *symbols* of the same worship have been to some extent explained by
persons writing at a time when they were still a living, though fast
expiring, language. Of such writers the most valuable is Plutarch, who
in his curious treatise 'De Iside et Osiride,' has given the meaning of
several of these symbols, and, as it would appear, upon very good
authority. According to him, Isis sometimes signifies the Moon, in which
sense she is denoted by a *Crescent;* sometimes the Earth as fecundated
by the waters of the Nile. For this reason water, as the seed of Osiris,
was carried in a vase in the processions in honour of this goddess.

*Osiris* is denoted by the picture of an *Eye* and *Sceptre;* his

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

name being compounded of Os "many," and iris "eye." Upon this point
Macrobius states (Sat. I. 21), "The Egyptians, in order to denote that
Osiris means the Sun, whenever they want to express his name in
hieroglyphic writing, engrave a Sceptre and on top thereof the figure of
an Eye; and by this symbol they express 'Osiris,' signifying this god to
be the Sun, riding on high in regal power, and looking down. upon all
things, because antiquity hath surnamed the Sun the 'Eye of Jupiter.'"

The *Fig-leaf* stands for "King"; and also for the "South."

The *Lizard*, which was believed to conceive through the ear, and to
bring forth through the mouth, is the type of the generation of the
Word, that is, the *Logos*, or Divine Wisdom. (This belief explains the
appearance of a lizard upon the breast of certain figures of
Minerva.) <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_40)

The *Scarabeus*, in its making spherical receptacles for its eggs, and
by its retrograde motion, imitates the action and movement of the Sun.
This insect had no female, according to the popular belief of the
Egyptians.

The *Asp* expresses a planet, for like that luminary, it moves rapidly,
though without any visible organ of locomotion.

The *Ibis* stands for the Moon: the legs of the bird, when extended,
making an equilateral triangle. (It is hard to discern any analogy
between the Moon and this figure of geometry, but yet the Pythagoreans
denoted Athene by the same sign. But that Plutarch is here correct is
proved by many gems which show a triangle set upon an altar and adored
by the baboon, Luna's favourite beast.) How the later Egyptians
symbolised the Sun and Moon is well expressed upon a jasper (Waterton)
where Horus, seated on the lotus, is adored by the baboon; in the field
are the sun-star and the crescent attached to their respective figures,
and also the *Triangle* very conspicuously placed.

Horus--Plutarch remarks--wears a crown of the branches of the Persea,
because its fruit resembles in shape the *heart;* its leaves, the
*tongue*. The legend goes that the tree (*Cordia myxa*, or Sebestene
plum) was first planted at Memphis by the hero *Perseus*, whence its
name. In memory of his mythic ancestor,

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Alexander ordered
that a garland of Persea leaves should form the prize at the games he
instituted at his new Capital. The tree never wants a succession of
flowers and fruit; the latter Pliny compares to a red plum, adding that
it will not grow in Europe.

We next come to a professed treatise upon this recondite subject,
Horapollo's 'Interpretation of the Sacred Animals.' Unfortunately, this
work bears upon its face clear evidence of having been excogitated by
some pragmatical Alexandrian Greek, totally ignorant of what he was
writing about, but impudently passing off his own stupid *conjectures*
as to the meaning of the figures on the ancient works surrounding him,
as though they were interpretations handed down to him by antique
authority. He must have written under the Lower Empire, when the art of
reading hieroglyphics was entirely lost, for we know that it still
existed in the first century; Tacitus particularly notes that an *aged*
priest read to Germanicus upon his visit to Thebes the contents of the
historical tablets on the edifices of that city. "Mox visit veterum
Thebarum magna vestigia; et manebant structis molibus literæ Ægyptiæ
priscam opulentiam complexæ, jussusque e senioribus sacerdotum patrium
sermonem interpretari" (Ann. II. 60). This happened A.D. 19. It would
appear that the knowledge of hieroglyphics was fast dying out, and only
preserved by members of the previous generation. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_41)

It is only in a few instances that Horapollo has preserved some genuine
tradition of the meaning of those symbols which were the most generally
used, and therefore the last to be forgotten. Of these explanations the
most important are what follow.

"The *Cynocephalus* baboon denotes the Moon, because that beast has a
certain sympathy with the luminary, and during her dark quarter sits
without eating, his eyes fixed upon the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

ground as though mourning for her loss. He moreover denotes the
*priestly order*, because he is naturally circumcised, and abhors fish
and fishermen. Erect and with uplifted paws and a basilisk (asp) upon
his head, he symbolises the New Moon, whose first appearance he hails
after this fashion. By his voiding his urine at fixed and regular
intervals, he first suggested to observers the regular division off the
day into hours, and furnished the first idea of the invention of the
*Clepsydra*, or water-clock.

"The *Dog* (Jackal) represents the sacred scribe: because that
functionary ought to be always studying, and likewise should bark at,
and make himself disagreeable to, everybody. In another sense he
expresses a Prophet, from his habit of staring fixedly at the statues of
the gods.

"The *Hawk* means 'God,' or 'Sun.'

"The *Lion*, from the resemblance of his *round* face to the solar orb,
is placed beneath the throne of *Horus*, the Egyptian title of the Sun.

"The Rising of the Nile, called in Coptic *Nov* or *Nev*, is denoted by
three large vases; and also by a lion, because it attains its full
height when the Sun is in that sign of the Zodiac; for which same cause
the spouts of the sacred lavers are made in the shape of lions' heads.

"By the *Ibis* is signified the *heart*, because the bird belongs to
Hermes, who presides over the heart and all reason. The Ibis also, by
its own shape, resembles the form of the heart; concerning which matter
there is a very long legend current amongst the Egyptians."

But the most graphic account of the symbols and ceremonies employed in
the worship of Isis, whilst yet in its full glory (the middle of the
second century), is to be obtained from the description of her
Procession which Apuleius (himself one of the initiated) has penned in
the eleventh Book of his "Golden Ass." "Next flow on the crowds of
people initiated into the divine mysteries; men and women of every rank,
and all ages, shining in the pure whiteness of linen robes; the latter
having their dripping hair enveloped in a transparent covering: the
former with their heads shaven clean, and the crowns thereof

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

shining white--these earthly stars of the nocturnal ceremony, raising as
they went a shrill tinkling with *sistra* of bronze, silver, and even of
gold. But the chief performers in the rites were those nobles, who, clad
in a tight-fitting robe of linen descending from the waist down to the
heels, carried in the procession the glorious symbols of the most potent
deities.

"The first held out at arm's length a *lamp*, diffusing before him a
brilliant light; not by any means resembling in form the lamps in common
use for illuminating our evening meals, but a golden bowl supporting a
more ample blaze in the midst of its broad expanse. The second,
similarly robed, held up with both hands the *Altar* that derives its
name from the beneficent *Providence* of the supreme goddess. The third
marched along bearing aloft a *palm branch* with leaves formed of thin
gold, and also the *Caduceus* of Hermes. The fourth displayed the symbol
of Justice, the figure of the *left hand* with the palm open, which, on
account of its natural inactivity, and its being endowed with neither
skill nor cunning, has been deemed a more fitting emblem of Justice than
the right hand. The same minister likewise carried a small golden
vestibule made in a round form like an *udder*, out of which he poured
libations of milk. The fifth carried a *winnowing fan* piled up with
golden sprigs. The last of all bore a huge *wine jar*.

"Immediately after these came the Deities, condescending to walk upon
human feet, the foremost among them rearing terrifically on high his
dog's head and neck--that messenger between heaven and hell displaying
alternately a face black as night, and golden as the day; in his left
the caduceus, in his right waving aloft the green palm branch. His steps
were closely followed by a cow, raised into an upright posture--the cow
being the fruitful emblem of the Universal Parent, the goddess herself,
which one of the happy train carried with majestic steps, supported on
his shoulders. By another was borne the coffin containing the sacred
things, and closely concealing the deep secrets of the holy religion.
Another carried in his happy bosom the awful figure of the Supreme
Deity, not represented in the image of a beast either tame or wild, nor
of a bird, nor even in that of man, but *ingeniously devised* and

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

inspiring awe by its very strangeness, that ineffable symbol of the
deepest mystery, and ever to be shrouded in the profoundest silence. But
next came, carried precisely in the same manner, a small vessel made of
burnished gold, and most skilfully wrought out into a hemispherical
bottom, embossed externally with strange Egyptian figures. Its mouth,
but slightly raised, was extended into a spout, and projected
considerably beyond the body of the bowl, whilst on the opposite side,
widening as it receded into a capacious opening, it was affixed to the
handle, upon which was seated an asp wreathed into a knot, and rearing
up on high its streaked, swollen and scaly neck."

These images and symbols require a few remarks in elucidation: suggested
by the notices of ancient writers, or by the representations of these
very objects upon extant monuments of the same religion. The
"udder-shaped" vessel exactly describes the one so frequently placed
upon the Gnostic gems, and which Matter so strangely interprets as the
"Vase of Sins" of the deceased--an unlikely subject to be selected for a
talisman intended to secure the *benevolence* of heaven. Much more to
the purpose is Köhler's conjecture that it is one of the earthen pots
used to be tied round the circumference of the irrigating wheel, still
employed for raising the water of the Nile to fertilise the adjacent
fields; "fecundating Isis with the seed of Osiris" in ancient phrase,
and certainly the *string* fastened about its top favours such an
explanation; in fact, we have an example of similar veneration for a
vessel in the case of the Canopus, the pot that held the same water when
purified for drinking. The "winnow-fan" is also often represented,
placed over this hemispherical vase; the same instrument played an
important part in the marriage ceremony of the Greeks. When piled with
fruit of all kinds, it was placed on the head of the bride; the same
significant article, a broad, shallow basket, was the cradle of the
infant Bacchus--the "mystica vannus Iacchi." The golden "Bowl," serving
for lamp, often figures amongst the various emblems adorning our
talismans. The "Sistrum" got its peculiar outline from the Indian *Yoni*
(emblem of the female sex), and it was on account of its similar shape
the almond, *luz*, was also held sacred in Egypt, which seems the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

true origin of the "vesica piscis," serving as the inclosure for divine
figures. The British Museum possesses a Hindoo altar in hardstone,
neatly polished, having its flat top formed into the shape of the
*lingam-yoni;* at each corner of the square a little idol is squatted.
This Indian figure, signifying the Active and Passive Powers of Nature
in conjunction for the work of Creation, is sculptured like a round
shallow basin, with long projecting lips tapering to a twist, with an
obtuse cone rising out of its middle. Now this is the exact shape of a
large brown lamp from Herculaneum (Caylus, vii. pl. 33), only that from
its centre, instead of a cone, springs a bent fore-finger, *digitus
obscœnus* (with the same meaning as the lingam) serving for handle to
carry it by, whilst from the sides project the three arms of the
Egyptian *Tau*. This vessel must have belonged to the Isis-worship in
that town, no doubt as popular there as it is known to have been at the
neighbouring Pompeii. As for the office of "Anubis-bearer," it is
related that when Commodus discharged that duty in the procession, he
gratified the insane cruelty of his nature by cracking the shaven skulls
of all within reach with the weighty head of the idol; and it seems to
follow as a matter of course that the Anubis of Apuleius, in order to
display *alternately* an ebon and a golden visage, must have possessed a
*pair* of heads, human and canine, just as he is figured, holding the
caduceus and palm upon certain Basilidan gems. Lastly, the mysterious
image, too awful to be described, but whose nature is darkly hinted at
as neither of *bird*, *beast*, nor *man*. These very expressions would
tempt me to believe a compound of all three; in a word, the veritable
figure of the Abraxas god. And be it remembered that this image was the
"Supreme God," and he, we know, was the IAO of Egypt. This idol must
have been of *small* dimensions, for it was carried in the *bosom* of
the devotee's robe, and my suspicion is strongly confirmed by the
existence in the late Mertens-Schaffhausen Collection of a bronze
statuette, five inches in height, found in the south of France, and thus
described in the Catalogue. "No 2002. Statuette of Iao standing, armed
with cuirass, shield and whip; his head in the form of a cock's, his
legs terminating in serpents."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[107:\*](gar16.htm#fr_41) Of which a fine
example, an intaglio, is figured in the Museum Odescalchum.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[108:\*](gar16.htm#fr_42) But the Demotic
writing must have lingered much longer in use, for Capitolinus, cap. 34,
mentions the "Egyptian" as one of the current alphabets of the third
century. "The soldiers raised a tomb to Gordian at Circeium Castrum, on
the confines of Persia; placing upon this edifice (*moles*) an epitaph
in Greek, Latin, Persian, Jewish, and *Egyptian* letters, so that it
might be read by everybody. "Divo Gordiano, victori Persarum, victori
Gothorum, victori Sarmatarum, depulsori Romanarum seditionum, victori
Germanorum, sed non victori Philipporum."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I. Origin of Mithraicism](gar17)
