[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar19)  [Next](gar21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IV. MITHRAIC TALISMANS.

Mithraic gems are, for the most part, earlier in date than those
emanating from the Gnosticism of Alexandria, with whose doctrines they
had no connection whatever in their first origin. Little difficulty will
be found on inspection in separating the two classes, the former being
pointed out by the superiority of their style, and yet more so by the
absence of the Egyptian symbols, and long Coptic legends that generally
accompany the latter. Indeed many of them belong to the best period of
Roman art--the age of Hadrian; and it is easy to perceive how the
worship of Apollo gradually merged into that of his more

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

spiritual oriental representative, in the times when religious ideas of
Indian origin began to get the upper hand throughout the Roman world--a
religion essentially speculative, and dealing with matters pertaining to
another life and the Invisible, utterly different in nature from the old
Grecian creed, so materialistic, so active, so entirely busying itself
with the Present and the Visible.

In accordance with the rule that prescribed the proper *material* for
talismans, the Jasper (Pliny's *Molochites*), green, mottled, or yellow,
is almost exclusively employed for intagli embodying Mithraic ideas, and
which take the place of Phœbus and his attributes amongst the glyptic
remains of the second and third centuries. To judge from their fine
execution, certain examples of the class may even date from the age of
the first Cæsars, and thus form as it were the advanced guard of that
countless host of regular Gnostic works, amidst whose terrific barbarism
ancient art ultimately expires. In their beginning these Mithraic works
were the fruit of the modified Zoroastrian doctrines so widely
disseminated over the Empire after the conquest of Pontus--doctrines
whose grand feature was the exclusive worship of the Solar god, as the
fountain of all life--a notion philosophically true, if indeed the vital
principle be, as some scientists assert, nothing more than electricity.
As will be shown hereafter ("Serapis"), the later Platonists, like
Macrobius, laboured hard to demonstrate that the multitudinous
divinities of the old faiths, wheresoever established, were no other
than various epithets and expressions for the same god iii his different
phases. The aim of all the school was to accommodate the old faith to
the influence of the Buddhistic theosophy, the very essence of which was
that the innumerable gods of the Hindoo mythology were but *names* for
the *Energies* of the First Triad in its successive *Avatars*, or
manifestations unto man.

To come now to the actual types setting forth these ideas; prominent
amongst them is the figure of the *Lion* (he being in astrological
parlance the "House of the Sun"), usually surrounded with stars, and
carrying in his jaws a bull's head, emblem of earth subjected to his
power. Sometimes he tramples on the serpent, which in this connection no
longer typifies wisdom,

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

but the Principle of Evil. For in all religions emanating from the East,
where deadly poisonousness is the most conspicuous character of the
snake-tribe, the reptile has been adopted as the most speaking type of
the *Destroyer*. In the West, on the other hand, where the same species
is for the most part innocuous, and a mere object of wonder, it has
always symbolized wisdom, and likewise eternity, from the popular belief
in the yearly removal of its youth through casting the slough; on this
account the serpent was made the companion of Apollo and Aesculapius;
and furthermore plays so important a part in Scandinavian mythology,
holding the whole universe together in its perpetual embrace.

*Mithras* himself often makes his appearance, figured as a youthful
Persian, plunging the national weapon, "Medus acinaces," into the throat
of a prostrate bull (which expresses the same doctrine as the type last
mentioned), whilst overhead are the sun and moon, the group standing in
the centre of the Zodiac. But the completest assembly of Mithraic
figures and symbols that has come under my notice, is the intaglio
published by Caylus ('Recueil d’Antiquités,' vi. pl. 84). It is engraved
upon a very fine agate, 2 × 1½ inches in measurement. In the centre is
the usual type of Mithras slaughtering the Bull, the tail of which
terminates in three wheat-ears, and between the hind legs hangs a huge
scorpion; below is the Lion strangling the Serpent--emblem of darkness
and of death. On each side stands a fir-tree, admitted into this system
because its spiry form imitates a flame, for which same reason its cone
was taken for the symbol of the element fire, and therefore borne in the
hands of deities in the most ancient Syrian sculptures. Against these
fir-trees are affixed torches, one pointing upwards, the other
downwards, which clearly stand for the rising and setting of the Sun. At
the side of one is a scorpion, of the other, a bull's head. Above each
tree again is a torch, each pointing in an opposite direction. The
principal group is flanked by Phœbus in his four-horse, Luna in her
two-horse car. Above the whole stand two winged figures entwined with
serpents and leaning upon long sceptres, between whom rise up three
flames, besides four more at the side of the right-hand

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

figure, making up the mystic number seven--perhaps representing the
seven Amshaspands or Archangels. A naked female, surrounded with stars,
kneels before the angel on the left--doubtless the soul for whose
benefit the talisman was composed--soliciting his patronage.

Could this elaborate composition be interpreted, it would certainly be
found to contain a summary of the Mithraic creed as it was received by
the nations of the West. As it is, however, some portions of the tableau
are explained by certain legends to be found in the Parsee sacred books;
whilst others derive light from comparison with the larger monuments of
the same worship. Thus, the termination of the bull's tail in ears of
wheat allude to the fifty life-giving plants which sprang from the tail
of the Primæval *Bull* (or *Life*, the same word in Zend) after he had
been slain by Ahriman. Of the same animal the seed was carried up by the
Izeds (genii) to the Moon, where, purified in her beams, it was moulded
by Ormuzd into a new pair, the parents of all that exists in earth, air
and water. The scorpion is appended to the part of the body, properly
under the influence of the sign so called, for as Manilius teaches, "The
fiery scorpion in the *groin* delights." In this particular situation it
expresses Autumn, as the serpent underneath does Winter; and with good
reason takes the place of the bull's genitals, for, as the same poet
sings (iv. 217.)

"With fiery tail when Scorpio threatens war,  
 As through the stars he drives the solar car,  
 He searches earth with penetrating rays  
 And the mixed seed deep in her furrows lays."

The torches raised and lowered signify the East and West. In the
circular altar of the Villa Borghese (Winckelmann Mon. Ined. No. 21) the
bust of Luna appears resting on a crescent over an aged head in front
face with crabs' claws springing out of his forehead--a speaking type of
Oceanus. The bust of the *rising* sun, with his customary badge, the
eight-rayed star, in point, rests upon an erect flambeau, whilst that of
the *setting* luminary looking downwards, is placed upon another lowered
towards earth. Again, the serpent winding *four* times about the figures
may signify the sun's annual revolution; an explanation

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

rendered the more plausible by the torso of Mithras at Arles, in which
the Zodiacal Signs occupy the intervals between the coils of the same
serpent. The lion and raven stand for the attendant priests; for in
these mysteries the higher officials were denominated *Lions*, the lower
*Ravens*: whence the rites themselves got the name of "Leontica," and
"Coracica."

The fires, the planets and the genii presiding over them are in number
*seven*--a numeral the most sacred of all amongst the Persians. But of
these seven Fires, *three* are ever depicted in a special manner as
those most worthy to be held in reverence. These three are the "Fire of
the Stars," that is, of the planet Venus, named *Anahid;* the "Fire of
the Sun," or the Fire *Mihr;* and the "Fire of Lightning," or the Fire
*Bersiov*, that is, the planet Jupiter. The *Mihr* is the winged orb, so
common in all Assyrian sculpture--an emblem which serves to explain the
Prophet's simile, "the *Sun* of Righteousness with healing in his
*wings*."

The worship of the Fire Gushtasp (or that of Anahid) figures on the Zend
sculptures as a very ancient worship, and also in the "Shah Nameh;" just
as that of the goddess Anaitis does in many Greek authors from Herodotus
downwards. This historian observes (I. 131) that *at first* the Persians
worshipped only the sun, moon, and elements, until they learnt from the
Assyrians the worship of Venus Urania, whom they called *Mitra*, the
same being the Mylitta of the Babylonians, the Alata or Alilat of the
Arabians. Now Mitra (feminine of Mithras) and Anahid, are one and the
same goddess, that is to say, the Morning Star, a female Genius,
presiding over love, giving light, and directing the harmonious movement
of the other planets by the sound of her lyre, the strings whereof are
the solar rays--"Apollo's lyre strung with his golden hair" (Creuzer,
Ital. de l’Antiq. ii. 731). In this doctrine we discover the reason for
the *separation* of the Fires upon Caylus’ gem into *two* groups; the
principal group consisting of the three most anciently adored; the
subsidiary one of the remaining four.

Other Mithraic symbols are of a very speaking character, and almost
explain their own meaning at first sight. Thus Mithras *piercing* the
bull's throat with his dagger signifies the *penetration* 

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

of the solar ray into the bosons of the earth, by whose action all
Nature is nourished; as is further expressed by the *Dog's* licking up
the blood that pours from the wound. The sign Capricorn frequently
introduced into the same group, declares the necessity of *moisture* to
co-operate with the Sun's influence in bringing about the germination of
the seed sown; whilst the *scorpion*, in the significant position above
noticed, expresses the generative *heat*. The union of two diverse
religions, already mentioned, is curiously exemplified by those stones
that show the Mithraic group surrounded by sets of the sacred animals of
*Egypt*, arranged by threes--crocodiles, goats, calves, vultures, hawks,
ibises--standing around in attitudes of adoration, and gazing upon the
great work of their supreme lord, Mithras (see page
[41](gar10.htm#page_41), [fig. 2](gar10.htm#img_fig02)).

Mithraic [bas-reliefs](errata.htm#4) cut upon the smoothed faces of
rocks, or upon tablets of stone, still abound throughout the former
western provinces of the Roman Empire; many exist in Germany; still more
in France; others in this island, along the line of the Picts’ Wall, and
a remarkably fine example at York, the station of the Sixth Legion. The
famous "Arthur's Oon" (destroyed in the last century) upon the Carron, a
hemispherical vaulted building of immense blocks of stone, was
unmistakably a *Specus Mithraicum*--the same in design as Chosroes’
magnificent Fire temple at Gazaca. Inasmuch as the sun-god was the chief
deity <span id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_48) of the Druids, it is easy to
imagine what ready acceptance the worship of his more refined Persian
equivalent would find amongst the Celtic Aborigines, when once
introduced by the Roman troops and colonists, many of whom were
Orientals. To the last circumstance a curious testimony is incidentally
borne by Lampridius, when he remarks that the entire military force
employed by Maximinus in his great invasion

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

of Germany, was the same that had been raised by Severus Alexander, and
which had accompanied him to the scene of his murder, "either the North
of Gaul or *Britain*," which same army the historian describes as
"potentissimus quidem per *Armenios* et *Osrhoenos*, et *Parthos*, et
omnis generis hominum." For this sagacious emperor had appointed to
subordinate commands in his own army all the prisoners of royal or noble
birth whom he had taken in his preceding Persian campaign.

Although the modern Parsecs, like their Achæmenian ancestry in the days
of Herodotus, abominate idols and all visible representations of things
divine, yet do they still piously cherish the ideas embodied on the
sculptures just passed under review. Amongst these, most conspicuous is
their veneration for the *Dog* which they yet esteem the most holy of
animals. Tavernier (I. 493) was on this account greatly scandalised by
the Guebres of Surat; "they have another strange custom--when a person
is on the point of death, to take a little dog, and place it upon his
breast. When they perceive that he is at his last gasp, they apply the
dog's muzzle to the dying man's mouth, and make it bark twice when in
this position, as if they meant to make the person's soul enter into the
dog, <span id="fr_50"></span>[\*](#fn_49) which they pretend will
deliver it unto the angel appointed to receive the same. Moreover, if a
dog happens to die, they carry it out of the town, and pray to God in
behalf of that piece of carrion, as though the brute's soul could derive
any advantage from their prayers after its death." Following up this
analogy, the sculptured dog licking up the bull's blood may actually be
intended for such a vehicle of departing life. In these times the
Parsecs expose their dead, upon gratings laid on the summit of the
"Tower of silence," to be consumed by the birds alone; but under the
Sassanian monarchy it was the inviolable rule to lay out all corpses in
the open fields to be devoured by the dogs. This was no more than
carrying out to the full a very ancient principle of the Zoroastrian
religion. Herodotus (I. 140) states from his own knowledge that the
corpse of a Magus was not allowed to be buried before it had been
*attacked* by a bird or

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

dog; adding that the same was *reported* of the other Persians. The Magi
regarded the killing of a dog equally criminal with that of a human
being. This primitive style of obsequies the Sassanians strove hard to
enforce upon all nations subjected to their sway, viewing as a great
sacrilege the placing of dead bodies in the bosons of the earth; a still
greater, the consuming them by the sacred element, *Fire*. This practice
above all others scandalised the narrow-minded Byzantines; the historian
Agathias expressing his horror at the casting the dead to the dogs,
whatever their rank or dignity in life; as in the case of the great
Satrap Mermeroes, whom he *saw* thus exposed naked in the fields to be
so devoured. When the last seven sages of Greece, expelled from their
professional chairs at Athens by the stupid bigotry of Justinian, sought
refuge in the ostentatious hospitality of Nushirwan the Just, even they
(despite their philosophy) found themselves obliged, by their disgust at
the sight of this practice, <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_50) to
return home with sad loss of dignity, and submit to the spirit of the
times. If the dogs refused to touch the carcase, this was looked on by
the friends of the deceased as the very worst of indications as to the
ultimate destination of his soul. The Parsees, who, with more decency,
constitute the raven <span id="fr_52"></span>[†](#fn_51) (or equally
sacred creature) sexton and sepulchre in one, derive a similar augury
from observing which eye is first attacked by the bird, the preference
for the right one being the token of salvation; for the left, of the
reverse.

A very curious portion of the initiatory ceremony in the

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

ancient Mysteries was the giving of the "Mark of Mithras." After
successfully undergoing each stage of the ordeal, the accepted candidate
was *marked* in a certain indelible manner, but the exact nature of this
marking cannot now be ascertained The expressions used by St. Augustine
(in Johan. i. dis. 7) lead us to conclude two things: firstly, that the
*engraved stones*, the object of our consideration, were given to the
candidate at the end of his probation, for a token of admission into the
fraternity, and for a medium of recognition between members: and
secondly, that every one, upon admission, was stamped with a *secret
Mark*, indelibly imprinted in his flesh. "Something of the sort has been
copied by a certain Spirit, in that he will have his *own image* to be
purchased with *blood*, forasmuch as he was aware that mankind were some
day or another to be redeemed by the shedding of blood." This last
expression shows that this Mark was not *burnt in*, but *incised* or
tattooed; and the same conclusion may be deduced from St. John's using
the termχάραγμα, *engraving*, not στίγμη, *branding*, for that badge of
servitude which all the subjects of the Second Beast, "having horns like
a lamb's, and speaking like a dragon," were forced to receive, either
*in* their right hands (*i.e.*, upon the palm) or upon their foreheads,
and he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond,
to receive a Mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads: "and that
no man might buy or sell, save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the
Beast, or the Number of his Name" (Rev. xiii. 17). These words contain a
compendious account of the different kinds of "Stigmata" then in use to
distinguish those devoting themselves to any particular deity. The
*Mark* was the figure of the special symbol or attribute of that deity
(exactly answering to the caste-marks of the modern Hindoos): the *Name*
was his own, written at full length in some sacred language: the
*Number* was the more recondite way of expressing that name, either by a
single numeral in the primitive Chaldæan fashion, or by other letters
taken numerically, and yielding the same sum. The author of the
Apocalypse very probably had the Mithraicists in view when penning this
allegory; yet we may be certain that the members of a *secret* society
did not receive the mark of membership

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

upon any *conspicuous* part of their persons. The same necessity meets
us here, as in every other branch of this inquiry, for placing the
origin of all such sectarian bodily Marks in India--the true
fountainhead, directly or indirectly, of so many Gnostic practices.
*There*, the votaries of the several deities are still distinguished,
each by the proper symbol of his patron-god impressed upon his
*forehead*, but by a milder process than of old, being traced, not in
his own blood, but with the ashes of cow-dung, the powder of
sandal-wood, or coloured-earths, daily renewed. Inasmuch as amongst them
the symbol of Fire (Bramah) is an equilateral Triangle, with the apex
pointing upwards, it may be *conjectured* that the Mithraic χάραγμα was
the same simple figure, by which indeed Horapollo informs us the
Egyptians symbolised the Moon, and Plutarch that Pythagoras expressed
the goddess Athene. <span id="fr_53"></span>[\*](#fn_52) Clarkson,
however, asserts positively that the Mark of Mithras was the "Tau
mysticum," but whence he derived this knowledge I have never been able
to ascertain. <span id="fr_54"></span>[†](#fn_53)

The *Seven Stars*, so conspicuous upon these talismans, doubtless stand
for something higher than the mere planets; in all likelihood they
denote the Seven Amshaspands, the First Order of Angels in the
Zoroastrian hierarchy; and who became the "Seven Spirits of God" to the
later Jews, and thence by gradual transition gave the epithet
"Septiformis munere" to the Spiritus Sanctus of Christianity. Of these
Amshaspands the names and offices are: Ormuzd, source of life and
creation; Bahman, king of the world; Ardibehest, giver of fire;
Shahrivar, of the metals; Çpandarmat (the Gnostic Sophia), queen of the
earth; Khordad, presiding over time and the seasons; Amerdad, over trees
and plants. Of these the highest in place are (after Ormuzd) the four
named next in gradation. Below this order stand the Izeds, twenty-seven
in number, ruled over by Mithras; they govern the heavenly bodies and
the elements.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Against each
Amshaspand and Ized is arrayed a corresponding Angel of Darkness, to
thwart all his operations, namely, the Seven Arch-Devs, and the
Twenty-Seven Devs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_48"></span>[136:\*](gar20.htm#fr_49) As "Belenus" he
continued to the last the patron god of Aquileia, that Gallic metropolis
of Cisalpine Gaul, and to his power was ascribed the death of Maximin
when besieging that city. The acclamations of the senate on the receipt
of the news of their deliverance from the tyrant, prove that Belenus was
held to be another name for Apollo. A *shoe* of the giant emperor, a
convincing testimony, literally an "ex pede Herculem," to his incredible
stature, was yet to be seen in the days of Lampridius, nailed to a tree
in the *sacred grove* at the place of his fall.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[137:\*](gar20.htm#fr_50) My Parsee informant
assures me this ceremony is now modified into the merely bringing a dog
into the dying man's chamber.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[138:\*](gar20.htm#fr_51) To which they would
have been forced to conform had they continued under the protection of
the Sassanian king.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[138:†](gar20.htm#fr_52) The same practice
prevails in Thibet with the motive thus assigned. "Several bodies
exposed on the banks of the stream were being devoured by crows and
buzzards, which soon leave nothing but the skeletons, which are washed
away by the summer rise of the stream. The Tibetians believe that as
each buzzard, gorged with its foul repast, soars into the heavens, a
portion of the spirit of the deceased is taken up into heaven. In the
case of rich people Lamas are employed to divide the body into small
pieces and carry it up to the top of a bill, where the vulture and
buzzard soon dispose of it. Interment of the dead is also practised, but
only among the poorer people, who cannot afford to pay Lamas to perform
the ceremony of exposing the body."--Cooper's 'Travels of a Pioneer of
Commerce,' p. 270.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[140:\*](gar20.htm#fr_53) Herself the lunar
deity, according to an old tradition preserved by Aristotle.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[140:†](gar20.htm#fr_54) There is very good
reason to discover a Mithraic mark in the "Phanaces" or, Sun between two
Crescents, the regular badge of the kings of Pontus, and as such pm upon
the states of Athens bearing the names of Mithridates and Aristion. (In
the Duc de Luynes Collection.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Gnostic Sacraments and Initiations as Connected with the
Mithraic](gar21)
