[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar20)  [Next](gar22.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. GNOSTIC SACRAMENTS AND INITIATIONS AS CONNECTED WITH THE MITHRAIC.

In my account of Mithraicism notice has been taken of the very prominent
part that sacraments for the remission of sin play in the ceremonial of
that religion; the following extracts from the grand Gnostic text-book
will serve to show how the same notions (and probably, forms) were
transferred to the service of Gnosticism.

*Baptism, Remitting Sins*.--(Pistis-Sophia) (298). Then came forth Mary
and said: Lord, under what form do *Baptisms* remit sins? I have heard
thee saying that the Ministers of Contentions (ἐριδαῖοι) <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_54.md) follow after the soul, bearing witness
against it of all the sins that it hath committed, so that they may
convict it in the judgments. Now, therefore, Lord, do the mysteries of
Baptism blot out the sins that be in the hands of the Receivers of
Contention, so that they shall utterly forget the same? Now, therefore,
Lord, tell us in what form they remit sins; for we desire to know them
thoroughly. Then the Saviour answered and said: Thou hast well spoken:
of truth those Ministers are they that testify against all sins, for
they abide constantly in the places of judgment, laying hold upon the
souls, convicting all the souls of sinners who have not received the
mystery, and they keep them fast in chaos tormenting them. But these
contentious ones cannot pass over chaos so as to enter into the courses
that be above chaos; in order to convict the souls therefore receiving
the mysteries, it is not lawful for them to force so as to drag them
down into chaos, where the Contentious Receivers may convict them. But
the souls of such as have not received the mysteries, these do they
desire and hail into chaos: whereas the souls that have received

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the mysteries, they have no means of convicting, seeing that they cannot
get out of their own place; and even if they did come forth, they could
not stop those souls, neither shut them up in their chaos. Hearken,
therefore, I will declare to you in truth in what form the mystery of
Baptism remitteth sins. If the souls when yet living in the world have
been sinful, the Contentious Receivers verily do come, that they may
bear witness of all the sins they have committed, but they can by no
means come forth out of the regions of chaos, so as to convict the soul
in the places of judgment that be beyond chaos. But the counterfeit of
the spirit <span id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_55.md) testifies against all
the sins of the soul, in order to convict it in the places of judgment
that be beyond chaos; not only Both it testify, but also sets a *seal*
upon all the sins of the soul, so as to print them firmly upon the soul,
that all the Rulers of the judgment place of the sinners may know that
it is the soul of a sinner, and likewise know the *number* of sins which
it hath committed from the seals that the counterfeit of the spirit hath
imprinted upon it, so that they may punish the soul according to the
number of its sins: this is the manner in which they treat the soul of a
sinner. (300). Now therefore if any one hath received the mysteries of
Baptism, *those mysteries become a great fire*, <span
id="fr_57"></span>[†](#fn_56.md) exceeding strong, and wise, so as to burn
up all the sins: and the Fire entereth into the soul secretly, so that
it may consume within it all the sins which the counterfeit of the
spirit hath printed there. Likewise it entereth into the body secretly,
that it may pursue all its pursuers, and divide them into parts--for it
pursueth within the body, the counterfeit of the spirit, and Fate--so
that it may divide them apart from the Power and the Soul, and place
them in one part of the body--so that the fire separates the counterfeit
of the spirit, Fate, and the Body into one portion, and the Soul and the
Power <span id="fr_58"></span>[‡](#fn_57.md) into another portion. The
mystery of Baptism remaineth in the middle of them, so that it may
perpetually separate them, so that it may purge and cleanse them in
order

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

that they may not be polluted by *Matter*. Now therefore, Mary, this is
the manner whereby the mystery of Baptism remitteth sins and all
transgressions.

\(301\) And when the Saviour had thus spoken, he said to his disciples:
Do ye understand in what manner I speak with you? Then came forth Mary,
saying: Of a truth, Lord, I perceive in reality all the things that thou
hast said. Touching this matter of the Remission of Sins, thou speaketh
aforetime to us in a parable, saying: I am come to bring *fire* upon the
earth; nay, more, let it burn as much as I please. And, again thou hast
set it forth openly, saying: I have a baptism wherewith I will baptise
and how shall I endure until it be accomplished? Ye think that I am come
to bring peace upon the earth? By no means so, but dissension, which I
am come to bring. For from this time forth there shall be five in one
house; three shall be divided against two, and two against three. This,
Lord, is the word that thou speakest openly. But concerning the word
that thou spakest: I am come to bring fire upon the earth, and let it
burn so much as I please: in this thou hast spoken of the mystery of
Baptism in the world, and let it burn as much as thou pleasest for to
consume all the sins of the soul, that it may purge them away. And again
thou hast shewn the same forth openly, saying: I have a baptism
wherewith I will baptise, and how shall I endure until it be
accomplished? The which is this; Thou wilt not tarry in the world until
the baptisms be accomplished to purify all the perfect souls. And again
what thou spakest unto us aforetime: "Do ye suppose I am come to bring
peace upon earth," &c. (302). This signifieth the mystery of Baptism
which thou hast brought into the world, because it hath brought about
dissension in the body of the world, because it hath divided the
Counterfeit of the spirit, the Body, and the Fate thereof, into one
party, and the Soul and the Power into the other party. The same is,
"There shall be three against two, and two against three." And when Mary
had spoken these things the Saviour said: Well done, thou Spiritual One
in the pure light, this is the interpretation of my saying.

Then Mary went on and said: Bear with me, Lord, whilst I yet inquire of
thee. Lo! we know now fully after what form

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Baptism remitteth
sin. Now therefore declare unto us the mystery of the Three Courts, and
the mystery of the First Mystery, and likewise the mystery of the
Ineffable One; in what form do these also remit sin? Do they remit sin
in the *form of baptism* or not? (303) The Saviour answered again: By no
means; but all the mysteries of the Three Courts remit in the soul, and
in all the regions of the Rulers, all the sins that the soul hath
committed even from the beginning. They remit also the sins that the
soul shall have committed afterwards up to the time that each one of the
mysteries taketh unto itself, the time whereof I will declare unto you
hereafter. Moreover the mystery of the First Mystery, and the mystery of
the Ineffable One, remit unto the soul in all the regions of the Rulers
all the sins and transgressions that it hath committed. And not only do
they remit, but they do not *impute sin* <span
id="fr_59"></span>[\*](#fn_58.md) to the soul, from henceforth for ever by
reason of the free-grace of the mystery and the exceeding glory of the
same. Then said the Saviour: Do ye understand all that I have said unto
you? Then Mary answered: Lord, I have caught up all the words thou hast
spoken. Now therefore as to the saying that all the mysteries of the
Three Courts remit sins, and blot out iniquities. Concerning this same
matter hath David the prophet spoken, saying: "Blessed are they whose
sins they have remitted, and whose iniquities they have covered," and as
to thy saying that the mystery of the First Mystery, and the mystery of
the Ineffable One, do not only remit all sin unto the soul for ever, but
also do not suffer sin to be *imputed* unto the same for ever and ever,
by reason of the free-gift of the great mystery, and the exceeding glory
thereof; concerning this same matter David the prophet foretold, saying:
"Blessed are they unto whom the Lord will not impute sin," which
signifieth they will not impute sin from henceforth unto those that
receive the mystery of the First Mystery and the mystery of the
Ineffable One. Then answered the Saviour: Well done, thou Spiritual One,
this is the interpretation of my word.

\(305\) Then Mary continued, saying: Lord, if a man shall

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

have received the mystery in the mystery of the First Mystery, and
afterwards shall turn back and sin, and again shall repent and pray in
his own mystery, shall his sin be remitted to him or not? Then answered
the Saviour; Whosoever after receiving the mystery shall again sin
twelve times, and again repent twelve times, and then shall pray in his
own mystery, his sin shall he remitted unto him. But and if, after these
twelve times, he shall turn again and transgress, then of a truth his
sin shall never more be remitted, so that he may turn again unto his own
mystery whatsoever it be. For such an one there is no repentance, unless
indeed he hath received the mystery of the Ineffable One that remitteth
all sins, and shall remit them at every time.

Then said Mary: Lord, those who have received the mystery of the First
Mystery, and then have turned back and sinned, if such without having
repented shall depart out of the body, shall they inherit the kingdom or
not, forasmuch as they have received the free gift of that mystery?
(306) The Saviour answered: Of such the judgment shall be the most
merciful amongst all the judgments, for their dwelling is in the Middle
Gate <span id="fr_60"></span>[\*](#fn_59.md) of the Dragon of Outer
Darkness, and at the end <span id="fr_61"></span>[†](#fn_60.md) of all
those that be in torment; because such an one hath received the free
gift of the mystery, and hath not remained steadfast therein. Then said
Mary: Such as have received the mystery of the Ineffable One and then
shall turn back and sin, but afterwards shall repent in their lifetime,
how many times shall their sin be remitted unto *them?* Then answered
the Saviour: To such an one, not only if he turn back and sin once, and
then repent, shall his sin be remitted, but even if he doth so
continually, so long as he shall repent whilst yet alive, not being in
hypocrisy, and shall pray according to his own mystery, because those
mysteries are merciful and remit sin at every time (307). Then asked
Mary: But if such an one shall depart out of the body before he hath
repented, what then shall happen unto him? (307) Then answered the
Saviour: Of such an one the judgment shall be worse than of any other,
and

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

exceeding great; for even if those souls be *new ones*, <span
id="fr_62"></span>[\*](#fn_61.md) they shall not return unto the changes of
the earthly bodies, neither shall they do any work, but they shall be
cast out into the uttermost parts of the Outer Darkness, and shall be
consumed so that they shall not exist for ever and ever.

\(308\) To this declaration Mary refers the saying: "Salt is good, but
if the salt hath lost its savour," &c.

The following extracts, from the same high authority, will much
elucidate the *pass-words* communicated to the dying believer, which
form so important a feature of the Gnostic system.

*Benefits of Initiation*.--I will declare unto you that mystery, which
is this: Whosoever shall have received that *One Word*, when he shall
depart out of the body of the Matter of the Rulers, there shall come the
Contentious Receivers to loosen him out of that body, which same
Receivers loosen every one departing out of the body. And when they
shall have loosened the soul that hath received that mystery which I
have declared unto you, in that very moment wherein he is set loose, he
becometh a great *flood of light* in the midst of them. And the
Receivers shall fear the light of that soul, and shall tremble, and
shall cease through their fear of the great light which they behold. And
that soul shall fly up aloft, and the Receivers shall not lay hold upon
him, neither shall they discern by what way he is gone, inasmuch as he
is become a great *Ray of Light*, and flieth up aloft, neither is there
any Power that can overtake him, nor ever come nigh unto him at all
(228). But he passes through all the regions of the Rulers, and also the
regions of the offspring of the Light, neither doth he give-in a
declaration in any region, nor yet a defence of himself, <span
id="fr_63"></span>[†](#fn_62) nor yet the pass-word (or symbol.md). Neither
can any Power of them all draw near him, but all the regions of the
Rulers and of the offspring of the Light shall

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

sing hymns, each one in his own place, fearing the flood of light that
clotheth that soul, until he shall come into the place of the heirs of
the mystery that he hath received, and become conjoined with the members
of the same. Verily, I say unto you, ire shall be in all the regions in
the time that a man can shoot an arrow. Again I say unto you, whosoever
shall receive that mystery and make himself perfect in all the types and
figures thereof, that man is in the world, but he is more excellent than
the angels, and shall be before them all; he is a man in the world, but
he is better than the archangels and shall be before them all (229); he
is higher than all the tyrants, and all the lords, and all the gods, and
all the luminaries, and all the pure ones, and all the triple powers,
and all the Primal Fathers, and all the Unseen Ones; he is a man in the
world, but he is more excellent than the great unseen Primal Father, and
shall be more exalted than he, and above all those pertaining to the
Middle-space, and above all the emanations of the Treasury of Light, and
above all the confusion, <span id="fr_64"></span>[\*](#fn_63.md) and above
every region of the Treasure of Light; he is a man in the world, but he
shall reign with me (230) in my kingdom; he is a man in the world, but
he shall be a king in the Light; he is a man in the world, but he is not
of the world; and verily I say unto you, that man is *I*, and I am *that
man;* and in the dissolution of the world, when the universe shall be
raised up, and all the number of perfect souls shall be raised up, and I
am made king over all the offspring of the Light, and when I am made
king over the seven ΑΜΗΝ, <span id="fr_65"></span>[†](#fn_64.md) and the
Five Trees, and the Three ΑΜΗΝ, and the Nine Keepers; and when I am king
over the Boy of the boy which be the Twin Saviours, and over the Twelve
Saviours, and over all the number of perfect souls which have received
the mystery of Light, then whosoever shall have received the mystery of
the Ineffable One, they shall be joint kings with me and shall sit upon
my right hand and upon my left hand in my kingdom. Verily I say unto
you, those men are I, and I am

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

those men. For this cause have I said to you formerly, ye shall sit upon
your thrones on my right hand and on my left in my kingdom, and ye shall
reign together with me (231). Therefore I did not refrain, neither was I
abashed to call you my brethren and my fellows, inasmuch as ye shall be
joint kings with me in my kingdom. These things therefore I said unto
you, knowing that I was about to give unto you the mystery of the
Ineffable One, because that mystery is I, and I am that mystery. Now
therefore not only ye shall reign with me, but also whatsoever men shall
have received that mystery they shall be joint kings with me in my
kingdom; and 1 am they, and they are I. But my throne shall be more
exalted than theirs; and inasmuch as ye shall receive sorrows in this
world beyond all other men whilst ye are preaching the words that I
declare unto you, therefore your thrones shall be next to my throne in
my kingdom. For this cause I said of old time, in the place where I
shall be, my twelve ministers shall be also; but Mary Magdalene, and
John the Virgin, shall be the most excellent amongst my disciples. And
all men that shall have received the mystery of the Ineffable One shall
be upon my right hand and upon my left, for I am they and they are I,
and they shall be equal with you in every thing; but your thrones shall
be more exalted than theirs, and my throne shall be more exalted than
yours (232). And all men that shall find out the *Word* of the Ineffable
One, verily I say unto you all the men that shall know that *Word*, the
same shall understand also the knowledge of all the words that I have
spoken unto you, both in their depth and in their height, in their
length and in their breadth. And what things I have not told you those I
will tell you in their place and in their order in the emanation of the
universe. Verily I say unto you, they shall know how the world is
established, and after what form those that pertain unto the height
(highest place) be made, and for what end the universe was created.

And when the Saviour had said these things, Mary Magdalene came forward
and said: Lord, be not wroth with me if I seek out everything with
diligence. Whether is the Word of the mystery of the Ineffable One, one
thing, and the Word of

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

the Knowledge of All, another? Then the Saviour answered, and said: The
Word of the mystery of the Ineffable is one thing, and the Word of the
Knowledge of All is another. Then said Mary: Suffer me, Lord, to ask
thee yet again one thing. Unless when we are living we understand the
knowledge of the whole Word of the Ineffable One, we shall not inherit
the kingdom of Light? (233). Then the Saviour answered, and said: Of a
truth, whosoever shall have received the mystery of the kingdom of
Light, the same shall go to inherit it into that place the mystery
whereof he hath received. But he shall not obtain the knowledge of the
All, wherefore all things were made, except he shall have known that One
Word of the Ineffable, the which is the knowledge of all. And again,
there is no way of knowing that One Word of knowledge, except a man
shall have first received the mystery of the Ineffable One; but every
man shall go to inherit that place the mystery whereof he hath received.
For which cause I said to you formerly: "He that believeth a prophet
shall receive a prophet's reward, and he that believeth a righteous man
shall receive a righteous man's reward," which is this: of whatsoever
place each hath received the mystery, into that same place shall he go.
He that hath received a humble mystery, the same shall inherit a humble
place. He that hath received an excellent mystery, the same shall
inherit an exalted place; and every one shall abide in his own place in
the light of my kingdom, and every one shall have authority over the
Course that is below him, but over that which is above himself he shall
not have authority, but shall abide in his inheritance of the light of
my kingdom, dwelling in a great light unto which there is no measure,
next to the gods and to the Unseen Ones, and he shall be in great joy
and gladness (234).

Now therefore I will speak with you touching the glory of those also
that shall receive the mystery of the First Mystery. He that hath
received the same, at the time when he shall depart out of this body of
Matter, the Contentious Receiver shall come that they may take his soul
out of the body, and that soul shall become a great Pay of light and
shall fly aloft through the midst of them, and shall pass through all
the regions and shall

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

not give-in any declaration, or defence, or symbol, token (password),
but shall pass through all, that he may come and reign over all the
places belonging to the First Saviour. In the like manner he that hath
received the Second Mystery and the Third and Fourth up to the
Twelfth <span id="fr_66"></span>[\*](#fn_65) (235.md), that soul likewise
shall pass through all the regions without giving in his defence, or
token, and shall come and reign over all the places belonging to the
Twelve Saviours. And in like manner those receiving the second mystery
shall reign over the places of the Second Saviour amongst the heirs of
light. In like manner those receiving the third and the fourth up to the
twelfth, shall reign over the regions of that Saviour whose mystery each
hath received. But they shall not be equal with those that have received
the mystery of the Ineffable One, but shall abide in the Courses of the
Twelve Saviours.

Then Mary answered, saying: Lord, suffer me yet again. How is it that
the First Mystery hath twelve mysteries, whereas the Ineffable hath but
one? Jesus answered: Of a truth He hath but One, but that mystery maketh
*three* others; the mystery is indeed *one*, but to each of them there
is a different form, and moreover it maketh *five* mysteries.

As for the First Mystery, when thou hast performed it well in all the
forms thereof, when thou departest out of thy body thou shalt forthwith
become a great Ray of light, and it shall traverse all the regions of
the Rulers and all the regions of Light, all being afraid of that light
of the soul, until it shall come into its own kingdom. As for the Second
Mystery, he that shall perform the same rightly in all the forms
thereof, if he speak it over the head of a man departing out of the
body, and *into his two ears*, that man departing out of the body when
he hath received the mystery a second time, and been made partaker of
the *Word of Truth*, <span id="fr_67"></span>[†](#fn_66.md) that man's soul
shall become, when it leaveth the body, a great flood of light, so as to
traverse all the regions until it cometh into the kingdom of that
mystery. But and if

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

that man hath not received that mystery, neither hath been made partaker
of the words of truth, if he that hath performed that mystery shall
speak the same into the ears of him who is departing out of the body,
verily I say unto you, the soul of that man, although he hath not
received the mystery of Light nor partaken of the words of truth, shall
not be judged in the places of the Rulers, neither shall it be punished
in any place, neither shall the fire touch it, by reason of the mystery
of the Ineffable which goeth along with it. And they shall hasten to
deliver that soul one to the other, and shall guide it Course after
Course, and place (239) after place, until they bring it before the
Virgin of Light: for all the regions shall fear the mystery and the
*Mark* <span id="fr_68"></span>[\*](#fn_67.md) of the kingdom of the
Ineffable One that is with it.

And when they have brought the soul unto the Virgin of Light, she shall
see the Mark of the mystery of the kingdom of the Ineffable One which is
with it. And the Virgin of Light marvelleth thereat, and she judgeth
that soul, but suffereth him not to be brought unto the light until he
hath accomplished the ministry of the light of that mystery, which be
these: the purification of the renouncing of the world and of all the
*Matter* that therein is. And the Virgin of Light sealeth him with a
special seal, which is this: in the same month in which he hath departed
out of the body, she will cause him to be placed in another body that
shall be righteous, and shall obtain the divinity of truth and the high
mystery, so that he may inherit the same, and also inherit the Light for
ever and ever. This is the grace of the Second Mystery of the Ineffable
One.

As touching the Third Mystery: the man that hath performed the same duly
in all the forms thereof and shall *name* that mystery over the head of
one departing out of the body whether he be living or *dead, or abiding
in the midst of the torments of the Rulers*, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[†](#fn_68.md) and their different fires, they shall make
haste to release

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

that man out of them all, and shall bring him before the Virgin of
Light, who shall place him in a righteous body that shall inherit the
light.

\(243\) Moreover in the dissolution of the Universe, that is, when the
number of perfect souls is made up, and the mystery is accomplished on
account of which the Universe has been created, then I will spend a
thousand years, according to the years of light, ruling over the
offspring of the light, and over the number of the perfect souls which
have received all the mysteries. Then Mary said, Lord, how many years in
the years of this world is one year of light? Jesus answered, One day of
light is one thousand years of this world, wherefore thirty and six
myriads and a half of the years of the world make one year of light. I
shall therefore reign a thousand years of light, being king in the
middle of the last *Parastates*, <span id="fr_70"></span>[\*](#fn_69.md)
being king over all the offspring of light, and over all the number of
perfect souls that have received the mysteries of light. And ye, my
disciples, and each one that hath received the mysteries of the
Ineffable One, shall be upon my right hand and upon my left, being kings
together with me in my kingdom. And those likewise that receive the
three mysteries of the five mysteries of the Ineffable shall be kings
together with you in the kingdom of light. But they shall not be equal
with you, and with those receiving the mystery of the Ineffable One, for
they shall continue kings behind you. And those receiving the five
mysteries of the Ineffable shall remain behind the three mysteries being
kings also. Likewise those receiving the twelve mysteries of the First
Mystery, they too shall abide as kings behind the five mysteries of the
Ineffable One. And they also are kings each one of them according to his
course, and all receiving in the mysteries in all the places of the
Court of the Ineffable One, so that they shall be kings also but come
after such as have received the mystery of the First Mystery: being sent
forth according to the glory of each, so that those receiving high
mysteries shall dwell in high places, but those receiving humble
mysteries shall abide in humble places.

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

These are the *Three Lots* of the Kingdom of Light, and the mysteries of
these Three Lots of Light are exceeding great. Ye will find them in the
great Second Book of **ΙΕV**; but I will give unto you and declare unto
you the mysteries of each lot, which be more exalted than any other
place (246), and are chief both as to place and as to order: the which
also lead all mankind within, into lofty places; according to the, court
belonging to their inheritance, so that ye have no need of any of the
*lower mysteries*, but ye will find them in the Second Book of **ΙΕV**
which Enoch wrote when I spoke with hint out of the Tree of Knowledge
and out of the Tree of Life in the Paradise of Adam.

Now therefore after I shall have declared unto you all Emanation, I will
give and I will tell unto you the Three Lots of my Kingdom which be the
chief of all.

Inasmuch as *Ordeals* and *Meritorious Penances* held so important a
place in the Mithraic ceremonial, it will not be irrelevant here to
adduce for comparison a series of the kind as excogitated by the
extravagant imagination of the Brahmins. The penances of the *demon*
Taraka, the Tapa-asura, by means whereof he constrained Brahma to grant
him whatever he chose to demand, are thus enumerated, each stage being
of one century's duration. 1. He stood on one foot, holding up the other
with both hands towards heaven, his eyes fixed immovably upon the sun.
2. He stood on one great toe. 3. He took for sustenance nothing but
water. 4. He lived similarly upon air. 5. He remained immersed in the
water. 6. He was buried in the earth, continuing, as during the last
penance, in continued adoration. 7. He performed the same act in the
fire. 8. He stood on his head with his feet upwards. 9. He stood resting
on one hand. 10. He hung by his hands from a tree. 11. He hung on a tree
by his feet, with his head downwards. (The twelfth degree Moor (Edward
Moor, *The Hindu Pantheon*--JBH.) has, for some reason, omitted.)

By means like these, termed the *Yog*, the ascetic *Yogī* is enabled to
obtain nine several gifts, that set him above all the laws of Nature.
For example, he may expand or contract his body to any size he pleases;
he may float in the air upon a sunbeam; he may exert all his sense at an
infinite distance from the objects of them; with other capabilities of
like kind.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And with respect
to the sixth penance of Taraka, this, incredible as it appears, is still
performed. To be buried alive in a small vault covered deep with earth
until a crop of grain, sown over him at the time of inhumation, shall be
ripe for cutting, is yet esteemed the most efficacious of good works for
extorting from heaven the blessing most desired by the patient or his
employer (the doctrine of *vicarious* atonement being most thoroughly
Hindoo). The English Resident at Runjeet Singh's court has minutely
described all the preparation made by the royal proxy, (whose regular
trade it was thus to die for others), and the successful completion of
his penance, which occupied the space of six weeks. The Resident
assisted at the closing and the opening of the vault, and was certain
that no deception could possibly have been practised by the Yogi. The
blessing aimed at was the gift of fecundity for a favourite queen of
Runjeet's.

The "Taurobolia," or *Baptism of Blood*, during the later ages of the
Western Empire, held the foremost place, as the means of purification
from sin, however atrocious. Prudentius has left a minute description of
this horrid rite, in which the person to be regenerated, being stripped
of his clothing, descended into a pit, which was covered with planks
pierced full of holes; a bull was slaughtered upon them, whose hot
blood, streaming down through these apertures (after the fashion of a
shower-bath), thoroughly drenched the recipient below. The selection of
the particular victim proves this ceremony in connection with the
Mithraica, which latter, as Justin says, had a "Baptism for the
remission of Sins"; and the Bull being in that religion the recognised
emblem of *life*, his blood necessarily constituted the most effectual
laver of regeneration. No more conclusive evidence of the value then
attached to the Taurobolia can be adduced, than the fact mentioned by
Lampridius that the priest-emperor Heliogabalus thought it necessary to
submit to its performance; and a pit, constructed for the purpose as
late as the fourth century, has lately been discovered within the sacred
precincts of the Temple at Eleusis, the most holy spot in all Greece.

The subject will find its most appropriate conclusion in the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

list of "Degrees" to be taken in the Mysteries, as laid down by M.
Lajard, in his elaborate treatise, 'Le Culte de Mithra,' <span
id="fr_71"></span>[\*](#fn_70.md) These degrees were divided into four
stages, Terrestrial, Aerial, Igneous, and Divine, each consisting of
three. The Terrestrial comprised the Soldier, the Lion, the Bull. The
Aerial, the Vulture, the Ostrich, the Raven. The Igneous, the Gryphon,
the Horse, the Sun. The Divine, the Eagle, the Sparrow-Hawk, the Father
of fathers. Lajard's theory is best elucidated by quoting his way of
expounding a very frequent cylinder-subject. Be finds the admission to
the degree of "The Soldier," in the group where a man is seen standing
before a "hierophant," or priest, who stands on the back of a bull
*couchant* on a platform. The hierophant, wearing a cap tipped by a
crescent, holds out to the neophyte a curved sword, symbol of admission
into the Order. A priestess stands apart, separated from him by the
horn, or Tree of Life, over which soars the emblem of the Assyrian
Triad. Her cap is tipped by the Sun-star, but she also wears the
crescent, to show the hermaphrodite nature of Mylitta!

 

<span id="img_fig05"></span> ![FIG. 5.](img/fig05.jpg.md)  
FIG. 5.

[(\*)](gar71.htm#an_fig05.md)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[141:\*](gar21.htm#fr_55.md) The Cabiri,
"punishers," of the ancient mythology, performing their former duties
under the new dispensation.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[142:\*](gar21.htm#fr_56.md) Ἀντιμῖμον Πνεύματος,
one of the four component parts of the soul; equivalent apparently to
our "Conscience."

<span id="fn_56"></span>[142:†](gar21.htm#fr_57.md) A clear allusion to the
Mithraic "torture of the fire."

<span id="fn_57"></span>[142:‡](gar21.htm#fr_58.md)The particle of the
Godhead mixed up in the quadruple [composition](errata.htm#5.md) of the
Inner Man.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[144:\*](gar21.htm#fr_59.md) This is the doctrine
that "knowledge" renders all actions free from
[sinfulness](errata.htm#6.md)--as held by the Simonians.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[145:\*](gar21.htm#fr_60.md) This term is borrowed
from the ancient Gates of the Amenti.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[145:†](gar21.htm#fr_61.md) The lost place,
answering to the Limbo of the mediæval Hell.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[146:\*](gar21.htm#fr_62.md) That is, have occupied
the body for the first time; not souls that after punishment for their
sins in this life, have been placed again in bodies to undergo a second
probation upon earth.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[146:†](gar21.htm#fr_63.md) All this is borrowed
from the Egyptian "Ritual of the Dead," concerning the soul's passage on
its way to the palace of Osiris Socharis, "the Occidental," through the
One-and-twenty Gates , each guarded by its own Genius, and each
requiring a separate address.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[147:\*](gar21.htm#fr_64.md) The Creation of the
Demiurgus, in which the Particle of the Godhead is *mixed up* and lost
in the heap of Matter.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[147:†](gar21.htm#fr_65.md) Title probably borrowed
from the former *Amenti*, the four sons of Osiris, and keepers of
Elysium.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[150:\*](gar21.htm#fr_66.md) This gradation seems
borrowed from the twelve degrees in the Mithraic initiation.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[150:†](gar21.htm#fr_67.md) This is what Epiphanies
relates of the practice of the Heracleonites of communicating the
pass-word to the ear of the dying man.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[151:\*](gar21.htm#fr_68.md) It has the impression
of the royal seal stamped upon it.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[151:†](gar21.htm#fr_69.md) Here we have the first
hint of masses performed for the dead. A similar idea is involved in the
practice mentioned by St. Paul of being "baptized for the sake of
deceased persons." A singular Italian usage alluded to by Dante in his
'Vendetta di Dio non Teme Suppe,' refers to something of the sort done
to appease the manes. A homicide who had eaten sops in wine upon the
grave of the slain man was thereby freed from the *vendetta* of the
family.--(Purgat. xxxiii. 35.)

<span id="fn_69"></span>[152:\*](gar21.htm#fr_70.md) The deity whose place
is next to the Supreme Light; to judge from the primary sense of the
word.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[155:\*](gar21.htm#fr_71.md) Lajard discovers upon
the Babylonian cylinders representations of admission to the several
degrees, of which they were given, as certificate to the initiated: and
accounts for their enormous extant numbers by the supposition that every
one, upon proceeding to a higher degree, threw away the cylinder marking
the preceding one. But the complicated system of the Mithraici was
evidently the creation of much later times, and of a religion vainly
struggling for life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Augustine on Gnosticism](gar22.md)
