[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar22)  [Next](gar24.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

## THE WORSHIP OF SERAPIS.

### I. THE FIGURED REPRESENTATIONS OF SERAPIS.

The next great series of monuments to be considered are those emanating
from the worship of Serapis, that mysterious deity, who, under his
varying forms, had, during the second and third centuries of our era,
completely usurped the sovereignty of his brother Jupiter, and reduced
him to the rank of a mere planetary Genius. Unlike the generality of the
deities who figure upon the Gnostic stones, the *Alexandrian* Serapis
does not belong to the primitive mythology of Egypt. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[\*](#fn_71.md) His worship may be said to be only coeval
with the rise of Alexandria, into which city it was introduced from
Sinope by the first Ptolemy, in consequence of the command (and repeated
threats, in case of neglect) of a vision which had appeared to him.
After three years of ineffectual negotiation, Ptolemy at last obtained
the god from Scythotherius, king of Sinope; but when the citizens still
refused to part with their idol, a report was spread, that it had
spontaneously found its way from the temple down to the Egyptian ships
lying in the harbour.

The prevalent opinion amongst the Greeks was that the figure represented
Jupiter *Dis* (Aidoneus) and the one by his side, *Proserpine*. This
latter the envoys were ordered by the same divine messenger, to leave in
its native shrine. Another story, also mentioned by Tacitus, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[†](#fn_72.md) made the statue to have been brought from
Seleucia by Ptolemy III, but this rested on slighter authority. It is,
however, a curious confirmation of this last tradition that Serapis is
named by Plutarch ("Alexander,") as the chief deity of *Babylon*
(Seleucia in later times) at the date of the Macedonian Conquest--a
proof that

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

he at least regarded that god as identical with *Belus*. Now, it is a
remarkable coincidence that *Ana*, the First Person in the primitive
Chaldean Triad, is likewise "King of the Lower World," and that his
symbol, the vertical wedge, stands also for the numeral 60, which last
is often used to express hieroglyphically the name Ana.

It was Timotheus, an Athenian Eumolpid, and, in virtue of his descent,
Diviner to the king, who indicated Pontus as the residence of the
unknown god, whose apparition had so disquieted the monarch by
commanding himself to be sent for without declaring whence. The figure,
seen in the vision, was that of a *youth*, a circumstance that tallies
ill with the mature majesty of the great god of Alexandria. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[\*](#fn_73.md) But the Helios Dionysos, a veritable
Chrishna, who graces the reverse of the gold medallion of Pharnaces II,
coined at Sinope in the following century, agrees much more exactly with
this description of the nocturnal visitor.

Speedily did Serapis become the sole lord of his new home; and
speculations as to his true nature employed the ingenuity of the
philosophers at Alexandria, down to the times when they were superseded
by the discussions on the doctrine of the Trinity, waged with equal zeal
but infinitely worse temper. Every conflicting religion strove to claim
him as the grand representative of their own doctrine. Macrobius has
preserved one of the most ingenious of these interpretations, as made by
the 'Rationalists,' a party so strong amongst the later Greeks (I. 20).
"The City of Alexandria pays an almost frantic worship to Serapis and
Isis, nevertheless they show that all this veneration is merely offered
to the *Sun* under that name, both by their placing the corn-measure
upon his head, and by accompanying his statue with the figure of an
animal having three heads; of these heads, the middle and the largest
one is a

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

lion's, that which rises on the right is a dog's in a peaceable and
fawning attitude; whilst the left part of the neck terminates in that of
a ravening wolf. All these bestial forms are connected together by the
wreathed body of a serpent, which raises its head up towards the god's
right hand, on which side the monster is placed. The *lion's* head
typifies the Present, because its condition between the Past and the
Future is strong and fervent. The Past is signified by the *wolf's*
head, because the memory of all things past is scratched away from us
and utterly consumed. The emblem of the fawning *dog* represents the
Future, the domain of inconstant and flattering hope. But whom should
Past, Present and Future serve except their Authors? His head crowned
with the *calathus* typifies the *height* of the planet above us, also
his all-powerful *capaciousness*, since unto him all things earthly do
return, being drawn up by the heat he emits. Moreover when Nicocreon,
tyrant of Cyprus, consulted Serapis as to which of the gods he ought to
be accounted, he received the following response:--

"'A god I am, such as I show to thee,  
 The starry heavens my head; my trunk the sea;  
 Earth forms my feet; mine ears the air supplies;  
 The sun's far-darting, brilliant rays mine eyes.'" <span
id="fr_75"></span>[\*](#fn_74.md)

From all this it is evident that the nature of Serapis and the Sun is
one and indivisible. Again, Isis is universally worshipped as the type
of earth, or Nature in subjection to the Sun. For this cause the body of
the goddess is covered with continuous rows of *udders*, to declare that
the universe is maintained by the perpetual nourishing of the Earth or
Nature." This last curious remark shows that Macrobius regarded the
Alexandrian Isis as the same with the Ephesian Diana, for the ancient
Isis of Egypt had only the usual complement of breasts. This philosopher
had started with the axiom (i. 17), "Omnes deos referri ad Solem," and
begins by demonstrating from the various epithets

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

of Apollo, that *he* was the same god with the one styled the Sun. He
then proceeds to prove the same of Bacchus, Hermes, Aesculapius, and
Hercules. His ingenious explanation of the serpent-entwined rod of
Hermes, and club of Aesculapius, will be found applied further on to the
elucidation of the remarkable symbol on the reverse of all the Chnuphis
amulets. After this, Macrobius passes in review the attributes and
legends of Adonis and Atys, also of Osiris and Horus, and comes to the
same conclusion concerning the real nature of all these personages,
adding parenthetically a very fanciful exposition of the Signs of the
Zodiac, as being merely so many emblems of the solar influence in the
several regions of creation. Nemesis, Paris, Saturn, Jupiter, and
finally the Assyrian Adad, are all reduced by him to the same
signification.

This brings us to that most wondrous identification of all, which
Hadrian mentions in a letter to his brother-in-law Servianus, preserved
by the historian Vopiscus in his Life of the Tyrant Saturninus. "Those
who worship Serapis are likewise Christians; even those who style
themselves the bishops of Christ are devoted to Serapis. The very
Patriarch himself, <span id="fr_76"></span>[\*](#fn_75.md) when he comes to
Egypt, is forced by some to adore Serapis, by others to worship Christ.
There is but one God for them all, Him do the Christians, Him do the
Jews, Him do the Gentiles, all alike worship." Severus Alexander, too,
who daily paid his devotions to Christ and Abraham, did none the less
expend large sums in decorating the temples of Serapis and Isis "with
statues, *couches*, and all things pertaining to their Mysteries," <span
id="fr_77"></span>[†](#fn_76.md) whilst he left the other gods of Rome to
take care of themselves.

And as connected with the same subject, it may be here observed that the
conventional portrait of the Saviour is in all probability borrowed from
the head of Serapis, so full of grave and pensive majesty. Of the first
converts, the Jewish foredilections were so powerful that we may be sure
that no attempt was made to portray His countenance until many
generations

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

after all who had beheld it on earth had passed away. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[\*](#fn_77.md) Nevertheless, the importance so long
attached to the pretended letter of Lentulus to the emperor, Tiberius,
describing Christ's personal appearance, demands a notice in this place.
Its monkish Latinity and style betray it, at first sight, for the
authorship of some mediæval divine. Yet, incredible as it may seem, even
a learned man like Grynæus has been so besotted through his pious
longing for the *reality* of such a record, as to persuade himself that
Lentulus, a Roman Senator and an eminent historian, could have written
in the exact phrase of a mendicant friar. "There has appeared in our
times, and still lives, a Man of great virtue, named Christ Jesus, who
is called by the Gentiles a Prophet of Truth, but whom his own disciples
called the Son of God; raising the dead, and healing diseases. A man
indeed of lofty stature, handsome, having a venerable countenance, which
the beholders can both love and fear. His hair verily somewhat wavy and
curling, somewhat brightish and resplendent in colour, flowing down upon
his shoulders, having a parting in the middle of the head after the
fashion of the Nazarenes, &c." (Grynæus, 'Orthodoxia' I. p. 2.) This
forgery reminds one of Pliny's remark, "Pariunt desideria non traditos
vultus, sicutin Homero evenit." The wish is father to the image of the
venerated object; and the conception is too joyfully accepted by the
loving soul for it to trouble itself overmuch in scrutinizing the
legitimacy of the same: for, as Martial exclaims with full truth "quis
enim damnet sua vota libenter?"

But to return to the Egypt of the times of Gnosticism. In the very focus
of that theosophy, Alexandria, the syncretistic sects which sprang up so
rankly there during the three first centuries of the Roman empire, had
good grounds for making out Serapis a prototype of Christ, considered as
Lord and Maker of all, and Judge of the quick and the dead. For the
response given to Nicocreon, above quoted, evinces that the philosophers
at least saw in Serapis nothing more than the emblem of the 'Anima

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mundi,' the
*Spirit* of whom Nature universal is the *body*, for they held the
doctrine of

". . . . . . . the one harmonious whole,  
 Whose body Nature is, and God the soul."

So that by an easy transition Serapis came to be worshipped as the
embodiment of the One Supreme, whose representative on earth was Christ.

The very *construction* of the grand Colossus of Serapis ingeniously set
forth these ideas of his character. It was formed out of plates of *all
the metals*, artfully joined together, to typify the harmonious union of
different elements in the fabric of the universe, the "moles et machina
mundi." This statue was placed upon the summit of an artificial hill
(whose vast interior was divided into vaulted halls, containing the
famous library), ascended by a flight of a hundred steps--a style of
building totally diverse from the native Egyptian and the Grecian model,
but exactly following the Indian usage, as may be seen by the grand
pagoda of Siva at Tanjore, and by the *topes* and *dagobas* of the
Buddhists.

The remarkable construction of this Colossus may reasonably be supposed
to have suggested to the Alexandrian Jew, who *completed* the Book of
Daniel, the notion of the similarly compacted *Image* which figures in
Nebuchadnezzar's Dream. That his description of the latter was penned
long after the coming of Serapis into that city is manifest from the
minute details this *prophet* gives concerning the constant squabbles
going on between Antiochus Epiphanes and Ptolemy Philometor, his nephew;
together with the final intervention of the Roman Senate. The popular
belief of the Alexandrians (Christian as well as pagan) was that the
profanation of this statue would be the signal for heaven and earth to
collapse at once into pristine chaos--a notion bearing clear testimony
to the grand idea embodied by the figure. At last, however, although his
worship, thus defended by deep-rooted fear, had been tolerated by the
Christian government long after the other gods of Egypt had been swept
away, this wonderful Colossus was broken down by "that perpetual enemy
of peace and virtue" the

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Patriarch
Theophilus, in the reign of Theodosius; and its mutilated trunk, dragged
triumphantly through the streets by the mob of rejoicing fanatics, was
ultimately buried in the Hippodrome.

Like that of Mithras, the worship of Serapis was widely diffused over
the West. A very curious exemplification of this is to be found in
Ammianus’ notice that Mederich, king of the Alemanni, had, when detained
as a hostage in Gaul, been taught certain Greek Mysteries, and for that
reason changed the name of his son Aganerich into *Serapion*. But
Serapis had a natural claim to the adoration of the Gauls, who, as Cæsar
tells us, actually boasted of descent from *Dis Pater*.

The new-corner from Sinope does not seem to have brought his name with
him. When Ptolemy consulted his own priesthood upon this important
point, Manetho boldly identified the Pontic god with their own
Osor-Apis, chiefly on the score of his attribute Cerberus, which he
considered the counterpart of the hippopotamus-headed Typhon who attends
Oser-Apis in his character of sovereign of the Lower World. This deity
is no other than the Bull Apis, who, after death, assumes the figure of
Osiris, the regular form of Egyptian apotheosis, and so frequently seen
applied to deceased kings. Osor-Apis, as he now becomes, is depicted as
a man with the head of a bull, and carrying the ensigns by which we
usually recognize Osiris. The god of Alexandria therefore differs in
form as widely as in origin from the original patron of Thebes, with
whom he has no other affinity than in name, and *that* rests only on the
arbitrary interpretation of the Egyptian priests, so successful in
persuading the Greeks that the mythology of the whole world was but a
plagiarism from their own.

M. Marlette in 1860 excavated the Theban Serapeum, as it was called in
Roman times, with its long avenue of sphinxes; he also discovered the
catacombs where the Apis Bulls were deposited after death, and found
there no fewer than sixty, two of their mummies yet reposing
undisturbed. It is amusing to notice how neatly the Greeks turned the
Coptic Osor-Apis into the more euphonious ὁ Σάραπις.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[158:\*](gar23.htm#fr_72.md) The difference between
him and the ancient Theban Serapis (as the Greeks translated his title
"Osor-Api"), shall be pointed out farther on.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[158:†](gar23.htm#fr_73.md) Who narrates the whole
affair at great length--a proof of the influence of the religion in his
day--in his History, iv. 84.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[159:\*](gar23.htm#fr_74.md) The great god of
Assyria, Adad, "The One," the oracle-giving Jupiter of Heliopolis, was
thus figured in his *golden* statue as a beardless youth, brandishing
aloft a whip, and holding in his left hand the thunder-holt and
wheat-ears. The rays crowning his head pointed downwards to signify
their influence upon the earth, who stood before him in the figure of
*Atergatis*, the rays in her crown pointing upwards, to express the
*springing up* of her gifts. She was supported, like Cybele, upon the
backs of lions.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[160:\*](gar23.htm#fr_75.md) I cannot help
suspecting that this description supplied Basilides with the idea of his
celebrated *Pantheus*, the Abraxas-figure. The head of the *bird* was
the fittest emblem of the air, the *serpent*, according to Herodotus,
was the offspring of earth, the *breast* of man was the Homeric
attribute of Neptune.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[161:\*](gar23.htm#fr_76.md) The Patriarch of
Tiberias, head of the Jewish religion, after the destruction of
Jerusalem.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[161:†](gar23.htm#fr_77.md) A very favourite
representation of Isis upon our talismans shows her reclining upon a
conch.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[162:\*](gar23.htm#fr_78.md) What proves the want
of any real authority for the portraits of the Saviour is the filet that
the earliest monuments in sculpture or painting, represent him as
*youthful* and *beardless*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II. The Probable Origin of Serapis](gar24.md)
