[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar30)  [Next](gar32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

# PART III.

# ABRAXAS, ABRAXASTER, AND ABRAXOID GEMS.

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### THE AGATHODÆMON WORSHIP

"THERE was a time" (says M. Matter with much force) "when it was from
Judaism, especially from the Kabbala, and the system of Philo, that
people sought to derive the great transition of the human mind from the
ancient into the modern world: a revolution in which so important a part
is played by *Gnosticism*. So far as regards the explanation of the
writings and the understanding of the views given by Origen, Irenæus,
and the other Fathers upon Gnosticism, the Jewish element still retains
its ancient pre-eminence; but in the case of the *tangible* monuments
come down to us from the Gnostics themselves, we ought henceforth to be
fully convinced that it is in the *antiquities of Egypt* we must look
for our chief information: and if the ideas, terminology, and symbols of
Judaism (that is, of the Kabbala) have lent certain doctrines to this
system, yet it is *Egyptian* art that has furnished it with the greatest
part of its symbols."

This grand development of the old Wisdom of Egypt in a new phase is the
most conspicuously exhibited in that very numerous class of engraved
gems popularly and indiscriminately called *Abraxas*, *Basilidan*, and
*Gnostic* stones, almost the sole production of the expiring Glyptic Art
during the last two centuries of the Western Empire. But, contrary to
the generally received notion concerning their nature, a careful. study
of their numerous subdivisions has fully convinced me that only a very
small minority amidst their multitude present any traces of the
influence of Christian doctrines; being for the most part the fruit of
religious ideas which had flourished long before the first dawn of
Christianity. An important portion, indeed, originating in the primitive
Egyptian Mythology, have more connexion with Magic and Medicine than
with any religious object; and their employment as talismans establishes

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

for them a higher antiquity than belongs to the real "Abraxas" gems, the
date of whose origin is historically ascertained. The subject therefore
will be more conveniently approached by considering in the first place
the Agathodæmon, Chnuphis, or Chneph figures, often named "Dracontia,"
and erroneously attributed to the Ophites and such-like semi-Christian
sects, as their actual *inventors*.

It cannot however be denied, that although these last-named sectaries
did not *invent* this emblem, yet that they generally adopted it for
their distinguishing badge or, to use their technical word, "seal." And
this circumstance leads to a remark which, applying to all talismans
alike, may aptly serve for preface to the following dissertation upon
their several classes. In the primitive Nature-worship of the Old World
all religion consisted in the deification of the great visible Powers of
the Universe. The Supreme Beings therefore belonged to the present
World, consequently all the blessings they could confer were limited to
this life. The means, of whatever kind, supposed to secure the goodwill
of these Powers had for object tangible blessings alone--wealth, peace,
long life, posterity--in fact all those rewards promised by Moses to the
obedient Israelites. The engraved stones under consideration, being
legacies of this older religion, were designed to secure temporal not
spiritual benefits to the wearers. The latter were not even dreamed of
by people holding the belief "mors ultima linea rerum est." 'This fact
explains why so many of the Gnostic gems are in reality no more than
medicinal agents, and prescribed by physicians, Heathen and Christian
alike, in their regular practice, from Nechepsos down to Alexander
Trallianus. On the other hand the true Gnostics, whose sole profession
was the knowledge of the other world, when they applied to the doctrines
of the ancient religion the same method of interpretation that the
Kabbalists had used for Moses and the Prophets (of which the
*Pistis-Sophia* has left us such ingenious specimens), subjected all the
productions of the former creed to the same Procrustean torture, and
consequently availed themselves of these same symbols--nay, more,
continued to manufacture them in their own sense of their import.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

The *Agathodæmon*--"Good Genius"--whose very name furnishes the reason
why he should be chosen to figure on an ornament intended to defend its
wearer from all disease and mischance, is depicted as a huge *serpent*
having the head of a *lion*, surrounded by a crown of *seven* or
*twelve* rays--components conspicuously announcing that he is the
embodiment of the idea of the Sun-god. This figure is usually
accompanied, either on obverse or reverse, with its proper title,
written variously **ΧΝΟϒΒΙΣ**, **ΧΝΟϒΦΙΣ**, and **ΧΝΟϒΜΙΣ**, accordingly
as the engraver fancied he could best master that difficulty to the
Greek mouth, the true sound of our letter **B**. This name
Salmasius <span id="fr_128"></span>[\*](#fn_127) considers as a
rendering of the Coptic **ΧΝΟϒΒ**, *gold*; and hence explains another
title which sometimes takes its place, **ΧΟΛΧΝΟϒΒΙΣ**, as "All-golden."
Jablonsky, however, derives the word more plausibly from **ΧΝΟϒΜ**,
*good*, and **ΙΣ**, *spirit*, and thus makes "Agothodæmon" to be the
literal translation of the name. <span id="fr_129"></span>[†](#fn_128)

This last had become in the third century the popular name for the
hooded snake of Egypt. Lampridius has "Heliogabalus Ægyptios dracunculos
Romæ habuit, quos illi *Agathodæmonas* vocant." This kind was the
Uraeus, to be seen commonly on Egyptian monuments, where it is the badge
of royalty placed upon the head of the sovereign. It is the *hadji
hasher* of the modern Arabs, the cobra di capello of the Hindoos. I have
met with a large sard engraved in the late Roman-Egyptian style, with
two imperial busts *regardant;* reverse, the Chnuphis Serpent, with the
legend in *Roman* letters **AGATHODAEMON**, the sole instance known to
me of such an amulet with a Latin inscription: but which goes far to
confirm Jablonsky's interpretation of the Coptic title. In classical
Greek the original Chneph becomes *Canopus;* hence the Canopic vase
often appears between two serpents for heraldic supporters. But in those
lower times, so fruitful in the Chnuphis talismans, no more Canopic
vases appear on gems.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

The ancient Agathodæmon, in the form of his congener the Cobra, still
haunts the precincts of the Hindoo temples, as of old the shrines of
Isis; and issues from his hole at the sound of a fife to accept the
oblation of milk from the attendant priest. As with the ancients so with
the Hindoos, he is the special keeper of concealed treasure; and when a
zemindar deposits his board in the prepared hiding-place, he, to make
assurance doubly sure, builds up a serpent therewith, to watch over the
gold. Suetonius records that Tiberius had a most appropriate pet in a
"serpens draco"; but having found it one day devoured by a swarm of
ants, the suspicious Cæsar took warning from its fate to beware of the
force of a multitude of feeble individuals; and consequently secured his
person against all danger of popular outbreak by shutting himself up in
the inaccessible fastness of Capri.

But to return to the type of the Agathodæmon upon our gems. Over the
seven rays of the lion's crown, and corresponding to their points, stand
often the seven vowels of the Greek alphabet, **ΑΕΗΙΟϒΩ**, testifying
the Seven Heavens; a mystery whereof notice shall be taken in the
fitting place. The reverse of such gems is invariably occupied by a
special symbol resembling the letter **S**, or **Z**, thrice repeated,
or the convolutions of a spiral cord, and traversed by a straight rod
through their middle; a symbol for which many and the most whimsical
explanations have been proposed. Of these the most ingenious, but also
the most fanciful, makes it represent the spinal marrow traversing the
spine--certainly an apt device for a medicinal talisman. But whatever
its primary meaning it was probably imported in its present shape from
India (that true fountainhead of Gnostic iconography). It is to be seen
in two varieties, upon series 16 and 17 in Plate VII. of E. Thomas’
admirable Essay on the Primitive Coinage of India, amongst the
punch-marks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[217:\*](gar31.htm#fr_128) He has treated the
subject at some length in that learned miscellany of his, the treatise
'De Anno Climacterico.'

<span id="fn_128"></span>[217:†](gar31.htm#fr_129) The prototype appears
to have been that ancient figure of Atmon (the Sun) designated as
**ΗFΕ** "The Serpent" *par éminence*, and which was a winged serpent
having human arms and feet. He is thus painted on mummy-cases as
guardian of the inmate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Chnuphis Serpent](gar32)
