[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar29)  [Next](gar31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### II. ON A CERAUNIA OF JADE CONVERTED INTO A GNOSTIC TALISMAN.

Few relics of antiquity combine in one so many and so widely differing
points of interest, with respect to the material, the strangely
dissimilar uses to which the same object has been applied in two
opposite phases of the history of Man, and, above all, the curious
superstitions engendered by its peculiar form, as does the stone brought
under the notice of the Archæological Institute by General Lefroy, now
in the Woolwich Repository. The kindness of that gentleman having
afforded me full opportunity for the careful examination of this
interesting monument, I proceed to embody, in as succinct a form as
their multifarious nature will permit, the observations suggested to me
by that examination.

The subject, therefore, of this section is a small stone celt of the
common pattern, but of very uncommon material (in the *antique* class),
being made, not of flint, but of dark-green jade or nephrite, 2 in. by
1½ in. in length and greatest width; and brought, there is reason to
believe, from Egypt many years ago, by Colonel Milner, aide-de-camp to
Lord J. Bathurst during the English occupation of Sicily in 1812. Each
of its two faces is occupied by a Gnostic formula, engraved with much
neatness, considering the excessive hardness of the material, in the
somewhat debased Greek character that was current at Alexandria during
the third and fourth centuries of our era.

The most important of these two formulæ has been ingeniously forced to
take the outline of a wreath composed of broad leaves, in number
*fourteen* (or the sacred *seven* duplicated), and doubtless intended
for those of the "Five Trees" that figure so conspicuously in Gnostic
symbolism; the ends being tied together with four broad ribbons. This is
a design of which no other example has ever come to my knowledge amongst
the innumerable and wondrously varied devices excogitated by the
prolific fancy of this religion of mysteries. Upon the four ties are
engraved in very minute letters different combinations of the seven
Greek vowels, whilst each of the

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

leaves is emblazoned with some "Holy Name," of which many can be easily
recognised as constantly recurring in charms of this class; others are
disguised by a novel orthography; whilst a few, from the uncertain forms
of the lettering, defy all attempts at interpretation.

To the first series belong **ΑΒΡΑCΑ**, "Abraxas," properly an epithet of
the sun, but designating here the Supreme Deity; **ΙΑΩΟΥΙΕ**, "Iao,
Jehovah;" **ΑΒΛΑΝΑ**, "Thou art our Father!" **ΓΑΜΒΡΙΗΛ**, a curious
mode of spelling "Gabriel," that testifies to the difficulty ever felt
by the Greeks of expressing the sound of our B; **ΑΚΤΝΟΝΒΩ**, which
contains the Coptic form of Anubis; **ΔΑΜΝΑΜΕΝΕΥC**, the sun's name in
the famous "Ephesian Spell;" and, most interesting of all,
**ΠCΑΝΤΑΡΕΟC**, who can be no other than the **ΙΨΑΝΤΑ** of the
*Pistis-Sophia*--one of the great Τριδυνάμεις, a Power from whom is
enthroned in the planet Mars. To the uncertain belong CΟΥΜΑ, probably
for **CΟΥΜΑΡΤΑ**, a name occurring elsewhere, and perhaps cognate to the
Hindoo *Sumitri*, **ΧΩΝΟΝΙΧΑΡ** which may be intended for
**ΧΑΡ-ΧΝΟΥΜΙC**, a common epithet of the Agathodæmon Serpent;
**ΑΕΙΩΕΝΑΑΝΗC**; **ΝΕΙΧΑΡΟΠΛΗC**; the two last, spells unexplained but
very uncommon; **ΜΟΝΑΡΧΟC**; whilst **ΑΧΑΡCΙC** and the rest appear here
for the first time, if correctly so read.

The other face is covered with an inscription, cut in much larger
letters, and in *eight* lines. This number was certainly not the result
of chance, but of deep design, for it was mystic in the highest degree,
representing--so taught the profoundest doctor of the Gnosis,
Marcus--the divine Ogdoad, which was the daughter of the Pythagorean
Tetrad, the mother of all creation. <span id="fr_99"></span>[\*](#fn_98)
The lines 2, 4, 5, consist of Greek letters used as *numerals*,
intermixed with *siglæ*, which, from their constant occurrence upon
monuments of a like nature, are supposed, with good reason, to be
symbols of the planets. The numerals, on their part, probably denote
various deities, for the Alexandrian Gnosis was the true daughter of
Magiism; and in the old theology of Chaldea every god and astral genius
had a *number* of his own, and which often stands instead of his proper

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

name in dedicatory inscriptions. <span id="fr_100"></span>[\*](#fn_99)
Thus, the number of Hoa (Neptune), was 40; of Ana (Pluto), 60; of Bel
(Jupiter), 50; of the Sun, 20; of the moon, 30; of the Air, 10; of
Nergal (Mars), 12; &e.

A fragment of the *Pistis-Sophia* <span id="fr_101"></span>[†](#fn_102)
supplied the "spiritual man" with a key to the right interpretation of
similar stenography in his own creed. "These be the *Names* which I will
give unto thee, even from the Infinite One downwards. Write the same
with a sign (cypher), so that the sons of God may manifest (understand?)
them out of this place. This is the name of the Immortal One, <span
id="img_19900"></span> ![AAA OOO](img/19900.jpg). <span
id="fr_102"></span>[‡](#fn_100) And this is the name of the Voice
whereby the Perfect Man is moved, **ῙῙῙ**. These likewise be the
interpretations of the names of the Mysteries. The first is **ΑΑΑ**, and
the interpretation thereof is **ΦΦΦ**. The second, which is **ΜΜΜ**, or
which is **ΩΩΩ**, the interpretation thereof is **ΑΑΑ**. The third is
**ΨΨΨ**, the interpretation thereof is **ΟΟΟ**. The forth is **ΦΦΦ**,
the interpretation thereof is **ΝΝΝ**. The fifth **ΔΔΔ**, the
interpretation thereof is **ΑΑΑ**, the which is above the throne of
**ΑΑΑ**. This is the interpretation of the second **ΑΑΑΑ**, namely,
**ΑΑΑΑΑΑΑΑ**; the same is the interpretation of the whole Name."

Lines 7, 8, are made up of vowels, variously combined, and shrouding
from profane eyes the *Ineffable Name* <span id="img_19901"></span>
![IAO](img/19901.jpg) which, as we are informed by many authorities (the
most ancient and trustworthy being Diodorus Siculus), <span
id="fr_103"></span>[§](#fn_101) was the name of the God of the Jews;
meaning thereby their mode of writing "Jehovah" in Greek characters.

Line 3 consists of the seven vowels placed in their natural order. This
was the most potent of all the spells in the Gnostic repertory; and its
importance may justify the extensiveness of the following extract from
the grand text-book of this theosophy, which sets forth its hidden sense
and wondrous efficacy. The primary idea, however, was far from abstruse,
if we accept the statement of the writer "On Interpretations,"

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

that the Egyptians expressed the name of the Supreme God by the seven
vowels thus arranged--**ΙΕΗΩΟΥΑ**. <span
id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_103) But this single mystery was soon
refined upon, and made the basis of other and infinitely deeper
mysteries. In an inscription found at Miletus (published by Montfaucon),
the Holy **ΙΕΟΥΑΗΩΑΕΙΟΥΩ** is besought "to protect the city of Miletus
and all the inhabitants of the same; a plain proof that this
interminable combination only expressed the name of some one divine
being. Again, the *Pistis-Sophia* perpetually brings in **ΙΕΟΥ**
invariably accompanied with the epithet of "the Primal Man," *i.e.*, He
after whose image or *type* man was first created. But in the fulness of
time the semi-Pythagorean, Marcus, had it revealed unto him that the
seven heavens in their revelation sounded each one vowel which, all
combined together, formed a single doxology, "the sound whereof being
carried down to earth becomes the creator and parent of all things that
be on earth." <span id="fr_105"></span>[†](#fn_104)

The Greek language has but one word for *vowel* and *voice*; when
therefore, "the seven thunders uttered their voices," the seven vowels,
it is meant, echoed through the vault of heaven, and composed that
mystic utterance which the sainted seer was forbidden to reveal unto
mortals. "Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and
write them not." <span id="fr_106"></span>[‡](#fn_105) With the best
reason, then, is the formula inscribed on a talisman of the first class,
for hear what the *Pistis-Sophia* delivers touching its potency. <span
id="fr_107"></span>[§](#fn_106) "After these things his disciples said
again unto him, Rabbi, reveal unto us the mysteries of the Light of thy
Father, forasmuch as we have heard thee saying that there is another
baptism of smoke, and another baptism of the Spirit of Holy Light, and
moreover an unction of the Spirit, all which shall bring our souls into
the treasurehouse of Light. Declare therefore unto us the mysteries of
these things, so that we also may inherit the kingdom of thy Father.
Jesus said unto them, Do ye seek after these mysteries? No mystery is
more excellent

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

than they; which shall bring your souls unto the Light of Lights, unto
the place of Truth and Goodness, unto the place of the Holy of holies,
unto the place where is neither male nor female, neither form in that
place but Light, everlasting, not to be uttered. Nothing therefore is
more excellent than the mysteries which ye seek after, saving only the
*mystery of the Seven Vowels and their forty and nine Powers*, and the
numbers thereof. And no name is more excellent than all these
(Vowels), <span id="fr_108"></span>[\*](#fn_107) a Name wherein be
contained all Names and all Lights and all Powers. Knowing therefore
this Name, if a man shall have departed out of this body of Matter, no
smoke (of the bottomless pit), neither any darkness, nor Ruler of the
Sphere of Fate, <span id="fr_109"></span>[†](#fn_108) nor Angel, nor
Power, shall be able to hold back the soul that knoweth that Name. But
and if, after he shall have departed out of this world, he shall utter
that Name unto the fire, it shall be quenched, and the darkness shall
flee away. And if he shall utter that Name unto the devils of the Outer
Darkness, and to the Powers thereof, they shall all faint away, and
their flame shall blaze up, so that they shall cry aloud 'Thou art holy,
thou art holy, O Holy One of all holies!' And if he shall utter that
Name unto the Takers-away for condemnation, and their Authorities, and
all their Powers, nay, even unto Barbelo, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[‡](#fn_109) and the Invisible God, and the three
Triple-powered Gods, so soon as he shall have uttered that Name in those
places, they shall all be shaken and thrown one upon the other, so that
they shall be ready to melt away and perish, and shall cry aloud, 'O
Light of all lights that art in the Boundless Light! remember us also,
and purify us!'" After such a revelation as this, we need seek no
further for the reason of the frequent occurrence of this formula upon
talismans intended, when they had done their duty in this world, to
accompany their owner into the tomb, continuing to exert there a
protective influence of a yet higher order than in life.

For the student of the mineralogy of the ancients this celt

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

has very great interest in point of *material*, as being the only
specimen of true jade, bearing indisputable marks of either Greek or
Roman workmanship, that, so far as my knowledge extends, has ever yet
been brought to light. This ancient neglect of the material is truly
difficult to explain, if the statement of a very good authority, Corsi,
be indeed correct, that the sort showing the deepest green is found in
Egypt. The known predilection of the Romans for gems of that colour,
would, one should naturally expect, have led them in that case to employ
the stone largely in ornamentation, after the constant fashion of the
Chinese, and to value it as a harder species of the *Smaragdus*, The
circumstances under which this relic was brought to England render it
more than probable that Egypt was the place where it was found; a
supposition corroborated by the fine quality of the stone exactly
agreeing with what Corsi remarks of the Egyptian kind. That *Alexandria*
was the place where the inscription was added upon its surface can admit
of little question; the lettering being precisely that seen upon
innumerable other monuments which can with certainty be assigned to the
same grand focus of Gnosticism. In addition to this, it is very doubtful
whether in the third or fourth centuries a lapidary could have been
found elsewhere throughout the whole Roman Empire capable of engraving
with such skill as the minute characters within the wreath evince, upon
a material of this, almost insuperable, obduracy. From the times of the
Ptolemies down to the Arab conquest, and even later, Alexandria was the
seat of the manufacture of vases in rock crystal. This trade served to
keep alive the expiring Glyptic art for the only purpose for which its
productions continued to be demanded--the manufacture of talismans,
consignments of which must have been regularly shipped, together with
the crystal-ware, <span id="fr_111"></span>[\*](#fn_110) to Rome, and
equally to the other important cities of the empire.

The primitive Egyptians, like the early Chaldeans, used stone in the
place of metal for their cutting instruments, and continued its use for
making particular articles down into historic times. Herodotus mentions
the regular employment of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

the "Ethiopian stone" sharpened, for a dissecting-knife <span
id="fr_112"></span>[\*](#fn_111) in the process of embalming, and
similarly for pointing the arrows <span id="fr_113"></span>[†](#fn_112)
carried by the contingent of the same nation in the army of Xerxes. The
Alexandrian citizen, half-Jew half-Greek, who had the good fortune to
pick up this primæval implement, doubtless rejoiced in the belief that
he had gotten a "stone of virtue," most potent alike from substance,
figure, and nature, and therefore proceeded to do his prize due honour
by making it the *medium* of his most accredited spells--nay, more, by
inventing a new formula of unusual complication and profundity whereby
to animate its inherent powers. As regards its *substance*, the stone
probably passed then for a *smaragdus* of exceptional magnitude, and
that gem, as Pliny records, <span id="fr_114"></span>[‡](#fn_113) was
recommended by the magi as the proper material for a talisman of
prodigious efficacy, which, duly engraved, should baffle witchcraft,
give success at court, avert hailstorms, and much more of like nature.
The *smaragdus* of the ancients was little more than a generic
designation for all stones of a *green* colour, and the entire Gnostic
series strikingly demonstrates that this hue was deemed a primary
requisite in a talismanic gem--the almost exclusive material of the
class being the green jasper and the plasma.

Again, as regards *figure*, this celt offered in its *triangular*
outline, that most sacred of all emblems, the mystic Delta, the form
that signified maternity, and was the hieroglyph of the moon. This
belief is mentioned by Plutarch, <span id="fr_115"></span>[§](#fn_114)
and explains why the triangle so often accompanies the figure of the
sacred baboon, Luna's special attribute, on monuments, where also it is
sometimes displayed elevated upon a column with that animal standing
before it in the attitude of adoration.

Lastly, the supposed *nature* of this gift of Fortune was not of Earth,
inasmuch as it then passed for a holy thing that "had fallen down from
Jupiter," being, in fact, nothing less than one of that god's own
thunderbolts. A notion this which will

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

doubtless strike the modern mind as so strange, or rather as so
preposterous, that it necessitates my giving at full length my reasons
for making such an assertion. And in truth the subject is well worth the
trouble of investigation, seeing that the same superstition will be
found to extend from an early period of antiquity down into the popular
belief of our own times throughout a large extent of Europe.

It is in accordance with this notion that I have designated this celt a
"ceraunia" (thunderbolt-stone), and it therefore remains for me to
adduce my reasons for giving it what must appear to most people so
unaccountable and highly inappropriate an appellation. *Sotacus*, who is
quoted elsewhere by Pliny "as one of the most ancient writers on
mineralogy," is cited by him <span id="fr_116"></span>[\*](#fn_115) "as
making two other kinds of the ceraunia, the black and the red,
resembling *axe-heads* in shape. Of these, such as be black and round
are sacred things; towns and fleets can be captured by their
instrumentality. The latter are called *Bætyli*, whilst the oblong sort
are the *Cerauniæ*. Some make out another kind, in mighty request in the
practices of the magi, inasmuch as it is only to be found in places that
have been struck by lightning." One would have been utterly at a loss
-to understand what the old Greek had been speaking about in the chapter
thus confusedly condensed by the later Roman naturalist, or to discover
any resemblance in form between the lightning-flash and an axe-head, had
it not been for the popular superstition that has prevailed in Germany
from time immemorial to the present day, and of which full particulars
are given by Anselmus Boëtius in his invaluable repertory of mediæval
lore upon all such matters, written at the beginning of the seventeenth
century. <span id="fr_117"></span>[†](#fn_116)

Under the popular names of "Strahl-hammer," "Donner-pfeil,"
"Donner-keil," "Strahl-pfeil," "Strahl-keil" (lightning-hammer,
thunder-arrow or club, lightning-arrow, &c.), and the Italian
"Sagitta," <span id="fr_118"></span>[‡](#fn_117) he figures stone celts
and hammers of five

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

different, but all common, types; remarking that so firm was the belief
in these things being the "actual arrow of the lightning" (ipsa fulminis
sagitta), that should any one attempt to controvert it he would be taken
for a madman. He however confesses with amusing simplicity that the
substance of these thunderbolts is exceedingly like the common flint
used for striking fire with; nay, more, he boldly declares he should
agree with those few *rationalists* who, on the strength of their
resemblance in shape to the tools in common use, pronounced these
objects to be merely ordinary iron implements that had got *petrified*
by long continuance in the earth, had it not been for the testimony of
the most respectable witnesses as to the fact of their being discovered
in places just seen to be struck with lightning. Besides quoting some
fully detailed instances from Gesner, he adds that several persons had
assured him of having themselves seen these stones dug up in places
where the lightning had fallen. The natural philosophers of the day
accounted for the creation of such substances in the atmosphere by
supposing the existence of a vapour charged with sulphureous and
metallic particles, which rising above a certain height became condensed
through the extreme heat of the sun, and assumed a wedge-like form in
consequence of the escape of their moisture, and the gravitation of the
heavier particles towards their lower end! Notwithstanding this
celestial origin, the virtue of the production was not then esteemed of
a proportionally sublime order, extending no further than to the
prevention or the cure of ruptures in children, if placed upon their
cradles; and also to the procuring of sleep in the case of adults. In
our own times Justinus Kerner mentions <span
id="fr_119"></span>[\*](#fn_118) the same names for stone celts as
universally popular amongst the German boors; but they are now chiefly
valued for their efficacy in preserving cattle from the murrain, and
consequently the finders can seldom be induced to part with them.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

It must not, however, be supposed that Sotacus picked up this strange
notion from the Teutones of his own age, whose very existence was
probably unknown to him; his informants ware unquestionably those magi
cited at the conclusion of Pliny's extract. The Greek mineralogist had
lived "apud Regem," that is, at the court of the King of Persia, very
probably in the capacity of royal physician, like his countrymen
Democedes and Ctesias. In that region he had ample opportunities of
seeing stone celts, for Rawlinson observes <span
id="fr_120"></span>[\*](#fn_119) that flint axes and other implements,
exactly identical with the European in workmanship, are *common* in all
the most ancient mounds of Chaldæa, those sites of primæval cities. Such
elevations above the dead level of those interminable plains were
necessarily the most liable to be lightning-struck; and hence probably
arose the idea that these weird-looking stones (all tradition of whose
proper destination had long since died out amongst the iron-using
Persians) were the actual fiery bolts which had been seen to bury
themselves in the clay. And again, to revert to the German belief, it
must be remembered that Thor, the Northern Jupiter, is pictured as armed
with a huge hammer in the place of the classical thunderbolt. The type
of the god had been conceived in the far-remote ages when the
stone-hammer was as yet the most effective and formidable of weapons,
and was preserved unchanged out of deference to antiquity, after the
true meaning of the attribute was entirely forgotten. Nevertheless, his
worshippers, accustomed to behold the hammer in the hand of the god of
thunder,--ὑψιβρεμέτης Ζεύς,--very naturally concluded that these strange
objects, of unknown use, found from time to time deep buried in the
earth, were the actual missiles which that deity had discharged. It is a
remarkable proof of the wide diffusion of the same belief, that the late
owner of the relic under consideration, habitually spoke of it as a
"thunderstone,"--a name he could only have learnt from the Arabs from
whom it was procured, seeing that no such notion with respect to *celts*
has ever been current in this country. But every one whose memory
reaches back forty years or more may recollect, that wheresoever in
England the

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

fossil *Belemnite* is to be found, it was implicitly received by all,
except the few pioneers of Geology (a word then almost synonymous with
Atheism), as the veritable thunderbolt shot from the clouds, and by that
appellation was it universally known. I, for one, can recollect stories,
quite as respectably attested as those Boëtius quotes concerning the
*Cerauniæ*, told respecting the discovery of new fallen belemnites under
precisely the same circumstances; and, in truth, the same author does in
the preceding chapter treat at length of the *Belemnites*, and his cuts
show that the name meant then what it does at present; but he assigns to
the missile an infernal instead of a celestial source, giving the vulgar
title for it as "Alp-schoss," (elfin-shot,) which he classically renders
into "dart of the Incubus," stating further that it was esteemed (on the
good old principle, "similia similibus curantur") of mighty efficacy to
guard the sleeper from the visits of that much dreaded nocturnal demon.
The Prussian, Saxon, and Spanish physicians employed it, powdered, as
equally efficacious with the *lapis Judaicus*, in the treatment of the
calculus. It was also believed a specific for the pleurisy in virtue of
its *pointed* figure, which was analogous to the *sharp* pains of that
disease, for so taught the universally accepted "Doctrine of
Signatures."

The *Cerauniæ* of Sotacus, however, comprised, besides these primitive
manufactures of man, other substances, it is hard to say whether
meteorites or fossils; the nature of which remains to be discussed.
Photius, <span id="fr_121"></span>[\*](#fn_120) after quoting the
paragraph, "I beheld the *Bætylus* moving through the air, and sometimes
wrapped up in vestments, sometimes carried in the hands of the
ministers," proceeds to give a summary of the wondrous tale told by the
discoverer of the prodigy--one Eusebius of Emesa. He related how that,
being seized one night with a sudden and unaccountable desire to visit a
very ancient temple of Minerva, situated upon a mountain at some
distance from the city, he started off, and arriving at the foot, sat
down to rest himself. Suddenly he beheld a globe of fire fall down from
heaven, and a monstrous lion standing by the same, but who

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

immediately vanished. Running to pick it up as soon as the fire was
extinguished, he found this self-same *Bætylus*. Inquiring of it to what
god it belonged, the thing made answer that he came from the Noble One
(so was called a figure of a lion standing in the temple at Heliopolis).
Eusebius thereupon ran home with his prize, a distance of 210 stadia (26
miles), without once stopping, being quite unable to control the impetus
of the stone! He described it as "of a whitish colour, a perfect sphere,
a span in diameter, but sometimes assuming a purple <span
id="fr_122"></span>[\*](#fn_121) shade, and also expanding and
contracting its dimensions, and having letters painted on it in
cinnabar, of which he gave the interpretation. The stone, likewise, if
struck against the wall, returned answers to consultors in a low
whistling voice." The grain of truth in this huge heap of lies is
obviously enough the fact that Eusebius, having had the good fortune to
witness the descent of a meteorite, and to get possession of the same,
told all these fables about it in order to increase the credit of the
oracular stone (which doubtless brought him in many fees) amongst his
credulous townsfolk. Damascius <span id="fr_123"></span>[†](#fn_122)
(whose Life of Isidorus Photius is here being epitomised) adds, that
this philosopher was of opinion that the stone was the abode of a
spirit, though not one of the mischievous or unclean sort, nor yet one
of a perfectly immaterial nature. He furthermore states that other
*bætyli* were known, dedicated to Saturn, Jupiter, and the Sun; and
moreover that Isidorus and himself saw many of such *bætyli* or
*bætylia* upon Mount Libanus, near Heliopolis in Syria.

As for the derivation of *bætylus*, the one proposed by the Byzantine
Hesychius, who makes it come from *bæte*, the goatskin mantle, wherein
Rhea wrapped up the stone she gave old Saturn to swallow, instead of the
new-born Jove, cannot be considered much more satisfactory than
Bochart's, who, like a sound divine, discovers in it a reminiscence of
the stone pillar which Jacob set up at Bethel, and piously endeavours to
force Sanconiathon, who speaks of the "living" stones, the
bæthylia, <span id="fr_124"></span>[‡](#fn_123)

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

to confirm his interpretation by correcting his text into "anointed."

But this last *bætylus* is beyond all question the same thing with that
described by the Pseudo-Orpheus, <span id="fr_125"></span>[\*](#fn_124)
under the names of Siderites, and the *animated Orites*, "round, black,
ponderous, and surrounded with deeply-graven furrows." In the first of
these epithets may easily be recognized the *ferruginous* character
common to all meteorites (*siderites* being also applied to the
loadstone), whilst the second (*Orites*) seems to indicate the locality
where they most abounded, viz., Mount Lebanon.

Sotacus’ notice, indeed, of the efficacy of the *bætylus* in procuring
success in seafights and sieges, is copiously illustrated by the
succeeding verses of the same mystic poet, who, it must be remembered,
can claim a very high antiquity, there being sufficient grounds for
identifying him with Onomacritus, a contemporary of Pisistratus, in the
sixth century before our era. The diviner Helenus, according to him, had
received this oracular stone from Apollo, and he describes the rites,
with great minuteness, for the guidance of all subsequent possessors of
such a treasure, by means of which the Trojan woke up the spirit within
the "vocal sphere." This was effected by dint of thrice seven days'
fasting and continence, by incantations and sacrifices offered to the
stone, and by bathing, clothing, and nursing it like an infant. Through
its aid, when at length rendered instinct with life, the traitorous seer
declared to the Atridæ the coming downfall of Troy; the stone uttering
its responses in a voice resembling the feeble wail of an infant
desiring the breast. It is more than probable that Orphesius in
describing the Orites, had in view the *Sālagrāma*, or sacred stone of
Vishnu, still employed by the Brahmins in all propitiatory rites,
especially in those performed at the death-bed. Sonnerat describes it as
"a kind of ammonite, round or oval in shape, black, and very ponderous."
The *furrows* covering its surface were traced by Vishnu's own finger;
but when found of a violet colour, it is looked upon with horror, as
representing a vindictive avatar of the god. The possessor keeps it
wrapped up in linen garment like a child, and often bathes

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and perfumes it--precisely the rites prescribed by our poet for the due
consultation of the oracle of the Siderites.

From all this it may safely be deduced that the "stone of power,"
whether *bætylus* or *orites*, was in most cases nothing more than a
fossil; either a ferruginous nodule, or an echinus filled with iron
pyrites. Their being found in abundance in one particular locality,
precludes the idea of these at least being meteorites, which latter,
besides, never assume any regular form, but look like mere fragments of
iron slag. This explanation is strongly supported by the drawings
Boetius gives <span id="fr_126"></span>[\*](#fn_125) of what was then
called the "Donner-stein," or "Wetter-stein," (thunder, or storm-stone,)
and which he very plausibly identifies with Pliny's *Brontias* "that got
into the head of the tortoise during thunder-storms," and which is
described in another place as the "eye of the Indian tortoise" that
conferred the gift of prophecy. His carefully drawn figure of this
Donner-stein (which also passed for the "grosser Kroten-stein," bigger
toad-stone), shows it to be only a fossil echinus of a more *oblate*
form than the common sort. The regular toadstone, plentifully to be seen
in mediæval rings, was, on the other hand, the small hollow hemisphere,
the fossil tooth of an extinct fish, found in the greensand formation.
In that ago the Donner-stein was held to possess all the many virtues of
the Toadstone, Belemnite, and Ovum Anguinum, in counteracting poison,
giving success in all enterprises, procuring sleep, and protection
against danger of lightning. But the old physician, so much in advance
of his times, cannot help winding up the list of its virtues with the
hint, "Fides sæpe veritate major."

The axe-heads and hammer-heads of stone, known to us by the general
designation of celts, have, until recent explorations, been regarded as
comparatively of rare occurrence amongst ancient relics obtained from
Eastern lands and from some other continental countries. Our
information, however, in regard to objects of this class has become
greatly extended. Mr. James Yates published, in the Archæological
Journal, examples of stone celts from Java; an interesting specimen
obtained at Sardis is figured, vol. xv. p. 178, and some others

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

were found by Mr. Layard at Nineveh. The occurrence of any ornament or
inscription upon such objects is very rare, but amongst numerous stone
implements obtained in Greece one is noticed by M. de Mortillet
(Matériaux pour l’Histoire primitive de l’Homme, Jan. 1868, p. 9), of
which he had received from Athens a drawing and an *estampage*; it is
described as "une hache en pierre serpentineuse, sur une des faces de
laquelle on a gravé trois personnages et une inscription en caractères
grecs. L’ancien outil a évidemment été, beaucoup plus tard, quand on a
eu complétement oublié son usage primitif, transformé en talisman ou
pierre cabalistique."

At the annual meeting of the Antiquaries of the North, on March 21st,
1853, under the presidency of the late King of Denmark, several recent
acquisitions were exhibited, obtained for his private collection at
Frederiksborg. Amongst these there was an axe-head of stone (length
about 6½ inches), perforated with a hole for the handle, and remarkable
as bearing on one of its sides four Runic characters, that appear to
have been cut upon the stone at some period more recent than the
original use of the implement. It has been figured in the Memoirs of the
Society, 1850-1860, p. 28; see also Antiquarisk Tidsskrift, 1852-1854,
pp. 258-266. I am indebted to a friend well skilled in Runes and
Scandinavian archæology, Dr. Charlton, formerly secretary of the Society
of Antiquaries of Newcastle, for the following observations on this
interesting relic.

"The first letter is L, and, if we accept the idea that these were Runes
of Victory, it may stand for the initial of Loki; the second is Th, and
may stand for Thor; the third O for Odin; the fourth, Belgthor, with a T
above it, may refer to Belgthor's friendship and alliance with Thor, and
the T stands for Tyr. We may imagine the names of the Northern gods to
have been cut on this stone axe to give it victory in battle, just as
the old Germans and Saxons cut mystic Runes on their swords, a practice
noticed by Haigh in his 'Conquest of Britain by the Saxons,' p. 28, pl.
1, where he has figured amongst various examples of the *futhorc*, or
alphabet of Runic characters, one inlaid on a sword or knife found in
the Thames, and now in the British Museum. At p. 51, *ibid*. pl. iii.
fig. 20, he has cited also the Runic inscription on the silver pommel of

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

a sword found at Gilton, Kent, formerly in the collection of the late
Mr. Rolfe, of Sandwich, and subsequently in the possession of Mr. Joseph
Mayer. This relic is now in the precious museum bestowed by his generous
encouragement of archæological science on the town of Liverpool. The
interpretation given in the latter instance is as follows,--I eke
victory to great deeds. <span id="fr_127"></span>[\*](#fn_126)

"There was another explanation given of the characters on the Danish
stone axe. It was read--LUTHER. O.--Ludr owns namely, the weapon thus
inscribed."

In the ancient Sagas, as remarked in Nilsson's 'Primitive Inhabitants of
Scandinavia' (translation by Sir John Lubbock, Bart, p. 214), mention
occurs of amulets designated life-stones. victory-stones, &c., which
warriors carried about with them in battle to secure victory. A curious
relation is cited from one of the Sagas, that King Nidung, when about to
engage in conflict, perceived that he had neglected to bring a precious
heir-loom, a stone that possessed the virtue of ensuring victory. He
offered the hand of his daughter, with a third part of his kingdom, to
him who should bring this talisman before the fight commenced; and,
having received it, he won the battle. In another narrative, the
daughter of a Scanian warrior steals during his slumbers the stone that
was hung on his neck, and gave it to her lover, who thus became the
victor. Nilsson observes that stones are found in museums, for instance
a hammer-stone with a loop, that appear to have been worn thus as
talismans in war.

It is perhaps scarcely necessary to advert to certain axe-heads of
stone, in their general form similar to those with which we are familiar
as found in Europe; upon these implements are engraved rude designs,
such as the human visage, &c. These objects, of which an example
preserved in a museum at Douai has been much cited, may be
"victory-stones" of an ancient and primitive people, but they are now
recognised as of Carib origin, and not European.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_98"></span>[198:\*](gar30.htm#fr_99) St. Hippolytus, Refut.
Om. Hæres. vi. 50.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[199:\*](gar30.htm#fr_100) On this curious
subject, see Rawlinson's 'Ancient Monarchies,' iii. p. 466.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[199:‡](gar30.htm#fr_102) That is, 1000 and 800
tripled. The next numbers are 10,000 tripled, and so on.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[199:§](gar30.htm#fr_103) 'Bibliotheca
Historica,' i. 94.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[199:†](gar30.htm#fr_101) Cap. 125.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[200:\*](gar30.htm#fr_104) This is in fact a
very correct representation, if we give each vowel its true Greek sound,
of the Hebrew pronunciation of the word Jehovah.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[200:†](gar30.htm#fr_105) Hippolytus, vi. 48.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[200:‡](gar30.htm#fr_106) Rev. x. 4.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[200:§](gar30.htm#fr_107) Pistis-Sophia, cap.
378.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[201:\*](gar30.htm#fr_108) Evidently alluding
to the collocation of the vowels on our talisman.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[201:†](gar30.htm#fr_109) The twelve Æons of
the Zodiac, the creators of the human soul, which they eagerly seek to
catch when released from the body in which they have imprisoned it.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[201:‡](gar30.htm#fr_110) The divine mother of
the Saviour, and one of the three "Invisible Gods," cap. 359.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[202:\*](gar30.htm#fr_111) "Dum tibi Niliacus
portat crystalla cataplus."--Mart. xii. 72.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[203:\*](gar30.htm#fr_112) ii. 86.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[203:†](gar30.htm#fr_113) vii. 69.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[203:‡](gar30.htm#fr_114) xxxvii. 40.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[203:§](gar30.htm#fr_115) 'De Fide et Osiride,'
cap. 75. He adds that the Pythagoreans called the equilateral triangle
"Athene"--a curious confirmation of the tradition quoted by Aristotle,
that the Attic goddess was one and the same with the Moon.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[204:\*](gar30.htm#fr_116) xxxvii. 51.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[204:†](gar30.htm#fr_117) 'Gem. et Lapid.
Hist.' ii. cap. 261.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[204:‡](gar30.htm#fr_118) "Saetta" (a vulgar
Italian execration), is now restricted to the lightning-missile, the
archer's shaft being expressed by the Teutonic "freccia," in accordance
with the genius of the language which reserves the old Latin terms for
the things <span id="page_205">p. 205</span> not of this world,--using
those of the *lingua militaris* for every-day purposes. The flint
arrow-heads found in the *terra marna* of the primæval Umbrian towns,
are believed by the peasantry to have this celestial origin, and are
highly valued as portable "light-conductors."

<span id="fn_118"></span>[205:\*](gar30.htm#fr_119) In his little
treatise on Amulets.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[206:\*](gar30.htm#fr_120) 'Ancient
Monarchies,' i. p. 120.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[207:\*](gar30.htm#fr_121) 'Bibliotheca,' 1063,
R.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[208:\*](gar30.htm#fr_122) The Greek purple
included every shade from crimson to violet.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[208:†](gar30.htm#fr_123) A stoic philosopher
under Justinian.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[208:‡](gar30.htm#fr_124) "Moreover the god
Uranus devised *bæthylia*, contriving stones that moved as having life."

<span id="fn_124"></span>[209:\*](gar30.htm#fr_125) Λιθικά, 355.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[210:\*](gar30.htm#fr_126) ii. cap. 264.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[212:\*](gar30.htm#fr_127) 'Archæologia,' vol.
xxxii. p. 321. A spear-head inscribed with Runes is noticed, 'Journ.
Brit. Arch. Ass.,' vol. xxiii. p. 387. There exist certain massive rings
of metal inscribed with Runes, that may have been, as some antiquaries
suggest, appended to sword-hilts as charms. One of these rings, lately
found at Carlisle, is in possession of Mr. Robert Ferguson, of Morton,
near that city.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Agathodæmon Worship](gar31)
