[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar38)  [Next](gar40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### VI. ABRAXAS--ITS NUMERICAL FORCE.

To find out some deep mystery expressed by the *numerical* value of the
letters in a name is the grand foundation of the famous science of the
Kabbala. Although the Jewish Talmudists now engross all the honour of
the discovery, it is but consistent with the known character of that
very uninventive race to suspect that they borrowed the first notion
from a foreign source--Chaldæa, the real fountain-head of all their
spiritual knowledge. The earliest instance that can be quoted

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

of this way of expressing a name is St. John's so much discussed "Number
of the Beast," employed to screen from vulgar curiosity some dangerous
secret. What though its analysis has supplied good Protestants like
Bishop Newton with a deadly weapon (in their own eyes) against the Pope,
after the sum total has been reduced into its integrals Λατεινὸς; yet a
prosaic non-controversialist will be more inclined to suspect that the
Kabbalistic number shrouds the name of some potentate of the times who
had happened to make himself especially formidable to the beholder of
the Vision. <span id="fr_146"></span>[\*](#fn_145) But the titles *Iao*,
*Abraxas*, and the like, instead of being recent Gnostic *inventions*,
were in all likelihood recognised "Holy Names," and borrowed from the
most ancient religions of the East. Pliny must be alluding to something
of the sort when he mentions with a sneer the miraculous powers ascribed
by the Magi to amethysts engraved with the *names of the Sun and
Moon*--names certainly from the nationality of his authorities not
inscribed in either the Greek or the Latin tongue. In the "Shemesh
Eilam," "Adonai," "Abraxas" of these talismans we may reasonably
recognise the words of power referred to by the great naturalist.

The Alexandrine Greeks, proceeding upon the axiom that "things equal to
the same thing are equal to one another," spied out the sacred number
365 in many Holy Names, and thus proved the identity of the several
personages, so denominated, with one another. To give a few examples:
the same sum is obtained by adding up the numerals in Μειθρας and in
Αβρασαξ; and whether we interpret the latter as "Blessing" or "Holy
Word," both are equally applicable to the Persian god. Again, the
Egyptians, says Heliodorus (Æth. ix. 22), discovered the same value in
Νειλος, appellation of that earliest god and father of their land,
entitled in their hymns *Horus* also, properly the name of the
Sun. <span id="fr_147"></span>[†](#fn_146) In the new-coined religions
of Egypt, other and stranger mysteries were extracted out of

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

sacred names by following the old process. Kircher publishes a gem
inscribed **ΧΝΟΥΜΙΣ · ΡΙ**, and supposes, with much apparent reason, the
last syllable to be added in order to make up a sum equivalent to
χριστὸς = 1480. That most ingenious of the Gnostics, Marcus, based his
whole system upon these numerical deductions. According to him, the
Saviour calls himself Α and Ω, because these letters stand for 801,
which is the sum of those in περιστερὰ, the Dove, assumed in virtue
thereof for the vehicle of the Holy Ghost. But the profoundest mystery
that rewarded his researches is the fact, certainly a very curious
coincidence, that all the 24 letters of the Greek alphabet added
together yield the exact "number of the Name" Ιησοῦς = 888. But his own
words well deserve to be quoted (Hip. vi. 50): "Now Jesus had this
ineffable origin. From the Mother of all things the First Tetrad,
proceeded another Tetrad, and there *was* an Ogdoad, whence proceeded
the Decad, so there were Eighteen." The Decad therefore having come
together with the Ogdoad, after that it had decoupled the same, produced
the number Eighty. And again after that it had decoupled the Eighty it
begot the number which is Eight hundred, so that the whole number of the
letters proceeding from the Ogdoad according to the Decad is eight
hundred and eighty and eight--the same is Jesus. For the Name Ιησοῦς by
the value of its letters is the number 888. And, verily, the alphabet of
the Greeks has eight monads, and eight decads, and eight hundreds,
producing the number 888, which is made up by all the numbers, the same
is Jesus. For this cause Both He call himself Α and Ω, to set forth his
generation from the All." At first sight it will strike the reader,
accustomed only to *Arabic* numerals, as a work of incredible
laboriousness to discover numerical values, so aptly tallying in
different words, of totally different components. But the difficulty was
in truth much less than it appears. The Greek, accustomed perpetually to
use the letters of his alphabet

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

indifferently as symbols of *number* and of *sounds*, perceived the two
forces at the same glance in every word that caught his eye, and easily
estimated the total value of each proper name, more especially when he
made it his business to attend to such coincidences. The same operation
would be equally familiar to ourselves were our "Arabic" numerals
exchanged for the first ten letters of the Roman alphabet, instead of
being what they are, the ancient Palmyrene somewhat modified by the wear
of ages and a long course of travel.

The use of the *Numerical Value* of Names is remarkably exemplified by a
*Midrash*, which makes the 318 men of Abraham's household, with whom he
defeated the Five Kings, to be no more than his *one* servant, Eliezer,
the numeral letters in whose name exactly make up that sum--a
coincidence, though accidental, truly astonishing!

That genuine Gnostic, Dante, employs with great effect this numerical
expression of a Name in that most mystical prophecy with which his
'Purgatorio' closes:--

"Ch’ io veggio certamente, e però il narro,  
  A darne tempo già stelle propinque,  
  Sicuro d’ ogni intoppo e d’ ogni sbarro,  
Nel qual un Cinquecento-dieci-e-cinque,  
  Messo di Dio, anciderà la fuia,  
  E quel gigante che con lei delinque."  
                                (Canto xxxiii. 40-45.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The interpretation
whereof is found in the word **DVX** formed out of the Roman letters,
and applying to the "General" of the Ghibelline League, from whom such
great things were expected by the poet for the chastisement of the
Papacy and the restoration of the Imperial power.

 

<span id="img_fig11"></span> ![](img/fig11.jpg)

[(\*)](gar71.htm#an_fig11)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_145"></span>[254:\*](gar39.htm#fr_146) Who expressly tells
us that "his number is the number of a man"; that is, the sum of the
numerical letters in the name of a certain person. The Hebrew characters
representing "Cesar Nero" produce by addition the required sum.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[254:†](gar39.htm#fr_147) Amongst the many
points of <span id="page_255">p. 255</span> close connexion between
Hindoo and Egyptian Mythology is the name of the sacred river, so nearly
resembling the Sanscrit *nil*, "blue," referring to the remarkable
colour of its waters. "In Nilo cujus aqua *mari* similis," observes
Pliny (xxxv. 36), speaking of a picture by Nealces of a naval battle
upon that river. The Arabs still distinguish its upper confluents as the
*Blue* and the *White* Nile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Abraxas Religion](gar40)
