[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar40)  [Next](gar42) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

### THE INEFFABLE NAME IN THE HINDOO FORM.

We have already seen how [important](errata.htm#16) a part the notion of
an "Ineffable Name," denoting the inconceivable Supreme, plays in the
machinery of the Gnosis, and here again the original idea is to be found
fully developed in the practice of the Brahmins. This awful name
emblazoned in *three* Sanscrit letters within a cartouche formed by a
coiled serpent (that normal inclosure for a Holy Name in Gnostic
art) <span id="fr_150"></span>[\*](#fn_149) is fittingly borne up by the
elephant headed Ganesa, god of *Wisdom*. The word being triliteral is
rather **AUM** than **OM**, as usually written in English. It is never
to be uttered aloud, but only mentally by the devout. Of the characters,
**A** signifies the Creator, **U** the Preserver, **M** the Destroyer;
that is, the Triad Brahma-Vishnu-Siva. "If pronounced aloud, the sound
much resembles Amen as drawled out by a country parish clerk. In fact it
is used for "Angiekar," *So be it!* in token of approbation" (Moor,
Hindoo Pantheon). <span id="fr_151"></span>[†](#fn_150) And here a very
curious analogy is to be pointed out in the assertion of the Talmudists
that the word *Amen* if shouted aloud is of power to open the gates of
Heaven. In the Pistis-Sophia the "Three Amen," and again the "Four
Amen," are repeatedly mentioned amongst the other Mysteries revealed by
the Saviour in his esoteric teaching. On this account the word may be

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

suspected to have some connexion with the Hindoo Sacred Name, unless
indeed Valentinus had got it nearer home, from the four "Amenti,"
guardians of the dead, and sons of Osiris. The common explanation that
"Amen" signifies *Truth* in some Eastern dialect, does not seem to rest
on good foundation. The Kabbalist Marcus discovered a great mystery in
Αμην, taken numerically, the number Ninety-nine became formed by the
union of the Eleven and the Nine and *therefore* set forth by the
parables of the piece of silver, and the ninety and nine sheep, "which
is the reason why we use 'amen' in prayers."

Other Hindoo titles of the Deity are "Tat" and "Sat" = Virtue. These are
recognisable in the Egyptian gods Tat or Hermes, and Sate, Truths. It is
likewise more than probable that the mighty **AUM** itself often lies
enshrouded amidst the lines of vowels filling our talismans. Certainly
the Praun calcedony (No. 517) bearing on one side the Delphic Apollo in
a good style of art, or the other (by a later hand) a man dancing with
his apron filled with fruits, presents in its legend πυρσπαιοω αουμ
ολει, the Sanscrit triliteral in the only form in which Greek characters
could express the sound.

The origin of this Ineffable Name is thus related ('Inst. Menu.' ii.
370) Brahma milked out as it were from the three Vedas the letter **A**,
the letter **U**, and the letter **M**; together with the three
mysterious words "Bhur," "Bhavah," "Swar," or Earth, Sky and Heaven.
From the three Vedas also the Lord of Creation, incomprehensibly exalted
successively milked out the three Treasures of the ineffable text,
beginning with the word "Tat," and entitled the "Savatri," or Gáyatrí. A
priest who shall know the Veda, and pronounce to himself both morning
and evening that syllable and that holy text preceded by the Three words
shall attain that sanctity which the Veda confers: and a "*twice born*"
man who shall a thousand times repeat those Three apart from the
multitude, shall be released in a month even from a great offence, as a
snake from its slough. The Three great immutable words preceded by the
Triliteral syllable and followed by the Gáyatri which consists of three
measures, must be considered as the *mouth*, or principal part of the
Veda." In

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

this doctrine lies the very origin of all talismanic inscriptions, for
their essence is the stringing together of sacred names. Nay more, the
actual Three words, disguised by Coptic pronunciation, or purposely
sealed from profane eyes by a duplication of vowels, very probably exist
in the midst of certain Gnostic formulæ. In the spell of Battus,
hereafter to be quoted, words of the same sense as the Hindoo Three do
in reality occur.

The Gáyatrí or holiest verse of the Vedas is: "Let us adore the
supremacy of the Divine Sun, the Godhead, who illuminates all, who
recreates all, from whom all proceed, unto whom all must return, whom we
invoke to direct our progress aright in our progress towards the Holy
Seat." Another is; "Earth, Sky, Heaven; Let us meditate upon that most
excellent Light and Power, of that most generous, sportive, and
resplendent Sun, that it may guide our intellects." In all this there is
something that irresistibly reveals the Gnostic invocations whenever
they can be interpreted, and the "Divine Sun" finds its counterpart in
the "Shemesh Eilam" so perpetually repeated.

This Gáyatrí is contained in the confession of faith of the Brahmin.
"This new and excellent praise of thee O, splendid playful Sun
(*Pushan*) is offered by us to thee. Be gratified by this my speech:
approach this craving mind as a fond man seeks a woman. May that Sun who
contemplates and looks into all worlds be our Protector! Let us meditate
on the adorable light of the Divine Ruler (*Savitri*); may it guide our
intellects. Desirous of food we solicit the gift of the splendid Sun,
who should be studiously worshipped. Venerable men, guided by the
understanding, salute thee, Divine Sun, with oblations and praise."

Moor hereupon makes the very pertinent remark: "It is difficult to
conjecture why this text should be so studiously kept secret, for its
exposition, unconnected with any idea of mystery, and affectation of
profundity, does not appear likely to have the effect so dreaded by all
priests of guiding the intellect of mankind to the discovery of Truth."

As already remarked our Gnostic formulae when expressed in Greek have a
spirit and a rhythm that strikes the ear as the echo of these primitive
invocations; witness the legend upon the

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

plasma described by Creuzer (Archeol. iii. last plate). Within the
serpent-formed cartouche is an inscription of many lines, the first half
an undecypherable medley of letters, which like Marcus’ thirty syllabic
appellation of the Supreme Tetrad, must express the name of the Unknown
God, who in the following portion is invoked as: "The Primal Father,
incorporeal, pervading all things, self-existing, the seal of Solomon:"
then come more mystic epithets ending with "lion-headed," evidently the
Mithraic figure of that kind. The declaration that the unknown legend is
the "Seal of Solomon" is extremely interesting, as showing the early
date of the celebrity attained by that most famous of talismans; which,
be it remembered, was reported to derive its virtue from the mighty
throne of God engraven on the gem.

Many further analogies between the two theosophies may be detected in
the Hindoo forms of worship published by Moor. Of the Persons in the
Supreme Triad, Brahma represents the Creator, Vishnu the Preserver, and
Siva the Destroyer. But the last is more truly the Changer, all *death*
being only *change*. Siva therefore in one of his characters becomes
identified with Yama, god of the Shades. Now, seeing that the first two
Persons are symbolised by the elements Fire and Water, the analogy of
the Hellenic Triad, Zeus, Poseidon, Hades, becomes at once apparent.
Here also we find the originals of the "Great Τριδυνάμεις," who hold so
high a place in the hierarchy of the Pistis-Sophia.

The famous Inscription of Buddha-Gaya, Bengal, dated the year 1005 of
the era of Vikramaditya (B.C. 57) contains this remarkable passage:
"Amaradiva \[son of Sandracottus\] having heard this voice caused an
image of the Supreme Spirit, Buddha, to be made; and he worshipped it,
according to the law, with perfumes, incense, and the like, and he thus
admired \[magnified\] the Name of that Supreme Being, an Incarnation of
a portion of Vishnu. Reverence be unto thee in the form of Buddha;
reverence be unto thee, Lord of the Earth! Reverence be unto thee an
Incarnation of the Deity, and the Eternal One; Reverence be unto thee O
God, in the form of the God of Mercy, the Dispeller of pain and trouble,
the Lord of all things, the

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Deity who
overcomes the sins of the *Kali yug* (Iron Age), the Guardian of the
universe, the emblem of Mercy towards all them that sue thee--**OM**,
the Possessor of all things in vital form, Thou art Brahma, Vishnu, and
Mahesa (Siva); Thou art the Lord of the universe; Thou art the proper
*form* of all things, <span id="fr_152"></span>[\*](#fn_151) moveable
and immoveable, the Possessor of the whole. And thus I adore thee.
Reverence be unto thee the Bestower of Salvation; Reverence be unto thee
the Destroyer of the Evil Spirit, Kesi; <span
id="fr_153"></span>[†](#fn_152) O Damadara shew me favour! Thou art he
who resteth upon the face of the Milky Ocean, and who lieth upon the
serpent Sesha. Thou art Trivikrama, who at three strides encompasseth
the earth; I adore thee, who art celebrated by a thousand names, and
under various *forms*, in the shape of Buddha, the God of Mercy; be
propitious, O thou Most High! Having thus worshipped the Guardian of
mankind, he became like one of the just. He joyfully caused a holy
temple to be built of a wonderful construction, and therein were set up
the *Divine Feet* of Vishnu, for ever Purifier of the sins of mankind;
the images of the Pandus, and the *Descents* of Vishnu (Avatars); and in
like manner of Brahma and the rest of the divinities." (Hind. Panth. p.
223.)

It may here be observed how extensively this symbol of the *Divine Foot*
has pervaded the religions of the West. Feet either in relief or *in
cavo*, cut in stone, are common about Hindoo temples; according to
tradition they are memorials of suttees, the self-sacrificing widow
having mounted from that stone upon the pyre. This usage supplies the
connection of the symbol. with Serapis, the translated Yama, god of
Hades. Compare the colossal Foot dedicated to the Serapis of Alexandria,
as his special attribute, and recently exhumed from the ruins of his
temple. <span id="fr_154"></span>[‡](#fn_153) It is richly sandalled,
and on the top sits enthroned the god himself, with his attendants
Cerberus and the Serpent, *Tricasa* 

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

and *Sesha* in Grecian disguise. The same Foot, winged and girt with the
Serpent placed between two seated lions, is cut on the altar inscribed
"Deo Sarapi M. Vibius Onesimus ex visu" (Montfaucon, pl. 122). The same
idea produced in Ceylon the print of Adam's foot upon the summit of the
Peak, bearing his name, whence he had ascended to his Creator, and
equally, in the very metropolis of Christianity, that of Christ himself
stamped in the basalt paving-stone of the Via Appia, still worshipped in
the church and entitled, "Domine quo vadis?"

An ancient silver plate, found in a pit at Islamabad, at the northern
end of the Bay of Bengal, records the hallowing of the site of a
projected temple there in the deposit in that pit of 120 small bronze
images called "Tahmudas," twenty of larger size, "Languda," one large in
stone, "Langudagari," and a brass vessel containing two of the bones of
"Thacur." This last title, "Noble," <span
id="fr_155"></span>[\*](#fn_154) is the regular style of a god, or a
deified mortal. In mediæval ecclesiastical usage (which probably still
continues) it was indispensable for the consecration of any altar in a
church that a relic (bone) of some Saint should have been deposited
under its base. The same silver plate contains this account of the birth
and infancy of Buddha. This coincidence, if accidental is very curious.
"When Buddha Avatar descended from the region of souls, and entered the
body of Mahamaya, the wife of Soontala Danna, Raja of Kailas, her womb
suddenly assumed the appearance of clear transparent crystal in which
Buddha appeared, beautiful as a flower, kneeling, and reclining on his
hands. When born he had on his head two *feet*, and on his hands the
marks of wheels. Brahma attending at the birth received the infant in a
golden vessel, and delivered him unto Indra."

This intimate connection of the theosophies of India and Greece was
originally (before the period of direct commerce) kept up through the
medium of the Persian Magi, as the classical writers themselves show by
casual but trustworthy allusions. Their notices were till lately
reckoned, amongst the other fictions of "Graecia Mendax," hut better
acquaintance with Sanscrit and Pehlevi records have revealed their
truth.

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> For it is now
accepted as certainly proved by the oldest portions of the Zendavesta
(the "Gathas," or hymns) that the primitive religion of the whole Aryan
race, previous to the great division, was a simple worship of the Powers
of Nature. This religion was reformed by Zoroaster, who retained the old
names for his Angels, but superadded the idea of the One Supreme.

Ammian in his account of Julian's Persian expedition, gives the
following curious, though oddly blundered, details upon this subject
(xxiii. 6). "In these tracts are situated the fertile lands of the
*Magi* \[in Media\], concerning whose profession and pursuits, since we
have come upon them, it will be fitting to give here some brief
information. Plato, that greatest authority upon celebrated doctrines,
states that the Magian religion, known by this mystic name of
'Machagestia,' is the most uncorrupted form of worship in things divine.
To the philosophy of this religion, Zoroastres, a Bactrian, in primitive
times, made many additions drawn from the Mysteries of the Chaldæans, as
did still later Hystaspes, a very learned prince, father of Darius. This
King Hystaspes, when he was boldly penetrating into the unknown regions
of *Upper India*, had come upon a certain wooded solitude, the tranquil
silence of which is occupied by those incomparable sages, the Brachmans.
Instructed by their teaching in the science of the motions of the world
and heavenly bodies, and also in *pure religious rites* as far as he was
able to gather them--of the notions thus acquired he transfused a
certain proportion into the creed of the Magi. The latter coupling these
doctrines with their own peculiar science of foretelling the future,
have handed down the whole through their descendants to succeeding ages.
Thenceforth, in the course of many generations to the present time, a
multitude, sprung from one and the same stock, dedicates itself to
sacred offices. It is said they preserve unextinguished the Sacred Fire
which first of all fell down from heaven, a portion whereof used always
to be carried before the kings of Asia as a good omen. The number of
persons so descended was at the first but small, and they were
exclusively employed by the Persian kings for the performance of
religious services. It was considered

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

a great offence to approach the altar, or to touch the sacrifice, before
a Magus, after reciting the appointed prayers, had poured upon it the
preliminary libation. But through gradual increase they are grown into
the name and dimensions of a distinct people, and inhabit villages
unprotected by walls, being allowed to follow their own laws, being
respected on account of their religious character. It was from this race
of men that the seven, as ancient history records, usurped the Persian
throne upon the death of Cambyses, and were crushed by the conspiracy of
that Darius who gained the kingdom through the neighing of his horse."
The worthy, but pedantic old soldier, in his anxiety to show off his
historical reading, has committed certain very ludicrous blunders in
this account. The father of Darius was no "ancient king of Persia," hut
merely governor of that *province* (ἐπαρχος) under Cambyses (Her. iii.
70). His name, derived from "Gushtasp," the planet Venus, was doubtless
common enough wherever Magism was the established religion. And yet more
ludicrously does Ammian convert the *one* Magian usurper, Smerdis, into
*seven*, the actual number of the Persian nobles who put him down.
Nevertheless, the tradition has great value, as proving the previous
existence of the Magi in a community of diviners and seers (like the
ancient Jewish fraternities, "Sons of the Prophets,") and the subsequent
modification of their doctrines by the importation of Brahminical ideas,
following upon the conquest of Indian provinces. Such being the case,
one need not be surprised at finding *Sassanian* kings named after
Hindoo deities, like the numerous *Varanes* (from "Varani," Vishnu's
title) just as others of their line assume that of the proper Persian
god, Ormuzd, in the form of that favourite royal appellation, Hormisdas
(Ahoromasdi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_149"></span>[266:\*](gar41.htm#fr_150) As the Pistis-Sophia
informs us, "the disk of the sun was a great dragon having his tail in
his mouth," the meaning of this figure whereon the sacred word is
emblazoned becomes sufficiently obvious.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[266:†](gar41.htm#fr_151) **OM MANI PADHVM**
"Glorification of the Deity," is the Thibetian Confession of Faith,
engraved on stone tablets set up everywhere over the country; and
everlastingly chanted by the Lamas as they tell their beads. (Cooper's
'Travels of a Pioneer,' p. 208). Huc mentions that the Lamas assert that
the doctrine contained in these words is immense, and that the whole
life of man is not sufficient to measure its depth and extent. Knox
('Overland through Asia') describes the ruined "Monastery of Eternal
Repose," built at the junction of the Augoon with the Amoor by an
emperor of the Yuen dynasty to commemorate his visit to that region. On
the summit of the cliff are three columns, 5 to 8 feet high of marble
granite, and porphyry and granite, bearing inscriptions commemorating
this foundation, and also this formula in Chinese, Mongolian and
Thibetan.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[270:\*](gar41.htm#fr_152) Meaning the
pre-existing Type, the Platonic *Idea*, the Persian Ferouher, the
Rabbinical Adam-Kadmon--all springing from this source.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[270:†](gar41.htm#fr_153) This explains the
title of the deity so often put on our talismans, Γιγαντορήκτης.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[270:‡](gar41.htm#fr_154) The religious
importance of the symbol is attested by an Alexandrian coin of Commodus,
having for reverse this same Foot, with the bust of Serapis placed on
the section of the leg. (Feuardent, 'Egypte Ancienne,' pl. xxvii.).

<span id="fn_154"></span>[271:\*](gar41.htm#fr_155) Exactly answering to
the ancient *Divus*, the Catholic *Saint*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abraxas-Gems, Their Materials, Workmanship, and Nature](gar42)
