[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar46)  [Next](gar48) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

### ORIGINAL PURPOSE OF THESE FORMULÆ.

The *interpretation* of Gnostic legends and the nature of the deity to
whom they were addressed have been thus far the subjects of our inquiry:
the next step is to search contemporary writers for information as to
the *special purpose* for which the talismans so enriched were
originally manufactured. The motive for placing in the coffin of the
defunct *illuminato* these "words of power" graven on scrolls of lead,
plates of bronze, the gems we are considering, and doubtless to an
infinitely greater extent on more perishable materials, derives much
light from the description Epiphanius gives (Hær. xxxvi.) of the
ceremony whereby the Heracleonitæ prepared their dying brother for the
next world. They sprinkled his head with water mingled with oil and
opobalsamum, repeating at the same time the form of words used by the
Marcosians in baptism, in order that his *Inner Man*, thus provided,
might escape the vigilance of the Principalities and Powers whose
domains he was about to traverse, and mount up unseen by any to the
Pleroma from which he had originally descended. Their priests therefore
instructed the dying man that as he came before these Powers he was to
address them in the following words: "I, the son from the Father, the
Father pre-existing but the son in the present time, am come to behold
all things both of others and of my own, and things not altogether of
others but belonging unto Achamoth (*Wisdom*), who is feminine and hath
created them for herself. But I declare my own origin from the
Pre-existing One, and I am going back unto my own from which I have
descended." By the virtue of these words he will elude the Powers, and
arrive at the Demiurgus in the eighth sphere, whom again he must thus
address: "I am a precious vessel, superior to the female power who made
thee, inasmuch as thy mother knoweth not her own origin, whereas I know
myself, and I know whence I am; and I invoke the Incorruptible Wisdom
who is in the father and in the mother of your mother that hath no
father,

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

nay, not even a male consort, but being a female sprung from a female
that created thee, though she herself knows not her mother, but believes
herself to exist alone. But I invoke the mother." At this address the
Demiurgus is struck with confusion (as well he might be), and forced to
acknowledge the baseness of his origin: whereupon the inner man of the
Gnostic casts off his bondage as well as his own *angel*, or soul, which
remains with the Demiurgus for further use, and ascends still higher
into his proper place. For every man is made up of *body*, *soul*, and
*inner man*, this last being the more spiritual nature. This same belief
was the popular one of the Jews, as appears from Rhoda's exclamation at
the unhoped-for reappearance of Peter, whom she supposed already put to
death.

The Achamoth here mentioned is the Sephandomad of Zoroaster, the Wisdom
of the later Jews--so fully described by the pseudo-Solomon under that
title (vii. 25). "She is the Spirit of the virtue of God, the pure
emanation of the brightness of the Almighty, the brightness of the
eternal Light, the mirror without spot of his majesty, the image of his
goodness." "Wisdom hath made her house upon seven pillars." The *naked
woman*, or Venus Anadyomene, so often seen on these gems, is the same
idea expressed by the ancient Greek type. One given by Caylus ('Rec.
d’Ant.' vi. Pl. 21) explains its destination in terms sufficiently
clear, despite their corrupt Byzantine orthography: **ΙΑΩ CΑΒΑΩ ΑΔΟΝΑΙ
ΗΚΑΙ ΕΛΛΑΞΕΙΩΝ ΤΟϒ ϒΑΡΤΑΡΟϒ CΚΟΤΙΝ**, "Jehovah, Sabaoth, Lord, come and
deliver me from the darkness of Hell!"

Could the long legends covering so many of these jasper tablets be
interpreted, most probably their purport would be found of the same
nature with the just-cited Heracleonitan passport for the Pleroma: it
were but a natural precaution on his friends’ part to supply the
deceased brother with a correct copy of such long-winded involved
professions of faith, and which otherwise would be extremely apt to
escape his memory; the more especially as being only confided to him by
his spiritual guides when he was already at the last gasp.

Of the practice itself, the origin undoubtedly lay in the very ancient
Egyptian rule of placing in the mummy cases those

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

elaborate "Litanies of the Dead" of which so many have come down to our
times: <span id="fr_196"></span>[\*](#fn_194) papyrus scrolls containing
the prayers to be addressed by the soul to each god whose "gate" it has
to traverse on its way to final rest. To prevent mistakes, the portrait
of each deity is prefixed to the column of prayers due to him, and this
same arrangement is found in the leaden scrolls belonging to the
heterogeneous doctrine of the Gnostics.

The same custom yet holds its ground in India, probably its pristine
source. Tavernier notices that the Brahmins placed on the breast of the
corpse seven pieces of paper, inscribed with the prayers to be uttered
by the soul as soon as released from its corporeal envelope by the
flames of the funeral pile. <span id="fr_197"></span>[†](#fn_195)

The gem-talismans that remain in such varied abundance are themselves
recognised in the few surviving writings of the Gnostic teachers. The
*Pistis-Sophia* is full of allusions to the *Seals* and *Numbers* of the
different Æons and the other Powers, <span
id="fr_198"></span>[‡](#fn_196) and with the repeated promise of the
Saviour to reveal these all unto his hearers; a promise which,
unfortunately, is not fulfilled in the book as it has come down to us.
Nevertheless the very allusion sufficiently declares the sense in which
we are to understand the **CΦΡΑΓΙC** so frequently to be seen on the
talismans. The motive for providing the defunct believer

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

with a good supply of these imperishable credentials is sufficiently
explained by the "Scheme of the Ophites" (published by Origen), which
details the prayers to be addressed to the Seven Planetary Powers by the
released soul, in its upward flight.

The prayer to Ildabaoth contains this indication: "O principal Spirit of
the Pure Intelligence, Perfect Work in the eyes of the Father and of the
Son, in presenting unto thee in this *seal* the sign of Life open the
gates closed by thy power unto the world, and freely traverse thy
domain."

Again, in saluting Iao (here taken from the Lunar Genius): "Thou that
presidest over the Mysteries of the Father and of the Son, who shinest
in the night-time, holding the second rank, the first Lord of Death! in
presenting thee with this thine own *symbol* swiftly pass through thy
dominions."

To Sabaoth: "Receive me, on beholding this pure symbol against which thy
Genius cannot prevail; it is made after the *image* of the type; it is
the body delivered by the Pentad."

To Orai (Venus): "Let me pass, for thou seest the symbol of thy power
annihilated by the sign of the Tree of Life." (Is this *sign* the Cross,
as Matter supposes, or the actual tree occasionally to be found on
Gnostic gems?) And it must be remembered that the primary meaning of
*symbolum* is the impression of a signet, which makes it more probable
that such is the sense in which the word is used in all these passages.
It may further be conjectured that in this conversion of the *symbolum*
into a passport to heaven originated the theological use of the word to
signify a creed or summary of the articles of Faith.

This same service of talismans in the next world is clearly recognised
in the Pistis-Sophia (§ 293), where Mary Magdalene gives this curious
version of the business of the tribute-penny: "Thou hast said that the
soul giveth an account of itself, and likewise a *seal* unto all the
Rulers that be in the regions of King Adamas, and giveth the account the
honour and the glory of all the *seals* belonging unto them, and also
the hymns of the kingdom of Light. This therefore is the word which thou
spakest when the *stater* was brought unto thee, and thou sawest that it

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

was of silver and likewise of copper. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[\*](#fn_197) Thereupon thou didst ask, Whose is this
image? and they answered, Of the King. Then when thou sawest that it was
of silver and also of copper, thou saidest: Give the part which is the
King's unto the King, and the part which is God's unto God. The which
meaneth this: After that the soul hath received the Mystery it giveth an
account of itself unto all the Rulers and unto the dominion of King
Adamas, and also giveth the glory unto those that pertain to the Light.
And thy saying that it shone, when thou sawest it, of silver and copper,
it is the image and likeness of the soul. The power of the Light which
is therein, the same is the fine silver: but the *Counterfeit of the
Spirit* (Conscience) is the *material* copper."

The grand doctrine of Gnosticism was this: The soul on being released
from the body (its prison-house and place of torment) has to pass
through the regions of the Seven Powers; which it cannot do unless
impregnated beforehand with *knowledge:* otherwise it is seized upon and
swallowed by the dragon-formed Ruler of this world, Satan Ophiomorphus,
and voided forth through his tail upon earth again, where it animates a
swine or some such beast, and repeats its career once more. But should
it be filled with *knowledge*, it eludes the Seven Powers, and tramples
upon the head of Sabaoth ("of whom they say he hath the hair of a
woman") and mounts up unto the eighth heaven, the abode of Barbelo, the
Universal Mother, and who according to the Pistis-Sophia is the
celestial Mother of the Saviour. Epiphanius quotes from the Gospel of
Philip another formula, intended to extort a free passage from the same
Planetary Genii: "The Lord hath revealed unto me what words the soul
must use as it ascendeth up into heaven, and how it must make answer
unto each one of the Celestial Virtues. 'I have known myself, I have
*collected* myself from all parts, neither have I begotten sons unto the
Ruler of this world, but I have plucked up the roots, and gathered
together the scattered members. I know thee who thou art, for I am

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

one from above.' But if convicted of having left any offspring upon
earth, the soul is detained there until it shall have collected all and
attracted these into itself."

This "Self-Collection" was only to be effected through the observance of
perpetual chastity, or rather (inevitable compromise) the practice of
the various unnatural vices that regularly spring from such an article
of faith. If however a woman of the congregation should through want of
precaution allow herself to become pregnant, the Elders produced
abortion, took the fœtus and pounded it up in a mortar along with honey,
pepper, and other spices and perfumery. Then this "congregation of swine
and dogs" assembled; and every one dipping his finger into the mess,
tasted thereof. This they called their Perfect Passover, saying: "We
have not been deceived by the Ruler of concupiscence, but have gathered
up again the backsliding of our brother." The very plain-spoken
Epiphanius gives exact particulars, not to be put into a modern tongue,
of the mode in which the faithful observed in one sense their vow of
perpetual chastity, without renouncing the joys of Venus. This he
illustrates by the singular explanation then current of the ancient myth
of Saturn's devouring his own offspring, against which interpretation
and the practice thereon founded, even Clemens had found it needful to
warn the orthodox two centuries before.

To exemplify the punishment ordained for having done the work of the
Demiurgus by leaving offspring upon earth, the Ophites told a wild
legend how that Elias himself was turned back from the gates of heaven,
although to his own conscience a pure virgin, because a female demon had
gathered up of his seed during his sleep, and formed infants therewith,
which to his unutterable confusion she then and there produced in
testimony of his sin. Hence springs the mediæval notion of the
*Succubæ*, nocturnal temptresses of the continent; although these were
supposed to do the work of their father the Devil in a different way, by
procuring him the needful supplies for his amours with the witches, to
whom he stood in the ex-officio relation of paramour.

All this is in strict accordance with what is found in the

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

fragments of the "Gospel to the Egyptians"; for Clemens (Stromata iii.)
quotes therefrom this dictum of the Saviour's: "When Salome asked the
Lord how long shall Death prevail? He answered unto her, So long as ye
women do bring forth children. Wherefore she said, Then I have done well
in not bearing children, seeing that there is no necessity for
generation. To which the Lord answered, Feed upon every herb, but that
which hath bitterness, eat thou not. Again when Salome asked when the
things should be known concerning which she inquired, the Lord answered,
When ye shall not need a covering for your nakedness; when the two shall
become one, the male with the female, neither male nor female." It is to
these overstrained rules of morality that St. Paul alludes when he
expostulates with the Colossians (ii. 20) asking them, "Why are ye
subject to ordinances (or rather, make laws for yourselves without any
warrant), namely, touch not (women), taste not (flesh), handle not
(things unclean)."

From the consideration of the value and use of these Gnostic Symbols in
the world to come, we are naturally led to inquire in what manner they
were employed by their owners in *this*. The meaning of the word itself
has gone through many transitions. "Symbolism" properly signified the
contribution of each member towards the expenses of a Greek
drinking-party. For this purpose each pledged his signet-ring to the
caterer and afterwards redeemed it by paying his quota of the bill. For
this reason Plautus transfers the name of symbolum to the ring itself.
The signet being considered the most trustworthy of all credentials, the
word came to signify any token serving for the purpose of a credential.
For example, Caylus figures (Rec. V. pl. 55), a bronze right-hand, the
natural size, inscribed on the palm **ΣϒΜΒΟΛΟΝ ΠΡΟΣ ΟϒΕΛΑϒΝΙΟϒΣ**,
"Credentials to the Velaunii" (a Gallic tribe whose seat was round
Antibes). <span id="fr_200"></span>[\*](#fn_198) The wrist at the
section is closed, forming a base,

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

so that the hand could stand upright of itself. A pair of clasped hands,
symbol of faith (still called in Italy *feae*), was the common present
from one nation or army to another on making alliance: "Miserat civitas
Lingonum veteri instituto dono legionibus *dextras* hospitii insigne"
(Tac. Hist. i. 54). From the nature of the case such presents must have
been made in the precious metals, and consequently none have been
preserved. This connexion of ideas shows plainly why in ecclesiastical
language symbolum stands for a profession of *faith*, a creed, *i.e.*
gr. "Symbolum Apostolicum." And so by degrees the word degenerated into
its present sense of any *token* denoting an idea, more especially a
religious one.

*Emblem* again has passed through equal vicissitudes. At first, a little
silver chasing, intended for letting into plate as an embellishment of
the surface--which the term ἔμβλημα neatly expresses--the designs being
always mythological, its name remained, after the fashion had expired,
to denote any representation of that nature. There is, however, a
distinction in the real meaning of *emblem* and symbol; the former
expressing by actual representation, the latter by hieroglyphs, the idea
they convey. Thus the *emblem* of Victory is a winged female holding a
palm; the *symbol* of Victory is the palm by itself.

The BAMBINO--the favourite idol of the women of Rome--bears, in its type
and decoration, the most convincing of all testimony as to the real
source of the religion in whose pantheon it plays so prominent a part.
It is a wooden figure, about two feet high, now passing for the *vera
effigies* of the Infant Jesus; but to any eye acquainted with Indian
art, an unmistakable copy of the Infant Buddha. The figure, in almost
full relief, stands in front face, with arms crossed on the breast, and
holding the lotus flower in the one hand, in the regular attitude of the
Hindoo god. But the most striking feature in the design is the shape of
the background, which has no prototype in Roman art, but is cut into the
so-called "pine-apple"

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

outline, which invariably accompanies the sacred images of India. On the
head is a crown, in the Oriental style, and the close-fitting garment,
reaching from neck to ankle, and now passing for the swaddling-clothes
of the baby, is profusely studded with precious stones--the offerings of
a later time. The very tradition as to its place of manufacture supplies
an inkling of the truth; for it is said to be the work of a monk at
Jerusalem, and carved out of one of the sacred olive-trees. The pious
artist must have been inspired by the sight of the Indian prototype, for
the resemblance is far too close to be accidental, if indeed, the whole
affair be not another instance of a "christened Jove."

The very nature of things renders it a necessity for the members of
every secret society to possess means for mutual recognition that shall
escape the observation of the outer world. The partakers of the
Eleusinian Mysteries, appear, from certain allusions in the classics, to
have been furnished by their sponsors with something of the kind. The
refusal to wear a garland at a feast was accepted as the sign of a
Mithraic brother. Certain it is that our popular notion about the
"Masonic Grip" was equally current as applied to the Gnostics in the
times of Epiphanius. "On the arrival of any stranger belonging to the
same sect, they have a *sign* given by the man to the woman, and *vice
versa*. In holding out the hand under pretence of saluting each other,
they feel and tickle it in a particular, manner, underneath the palm,
and by that means discover whether the new-comer belongs to the same
society. Upon this, however poor they may be, they serve up to him a
sumptuous feast, with abundance of meats and wine. And after they are
well filled the host rises, leaving his wife behind, bidding her, 'Show
thy charity unto this our brother,'" &c., carrying out his hospitality
to an extent that in our selfish times no one can expect to meet with
unless amongst the Esquimaux.

As may well be supposed, these *symbola* are widely diffused; for
Gnosticism was more than co-extensive with the empire of Rome, and long
survived her fall. Besides our guns, plates of bronze and lead (and even
of gold in the remarkable example

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

found near Carnarvon), and rude copper medallions, engraved with similar
devices, are constantly disinterred from ancient cemeteries, where they
had so long protected the repose of their original possessors. Of that
rarer class, the medallions, the most interesting known to me, was found
in Provence (Praun Cabinet). It shows in *intaglio* the Abraxas god, for
reverse, the triple Hecate, executed with considerable spirit types well
illustrating the syncretistic nature of the creed by this union of an
ancient and a newly-devised type. The sepulchre of Maria, wife of the
most orthodox Honorius, contained, amongst a variety of amniotic figures
(or perhaps toys--little animals, mice, &c.), carved in crystal and
agate, a gold plate, inscribed with the names of the "Angels of the
Presence." On account of the great interest of this discovery, I have
inserted a complete translation of Fauno's account, the only description
ever penned of the rifling of an imperial tomb. And when Bishop
Seffred's coffin (deceased 1159) was opened in Chichester Cathedral,
upon his bony finger still lay the episcopal ring, set with an Abraxas
jasper, no doubt recommended to him in life and death by the numerous
virtues so particularly set forth by Camillus Leonardi. When did the
belief in the virtue of these talismans really expire? The Young
Pretender, with the superstition inherent in his family, had sought to
enlist in his service the mighty Abraxas himself for his ill-starred
expedition. In his baggage, captured at Culloden by General Belfort, was
found a bloodstone, set in silver as a pendant, engraved with the
well-known Pantheus. and for reverse the naked Venus, *Achamoth*, legend
**ΑΤΙΤΑ** (Figured by Walsh, pl. 7).

Provence is yet a fruitful source of these interesting memorials of the
wide-spread theosophy. Gnosticism from the beginning took root and
flourished in Southern Gaul, as the elaborate treatise of Irenæus
attacking it, as no newly-invented thing, very clearly demonstrates. Its
success was probably due to the close affinity of its leading doctrines
to the Mithraic and original Druidical systems previously reigning
there. Later still, in the middle of the fourth century, a new form of
Gnosticism, broached by Piriscllian, Bishop of Avila, who was put to
death for his

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

pains by the British emperor Magnus Maximus. Gibbon's note upon the
unlucky heresiarch is so characteristic of his style that I cannot
forbear quoting it: "The bishopric of Avila (in Old Castile) is now
worth 20,000 ducats a year, and is therefore much less likely to produce
the author of a new heresy." That Spain also had, long before
Priscillian's preaching, received and warmly embraced that of Basilides,
although so far removed from its fountain-head, is apparent from a
passage in Jerome's 29th letter to Theodora: "Our friend Licinius, when
that most foul heresy of Basilides was raging throughout Spain, and like
a pestilence and murrain was devastating all the province between the
Pyrenees and the Ocean, held fast the purity of the Christian faith, far
from receiving Amargel, Barbelo, Abraxas, Balsamus, the ridiculous
Leusiboras, and the other such-like monstrosities."

That Britain had to some extent received the same doctrines, the
Carnarvon gold plaque is sufficient evidence. And its existence throws
light upon the singular fact mentioned by Matthew Paris, that when
Eadred, in collecting building materials for his conventual church, was
pulling up the Roman foundations of Verulamium, he came upon a little
cupboard, "armariolum," in the thickness of an immense wall containing
scrolls in an unknown tongue. At last a very aged monk, Unwona by name,
made them out to be written in the ancient British language, and
containing invocations to the gods formerly worshipped in the place. But
Verulamium was so entirely Roman, as far as its public edifices were
concerned, that the use of the native language in any documents
accompanying the foundation of a temple is in the highest degree
improbable; the regular Gnostic Greek would be equally puzzling to the
old Saxon monk, and his explanation was a safe cloak for his ignorance.
The late period of the Roman occupation, when Gnosticism most
flourished, will account for the preservation of "scrolls" (parchment no
doubt) through the few centuries intervening before the abbotship of
Eadred.

It is more than probable that such doctrines lurked unnoticed amongst
the native Gallo-Romans, during the times of the Arian Gothic kings, and
did no more than revive into the

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

flourishing Manicheism of the Albigenses in the twelfth century. The
fact of these sectaries having received the same share of persecution
from Catholics as the Waldenses themselves is not alone sufficient to
prove them equally good Protestants with the latter; though *that* is
now taken for granted, especially by expounders of the Apocalypse, when
hard put to it to find the required "Two Witnesses" against the Scarlet
Lady.

Gnosticism has left traces of itself, whether by direct or indirect
descent amongst those mysterious sects of the Libanus, the Druses and
Anseyrets. As late as Justinian's reign, according to Procopius, no
fewer than a million Polytheists, Manicheans and *Samaritans* (the last
also a sect of Gnostics) <span id="fr_201"></span>[\*](#fn_199) were
exterminated in Syria alone, during the systematic persecution, so long
carried on by this pedantic bigot. As that region soon afterwards fell
under the more tolerant Caliphs, who never troubled themselves about the
religion of their subjects, provided their tribute were punctually paid,
these doctrines may very well have come down in some sort to our days,
considering the secluded position of the people holding them, and the
tenacity of life possessed by every well-defined system of religious
ideas.

 

<span id="img_fig15"></span> ![FIG. 15.](img/fig15.jpg)  
FIG. 15.

[(\*)](gar71.htm#an_fig15)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[331:\*](gar47.htm#fr_196) "Papyri, it is well
known, were frequently kept in readiness, with blank spaces for the
names and occupation of the deceased: the papyrus in fact formed part of
the regular funeral appliances. They were of three classes, namely
*Ritual*, *Books of Transmigrations*, and *Solar Litanies*, or
descriptions of the passage of the soul through the earth in the solar
boat. These highly curious MSS. contain minute descriptions of all the
regions through which the soul was supposed to pass after death."--C. W.
Goodwin. A MS. of this kind, written in the fourth century before our
era, was found by the Prince of Wales when excavating in Egypt; and has
been published with facsimile. But the finest example known is the one
preserved in the Soane Museum, hitherto unpublished.

<span id="fn_195"></span>[331:†](gar47.htm#fr_197) The Lord Taraka, if
duly propitiated, will breathe into the dying man's ear a *mantra* or
charm of such power as will secure him a safe passage to heaven.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[331:‡](gar47.htm#fr_198) "Then they bring the
soul before the *Virgin of Light*, and it showeth unto the Virgin her
own *seal*, her own form of defence, &c." This very illustrative portion
of the teaching of Valentinus is found in the Pistis-Sophia.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[333:\*](gar47.htm#fr_199) A curious remark,
pointing clearly to Alexandria as the place where this Gospel was
written, its tetradrachmn of imperial times being very base silver
indeed.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[335:\*](gar47.htm#fr_200) The best, as well as
the moat interesting example of a symbolism extant, is the one figured
by Caylus, without any conception of its value (Pl. 87, i.). It is an
ivory disk, two inches in diameter, engraved with two fishes, placed
side by side, with a palm-branch between them; the reverse is inscribed
<span id="img_33500"></span> ![](img/33500.jpg). The-well known emblems
show this <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> ticket to have been the pass
of some "Brother in Christ Jesus," in the primitive ages of the Church,
serving as his introduction to the faithful in whatever part he might
require their help.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[340:\*](gar47.htm#fr_201) And the most ancient
of all, for they claimed Simon Magus for their founder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gnostic Theogony](gar48)
