[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar53)  [Next](gar55) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTE: I have supplied section breaks in Part V. These titles are in
green type--JBH

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

# PART V.

# TEMPLARS, ROSICRUCIANS, FREEMASONS.

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "*Inscriptiones* propter quas vadimonium deseri possit: at cum intraveris, Di Deaeque! quam nihil in medio invenies." (Plin. H. N. Praef.) |

</div>

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

# TEMPLARS, ROSICRUCIANS, FREEMASONS.

## PRESERVATION OF GNOSTIC SYMBOLS AMONGST THE FREEMASONS.

### Masonic Origins

AT the first sight it is absolutely startling to recognise so many
Gnostic (primarily Indian) symbols, figuring so conspicuously amongst
the insignia and illustrated formulæ of our Freemasons, and that, too,
apparently in their original sense as exponents of the deepest
mysteries, human and divine--a circumstance of itself lending a specious
colour to the pretensions of the Order to the most venerable antiquity.
"Inscriptiones propter quas vadimonia deseri possint. Sed ubi
intraveris, Dii Deæque! quam nihil in medio invenies," to quote old
Pliny's words in speaking of the charlatans of his day. For the pleasing
illusion vanishes when we come to investigate the line of their descent;
and the Fraternity, though claiming them as its own legitimate
inheritance, turns out at the end a mere daw in borrowed plumes.

To begin by stating these claims, as recently put forward by one of
their most zealous and pugnacious defenders: "The mere *title* may be
comparatively modern; for the society in antediluvian (!) and
prehistorical times most undoubtedly was not called Freemasonry. But the
*thing* was in existence, and has descended to our own day." "On the
arrival of the Romans in Britain, we find Cæsar and several of the Roman
generals who succeeded him in the government of the island becoming
patrons and protectors of the craft; but there is no information to be
found in regard to the usages and customs prevalent among them at that
time. Their lodges and conventions were

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

regularly held, but were open only to the initiated fellows. There is
enough however to show that the same society which now flourishes
everywhere was then in existence, holding lodges and conventions and
having its initiated fellows. I may add, that a regular list of Grand
Masters can be produced quite as genuine and reliable as that of the
Archbishops of Canterbury, or of the Kings of England. If that in itself
is not valid evidence enough of the continued existence of the same
society in England from the earliest historical period down to the
present date, I don't know what *would* be admitted as sufficient
evidence." "Going back to A.D. 300 we find the Emperor Carausius
supporting it, and appointing Albanus, his Steward, Grand Master. This
was none other than the famous St. Alban, the first British martyr, who
was born at Verulam, now St. Albans, in Hertfordshire." <span
id="fr_222"></span>[\*](#fn_220)

The above is an unusually brilliant specimen of the logic of the
Brotherhood, that assumes in every notice of *building* and *builders*
to be found in antiquity a recognition of the then existence of their
own society exactly as at present constituted. The old guild of
*working-masons* seems to have made pretensions of the same nature (if
we allow the genuineness of the *supposed* Bodleian MS. copied by
Locke); for their great patron Henry VI. informs his scholar that "the
Mystery was first brought into England by Peter Gower" (Pythagoras)--a
corruption of the name, by the way; plainly betraying that he had
obtained this piece of information from a *French mouth*, probably from
some one in the suite of his queen. It is not unlikely that this
connexion of the Father of Mathematics with the building trade arose
from the study of that science by the Greek and Roman architects: for
upon the vital importance of a knowledge of Mathematics to his own
profession Vitruvius repeatedly and strongly insists. But this very
king, whom our Freemasons claim as their chief resuscitator, furnishes
the most conclusive evidence against the reality of their modern
pretensions. By the advice of the Bishop of Winchester, better known as
Cardinal Beaufort, he passed an Act, in his third year, forbidding

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Masons to hold
lodges or any meetings whatsoever, which protection is clearly directed
against no higher things than mere "trade-union" proceedings. But at a
later period he showed the Masons more favour, and even attended their
meetings, as did his contemporary James I. of Scotland. But the question
is set at rest by the language of the Act: <span
id="fr_223"></span>[\*](#fn_221) "First, Whereas by the assembling
congregations and confederacies made by the Masons in their grand
chapters and assemblies the good cause and effect of the *Statute of
Labourers* be openly violated and broken, in subversion of the law and
to the great damage of all the commons, our said Lord the King willing
in this case to provide remedy by the advice and assent aforesaid, and
at the special request of the said commons, hath ordered and
established, that such chapiters and congregations shall not be
hereafter made, they that cause such chapiters and congregations to be
assembled and holden, if they thereof be convict, shall be judged for
felons. And that all the other masons that come to such chapiters and
congregations, be punished by imprisonment of their bodies, and make
fine and ransom at the king's will."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_220"></span>[376:\*](gar54.htm#fr_222) From a letter
published in the 'Cork Constitution,' Jan. 15, 1866, by John Milner,
B.A., Chaplain to H.M.S. Hector.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[377:\*](gar54.htm#fr_223) 'Statutes at Large,'
ed. Keble, 1695. 3 Hen. VI. cap. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Earliest Masonic Document](gar55)
