[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar58)  [Next](gar60.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### The Rosicrucians

But although this Society of Freemasons was convoked in London, and
established branches all over England, furnishing also the members with
the means for secret recognition, and all for a political end, yet in
its true origin Freemasonry had nothing political in its nature, neither
was the aforesaid convocation in London the real commencement of its
existence. This final organisation was only the adaptation to a special
end of another society, then in fullest bloom, the *Rosicrucian*. If we
reflect how rankly both astrology and alchemy were flourishing at that
time in England, <span id="fr_235"></span>[\*](#fn_233.md) and that the
Rosicrucian sect was essentially of *Protestant* growth, we may on good
grounds conclude that this sect already numbered many English members
from amongst the educated classes and the philosophers of the

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

day. These last were for the most part ardent Royalists, hating the
established order of things, joined with many fanatical Republicans
equally impatient of the new despotism of Cromwell. In the Rosicrucian
system Religion and Philosophy, the latter meaning little more than
astrology and alchemy, <span id="fr_236"></span>[\*](#fn_234.md) were
strangely interwoven, and the terminology of the one was borrowed to
express the ideas and aspirations of the other. This hypothesis is
strongly recommended from its adoption by the acute De Quincey in his
essay entitled "Freemasons and Rosicrucians" ('London Magazine,' 1824),
where he shows how the Rosicrucians, when driven by persecution out of
Germany, re-appeared in England as Freemasons, taking that name from the
place of meeting, and from nothing else. Under the new appellation the
sect was re-imported into the Continent as an *English* institution. De
Quincey, however, makes their object to have been purely religious
without any admixture of politics, and so far differs from Nicolai,
whose views have been adopted by myself in what precedes, and who, being
himself an *illuminato* of the first water, ought certainly to be
regarded as the higher authority of the two.

The latter writer has given in his 'Tempel-Herren' what appears to be
the best supported account of the rise <span
id="fr_237"></span>[†](#fn_235.md) and progress of Rosicrucianism. He
points out for its founder a Lutheran mystic, J. V. Andreæ, <span
id="fr_238"></span>[‡](#fn_236.md) almoner to the Duke of

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Würtemberg early
in the seventeenth century. At least, the writings of this divine,
wherein the *Rosy Cross* prominently figures were the first indications
that made the existence of the fraternity known to the outer world. But
Andreæ appears to have done no more than borrow the symbols and occult
means of communication already existing from time immemorial amongst the
astrologers and alchemists (in other words the wealthy and the learned
of the age, when the Emperor Rudolf II. was the greatest patron of the
"curious arts" ever recorded in history) in order to employ them on the
furtherance of a visionary scheme of his own. This scheme was the fusion
of all Christian sects <span id="fr_239"></span>[\*](#fn_237.md) into one
universal brotherhood, and the projector wisely commenced his
apostleship by attempting to bring over to his side the most eminent of
the mass, by the utilization of such ancient and venerated machinery.
The well-meaning enthusiast had evidently disregarded the remark of the
sagacious Julian (Am. Mar. xxi. 5), confirmed as it is by the experience
of every succeeding generation, owes as much as any; "Nullas infestas
hominibus bestias ut sunt sibi ferales plerique Christianorum." As a
matter of course, his scheme of universal brotherhood dissolved in smoke
as soon as established, but the older philosophy, whose garb he had
adopted, bloomed with fresh vigour under the new organisation and
euphonious name.

But before going any further, let us for diversion's sake hear the
Rosicrucians' own story, and examine some of their doctrines and
insignia, which have an important bearing upon the subject of our
inquiry. The Rosicrucians, says Boyle, make their founder to have been a
certain German, only known as A. C., who having gone to Damascus in the
year 1387, was instructed in their mysteries by the *College of Arabian
Sages* <span id="fr_240"></span>[†](#fn_238.md)

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

there established. Returning home he communicated his knowledge to a
small number of chosen associates, dying in 1484. It is a matter of
importance to notice that in this legend Syria is made the fountain head
of the new philosophy. The Rosicrucian Creed, according to the 'Essay on
Spirits' (dedicated to Mr. Locke, 1647), contains, amongst others, this
palpable adoption of the Pythagorean system:--

"Ante omnia Punctum extitit, non mathematicum, sed diffusivum extrinsicæ
Monados, intrinsicæ Myriados; omnia et nihil; Est et Non.  
Haec Monas commovebat se in Dyadas, et per Triadas egressæ sunt facies
luminis secundi.  
Hic respiciens superiorem et inferiorem Parentem, iisdem deinde protulit
Vultum Triformem."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[392:\*](gar59.htm#fr_235.md) Oxford produced the
two great lights of the Hermetic philosophy, Robert de Fluctibus
(Fludd), and his contemporary Eugenius Philaethes (Thos. Vaughan). The
latter, born in 1612, is said by a writer of the year 1749 to be then
living at Nuremberg, as the president of the *illuminated* throughout
the world.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[393:\*](gar59.htm#fr_236.md) The position of the
latter science in this century cannot be more strongly exemplified than
by the actual existence of current coins declaring themselves to be made
out of Hermetic metal by the symbols for mercury and lead (Ψ ♄) stamped
on their reverse. Examples are three ducats of Gustavus Adolphus (Paris
Cabinet), thalers of Wilhelm, Landgrave of Hesse, and contemporary coins
of the city of Erfurt. This subject has been well handled by Martin Reg
in his memoir, "Anciennes Pièces Hermétiques," 'Revue Numismatique' for
1867.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[393:†](gar59.htm#fr_237.md) 'The Rosicrucians:
their Rites and Mysteries; with Chapters on the ancient Fire-and-Serpent
Worshippers, and explanations of the Mystic Symbols represented in the
Monuments and Talismans of the Primeval Philosophers.' By Hargrave
Jennings, London, 1870. A truly "Masonic" production, without "method in
its madness," but valuable for giving many Rosicrucian (or rather
Kabbalistic) expositions of symbols, extracted from Fludd's writings.
The compiler has, moreover, laid my 'Gnostics' largely under
contribution, and even reproduced my engravings with sundry fanciful
improvements that wonderfully heighten their mystic value.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[393:‡](gar59.htm#fr_238.md) Solomon Somber,
however, in <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> his 'Collections for the
History of Rosicrucianism,' assigns a fabulous antiquity to the sect.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[394:\*](gar59.htm#fr_239.md) Exactly the same
scheme, based upon Judaism, is the crime that now keeps in perpetual
imprisonment Nicholas Ilvin, the far-famed "Convent Spectre" of
Solovetsk in the Frozen Sea, universally believed in Russia to be the
lost Grand Duke Constantine.--(Dixon's 'Free Russia.')

<span id="fn_238"></span>[394:†](gar59.htm#fr_240.md) This tradition may
have some truth in it, allowing for an error of locality. At *Cairo* the
Fatemite sultans (Ismaelites be it remembered) had three centuries
before this date <span id="page_395">p. 395</span> founded the far-famed
lodge, entitled "the House of Wisdom." Here the student passed through
*nine degrees*, beginning with Obedience, Mysticism, Philosophy, Doubt,
&c., up to Absolute Incredulity. William of Tyre (xix. 17) tells a
wonderful story, how Hugo of Cæsarea and Geffroi of the Temple, envoys
to Cairo on business of the Order, were led by the Soldan himself to the
palace Kashef, and conducted through numerous courts of the richest
architecture, full of strange birds and beasts, to the inmost hall,
where the Soldan having first adored the unseen "Master," the curtains
of gold and pearl were suddenly drawn back, and that dignitary appeared
seated in unspeakable glory on a golden throne, attended by his chief
officials.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Templars](gar60.md)
