[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar50)  [Next](gar52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### STATE AFTER DEATH OF THE UNINITIATED.

\(261\) "Then stood forth Mary and said, Lord, as concerning just men
and perfect in all righteousness; such a man in whom there is no sin at
all, shall they torment him with all these judgments and punishments, or
shall they not? Or shall they carry such a man into the kingdom of
heaven or not?

"The Saviour answered and said unto Mary, The just man perfect in all
righteousness, that hath never committed sin, but yet hath never
obtained any one mystery of Light, when his time cometh for departing
out of the body, straightway there shall come for him the Gatherers
belonging to that one of the great Triple Powers who is the greatest
amongst them, in order that

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

they may take away that soul from the Contentious Gatherers, and during
three days they shall go about with that soul amongst all the creatures
of the world (*i.e.* throughout all creation). After the three days they
shall lead him down into Chaos, so that they may deliver him out
of <span id="fr_214"></span>[\*](#fn_212) all the punishments therein,
and out of the judgments, and they shall bring him unto all the
judgment-places, but no flame of Chaos shall afflict him greatly; (262)
nevertheless they shall in some wise afflict him for a little space, but
speedily shall they have compassion upon him, and draw him up out of
Chaos so as to take him out of the Road of the Middle-space, and from
all the Rulers thereof. And these shall not punish him with their cruel
torments, but the flame of their regions shall afflict him in some
measure; and after they have brought him into the unmerciful place
**ΑΧΘΑΝΑΒΑΣ** they shall not torment him with the cruel torments
therein, but they shall keep him there a little while, and afflict him
in some measure with the heat of the torments of that place. But they
shall quickly have compassion upon him, and bring him forth out of all
those places, neither shall they lead him by the way that goeth from out
of the Æons, for fear lest the Rulers of the Æons should hold him too
firmly, but they shall conduct him by the path of the Sun's light, in
order to bring him before the Virgin of Light. And she doth try that
soul that she may find it free from sin, and she ordereth it not to be
carried unto the Light because the *mark of the Kingdom of Light* is not
upon it; but she sealeth it with a special seal, and takes care that it
be put into a body of righteousness belonging to the Æons. (263) This
man will be good, so that he will obtain the seals of the mysteries of
the Light, and inherit the kingdom for ever and ever.

"But if he shall have sinned once, twice, or thrice, they shall reject
that soul, sending it back again into the world according to the *form
of the sins that* it may have committed; the form whereof I will declare
unto you hereafter. But verily, verily I say unto you, that even the
righteous man that hath committed no sin at all cannot be brought into
the Kingdom of Light, forasmuch the seal of the mysteries of that
kingdom is not found

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

upon him. Once for all, I say unto you, a soul cannot be brought into
the kingdom, if it be without the mysteries of the Kingdom of Light."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_212"></span>[355:\*](gar51.htm#fr_214) Protect him against
any suffering from.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Future Punishments](gar52)
