[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar65)  [Next](gar67.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Profession of Continence

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

A distinguishing feature of [Gnosticism](errata.htm#26.md) was the
profession of continence, at least as far as regards the propagation of
the human species, which was denounced to the "spiritual" as the doing
in the highest measure the will of the Demiurgus, and the perpetuating
the reign of Matter. The strange means they adopted to preserve their
vow inviolate may be learnt by referring to Clemens, where he quotes
their interpretation of the ancient fable about Saturn's devouring his
own children, or to Epiphanius when he describes the rites of the Ophite
eucharist. In no other doctrine of the Gnosis is the Buddhistic
influence more clearly traceable than in this, for any intrinsic merit
in similar asceticism (as practised purely for its own sake) was never
dreamed of by the Grecian philosophy, that offspring of reason in her
brightest and most uncorrupted development. This self same affectation
of purity contributed, even more than the proclaimed liberty of
conscience, to promote the spread of Gnostic tenets in every age of
their development, from Valentinus down to the grand apostle of
Languedoc, Nicetas of Constantinople. His Manichean bishops owed their
success in great measure to their black robes and professed abstinence
from, nay, more, pious horror of, all the pleasures of sense. For any
preaching is certain to obtain flocks of converts that shall make,
besides the promise of fully explaining things too high for man's
understanding, an outward and noisy profession of asceticism, and
proclaim the exaltation of the poor and the certain damnation of the
rich as a capital article of its creed. For the vulgar mind ever admires
what is difficult merely *because* it is difficult, however useless in
itself may be the result, or even pernicious to society in its
consequence, if logically carried out; and inasmuch as the abstinence
from sensual pleasures is to them the hardest of all tests, so much the
more is the ostentation of similar self-denial the most effectual method
for gaining ascendency over brutish intelligences, utterly incapable of
distinguishing the means from the end. Moreover, such doctrines find
powerful allies, ready existing for them, in the natural enviousness and
greed of common souls. The actually poor being ever the vast majority in
the land, such hearers joyfully receive the teaching that promises

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

the punishment of their betters in the next world, purely as a
counterbalance to their superior happiness in *this:* whilst as scarcely
any one considers himself as a truly *rich* man, but is constantly
climbing upwards towards a point that constantly recedes before him at
every successive stage of his ascent, even the wealthy convert is
enabled to hold the comfortable assurance that he himself continues in
the category of the poor, and that the anathema is only launched against
the one immediately above himself on the social ladder. In this feeling
lies the true secret of the amazing success of Manicheism, its rapid
absorption into itself of the earlier Gnostic forms, and above all, of
the facility with which it got possession of those very regions where
the Catholic Church was the most richly endowed; and where her clergy,
particularly the *Regular*, were attracting the greatest envy by their
wealth and ostentation.

The Templars began their course in actual poverty, leading a doubly hard
laborious life--that of monk and soldier combined. To express this
poverty the original device, or common seal, of the Order, bore two
knights mounted upon the same horse, the most striking exemplification
of humility that could be imagined in those days of chivalry. Becoming
ashamed of such a badge as they grew in power, they altered it into the
somewhat similar outline of a *Pegasus*--such at least is the old
tradition. The Winged Horse, however, may from the first have involved a
more spiritual meaning, allusive to the heavenward aspirations of those
initiated into the Order. And when their career was drawing to a close,
amidst the wealth and luxury that drew down upon them so cruel a
destruction, the brethren, no doubt through some ingenious node of
self-deception, still flattered themselves that their vows were as
faithfully observed as in the very springtide of their institution.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mithraicism](gar67.md)
