[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar60)  [Next](gar62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Idols of Baphomet

But it is now full time to return to Von Hammer's Baphometic Idols, and
his profound interpretations of their figures and inscriptions. It is
obvious at the first glance that the idea of most of them was suggested
by the Roman Jupiter Hercules, or Silenus (classical types, by the way,
entirely unknown to the art of the 12th and 13th centuries); their
heads, or rather their faces, are *triple*, eyes and ears are
plenteously distributed all over the body, which is moreover adorned
with planetary signs. Our author sets them down without hesitation as
the

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

actual figures of the "Old Man" adored by the Knights, described so
persistently by the witnesses against them as "une ydole avec *trois
faces*." <span id="fr_248"></span>[\*](#fn_246) The same statuettes are
for the most part girded with serpents, whose heads they hold in their
mouths, or in various distorted attitudes, amply sufficient grounds for
Von Hammer to connect them with the Ophite mysteries. But this very
attribute, together with the numerous eyes studding the body, would
rather seem to betray an acquaintance in the sculptor with similar
Hindoo creations--Indra, the eye-bespangled god of the firmament, for
example. Similar fancies had found their way even into the Cinque-cento
dress; Queen Elizabeth is painted in a gown thus embellished. Some,
again, of these figures carry the Egyptian Tau (*marculus*, Masonic
*Knocker*) conspicuously suspended from the neck. But, as already
hinted, the artistic composition of these well-executed monstrosities,
and the classical *motives* everywhere peeping out in their outlines,
seem altogether foreign to the quaint simplicity of early mediæval art.

The three "Baptismal Vases," or *Fonts*, on which he lays so much
stress, are nothing but little stone cups six inches high at the utmost,
covered with bas-reliefs, the phallic character whereof would seem to
point to their employment in the brewing of the Elixir of Life from its
most obvious ingredients. The second of these reliefs, explained as
denoting the "Baptism of Fire," does in truth recall to our recollection
the "Twelve Tortures" of the Mithraic rock-tablets; for it exhibits a
naked boy holding various instruments--the axe, lyre, bucket of
Anubis--whilst another, blowing a horn, feeds the fire in a furnace. Of
the third vase, however, the decoration savours strongly of Judaism,
representing the lifting up of the Brazen Serpent, though the female
reclining below appears rather to

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

caress the living reptile that encircles her, than to be alarmed at its
embrace; whilst the Candlestick of the Tabernacle, which the second
female is quenching from a vase at the bidding of Von Hammer's "Mete,"
personified as a regular Dutch Solomon, but with uplifted hands whence
drop off chains, all betray the same source of inspiration. Bacchic and
sidereal symbols, amongst which the phallus of course predominates, are
plentifully strewn over the field. But the Arabic legends in the
*modern* lettering, in this case, equally with the classical air of the
design in the second, suffice to convince the sober archæologist that
all three vases are nothing more than a portion of the paraphernalia of
those Rosicrucian or alchemical quacks, who fattened upon the credulity
of that arch-virtuoso, Rudolf II., ever since whose reign these "fonts"
have been treasured up in the Imperial Cabinet. A sufficient notion of
Von Hammer's mode of explaining these monuments is afforded by his
interpretation of the Arabic inscription upon the scroll displayed in
the hands of his "Mete" (according to him the Ophite *Sophia*), a female
yet bearded figure whose sex is ostentatiously revealed to view:
"Exaltatur Mete germinans, stirps nostra Ego et Septem fuere. Tu es unus
Renegantium. Reditus πρωκτὸς fit."

The Baphometic idol, that "Head of the Old Man," which makes so fearful
a figure in the Articles of Accusation, reminds one of the crowned
Osiris seen in front face, otherwise that terminal figure often to be
found cut on certain large green jaspers, which differ widely in style
from the true Gnostic talismans dating from the Lower Empire, but rather
have something about them bespeaking a mediæval and Arabian origin. For
example, Raspe <span id="fr_249"></span>[\*](#fn_247) gives a gem (No.
588) with "God the Father" crowned with five stars, and several
barbarous characters. Reverse, a square, a sphere, a pentagon of
Pythagoras, and several astrological and geometrical figures. Such a
talisman was lately found in the tomb of a *Knight Templar* which was
opened in Germany. And here it may be parenthetically observed, that our
Freemasons, in order to give a better colour to their pretence of
descent from the Templars, perpetually talk of them as the greatest
*builders* of their times,

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

and as the best patrons of the *subordinate* body of working masons.
Nothing can be more baseless than this assertion. The Order invested its
wealth in a far more profitable manner than in stone and mortar, and
really did nothing in the way of architecture, if compared with the
great monastic Orders of the same period. In proof of this,
notwithstanding its enormous possessions in England, no more than *four*
churches were built for "Temples."

Von Hammer, amongst the numerous examples he has so indefatigably
collected, presents many of a nature seemingly quite antagonistic to
Catholic art, and of truly Gnostic and Oriental character. Conspicuous
amongst them are the Three Vases, already described, in which he
discovers examples of the true "Sangraal," that mystic cup which shines
so brightly forth in the early romances of chivalry, the quest thereof
being the highest adventure proposed in the *Morte d’Arthur;* perfect
chastity being the indispensable condition for attaining unto the sight
of the miraculous vessel. And in truth the decoration of these mystic
fonts, used in the "Baptism of *Mete*" (the Gnostic Wisdom), whence
their title "Baphometic," furnishes a very plausible foundation for the
charges our author brings against their *supposed* inventors. But as for
the obscene sculptures taken from the Templar churches, which he refers
to the rites of the *Venus Mascula* celebrated therein, these are to be
found in equal abundance and shamelessness amongst the carvings of other
churches totally unconnected with the Order; for example, notably at
Arcueil, near Paris. Such sculptures either contain a moral grossly
expressed, according to the taste of their barbarous age, the censure of
some particular vice, or may be no more than the ebullition of the
brutal humour of the beery artist. But the gravest error into which this
too sagacious interpreter has fallen is the attempt to identify the
heresy of the Templar with the *Ophite*--that primitive form of the
Gnosis, swallowed up so many ages before the foundation of the Order, in
the overwhelming flood of Manicheism; a flood indeed that may, even at
its source, Syria, have carried away as many inquiring spirits amongst
the Knights, as it was simultaneously intoxicating in Italy and
Provence. A great absurdity, too, is

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

the building up his grand hypothesis upon the inexplicable "Mete," which
he finds out for himself in these unintelligible legends, seeing that
the Archaic Μῆτις was never used in Gnostic times as synonymous with
Σοφία, *Achamoth*, an identity nevertheless taken for granted in his
argument. And by the same rules does Von Hammer explain the Masons’
marks that he has collected, although they in no wise differ from others
found in mediæval buildings of every conceivable destination and origin.

Before quitting this part of the subject, a word must be said upon other
etymologies that have been proposed for the mighty word "Baphomet." One,
equally consistent with Von Hammer's views, and much more so with the
genius of the Byzantine language, would be βαφὴ Μητρός, "Baptism of the
Mother," that special designation of Barbelo in the Valentinian
theology. <span id="fr_250"></span>[\*](#fn_248) Such Greek technical
phrases *may* have been perpetuated in the Manichean ritual, wherever,
and however late, it was introduced into France.

Another explanation makes Baphomet the corruption of *Behemoth*, meaning
the golden calves Opis and Mnevis, whose bones were exhibited to their
worshippers, set out upon the lid of the coffin. So in later times were
the bones of Manes displayed for the adoration of his followers; and
those of the **G.M.** Hiram, <span id="fr_251"></span>[†](#fn_249)
according to report, at the initiation of a Templar. Hence came the
*Death's Head* and *Coffin*, that figure so conspicuously at the
Carbonari Conclaves, and the cognate engine of terror at our Masonic
receptions, when the candidate for admission "being brought to the G.P.
receives that sudden and awful impression on his mind that cannot fail
to have the desired effect: a part of the ceremony that ought to be well
attended to, as well for the *honour* and *safety* of the new-made
brother, as of the Fraternity at large." But to return to etymology.
Visconti is probably in the right after all, in considering "Baphometa"
no deeper mystery that the French corruption of the name "Mahomet," as
repeated by the ignorant witnesses for the prosecution.

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

But although the fanciful Orientalist has pushed this theory to an
unwarrantable and even ludicrous extent, yet proved facts, coupled with
probabilities, will induce the unprejudiced inquirer to acquiesce in the
conclusions of the judicious Raspe. "The Gnosis of Basilides was an
*occult science* which, according to his tenets, should be known only
and communicated to one in thousands, and to two in ten thousands, and
that if the Knights Templars were guilty of any offence at the time of
their extermination, it was that of having adopted the doctrines of the
Gnostics, and consequently of having renounced the established doctrine
of the Church on the human nature of Christ, and on the Trinity: in the
place of which they, with the Gnostics, professed one Supreme Being,
Father and Creator of all the Powers which, emanating from him, have
created and do govern this world. At their reception or initiation into
the *highest degree* of the Order they received βαφὴ μήτους, or
μήτιος--that is to say, the *Baptism* or *Tincture* of *Wisdom;* they
were presented with a sign or *symbol* of their baptism, which was the
Pentagon of Pythagoras; and they worshipped a kind of *image* or *idol*;
that like the Abraxas or this gem was the figure of a Bearded Old Man,
or rather the representation of the only Supreme Being that they
admitted and professed." The gem referred to is a jasper (Townley)
presenting: "Abraxas, the Sun, or God-Father, or Demiurgus according to
the Gnostics and necromancers. This head is crowned, the beard long, the
hands crossed upon the breast: for the rest, he is formed as a Term, or
a mummy. In the field are eight stars, probably an allusion to the eight
Powers, or heavens, that are subordinate to them, according to
Epiphanius. In the field are two Hebrew letters, ‏ת ה‎.

"Reverse. The same God the Father, or Abraxas, in the same attitude,
standing above four angels placed upon a sphere and receiving his
emanations; in the field are three, on the sphere are five stars. There
are besides in the field two Hebrew letters, three lines of inscription,
&c."

Figures of unquestionably mediæval workmanship do, however, exist, which
would have stood Von Hammer (had he known of them) in far better stead
than the easily recognisable legacies

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

of Rudolf II. and his Rosicrucian quacks. Such is the brass statuette
published by Caylus (Rec. d’antiq. v. Pl., 32) representing a man in
tight jerkin and hose (as worn under armour), but head covered with a
jester's horned hood. Upon his belly is emblazoned a blazing sun; he is
girt with the broad knightly belt, engraved all round with planetary
signs, and regular Masons’ Marks; which also run round the edge of the
tripod upon which he stands. The figure, about five and a half inches
high, extends both hands with the palms uppermost, and these are pierced
with holes for the reception of the supports of some vessel, probably a
magician's lamp. Amongst other devices engraved on the trunk, most
conspicuous are the eagle, serpent, and crucible supporting a retort.
Caylus places his drawing of it amongst his Egyptian monuments, but
reasonably enough distrusting such an origin for the inscriptions,
suggests, with no better reason, that the work belongs to Persia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_246"></span>[403:\*](gar61.htm#fr_248) "Car tantôt après
ils alloient adorer une *Idole*, et pour certain icelle idole était une
vielle peau, ainsi comme toute embaumée, et comme toile polie; et
illecques certès le Templier mettoit sa tres vile foy et croyance; et en
lui tres fermement croyoient. Et en icelle avoit ès fosses des yeux
escarboncles reluisants comme clarté du ciel; et pour certain toute leur
esperance étoit en icelle, et étoit leur Dieu souverain, et mêmement se
affioit en lui de bon coeur" (Art. 3. Vie de Philippe le Bel, chap. 66.
'Chronique de S. Denys').

<span id="fn_247"></span>[404:\*](gar61.htm#fr_249) 'Descriptive
Catalogue of Engraved Gems.'

<span id="fn_248"></span>[406:\*](gar61.htm#fr_250) Which made her the
*heavenly* mother of the Saviour.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[406:†](gar61.htm#fr_251) Being set upon a
coffin containing a corpse, elevated upon a catafalque of five steps
(Clarkson).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Manicheism](gar62)
