[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar61)  [Next](gar63.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Manicheism

*Manicheism* has been so repeatedly referred to in the foregoing pages,
as to make it necessary to give a brief explanation of the way, in which
that strange creed may possibly have affected the religion of the
Templars. And here, all is either assertion of enemies, or modern
theory; hardly any monuments remaining that can be with certitude
attributed to the Manicheans, though so numerous in their time, for they
had drawn within their own circle every older form of Gnosticism in the
interval between Constantine and Justinian. This deficiency is partly
due to the fast increasing barbarism of those ages, which produced
nothing in the way of art, however degraded. Their sole religious
monuments were sacred books, prayers, spells, committed to perishable
materials, parchment, papyrus, diligently sought out and destroyed by
every persecutor. The extirpation of Gnosticism was vigorously
prosecuted by the later emperors of the West, and by those of the East,
Arian equally with Catholic. In this pious career the first step was
made by Magnus Maximus, the British usurper under Gratian, by putting to
death Priscillian, bishop of Avila, and his chief adherents, in spite of
the very *unsaintly* remonstrances of the good Martin of Tours. The
usurper's punisher, Theodosius, also made Manicheism (Priscillian's
crime) a capital offence, his

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

edict being the first *statutable* infraction of the old Roman principle
of universal religious toleration. In the reign of his son, Epiphanius
boasts of having brought about the exile of seventy women, some noble,
through whose seductions he had himself at one time been drawn into
joining the Marcosians. Such a vaunt leads to the suspicion that the
renegade had saved himself by turning evidence against his fellow
sectarians at the opening of the persecution. Or again, this absence of
Manichean relics may be accounted for by the rigid character of the
creed itself, the offspring of Magism, therefore regarding all imagery
as idolatrous and sinful, a tenet latterly carried out to the fullest
extent by the iconoclastic Albigenses.

To come now to the *second* diffusion of Manicheism over Europe. In the
middle of the seventh century, under Constans II., Constantinus
Sylvanus, a native of Samosata, broached that last and most
far-spreading heresy, the *Paulician*. The name arose from his
combination of the doctrine of St. Paul with that of Zoroaster, but he
had intermingled a larger proportion of the former ingredient than his
precursor Manes had thought fit to do in his original theosophy. The new
teacher easily united into one church the remnants of the old Gnostics,
especially the Manicheans of Armenia, and the still unconverted
Zoroastrians of Pontus and Cappadocia. Incessantly persecuted by the
Byzantine powers, their chief Carbeas founded a new capital for his
sect, the impregnable Tephrice, in the mountains near Trebizond; but
which was ultimately destroyed by Basil the Macedonian about the year
A.D. 880. But in the middle of the preceding century, the irreligious
Constantine Copronymus had transplanted a large colony of these Armenian
Paulicians into the depopulated Thrace, where their numbers were largely
augmented in the tenth century by a fresh reinforcement drawn from the
Chalybian Hills and planted in the valleys of Mount Haemus by John
Zimisces. Here their missionaries converted the neighbouring pagans, the
Bulgarians, whence the sect derived a new and more odious appellation,
one which in course of time from denoting heresy in religion was fixed
to the branding of heresy in love. Warlike and fearless of death, we
find these Paulicians serving in

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

the Byzantine armies, notably in those of Alexius Comnenus in his wars
with the Normans of Sicily. From this island as a focus they diffused
their doctrines over Italy, they gained numerous converts even at Rome
and Milan, but spread with still more astonishing rapidity through the
South of France. Persons even whose interests were diametrically opposed
to the progress of the sect, joined it with inexplicable fervour; twelve
canons of the Cathedral of Orléans were burnt alive at one time for
embracing Paulicianism. These few facts, selected from the wide range of
their history, will suffice to illustrate the diffusion of Manichean
notions during the period when the Templars were at the height of their
prosperity and power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Assassins](gar63.md)
