[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar66)  [Next](gar68.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Mithraicism

The strange and obscene <span id="fr_257"></span>[\*](#fn_255.md)
ceremonies observed on the admission of neophytes into the various
secret societies that

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

flourished under the Lower Empire and in the Middle Ages are all of them
no more than faint traditions of the penances, or "Twelve Tortures" that
purchased admission into the Cave of Mithras. How widely diffused were
these *Mithraici*, especially in the West, is attested by the
innumerable tablets, altars, and inscriptions still remaining in
Germany, France, and this country. The religion of Mithras was so
readily embraced and flourished so extensively amongst all the Celtic
races, in consequence of its analogy to the previously dominant
Druidical religion.

This affinity had struck with astonishment that sagacious observer, the
elder Pliny, who must have had ample opportunity for forming a correct
judgment during his protracted military service upon the Rhine. He
declares (Nat. Hist. xxx. 4): "Gallias utique possedit (*Magica*) et
quidem ad nostram memoriam; namque Tiberii Cæsaris principatus sustulit
Druidas eorum et hoc genus vatum medicorumque per senatus consultum.
Quid ego hæc commemorem in arte Oceanum quoque transgressa, et ad Naturæ
inane pervecta? *Britannia* hodieque celebrat, tantis ceremonies ut
*dedisse Persis* videri possit; adeo ista toto mundo consensere quamquam
discordi et sibi ignoto. Nee satis æstumari [potest](errata.htm#27.md)
quantum Romanis debeatur, qui sustulere monstra in quibus hominem
occidere religiosissimum erat, *mandi* verò etiam saluberrimum." A
hundred years before, Cæsar (Bell. Gall. vi. 13) had stated: "Disciplina
Druidica in Britannia *reperta* atque inde in Galliam translata esse
æstimatur, et nunc qui diligentius eam rem cognoscere volunt plerumque
eò discendi causa proficiscuntur." The subjects of study in the
Druidical school were literally those of the Magian Gnosis, "Multa
præterea de sideribus eorumque motu, de mundi ac terrarum magnitudine,
de rerum natura, de *deorum immortalium vi ac potestate* disputant." For
Pliny by his "Magica" understands the rites instituted by Zoroaster, and
first promulgated by Osthanes to the outer world, this Osthanes having
been "military chaplain" to Xerxes during his expedition into Greece.
And this judgment of the Romans is fully borne out by native evidence,
for Druidism (such as it appeared in its final struggle with
Christianity during the short-lived independence of Britain after the
withdrawal

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

of the legions) is a religion agreeing most wonderfully in many
important points with the doctrine of Zoroaster. Thus, it expressly
teaches the eternal existence and antagonism of the Two Principles, the
final triumph of Good, and the Renovation of all things. A most valuable
fragment of early Druidical teaching Plutarch has preserved to us in his
strange essay "On the Face in the Moon," by the title of the "Doctrine
of the Sons of Saturn," which is full of Gnostic ideas; those of Manes
for instance, and even of Gnostic expressions.

Now Manes himself started as a Zoroastrian priest, and framed his new
creed (according to Epiphanius) by engrafting upon the original the
transcendental Buddhistic notions picked up by his true master,
Scythicus, during his travels in India. Is there not then a possibility
that some sparks of the ancient Mithraic doctrine may have lingered
unnoticed in the West <span id="fr_258"></span>[\*](#fn_256.md) until made
to blaze up anew by the congenial breath of the Paulician Apostles?
Indeed, one may even now discern the awful antique ceremonial as
parodied to the minutest particular in the procedure of the modern
convivial *hetæria;* for Jerome's *Miles*, the lowest grade in the Cave
of Mithras, the Templars’ "watchman placed on the roof of the house or
church wherein the Chapter is held" (Art. 101), have their exact
representative in the armed man, the "Tiler," lowest official, who
stands sentinel at the door of the Freemasons’ secret conclave.

The Druidical temple, always circular in ground-plan, whether formed out
of native rocks, or built with Gallo-Roman masonry as in its latest
example at Lantef in Bretagne (figured by Caylus, vi. pl. 124),
consisting of two concentric enclosures pierced with numerous arches,
bears in this point a remarkable analogy to all other structures
dedicated to the element of fire. Such is the plan of the temple of
Moloch (uncovered at Carthage by Davis), the Roman Vesta's temple, the
Guebre fire temples at Balkh, to this day circular towers, and the great
Sassanian temple at Gazacas destroyed by Heraclius in his

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

invasion. The spherical edifice within the palace containing the
abominable idol of Chosroes, the image of himself, enthroned as in
heaven, and all round him the sun, moon, and stars, which the
superstitious king worshipped as gods: angels also had he placed
standing about him like sceptre-bearers. Moreover, this enemy of God had
so contrived by means of certain mechanism that drops of water should
fall from the ceiling to imitate rain, and that sounds of thunder should
reverberate therefrom. Our Verulamium also boasted a Mithraic temple
commensurate to the importance of the place; until destroyed by the
superstitious barbarian, Ealdred, eighth Abbot of St. Albans, for to no
other purpose could have served "the very deep grotto, covered with an
unbroken hill of earth, and approached by a subterraneous passage," the
ruins of which were yet visible when Matthew Paris wrote. "*Specus*
quoque profundissimum monte continuo circumseptum, cum *spelunca*
subterranea quam quondam Draco ingens fecerat et inhabitavit, in loco
qui *Wurmenhert* dicitur, in quantum potuit explanavit, vestigia tamen
æterna habitationis serpentinae derelinquens." <span
id="fr_259"></span>[\*](#fn_257.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_255"></span>[420:\*](gar67.htm#fr_257.md) "*Art*. 26. Item,
quod in receptione Fratrum hujus Ordinis, vel circa, interdum recipiens
et receptus aliquando se deosculabantur in ore, vel in umbilico seu in
ventre nudo, vel in ano seu in spina dorsi."

"*Art*. 29. Item, aliquando in virga virili."

"*Art*. 30. Item, quod in receptione sua illa faciebant juxta eos quos
recipiebant quod Ordinem non exierint."

<span id="fn_256"></span>[422:\*](gar67.htm#fr_258.md) Similarly there is
every reason to believe that the mediæval Witches' *Sabbat* preserved
uninterrupted the ceremonial of the ancient rural *orgia*, the only
change being in the name of the presiding deity. Michelet is of this
opinion in describing the immense *Sabbats* of the 17th century.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[423:\*](gar67.htm#fr_259.md) *Gesta Abbatum S.
Albani*, ed. H. T. Riley, vol. i., page 25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Transmission of Gnostic Symbols](gar68.md)
