[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar77)  [Next](gar79.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_f"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
F](tn/pl_f.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_f.jpg.md)  
Plate F  
</span>

### PLATE F.

### ANCIENT EGYPTIAN TYPES ADAPTED TO GNOSTIC IDEAS.

It is in this class that the influence of Judaism is more strongly
marked than in any other family of these monuments. These gems were
designed as amulets against the power of demons, either considered
specially, or as manifested in the diseases of which they were the final
cause to mankind. But before proceeding further, it will tend much to
the elucidation of this curious subject briefly to sketch the *orthodox*
Jewish doctrine upon this point. There is no such thing in existence as
a spirit *naturally* evil, inasmuch as God, being all goodness, was
absolutely incapable of creating evil. Satan is himself an angel, like
the others, and has his own place in the Court of Heaven; but he is
deputed to test, by temptation, the strength of Man's virtue, since
without a *struggle* there can be no crown. The Babylonian Rabbi,
Philemon, <span id="fr_264"></span>[\*](#fn_262.md) having demonstrated
this grand truth to the satisfaction of his numerous school, was
surprised the next day by a visit from this *Ange mal entendu*, in a
bodily shape, who tendered him public thanks <span
id="fr_265"></span>[†](#fn_263.md) for the pains he had taken to set his
character in a true light. But, unfortunately, the Demiurgus had
commenced his work by creating so vast a number of spirits, that the
Sabbath-even came upon him before he had made bodies enough for half of
them. These poor houseless beings are not naturally malignant, but are
jealous of their more fortunate brethren, for the same reason that "the
man who has no coat to his back hates the man that has." They therefore
roam up and down the world, ever striving to force their way into bodies
already occupied, where their struggles with the rightful owner give
birth to all the maladies that flesh is heir to. It is remarkable that
the latter belief is universal among primitive races, however widely
separated--the Samoiedes, the Hindoos, the Red Indians. Something
similar, too, may be found in Plutarch's curious disquisitions on the
nature of demons, contained in his two Treatises upon Oracles.

It is the fashion of our days to believe that the Jews borrowed all
their metaphysical theories from the Platonists of Alexandria; but
whoever has gone deeply into the subject sees good reason to suspect
that both Jews and Greeks had gone, independently of each other, to a
much more ancient source for such traditions.

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

1\. The Agathodæmon Serpent, mounted upon a pair of human legs. A unique
variety of the class--the same idea being more usually embodied in a
human figure with head and neck of a serpent; or in a serpent with the
head of Serapis. The long invocation on the field evidently begins with
the name of "Abraxas."

2\. The jackal-headed Anubis, an *Egyptian* sceptre in each hand,
advancing between the Sun and the Moon, the regular emblems of Eternity.
A remarkable specimen of religious syncretism, for the power of the
Pharaonic god is doubled by adding, on the reverse, the name of Michael,
guardian-angel of the Jewish race, between four stars, which certainly
stand for the letters of the Great *Tetragrammaton*.

3\. Mummy, enveloped in the folds of the guardian Agathodæmon. The
detached letters around (often so found in these gems) seem to cloak the
word "Initia." If so, this may have been a token (*symbolum*) given to
the neophyte upon his initiation into certain mysteries: a custom to
which St. John alludes, mentioning the "white stone" with the New Name
graven thereon, to be given to him that overcometh.

4\. A Power equipped with double arms and wings, bearing sceptres to
mark his dignity, and carrying on his head the sacramental Table. The
tree-trunk below, with its *Five* lopped-off branches, had doubtless a
deep mystic meaning, probably the *degree* of the person who carried the
talisman. Of the most barbarous execution, but valuable for the name
"Baincho" on the reverse: the astral Power, according to the
"Pistis-Sophia," resident in the planet Mercury.

5\. Anubis, in one hand the sceptre, in the other the lustral vase,
standing above the open left hand, which Apuleius informs us was the
type of *Justice*. At his side is the goddess of Truth, her head formed
out of a bunch of ostrich-feathers: under her feet the udder-shaped
vessel carried in the Isiac procession. One deity is invoked by "Thou
art our Father!" the other as "Sun of the Universe!" The letters in the
middle seem to make up the owner's name, "Pia . . ."

6\. Anubis, advancing with the sceptre and *situla*: the legend on the
reverse is unexplained.

7\. A talisman, certainly meant to be of mighty efficacy, for it
combines the influences of Anubis, Cnuphis, and Horus with that of the
God of the Jews, rudely cut upon the four sides of a cube of steaschist.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_262"></span>[439:\*](gar78.htm#fr_264.md) Or "Polemo," as the
Hebrew may equally well be read.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[439:†](gar78.htm#fr_265.md) "Kissed his knees" is
the expression in the Talmud.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate G. Egyptian Types (continued)](gar79.md)
