[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar78)  [Next](gar80.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_g"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
G](tn/pl_g.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_g.jpg.md)  
Plate G  
</span>

### PLATE G.

### EGYPTIAN TYPES (*continued*).

1\. In this composition an element from a little-used source is
introduced. The Grecian Apollo, distinguished by his proper attribute,
the bay-branch, is seen caressing the Ibis, sacred to Thoth, scribe of
the gods. The latter deity being identified with Hermes, his bird
carries the caduceus; it also bears upon its head the corn-measure,
typical of abundance.

2\. The Ass-headed Typhon, or the Principle of Evil, with quadruple

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

wings and one foot hoofed, carries by the tail two monstrous scorpions:
over his head a scarabæus flying. Of no esoteric meaning, but simply an
amulet against the bite of the reptile, made after the rule in such
cases prescribed. The most convincing proof of the practice is the early
Greek gem published by Gen. Cesnola ('Cyprus.' pl. xl. 17), representing
two asps, with the explanation **ΕΧΚ**; and to this day the Arabs always
draw upon their amulets the figure of the thing against which it ought
to guard the wearer.

3\. A *Dual* Power, who combines the jackal's head of Anubis with the
ass's head of Typhon, whence one of his feet is hoofed, brandishes in
his four hands swords and torches, wherewith to scare away the evil
spirits. The legend on the reverse, **ΠΕΡΑΑΜΒΑ VΒΑΚΑ ΚΞΙΚ Λ**, has not
been read, but contains the Coptic name of Anubis.

4\. The Sun-god, Phre, with radiated head, *adoring* the seated Thoth,
ibis-headed, and using the invocation (cut on the reverse) "Thou art our
Father!" Inasmuch as the Neo-Platonists made Hermes to be the Power that
regulates the motion of the heavens (for which reason Julian addressed
his morning prayer to *him*), there is evident reason why the god of Day
should thus do [homage](errata.htm#31.md) to Thoth as his superior and
director.

5\. A very popular *Gryllus*, its components being the emblems of the
elements--the *Bird* standing for air; the *Lion* for Fire; the *Ram's
head* for Earth, and the *Bacchic* mark for water. This Pagan talisman
has been Gnosticised by Thoth's ibis, with the Holy Names, "Abraxas" and
"Iao;" but the work on both sides is evidently from the same hand, and
in the style of the fourth century. The material is a rarely-used
stone--obsidian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate H. Egyptian Types (continued)](gar80.md)
