[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar85)  [Next](gar87) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_o"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
O](tn/pl_o.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_o.jpg)  
Plate O  
</span>

### PLATE O.

### HINDOO SYMBOLS AND CASTE-MARKS.

I. *No*. 1. Type of Mahadeva or Siva. Fire personified.  
  *No*. 2. Type of Vishnu: Water.  
  *No*. 3. The *Sherkun*: symbol of the union of the two Elements.  
No. 4. The five-pointed figure representing the, conjunction of Brahma
(*Creator*) with Siva (*Destroyer*) becomes the famous "Solomon's Seal,"
the badge of the Jewish nation, and therefore engraved upon their tombs
in the Roman Catacombs.

The equilateral Triangle, *Trikun*, symbolises Triune Co-equality. A
Point (mathematical) the self-existing Deity. The circle expresses
Brahma, or Eternity. The Triangle inscribed in the Circle, Trinity in
Unity. The Circle within the Triangle, Unity in Trinity.

The worshippers of a *Sacti* (Female Power) mark their sacred jars with
the very expressive symbol, *No*. 5; those of Vishnu with *No*. 6; and
those of Siva with *No*. 8, which signifies the copulation of Siva with
Durga.

Amongst the signatures of the ancient *Jaina* (Buddhist) kings, occur
the symbols 8 and 9; and also the so-called "Maeander," that frequent
decoration of Greek Coins.

The six following symbols are various *Caste-marks*, which religious
Hindoos put upon their foreheads every morning, with ashes of cowdung,
or coloured earths, and powdered sandalwood, producing a great variety
in them by the employment of different colours. Those figured here
designate the followers of Vishnu.

II\. These marks distinguish the votaries of Siva and his wife,
[Parvati](errata.htm#33). The most obvious symbol of the Passive
Principle of Nature, the mystic *Yoni*, (and with which Sesostris
branded the nations that had submitted to his arms without resistance)
is decorously repressed in the general form of these marks, the two
Deities being those that preside over propagation and change which the
vulgar call by the name of *Death*.

III\. Other caste-marks, denoting minor differences in the sects that
bear them: they are given here because they include in their number some
that appear to have been the originals of certain Mediæval *siglæ*.

IV\. Characters cut upon the rock in the sandstone quarries of Silsilis

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

in Upper Egypt. That they are *alphabetical* may be inferred from the
fact of their accompanying the figures of various animals; they are of
great interest to us, being identical with those so often found upon our
talisman.

V. Palmyrene characters from a finely-cut inscription now in the Louvre.

VI\. *Siglæ*, exactly of the nature of Masons’ Marks, and of very
ancient date, for they are found on the pottery deposited in the Gallic
tombs around Bologna. Some are stamped in the clay *before* baking, and
therefore must have indicated the maker's name; but the greater number
have been scratched on the surface at some later time, probably when
placed in the sepulchre, to carry down to posterity the memory of the
deceased. Those here given are selected from the list figured by the
Conte Gozzalini in his very instructive memoir 'Gli Scavi presso
Bologna,' 1877.

VII\. Masons’ Marks, cut on the ashlar of the old Palace of Sadilat,
near Ispahan, whence they were copied by Ouseley, in the belief that
they were inscriptions in some unknown tongue.

VIII\. Masons’ Marks from the "Drawing-room" of Raglan Castle, an
Elizabethan building. They will suffice for specimens of the notation,
all the mediæval, early or late, being of the same nature, though
infinitely varied in minor details. Many lists of these have been
published from time to time, the most recent, of the Marks in Duffield
Church, a Norman building, published in the Journal of the Derbyshire
Arch. Soc., ix. p. 168.

IX\. Every genuine Free Mason (*not* Rosicrucian *recoctus* Freemason)
after serving his apprenticeship, and being made "free and accepted" of
the Craft, receives his own "Mark," which he must thenceforth cut upon
every stone that he dresses, in order to identify his own work when
payday comes. The essential principle in the Mark is that it must have
an *odd* number of terminations. The Marks here set down were in use
with the masons employed in the construction of the South Wales Railway.
The most convincing proof of the emptiness of the lofty pretensions of
our so-called Freemasons, is that they actually are entirely ignorant
that this most ancient rule of the Craft, to which they pretend to
belong, is still regularly followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliographical Appendix](gar87)
