[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar83)  [Next](gar85) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_m"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
M](tn/pl_m.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_m.jpg)  
Plate M  
</span>

### PLATE M.

### GENERAL TALISMANS.

1\. Zodiacal Monster, compounded of Scorpio and Capricornus, carrying a
legionary standard. Bearing in mind that the former *Sign* is under the
patronage of Mars, according to Manilius--"Pugnax Mavorti Scorpius
haeret"--and the latter a badge of the second Augustan Legion, we may

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

reasonably suppose this gem to have been engraved for the benefit of
some member of that corps. Sard. (New York Museum.)

2\. Three lines of the usual Gnostic *siglae*, in a cartouche formed by
a coiled serpent, precisely in the same way that the Brahmins still
write the Great Name **AUM**--a sure evidence of the meaning of these
mystic characters. Sard., set in an iron ring, of which only fragments
remain.

3\. Fortuna, with rudder and horn of plenty, standing. The word
*Feliciter*, in scattered letters, the usual acclamation of the crowd,
and the *palm-branch* prove this gem a present to some favourite
*auriga*. Its purport is the same as that of the monogram so often found
enclosed in the field of the Antoniate medal, also accompanied with a
palm, which has at last been made out to contain the elements of *Palma
Feliciter!* 

4\. Masks of Silenus and of Bacchus, combined into the outline of an
elephant's head, bearing a caduceus in his trunk. The typical beast of
*India* is an allusion to the *Indian* origin of the god; and the
conceit was a favourite with the Romans, to judge from the number of
such compositions that they have bequeathed us. Red jasper. (New York.)

5\. Astrological *Trine*, or figure produced by dividing the circle of
the Zodiac into equilateral triangles. Here, Virgo (Astræa) at the apex
of a triangle, is borne up by Taurus and Capricorn. This was the
horoscope of Pescennius Niger, who placed it on the reverse of a coin,
on account of its appropriateness to his surname of *Justus*, of which
virtue Astræa was the emblem.

6\. The Gorgon's Head: the type explains itself by the legend, "I
protect Rhoromandares"--some Greco-Persian, to judge from his Oriental
name. The younger Lucian tells us in his 'Philopatries' that the Gorgon
was placed upon the shields of the Heroes as being "a thing that wards
off all dangers." Red jasper. (New York.)

7\. Mars, grounding arms, in the costume of a soldier of the times of
Constantine. The legend declares the virtue of the *sigil*: "Mars hath
cut off the disease of the liver." But a most interesting point in the
amulet has been discovered by Prof. Stephens, viz., that the four
characters behind the head of Mars are the Runes for **ABLE**, *Help*.
Under Constantine and his sons, the Franks (as Ammian observes) were
paramount in the army. It is easy to conceive how some officer of that
nation has thought to augment the great virtue of this important
talisman by the addition of one of his national spells. Engraved in a
slight manner, upon hæmatite.

8\. Naked Warrior, upon a prancing steed, brandishing a *mace*, that
specially Oriental weapon; legend, "The Seal of God." Curious for the
material--a turquoise; to the present day the Persians firmly believe in
the protective virtue of this gem, to which they give the name of
*Phiruz*--"The Victor."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate N. General Talismans (continued)](gar85)
