[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gar79)  [Next](gar81) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002BA5FIO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Gnostics and Their Remains*, by Charles William King, \[1887\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="img_pl_h"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
H](tn/pl_h.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl_h.jpg)  
Plate H  
</span>

### PLATE H.

### EGYPTIAN TYPES (*continued*).

1\. Tortoise lying upon the lotus, which springs out of the back of a
crocodile. The unexplained legend of the reverse occurs again in
connection with an analogous design--a vulture-headed winged Genius,
seated on the back of a double-headed crocodile, published by Walsh (No.
13) in his 'Coins, Gems, &c., illustrating the Progress of
Christianity.'

2\. The Ark of the Covenant, apparently copied from the "Altar of
Lyons," that so common device of the brass coins of Tiberius. The
engraver of this late Roman gem had not studied the minute description
of the Ark, given in the Law. There is a Rabbinical tradition (although
savouring too much of Alexandrian philosophy to demand any credit) that
the Cherubim placed over it were represented as male and female, in the
act of copulation, in order to express the grand doctrine of the essence
of *Form* and *Matter*, the two principles of all things. When the
Chaldeans broke into the Sanctuary, and beheld this most astounding
emblem, they naturally enough exclaimed "Is this your God, of whom you
boast, that He is such a lover of purity!"

On the side is a blundered attempt at the mystic word, *Tetragrammaton*,

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

*i.e.* the Name of Four Letters,' *viz*.--*Iod*, *He*, *Vau*, *He*. For
the Names of God, according to the Kabbala, are made up respectively, of
*Four*, *Forty-two*, and *Seventy-four* letters. The second explains the
motive for the number of sacrifices offered up by Balaam in his
fruitless attempt to propitiate the God of the Hebrews; and perhaps may
have induced the composers of the Genealogy of Jesus (though working
independently of each other) to bring out the same mystic number by
curtailing the second series of three of its kings.

3\. A doubly-winged and doubly-armed Power, holding four Egyptian
sceptres, and standing on a coiled serpent, enclosing a Holy Name. The
legend is a transliteration of the Hebrew for "Light of Lights." Another
form of such transliteration is given by Caylus ('Recueil d’Antiquités,'
vi. Pl. 21), σρωοριονσ, reading from the end backwards; cut for reverse
to a coiled serpent enclosing various *sigla*.

4\. Thoth's baboon, bearing on his head the Solar disk, in the attitude
of adoration. The reverse bears **ΗΝΑ-ΜΕΡΩ**, sometimes written
**ΜΑΠΩ-ΗΝΙ**, "Enlighten my eyes!" whence we may suspect this very
common type to be no more than an amulet against ophthalmia.

5\. This gem is given here as a good specimen of a type of which great
numbers are to be met with, although its whole conception, and the vague
symbols in the field--the Solomon's Seal, celestial globe, etc.,
entirely out of the antique taste, refer its creation to the fancy of
mediæval quacks and astrologers. Was the figure suggested by the idol
"in the shape of an *Old Man*," with whose worship the Templars were so
persistently charged? The present example, belonging as it does to the
original Praun Cabinet, must have been executed before the beginning of
the seventeenth century.

6\. The outline of the human figure filled up with "Holy Names," and
thereby representing *Adam Kadmon*, "the Primitive Man" of the Kabala.
The finest example of this curious design, and in which the letters are
the most clearly defined, is the one Caylus gives (l.c. pl. 22), which
has been cut by a later hand on the reverse of a Lion *passant*, in the
Persian style.

7\. The Baboon adoring a *Triangle*, Egyptian symbol of the Moon,
elevated upon a column bearing an inscription. The fact that the
Pythagoreans (who avowedly got their whole system from Egypt) symbolised
Athene by the triangle, lends [strength](errata.htm#32) to the idea that
the Attic goddess was in her origin merely the expression of the Lunar
Power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plate J. Subjects Connected with the Mithraic Mysteries](gar81)
