[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Utopia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sou12)  [Next](sou14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127907/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Story of Utopias*, by Lewis Mumford, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span> <span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

### CHAPTER TEN

How the Country House and Coketown became the utopias of the Modern Age;
and how they made the world over in their image.

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

### CHAPTER TEN

#### 1

Now that we have ransacked the literature of ideal commonwealths for
examples of the utopian vision and the utopian method, there remains
another class of utopias which has still to be reckoned with, in order
to make our tally complete.

All the utopias that we have dealt with so far have been filtered
through an individual mind, and whereas, like any other piece of
literature, they grew out of a certain age and tradition of thought, it
is dangerous to overrate their importance either as mirrors of the
existing order or as projectors of a new order. While again and again
the dream of a utopian in one age has become the reality of the next, as
O’Shaughnessy sings in his famous verses, the exact connection between
the two can only be guessed at, and rarely, I suppose, can it be traced.
It would be a little foolish to attempt to prove that the inventor of
the modern incubator was a student of Sir Thomas More.

Up to the present the idola which have exercised the most considerable
influence upon the actual life of the community are such as have been
partly expressed in hundred works and never perhaps fully expressed in
one. In order to distinguish these idola from those that have occupied
us till now, we should perhaps call them collective utopias or social
myths. There is a considerable literature that relates to these myths

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

in French, one of the best known works being M. George Sorel's
Reflections on Violence; and in practice it is sometimes rather hard to
tell where the Utopia leaves off and the social myth begins.

The history of mankind's social myths has still in the main to be
written. There is a partial attempt at this over a limited period in Mr.
Henry Osborn Taylor's The Mediæval Mind; but this is only a beginning,
and other ages are almost untouched. The type of myth that concerns us
here is not the pure action myth which M. Sorel has analyzed; we are
rather interested in those myths which are, as it were, the ideal
content of the existing order of things, myths which, by being
consciously formulated and worked out in thought, tend to perpetuate and
perfect that order. This type of social myth approaches very closely to
the classic utopia, and we could divide it, similarly, into myths of
escape and myths of reconstruction. Thus the myth of political freedom,
for example, as formulated by the writers of the American revolution,
frequently serves as an excellent refuge for disturbed consciences when
the Department of Justice or the Immigration Bureau has been a little
too assiduous in its harassment of political agitators.

Unfortunately, it has become a habit to look upon our idola as
particularly fine and exalted, and as representing the better side of
human nature. As a matter of fact, the myths which are created in a
community under religious, political, or economic influences cannot be
characterized as either good or bad: their nature is defined by their
capacity to help men to react creatively upon their environment and to
develop a humane life. We have still to recognize that a belief in these
idola

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

is not by itself a creditable attitude. Even quite base and stupid
people are frequently governed by ideals; indeed, it is the ideals that
are in many cases responsible for their baseness and stupidity. Neither
is the habit of responding to idola any evidence of rational thought.
People respond to "ideas"—that is, to word-patterns—as they respond to
the stimulus of light or heat, because they are human beings and not
because they are philosophers, and they respond to projections, to
idola, for the same reason, and not because they are saints. Our myths
may be the outcome of rational thought and practice or not; but the
response to these myths is not perhaps more than ten times in a hundred
the result of following the processes of reason from beginning to end.

We must think of our idola as a sort of diffused environment or
atmosphere, which differs in "chemical content" and in extension with
each individual. Some of these idola have so uniformly taken possession
of men's minds in a particular age that they are as much a part of the
environment a baby is born into as the furniture of his house. The
sociologists who follow Emile Durkheim have called a certain part of
these idola collective representations but they are wrong, I believe,
when they limit these "representations" to savage or ignorant groups for
they are an important part of every civilized person's luggage. Parallel
with The Story of Mankind and with The Story of Utopias, which I have
just told, it would be amusing to write The story of Mankind's Myths.
This work, however, would require the scholarship and industry of
another Leibniz, and all that I wish to do here is to put together the
chief social myths that have played a part in Western

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Europe and America
during the modern period, to contrast these idola with the utopias of
the past and the partial remedies for the present, and to suggest the
bearing of all this upon any new departures we may be ready to make.

In selecting these idola—The Country House, Coketown, the Megalopolis—I
have been forced to gauge their strength and test their quality very
largely by their actual results in the workaday world, and it is a
little hard to purify them from the various institutions, old and new,
in which they are mixt. Yet with all this taint of actuality, these
idola are scarcely as credible as the Republic and it will help matters
a little to realize that we are still within the province of utopia, and
may exercise all the utopian privileges.

#### 2

To understand the utopia of the Country House we must jump back a few
centuries in history.

Anyone who has ranged through the European castles that were built
before the fourteenth century will realize that they were no more built
for comfort than is a modern battleship. They were essentially garrisons
of armed men whose main occupation was theft, violence, and murder; and
every feature of their environment reflected the necessities of their
life. These castles would be found beetling a cliff or a steep hill;
their walls and their buttresses would be made of huge, rough hewn
stones; their living arrangements would resemble those of a barracks
with an almost complete lack of what we now regard as the normal
decencies and privacies, except possibly for the lord and his lady;

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

and the life of these feudal bands was necessarily a crude and limited
one.

Up to the fourteenth century in Western Europe the little fortified
town, or the unfortified town that lay beneath the protection of a
garrison on a hill, was the only other social unit that competed with
the even more limited horizons of the peasant's village, or with the
spacious claims for the Here and the Hereafter which were put forward by
the Roman Church. To dream of huge metropolises and farflung armies and
food brought from the ends of the earth would have been wilder in those
days than anything More pictured in his Utopia.

During the fifteenth century in England, and in other parts of Europe
the same thing seems to have happened sooner or later, this life of
agriculture and warfare and petty trade was upset: the feudal power of
the reigning nobles was concentrated in the hands of a supreme lord, the
King; and the King and his archives and his court settled in the
National Capital, instead of moving about from place to place in the
troubled realm. The territories of the feudal lords ceased to be
dispersed; their possessions were confined more and more within what
were called national boundaries; and instead of remaining in their
castles the great lords gave up their crude, barbaric ways, and went up
to the capital to be civilized. In the course of time money took the
place of direct tribute; instead of receiving wheat and eggs and labor,
the lord came into possession of a rent which could be figured in pence
and pounds; a rent which could be transferred to the new trading cities
for the goods which the rest of the world had for sale. There is a
fascinating picture of this change

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

in W. J. Ashley's Economic History; and the old life itself is outlined,
with a wealth of significant detail, in J. S. Fletcher's Memorials of a
Yorkshire Parish.

At the same time that this change was taking place in the physical life
of Western Europe, a corresponding change was taking place in the domain
of culture. Digging about the ruins of Rome and other cities, the men of
the late Middle Age discovered the remains of a great and opulent
civilization; and exploring the manuscripts and printed books which were
getting into general circulation, they found themselves face to face
with strange conceptions of life, with habits of refinement, ease, and
sensuous luxury which the hard life of the camp and the castle had never
really permitted. There followed a reaction against their old life which
was little less than a revulsion; and in that reaction two great
institutions fell out of fashion. Men ceased to build castles to protect
themselves against physical dangers; and they left off entering
monasteries in order to fortify their souls for the Hereafter. Both the
spiritual and the temporal life began to shift to a new institution, the
Country House. The idolum of the Country House drew together and
coalesced; and as a familiar symbol of this change the colleges at
Oxford which date from the Renascence can scarcely be distinguished in
architectural detail from the palaces which the aristocracy were
building in the same period; while our banks and our political edifices
to this day bear almost universally the stamp of that Roman and Grecian
litter which men discovered on the outskirts of the mediæval city.

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

#### 3

We do not know the Country House until we realize, to begin with, what
its physical characteristics are like. There are a great many
descriptions which the reader may consult if he does not happen to live
in the neighborhood of a great Country House: but perhaps instead of
examining the contemporary Country House it will be well to go back to
its beginnings, and see how it was pictured in all its encrusted
splendor at the first movement of the Renascence—in the setting which
François Rabelais, in one of the few downright serious passages in his
great work, Gargantua, sought to provide for the good life.

Gargantua purposes to build a new Abbey which he calls the Abbey of
Theleme. This Abbey is to be in every respect what the mediæval Abbey
was not. Hence to begin with, the Abbey, unlike the castle, is to lie in
the midst of the open country; and unlike the monastery, it is to have
no walls. Every member is to be furnished with a generous apartment,
consisting of a principal room, a withdrawing room, a handsome closet, a
wardrobe, and an oratory; and the house itself is to contain not merely
libraries in every language, but fair and spacious galleries of
paintings. Besides these lodgings there is to be a tilt-yard, a riding
court, a theatre, or public playhouse, and a natatory or place to swim.
By the river, for the Abbey is to be situated on the Loire, there is to
be a Garden of Pleasure, and between two of the six towers of the
hexagon, in which form the building is arranged, there are courts for
tennis and other games. Add to this orchards full of fruit trees, parks
abounding with venison, and an archery

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

range, fill all the halls and chambers with rich tapestries, cover all
the pavements and floors with green cloth—and the furnishing of the
Abbey of Theleme is complete.

The costumes of the inmates are equally splendid and elaborate. In order
to have the accoutrements of the ladies' and gentlemen's toilets more
convenient, there was to be "about the wood of Theleme a row of houses
to the extent of half a league, very neat and cleanly, wherein dwelt the
goldsmiths, lapidaries, jewellers, embroiderers, tailors, gold drawers,
velvet weavers, tapestry makers, and upholsterers. . . ." They were to
be "furnished with matter and stuff from the hands of Lord Nausiclete,
who every year brought them seven ships from the Perlas and Cannibal
Islands, laden with ingots of gold, with raw silk, with pearls and
precious stones."

The women who are admitted to Theleme must be fair, well-featured, and
of sweet disposition; the men must be comely and well-conditioned.
Everyone is to be admitted freely and allowed to depart freely; and
instead of attempting to practice poverty, chastity, and obedience, the
inmates may be honorably married, may be rich, and may live at liberty.

The liberty of Theleme is indeed complete; it is such a liberty as one
enjoys at a Country House to this day, under the care of a tactful
hostess; for everyone does nothing except follow his own free will and
pleasure, rising out of his bed whenever he thinks good, and eating,
drinking, and laboring when he has a mind to it. In all their rule and
strictest tie of their order, as Rabelais puts it, there is but one
clause to be observed

"Do what you please."

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

#### 4

When we turn our attention from Rabelais’ conceit of an anti-monastic
order, we discover that he has given us an excellent picture of the
Country House, and of what I shall take the liberty of calling Country
House culture. We see pretty much the same outlines in the introduction
to Boccaccio's Decameron; it is elaborately described in terms of that
most complete of Country Houses, Hampton Court, in Pope's Rape of the
Lock; it is vividly pictured by Meredith in his portrait of The Egoist;
and it is analyzed in Mr. H. G. Wells' cruel description of Bladesover
in Tono-Bungay, as well as by Mr. Bernard Shaw in Heartbreak House.
Whether Mr. W. H. Mallock holds the pattern of Country House culture up
to us in The New Republic or Anton Chekhov penetrates its aimlessness
and futility in The Cherry Orchard, The Country House is one of the
recurrent themes of literature.

This renascence idolum of the Country House, then, is powerful and
complete: I know no other pattern which has imposed its standards and
its practices with such complete success upon the greater part of
European civilization. While the Country House was in the beginning an
aristocratic institution, it has penetrated now to every stratum of
society; and although we may not immediately see the connection, it is
responsible, I believe, for the particular go and direction which the
industrial revolution has taken. The Country House standards of
consumption are responsible for our Acquisitive Society.

#### 5

Perhaps the shortest way to suggest the character

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

of Country House institutions is to say that they are the precise
opposite of everything that Plato looked upon as desirable in a good
community.

The Country House is concerned not with the happiness of the whole
community but with the felicity of the governors. The conditions which
[underlie](errata.htm#5) this limited and partial good life are
political power and economic wealth; and in order for the life to
flourish, both of these must be obtained in almost limitless quantities.
The chief principles that characterize this society are possession and
passive enjoyment.

Now, in the Country House possession is based upon privilege and not
upon work. The title to land which was historically obtained for the
most part through force and fraud is the economic foundation of the
Country House existence. In order to keep the artisans and laborers who
surround the Country House at their work, it is necessary to keep them
from having access to the land on their own account, provision always
being made that the usufruct of the land shall go to the owner and not
to the worker. This emphasis upon passive ownership points to the fact
that in the Country House there is no active communion between the
people and their environment. Such activities as remain in the Country
House—the pursuit of game, for instance—rest upon imitating in play
activities which once had a vital use or prepared for some vital
function, as a child's playing with a doll is a preparation for
motherhood. The Country House ideal is that of a completely functionless
existence; or at best, an existence in which all the functions that
properly belong to a civilized man shall be carried on by functionaries.
Since this ideal cannot be realized in the actual world,

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

for the reason that it is completely at odds with man's biological
inheritance, it is necessary in the Country House utopia to fill in by
play and sport an otherwise desirable vacuity.

In the Country House literature and the fine arts undoubtedly flourish:
but they flourish as the objects of appreciation rather than as the
active, creative elements in the community's life; they flourish
particularly in the fashion that Plato looked upon as a corrupting
influence in the community. In the arts, a gourmandizing habit of
mind—the habit of receiving things and being played upon by
them—prevails; so that instead of the ability to share creative ecstasy,
the chief canon of judgment is "taste," a certain capacity to
discriminate among sensory stimuli, a capacity which is essentially just
as hospitable to a decomposing cheese as to the very staff of life. The
effect of this gourmandism in the arts can be detected in every element
of the Country House from cellar to roof; for the result has been to
emphasize the collection of good things rather than their creation, and
there is an aspect in which the Country House is little better than a
robber's hoard or a hunter's cache—a miniature anticipation of the
modern museums of natural history and art.

Observe the architecture of our Country House. If it has been built in
England during the last three hundred years, the style is probably that
bastard Greek or Roman which we call Renascence architecture; if the
Country House was built in America during the last thirty years, it is
as likely as not a Tudor residence with traces of castle fortification
left here and there on the facade. On the walls there will be plenty of

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

paintings; indeed a whole gallery may be devoted to them. In all
probability, however, the paintings have been created in other times by
men long since dead, and in other countries: there may be a portrait by
Rembrandt, a Persian miniature, a print by Hokusai. Some very fine
element in the structure, a fireplace or a bit of panelling, may have
been removed piece by piece from the original Country House in England,
Italy, or France; even as many features of the original Country House
were quarried, perhaps, from some mediæval abbey. The very china that we
use upon our tables nowadays is a Country House importation which took
the place of pewter and earthenware; and wall paper is another
importation. From feature to feature everything is derivative;
everything, in the last analysis, has either been stolen or purchased
from the original makers; and what has not been stolen or purchased has
been basely copied.

The insatiability of the Country House to possess art is only equalled
by its inability to create it. In the Country House, the arts are not
married to the community, but are kept for its pleasure.

Let there be no confusion as to either the facts or the ideal we are
examining. There is a vast difference between that fine mingling of
traditions which is the very breath of the arts, as the lover of classic
Greek statuary knows, and the rapacious imperialistic habit of looting
the physical objects of art which has been the essence of the Country
House method in modern times, even as it seems to have been a couple of
thousand years ago in the Roman villa. A genuine culture will borrow
steadily from other cultures; but it will go to them as the bee goes to
the flower for pollen, and

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

not as the beekeeper goes to the hive for honey. There is a creative
borrowing and a possessive borrowing; and the Country House has in the
main limited itself to possessive borrowing. The Country House ideal, in
fact, is limitless possession: so the great Country House masters have
five or six houses, perhaps, in their name, although they need but a
single one to cover their heads.

Now the Country House idolum involves a dissociation between the Country
House and the community in which it is placed. If you will take the
trouble to examine mediæval conditions, you will find that differences
of rank and wealth did not make a very great difference between the life
of the lord in his castle, and his retainers: if the common man could
not claim to be as good as his lord, it is plain that the lord shared
most of the common man's disabilities, and was, for all the
exaggerations of chivalry, just as ignorant, just as illiterate, just as
coarse. In the cities, too, the lowest workman in the guild shared the
institutions of his masters: the churches, the guild pageants, and the
morality plays were all part and parcel of the same culture.

The Country House changed this condition. Culture came to mean not a
participation in the creative activities of one's own community, but the
acquisition of the products of other communities; and it scarcely
matters much whether these acquisitions were within the spiritual or the
material domain. There had of course been the beginnings of such a split
in mediæval literature, with its vulgar Rabelaisian tales and its
refined romances of the court; but with the integration of the Country
House idolum, this divorcement was accentuated

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

in every other activity of the community. One of the results of this
split was that popular institutions were deprived of their contacts with
the general world of culture, and languished away; or they were
transformed, as the public schools of England were transformed into
restricted upper class institutions. Far more important than this,
perhaps, was the fact that each separate Country House was forced to
obtain for its limited circle all the elements that were necessary to
the good life in a whole community such as Plato described. We shall
deal with the effects of this presently.

#### 6

Let us admit what is valid in the utopia of the Country House. Enjoyment
is a necessary element in achievement, and by its regard for the decent
graces of life, for such things as an ease in manners and a fine flow of
conversation and the clash of wits and a sensitiveness to beautiful
things, the Country House was by all odds a humanizing influence. In so
far as the Country House fostered a belief in contemplation and a desire
for the arts apart from any uses that might be made of them by way of
civic advertisement; in so far as it urged that all our pragmatic
activities must be realized in things that are worth having or doing for
themselves, the Country House was right, eminently right. It was no
snobbery on the part of Russian soviet officialism when it opened up
some of its Country Houses as rest houses for the peasants and workers,
and then insisted that some of the airs of the Country House should be
acquired there, to replace the rough usages of the stable, the dungpile,
and the

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

field. Ruskin and Samuel Butler were possibly right when they insisted
that the perfect gentleman was a finer product than the perfect peasant
or artisan: he is a finer product because he is essentially more alive.
Even by its emphasis upon appreciation the Country House did no mean
service; for it called attention to the fact that there were more
permanent standards—standards which were common to the arts of Greece
and China—than those which were looked upon as sufficient in the local
region. In sum, the Country House emphasized a human best, which was the
sum of a dozen partial perfections; and so all that was crude and
inadequate in the old regional cultures was brought to light and
criticized. All these virtues I admit; and they hold just as good today
as they ever did.

The fatal weakness of Country House culture comes out all the plainer
for this admission. The Country House did not see that enjoyment rested
upon achievement, and was indeed inseparable from achievement. The
Country House strove to put achievement in one compartment and enjoyment
in another; with the result that the craftsman who no longer had the
capacity to enjoy the fine arts no longer had the ability to create
them. The effect of an isolated routine of enjoyment is equally
debilitating; for enjoyment, to the masters of the Country House came
too easily, with a mere snap of the fingers, as it were, and the
tendency of connoisseurship was to set novelty above intrinsic worth.
Hence the succession of styles by which Country House decoration has
become a thing for mockery: Chinese in one age, Indian in another,
Persian in the next, with Egyptian, Middle African, and heaven knows
what else destined to follow in due order. There is

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

nothing to settle to, because there is no task to be done, and no
problem to work out; and as soon as the first taste for a style gets
exhausted it is speedily supplanted by another.

It would be impossible to calculate the extent to which the Country
House has degraded our taste but I have little doubts as to the source
of the degradation. The stylicism which has perverted the arts and has
kept a congruent modern style from developing has been the work of
Country House culture. I remember well the contempt with which a
furniture manufacturer in the Chiltern Hills told me about the way in
which he produced an original Sheraton: his knowledge of sound furniture
design was subordinated to some other person's knowledge of "style" and
the miscarriage of the man's innate craftsmanship made him so mordant on
the subject that it seemed as though he had been reading Thorstein
Veblen's Theory of the Leisure Class. It is the same through all the
arts. A visit to the industrial sections of the Metropolitan Museum in
New York will show how dismally the taste for novelty, which led the
Sheratons and Chippendales to find "classic motifs" in one age, causes
the designers of the present day to seek the motifs of Sheraton and
Chippendale. So much for what happened to the arts when enjoyment and
achievement are separated.

#### 7

The industrial bearing of the Renascence ideal is of capital importance.

During the Middle Age the emphasis in industry was upon the production
of tangible goods: the craft guilds

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

set high standards in design and workmanship; and the aim of the worker,
in most of the trades, was to get a living from his work, and not simply
to get enough money to free himself from the necessity of working. This
is a broad generalization, I need scarcely emphasize, and there is
plenty of evidence of pecuniary interests under the best of conditions;
but it seems fair to say that the dominant ideals of the older
industrial order were industrial rather than commercial. In the trading
ventures that the Country House promoted under its Drakes and Raleighs,
ventures which were needed to bring them "Ships from the Perlas and
Cannibal Islands," the emphasis shifted from workmanship to sale; and
the notion of working and gambling to acquire multifarious goods took
the place of that earlier ideal which Henry Adams so sympathetically
described in Mt. St. Michel and Chartres. Thus the good life, as I have
said elsewhere, was the Goods Life: it could be purchased. If the whole
community no longer offered the conditions for this life, one might
filch what one wanted from the general store, and try to monopolize for
self or family all that was needed for a good life in the community.

What is the chief economic outcome of this ideal? The chief outcome, I
think, is to exaggerate the demand for goods, and to cause an enormously
wasteful duplication of the apparatus of consumption. If the limit to
one's possessions should be simply the extent of one's purse; if
happiness is to be acquired through obtaining the comforts and luxuries
of life; if a man who possesses a single house is considered fortunate,
and a man who possesses five houses five times as fortunate; if there
are no standards of living other than the insatiable

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

one that has been set up in the Country House—well, then there is really
no limit to the business of getting and spending, and our lives become
the mean handiwork of coachman, cook, and groom. Our Country House will
not merely be a house: there will be a chapel, an art gallery, a
theater, a gymnasium, as François Rabelais imagined. As the common
possessions of the community dwindle, the private possessions of
individuals are multiplied; and at last, there remains no other
community than a multitude of anarchic individuals, each of whom is
doing his best to create for himself a Country House, notwithstanding
the fact that the net result of his endeavors—this is the drab tragedy
and the final thing to be said against it—is perhaps nothing better than
six inadequate rooms at the end of nowhere in a Philadelphia suburb.

The Country House, then, is the chief pattern by means of which the
mediæval order was transformed into the modern order. It does not matter
very much whether the Country House is an estate on Long Island or a
cottage in Montclair; whether it is a house in Golder's Green or a
family manor in Devonshire: these are essentially affairs of scale, and
the underlying identity is plain enough. The idolum of the Country House
prevails even when quarters are taken up in the midst of the metropolis.
More than ever the Country House today tries to make up by an abundance
of physical goods for all that has been lost through its divorce from
the underlying community; more than ever it attempts to be
self-sufficient within the limits of suburbia. The automobile, the
phonograph, and the radiotelephone have only served to increase this
self-sufficiency; and I need not show at length how these
instrumentalities

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

have deepened the elements of acquisitiveness and passive, uncreative,
mechanical enjoyment.

The Country House's passionate demand for physical goods has given rise
to another institution, Coketown; and it is the idolum of Coketown, the
industrial age's contribution to the Country House, that we have now to
consider.

#### 8

The chief difference between the individual utopias of the nineteenth
century and the "collective representation" of Coketown is that these
individual utopias were concerned to repair certain points where
Manchester, Newark, Pittsburgh, and Elberfeld-Barmen fell short of the
ideal. In repairing these points, Bellamy and Hertzka were ready to
alter the conventional arrangements by which property and land were
held, and capital was accumulated. The final end however was the same;
and the differences are therefore more apparent than real.

If the illustrative example of the Country House is in the Abbey of
Theleme, that of Coketown is in the sharp picture of industrialism which
Charles Dickens presents in Hard Times.

Coketown, as Dickens sees it, is the quintessence of the industrial age.
It is perhaps one of the few idola of the modern world which has no
parallel in any earlier civilization that we have been able to explore.
In order to understand what Coketown brought into the world, we must
realize that before Coketown came into existence the center of every
important European city consisted of a marketplace, shadowed over by a
Cathedral, a Market Court, and a Guildhall; and frequently there

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

would be an adjacent university. This was the typical formation. The
various quarters of the city were subordinated to these central
institutions, and the work which was carried on within the city's walls
was more or less concretely realized in the local community.

Coketown, on the other hand, was the outcome of other conditions and
necessities. The center of Coketown's activity was the mill, set at
first in the open country near falling water, and then as coal was
applied to steam engines, removed to areas more accessible to the coal
fields. The factory became the new social unity; in fact it became the
only social unit; and, as Dickens sharply put it, "the jail looked like
the town hall, and the town hall like the infirmary"—and all of them
looked like the factory, a gaunt building of murky brick that once was
red or yellow. The sole object of the factory is to produce goods for
sale; and every other institution is encouraged in Coketown only to the
extent that it does not seriously interfere with this aim.

What are the outward physical aspects of Coketown? To begin with, the
city is laid out by an engineer; it is laid out with a mathematical
correctness and with a complete disregard for the amenities. If there
are hills where Coketown ought to stand, the hills are leveled; if there
are swamps, the swamps are filled; if there are lakes, the lakes are
drained away. The pattern to which Coketown's activities are fitted is
that of the gridiron; there are no deviations and no allowances in the
working out of this plan; never will a street swerve as much as a hair's
breadth to save a stand of trees or open up a vista. In the matter of
transportation and intercourse, the aim of Coketown is to "get

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

somewhere"; and it fancies that by laying down straight lines and
joining them in rectangles this aim is expedited; despite the
demonstration in every city of older growth that a radial system of
intercommunication is much more economical than the gridiron. As a
result, there is no terminus to any of the avenues of Coketown; for they
begin on a draughting board and end in infinity. It is impossible to
approach from the front the jails, hospitals, and sanatoria of which
Coketown boasts; the tendency is to run past them. So much for the
physical layout of the industrial city; what remains is obscured by
smoke.

The factory is the center of Coketown's social life; and it is here that
the greater part of the population spend their days. At its purest, that
is to say, during the first half of the nineteenth century, and in a
great many centers to this day, the factory is the only institution that
provides anything like a social life, in spite of the fact that the
unremitting toil which accompanies its routine reduces the graces of
social intercourse to such a minimum that drunkenness and copulation are
the only amusements which the inhabitants can engage in as a relief from
their noble duty of providing the rest of the world with necessities,
comforts, luxuries, and nullities.

The Coketown idolum has been disintegrating a little during the last two
decades, under the influence of the garden cities movement, and I am
aware that in certain departments I am celebrating a lost cause and an
abandoned idealism; but there still remain in acres and acres of
workingmen's dwellings, such as one finds in Battersea and Philadelphia,
and in old-fashioned railway stations, and in buildings like the
Mechanics Halls of

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pittsburgh and
Boston, a notion of what Coketown stood for when Coketown, the
Frankenstein which had been created by the Country House, had not been
repudiated by its master.

Coketown is devoted to the production of material goods; and there is no
good in Coketown that does not derive from this aim. The only enjoyment
which those who are inured to the Coketown routine can participate in is
mechanical achievement; that is to say, activity along industrial and
commercial lines; and the only result of this achievement is—more
achievement. It follows that all the standards of Coketown are of a
quantitative kind; so many score of machines, so many tons of gew-gaws,
so many miles of piping, so many dollars of profit. The opportunities
for self-assertion and constructiveness in such a community are
practically boundless; and I can never confront the mechanical
felicities of a printing plant without realizing how fascinating these
opportunities are, and how deeply they satisfy certain elements in our
nature. The unfortunate thing about Coketown, however, is that these are
the only sort of opportunities that are available; and work whose
standards are of a qualitative sort, the work of scholars and artists
and scientists, is either frozen out of the community by deliberate
ostracism, or is hitched to the machine; the artist, for example, being
compelled to sing the praises of Coketown's goods or to paint the
portrait of Coketown's supreme esthetic achievement—the Self-Made Man.

In its pristine state, Coketown is not a complete community. So it is
natural that the idolum should have provided certain additions. In the
first place, the activities of Coketown, whether they are beneficial or

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

wasteful, satisfy only certain elements in the human makeup; and
although much may be done by compulsory education to discipline the
younger generation to the machine, and to show them the necessity of
doing nothing which would interfere with the continued activity of the
machine—for work in Coketown, as Samuel Butler fearfully predicted in
Erewhon, is in the main simply attendance upon machinery—here and there
the igneous instincts of the workers will break through the solidified
layer of habit which the school and the factory have produced, and the
arcane energies of the population will flow either into the Country
House or into that other simulacrum of the civic life, Broadway.

Coketown for the workaday week, the Country House for the weekend, is
the compromise that has been practically countenanced; although the
country houses of the working classes may be nothing more than a
diminutive extension of the urban slum near sea or mountain. But it must
be admitted that there is a permanent Country House and a permanent
Coketown population in the more ideal aspects of the order. Mr. Wells in
the Time Machine has given a picture of Coketown which is perhaps a
little exuberant in some of its details—the picture of a happy and
careless Country House population, living on the surface of the earth,
mid all the graces of a jolly weekend, and that of the factory
population, the Morlocks, living in the bowels of the earth and
performing the necessary industrial functions. Mr. Wells' presentation
is a little exaggerated, however, and we must be content here with such
a plain and outright description as Messrs. Bounderby and Gradgrind
would approve of.

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

In the Coketown scheme of things, all that does not contribute to the
physical necessities of life is called a comfort; and all that does not
contribute either to comforts or necessities is called a luxury. These
three grades of good correspond to the three classes of the population:
the necessities are for the lower order of manual workers, together with
such accessory members as clerks, teachers, and minor officials; the
comforts are for the comfortable classes, that is, the small order of
merchants, bankers, and industrialists; while the luxuries are for the
aristocracy, if there is such an hereditary group, and for such as are
able to lift themselves out of the two previous orders. Chief among the
luxuries, it goes without saying, are art and literature and any of the
other permanent interests of a humane life.

Let us note what an improvement the three classes of Coketown are upon
the three classes in Plato's Republic. The custom of limiting the
earnings of the working classes to the margin of subsistence is
singularly effective in keeping them occupied with the business of
production—as long as there is no over-plus in the market to throw them
out of work—and it is thus a safeguard of efficiency and industry which
Plato, who was deplorably obtuse in these matters, did not provide. It
is likewise obvious that the life of a middle class citizen, with plenty
to eat and drink, with his life protected by the policeman, his
pocketbook protected by the insurance company, his spiritual happiness
protected by the church, his human sympathies protected by the charity
organization society, his intelligence protected by the newspaper, and
his economic privileges protected by the State—this middle class citizen
is, after all, a much more fortunate and happy

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

individual than those Platonic warriors whose life was a perpetual
effort to keep the edge on their bodies and minds. As for the Guardians
of the State, it is plain that Plato did not offer them any inducement
to do their work which would attract a normal commercial man: anyone who
was worth a hundred thousand dollars a year would have thought twice
before assuming leadership in Plato's impoverished commonwealth, whereas
in Coketown he would find that his simple ability to make money would be
taken as sufficient proof of his education, his insight, and his wisdom
in every department of life. More than that, Coketown, when all is said
and done, welcomes the artist with a cordiality that puts Plato to
shame: Coketown can afford its luxuries since, when you look at the
matter squarely, a rare painting might be worth as much as a rare
postage stamp; and it is accordingly an acceptable addition to the
Coketown milieu.

Coketown has, in fact, only one question for the arts to answer: What
are they good for? If the answer can be expressed in money, the art in
question is taken to be almost as satisfactory as a device to save
labor, to increase speed, or to multiply the output.

#### 9

There is one phenomenon still to be accounted for in the economy of
Coketown; one monumental instrument without which the wheels of Coketown
would become clogged and the very breath of Coketown be extinguished.

I refer to the rubbish heaps.

The aim of production in Coketown is naturally more

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

production, and it is only by making things sufficiently shoddy to go to
pieces quickly, or by changing the fashion sufficiently often, that the
machinery of Coketown can for the most part be kept running. The rage
and fury of Coketown's production has to be balanced off by an equal
rage and fury of consumption—continence would be fatal. As a result,
nothing in Coketown is finished or permanent or settled: these qualities
are another name for death. Coketown makes china to be broken, clothes
to be worn out, and houses to be torn down; and if something remains
over from an earlier age which made things more soundly, it is either
incarcerated in a museum, and derided as the monument of a
non-progressive age, or it is demolished as a nuisance. (So powerful is
the idolum of Coketown that in the workaday world building after
building continues to meet with irreparable ruin at the hands of
barbarians from Coketown: why, I have even seen innocent little
half-timbered fifteenth century cottages whose fronts were obliterated
by a nineteenth century plasterer, in the name of progress.)

The status of every family in Coketown can be told by the size of its
rubbish heap. In fact, to "make a pile" in the markets of Coketown is
ultimately to make another pile—of dust and junk and litter—on the edge
of the town where the factory district dribbles off into the open
country. So in Coketown consumption is not merely a necessity: it is a
social duty, a means of keeping "the wheels of civilization turning." At
times there appears to be a possibility that this utopia may defeat its
purposes by producing goods at such a pace that the rubbish heaps will
fall behind the demands of the market; and while this mars the theoretic
perfection

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

of the Coketown social organization, it is offset by periods of war,
when the market is practically inexhaustible, and Coketown's prosperity
increases to a point at which the working classes are on the point of
becoming the comfortable classes without having had sufficient previous
training to make their contribution to the rubbish heap—a serious pass,
amidst which confusion the working classes of Coketown might take to
reducing their working days and enjoying their leisure without
sufficient consumptive effort.

This, then, is the idolum of Coketown. There are certain features in it
which need to be noticed. The first is that there is a certain solid
reality in Coketown that remains when all its pretensions and idiocies
have been incinerated. An environment that is devoted solely to the
production of material goods is obviously no sort of environment for a
good community, for life is more than a matter of finding what we shall
eat and wherewithal we shall be clothed: it is an interaction with a
whole world of landscapes, living creatures and ideas, in comparison
with which Coketown is a mere blister on the earth's surface.
Nevertheless, with respect to the business of melting steel and building
roads and performing certain essential industrial operations, the aims
of Coketown are, up to a certain point, relevant: we have already
encountered them in Andreæ's Christianopolis. There is no need to
dismiss the good that lies inside of industrialism because it does not
embrace the good that lies beyond it.

Up to a certain point, then, using mechanical power rather than human
power is good; so is large-scale production, so is the division of labor
and division of operation; so is rapid transportation; so is the
accurate

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

methodology of the engineer; and so are various other features in the
modern industrial world. One might even say a word for efficiency, as
against "doing things rather more or less." Coketown made the horrid
mistake of believing that all these things were good in themselves. New
factories, for example, drew a bigger population into the city: Coketown
did not perceive that, as Plato pointed out, beyond a certain point the
city as a social unit would cease to exist. Bigger and better was
Coketown's motto; and it resolutely refused to see that there was no
necessary connection between these adjectives. The whole case for and
against Coketown rests upon our admission of the phrase "up to a certain
point." Up to a certain point, industrialism is good, especially in its
modern, neotechnic, electrical phase: Coketown, on the other hand,
believes that there is no limit to the usefulness of industrialism.

Up to a certain point—but what point? The answer is, up to the point at
which the cultivation of a humane life in a community of humane people
becomes difficult or impossible.

Men come together, says Aristotle, to live; they remain together in
order to live the good life. This determination of the good life is the
only check and balance that we can have upon Coketown; and it is perhaps
because we have been so little concerned with it that the practical
effect of the Coketown idolum has been so devastating. "Invention and
organization," as Mr. George Santayana admirably points out, "which
ought to have increased leisure by producing the necessaries of life
with little labor, have only increased the population, degraded labor,
and diffused luxury." William Morris conceived that men in the future
might

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

discard many complicated machines because they could live more happily,
aye, work more happily without them. Whether indeed a good part of
modern organization and machinery could be scrapt is perhaps a debatable
question: but the possibility of scrapping it is at least conceivable
once we become more interested in the actual result of industrialism
upon the life and happiness of the people who are part of the
organization than we are in the profits which pile up upon paper, and
are finally realized in an ever-growing rubbish heap.

#### 10

By what means can the Country House keep Coketown working for it? The
idolum of the Country House, which was built up during the Renascence,
and the idolum of Coketown, which was formed in the early part of the
nineteenth century, are obviously two separate worlds; and in order that
each might be realized in our daily life, it was necessary that some
connecting tissue be manufactured to keep them together. This tissue was
the social myth, the collective utopia, of the National State.

There is a sense in which we may look upon the National State as a fact;
but that great philosopher of the National State, Mazzini, realized that
the National State had continually to be willed; and its existence lies
plainly, therefore, on a different plane from the existence of a bit of
territory, a building, or a city. In fact, it is only by the persistent
projection of this utopia for the last three or four hundred years that
its existence has become credible; for all the minute descriptions which
the political historian gives to the

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> National State,
its origins and its institutions and its people, read a good deal like
that fine story which Hans Andersen told about the king who walked the
streets naked because two rascally tailors had persuaded him that they
had woven and cut up for him a beautiful outfit of clothes.

It will help us to appreciate this beautiful fabrication of the National
State if we turn aside for a moment and glance at the actual world as it
is known to the geographer and the anthropologist. Here are the physical
facts in defiance of which the utopia of nationalism has been clapped
together.

#### 11

The earth that the geographer surveys is divided into five great land
masses. These land masses in turn can be broken up into a number of
natural regions, each of which has within its rough and approximate
frontiers a certain complex of soil, climate, vegetation, and, arising
out of these, certain primitive occupations which the inhabitants of the
region originally practiced and later, through the advance of trade and
invention, elaborated. Between these natural regions there are
occasionally frontiers, such as the barrier of the Pyrenees which
separates "France" from "Spain"; but these barriers have never
altogether prevented movements of population from one area to another.
In order to have a more faithful knowledge of regional groupings in
certain important areas, the reader might with profit consult Professor
Fleure's Human Geography in Western Europe. (London: Williams and
Norgate.)

These natural regions are the groundwork of human regions; that is, the
non-political grouping of population

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

with respect to soil, climate, vegetation, animal life, industry and
historic tradition. In each of these human regions we find that the
population does not consist of a multitude of atomic individuals: on the
contrary, when the geographer plots houses and buildings on a
topographic map, he finds that people and houses cohere together in
groups of more or less limited size, called cities, towns, villages,
hamlets. Normally, a vast amount of intercourse takes place between
these groupings; and in the Middle Age, before the utopia of the
National State had been created, the pilgrim and the wandering scholar
and the journeyman and the strolling player could have been met with on
all the highways of Europe. Under the dispensation of the National
State, however, the population, as the German economist Buecher points
out, tends to be more settled, and we transport goods rather than
people. It is important to realize that, so far as the geographer can
discover, this trade and intercourse between local groups has been a
part of Western European civilization since Neolithic times, at least:
it takes place continually between individuals and corporate groups in
one place and another, and as far as geographical facts are concerned
might more easily exist between Dover and Calais, let us say, than
between Calais and Paris.

Now the interesting thing about the utopia of the National State is that
it has only the most casual relation to the facts of geography. Wherever
it suits the purposes of the Guardians of the State, the facts are
ignored, and an artificial relation is *willed* into existence. The
human communities which the regional sociologist recognizes do not
always coincide with those which the statesman wishes to incorporate as
"national

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

territory," and when this conflict occurs, the idea rather than the
reality triumphs, if necessary by brute force.

In the utopia of the National State there are no natural regions; and
the equally natural grouping of people in towns, villages and cities,
which, as Aristotle points out, is perhaps the chief distinction between
man and the other animals, is tolerated only upon the fiction that the
State hands over to these groups a portion of its omnipotent authority,
or "sovereignty" as it is called, and permits them to exercise a
corporate life. Unfortunately for this beautiful myth, which generations
of lawyers and statesmen have labored to build up, cities existed long
before states—there was a Rome on the Tiber long before there was a
Roman Imperium—and the gracious permission of the state is simply a
perfunctory seal upon the accomplished fact.

Instead of recognizing natural regions and natural groups of people, the
utopia of nationalism establishes, by the surveyor's line, a certain
realm called national territory, and makes all the inhabitants of this
territory the members of a single, indivisible group, the nation, which
is supposed to be prior in claim and superior in power to all other
groups. This is the only social formation that is officially recognized
within the national utopia. What is common to all the inhabitants of
this territory is thought to be of far greater importance than any of
the things that bind men together in particular civic or industrial
groups.

Let us look at this world of national utopias. The contrast between the
politician's map and the geographer's would be little less than amazing
were our eyes not used to it, and were we not taught in modern times

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

to look upon it as inevitable. Instead of the natural grouping of land
masses and regions, one finds a multitude of quite arbitrary lines:
boundaries like those that separate Canada and the United States or
Belgium and the Netherlands are just as frequent as the natural frontier
of sea that surrounds England. Sometimes these national territories are
big, and sometimes they are little; but the bigness of empires like
those of France, England, or the United States is not due to any
essential identity of interests between the sundry communities of these
empires, but to the fact that they are forcibly held together by a
political government. National lines, in other words, continue to exist
only as long as the inhabitants continue to act in terms of them; are
ready to pay their taxes to support customs bureaux, immigration
offices, frontier patrols, and educational systems; and are prepared, in
the last extremity, to lay down their lives to prevent other groups from
crossing these imaginary lines without permission.

The chief concern of the national utopia is the support of the central
government, for the government is the guardian of territory and
privilege. The principal business of that government is to keep the
territory properly defined, and to increase its limits, when possible,
so as to make the taxable area larger. By stressing the importance of
these concerns, and constantly playing up the dangers of rivalry from
other national utopias, the State builds a bridge between the Country
House and Coketown, and persuades the workers in Coketown that they have
more in common with the classes that exploit them than they have in
common with other groups within a more limited community. It would seem
that this reconciliation of Coketown and

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

the Country House is little less than miraculous, even as an ideal; and
perhaps it would be interesting to examine a little more carefully the
apparatus by which this is effected.

#### 12

The chief instrument of the National State is Megalopolis, its biggest
city, the place where the idolum of the National Utopia was first
created, and where it is perpetually willed into existence.

In order to grasp the quintessential character of Megalopolis we must
shut our eyes to the palpable earth, with its mantle of vegetation and
its tent of clouds, and conceive what might be made of the human
landscape if it could be entirely fabricated out of paper; for the
ultimate aim of the Megalopolis is to conduct the whole of human life
and intercourse through the medium of paper.

The early life of a young citizen in Megalopolis is spent in acquiring
the tools by which paper may be used. The names of these tools are
writing, reading, and arithmetic; and once upon a time these constituted
the main elements in every Megalopolitan's education. There was,
however, a good deal of dissatisfaction, on paper, against this somewhat
barren curriculum, and so at a fairly early date in the history of
Megalopolis, various other subjects, such as literature, science,
gymnastics, and manual training were added to the curriculum—on paper.
It is indeed possible for a Megalopolitan student to know the atomic
formula of clay without ever having seen it in the raw earth, to handle
pine wood in the workshop without having walked through a pine forest,
and to go through the

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

masterpieces of poetic literature without having experienced a single
emotion which would prepare him to appreciate anything different from
one of the influential Megalopolitan magazines, "Smutty Stories", but as
long as his hours of attendance can be recorded on paper, and as long as
he can give a satisfactory account of his studies on an examination
paper, his preparation for life is practically complete; and so he is
graduated with a paper certificate of education into the industries of
Coketown, or into the multitudinous bureaus of Megalopolis itself.

The end of this period of paper tutelage is but a prelude to its
continuation in another form; for the religious care of paper is the
Megalopolitan's life work. The daily newspaper, the ledger, the card
index are the means by which he now makes contact with life, whilst the
fiction magazine and the illustrated paper are the means by which he
escapes from it. Through the translucent form of paper known as
celluloid, it has been possible to do away on the stage with
flesh-and-blood people; and therefore the drama of life, as the
Megalopolitan story writers tell it, can be enacted at one remove from
actuality. Instead of his travelling, the world moves before the
Megalopolitan, on paper; instead of his venturing forth on the highways
of the world, adventure comes to him, on paper; instead of his getting
him a mate, his bliss may be all but consummated—on paper. In fact, so
accustomed does the Megalopolitan become to experiencing all his
emotions on paper that he can be entertained by the representation of a
static bowl of flowers on a moving picture screen; while his cockney
ignorance of nature is so vast that a certain vaudeville performer,
seeking to amuse

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

him by imitating the calls of birds and beasts, finds it wise to have
moving pictures taken of the rooster, the dog, and the cat, in order to
give his mimicries reality in minds destitute of any personal image.

The notion of direct action, direct intercourse, direst association, is
a foreign one to Megalopolis. If any action is to be taken by the whole
community, or by any group in it, it is necessary to carry it through
the Megalopolitan parliament, and have it established on paper, after
innumerable people, who have no genuine concern in the matter, have
committed their views about it to paper. If any intercourse is to be
carried on, it must he largely conducted on paper; and if that medium is
not directly available, subsidiary instruments, like the telephone, are
used. The chief form of association in Megalopolis is that by political
party, and it is through the political party that the Megalopolitan
expresses his views, on paper, as to what is necessary to amend the
paper constitution or promote the welfare of the paper community; albeit
he realizes that the promises made by political parties are written on
what Megalopolitans in their more cynical moments call "non-negotiable"
paper, and will probably never pass into currency.

By its traffic in Coketown's multifarious goods and by its command over
certain kinds of paper known as mortgages or securities, Megalopolis
ensures a supply of real foods and real staples from the countryside.
Through incessant production of hooks, magazines, newspapers,
boilerplate features, and syndicated matter, Megalopolis ensures that
the idolum of the National Utopia shall be kept alive in the minds of
the underlying inhabitants of the country. Finally, by the devices

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

of "national education" and "national advertising" all the inhabitants
of the National Utopia are persuaded that the good life is that which is
lived, on paper, in the capital city; and that an approximation to this
life can be achieved only by eating the food, dressing in the clothes,
holding the opinions, and purchasing the goods which are offered for
sale by Megalopolis. So the chief aim of every other city in the
National Utopia is to become like Megalopolis; its chief hope is to grow
as big as Megalopolis; its boast is that it is another Megalopolis. When
the denizens of Megalopolis dream of a better world, it is only a paper
perfection of that National Utopia which Edward Bellamy looked forward
to in Looking Backward.

Working in connection with the Machine Process of Coketown, the
Megalopolis erects a standard of life which can be expressed in
commercial terms, on paper, even if it does not offer any tangible
satisfaction in goods and services and perfections. The chief boast of
this standard is its uniformity; that is, its equal applicability to
every person in the community without respect to his history, his
circumstances, his needs, his actual rewards. Hence such goods as
Megalopolis creates in profusion are for the most part in the line of
plumbing and sanitary devices which, if they do not exactly heighten the
joy of living, at any rate make the routine of Megalopolitan life a
little less formidable.

The total result of these standards and uniformities is that what was
originally a fiction in time becomes a fact. Whereas the inhabitants of
the national utopia may originally have been as diverse as the trees in
a forest, they tend to become, under the influence of education and
propaganda, as similar as telegraph

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

poles along a road. It is not a little to the credit of Megalopolis that
the National Utopia has pragmatically justified itself. It has created
the sort of mental environment on paper which is necessary to a smooth
adjustment of Coketown and the Country House. What is Megalopolis, in
fact, but a paper purgatory which serves as a medium through which the
fallen sons of Coketown, the producer's hell, may finally attain the
high bliss of the Country House, the consumer's Heaven?

#### 13

It should be plain that in describing the National Utopia and
Megalopolis I have been trying to outline what Plato would call the pure
form. It is equally clear, I trust, that the pure form is an idolum to
which any existing national state or metropolis approximates only so far
as the idolum does not conflict too grossly with the real men and women,
the real communities, the real regions, the real workaday occupations
which continue, despite the reign of these idola, to exist, and to
occupy our main attention. Formal education has not altogether taken the
place of vital education; loyalty to the state has not altogether
succeeded as a substitute for deeper allegiances and affiliations:
occasionally, here and there, people meet each other face to face, they
eat real food, dig in real earth, smell real flowers instead of coal tar
perfumes that arise from paper bouquets, and embark quite madly on real
love affairs. It is true that these realities are a disturbing
influence: they are always threatening to undermine the idola which the
politicians and journalists and academic handymen unite so valiantly to
build up; but there they

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

are—and even the most stubborn idealist cannot help himself from
occasionally confronting the world that he denies!

If you and I were perfect citizens of Megalopolis, we should never let
anything come between us and our loyalty to the State: when the State
called for our taxes, we should never think regretfully of the
amusements we must forego in order to pay them; when the State demanded
that we go to war, nothing like the claims of a family or an occupation
or a moral conviction would ever step between us and our national duty.
By the same token, we should never eat any other food than that which
had been nationally advertized, and never buy anything direct from the
producer when we might buy it from a third person in Megalopolis; we
should never read any literature that is not produced in our own
country, never desire any other climate than our own country can boast,
and never seek to find in any other culture, remote in space or time,
the things which we seem to miss in our own environment. If only this
utopia of nationalism could be realized completely it would be
self-sufficient; and there would be nothing on earth, in heaven, or in
the waters over the earth which did not bear the authentic trademark of
Megalopolis.

#### 14

The picture of the National Utopia that I have drawn is perhaps a little
too black to stand out clearly; and I must now add a few high lights for
definition.

As in Coketown, there was a point up to which efficiency in mechanical
production was a good thing, so in the national utopia there is a point
up to which

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

uniformity is a good thing. The National State seems historically to
have arisen in some part through the relief which the people of the
Middle Age experienced in being able to travel under the protection of
the King's law along the King's highway, and their discovery that common
laws and customs, common weights and measures, were on the whole an
advantage over a multitude of senseless irregularities which continued
to exist in particular neighborhoods. It was a distinct triumph for the
good life when the men of London and the men of Edinburgh, let us say,
realized that they had something in common as citizens of a single
country, and emphasized the likenesses which bound them as men rather
than the antagonisms that separated them as cities. If the National
State erected barriers of trade against other countries, it at any rate
broke down barriers that had long existed in even more limited regions,
and that have long continued to exist in certain cities in Italy and
France. So much is to the good.

But uniformity is not a good in itself. It is a good only in so far as
it promotes association and social intercourse. In breaking down minor
barriers, the State created major ones, and it created national
uniformities in regions where they were meaningless. Moreover,
nationalism is inimical to cultural unity, and it perpetuates irrelevant
conflicts in the Kingdom of the Spirit where there should be neither
slave nor free, neither white nor black, neither citizen nor outlander.
As a matter of fact, the two great international cultural vehicles of
the Middle Age—the Latin Language and the Roman Church—were broken down
by the propagation of a National Language, that spoken at the National
Capital, and a National Church, that

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

which was subservient to the State; and nothing that nationalism has
done since has repaired this loss. On one hand, the idolum of the
National State is too narrow, because the world of culture is man's
common inheritance, and not the mere segment of it which is called
"national literature" or "national science." And on the other hand, the
idolum is too big, for the reason that there is no bond except a paper
one between men who are as far apart as Bermondsey and Bombay, or New
York and San Francisco. The temporal community, as Auguste Comte finely
pointed out, is local, restricted, and multiform; this is its essential
nature and limitation. The spiritual community is universal. It was a
great cultural misdemeanor when the National Utopia, in its extension as
imperialism, sought to make the spiritual community restricted and the
temporal community universal; and it is this heresy to the good life
which makes all the pretensions of the national utopia so shabby and
insincere.

#### 15

If Coketown and the Country House and the National Utopia had remained
on paper, they would doubtless be entertaining and edifying
contributions to our literature. Unfortunately, these social myths have
been potent; they have given a pattern to our lives; and they are the
source of a great many evils that threaten, like stinking weeds, to
choke the good life in our communities. It is not because these myths
are utopias that I have been criticizing them so assiduously; it is
rather because they continue to work such wholesale damage. Hence it has
seemed worth while to point out that they are on pretty much the same
level of reality

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

as the Republic or Christianopolis. We may perhaps approach our social
institutions a little more courageously when we realize how completely
we ourselves have created them; and how, without our perpetual "will to
believe" they would vanish like smoke in the wind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Eleven](sou14)
