[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc24007)  [Next](cc24009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image
of gold, whose height *was* threescore cubits, *and* the breadth thereof
six cubits: he set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of
Babylon.

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span>**1.** Nebuchadnezer rex fecit imaginem ex
auro, altitudo ejus cubitorum sexaginta, latitudo cubitorum sex: erexit
eam in planitie Dura,  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) in
provincia Babylonis.

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span><span id="ix.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>Very probably this statue was not erected by
King Nebuchadnezzar within a short period, as the Prophet does not
notice how many years had passed away; for it is not probable that it
was erected within a short time after he had confessed the God of Israel
to be the Supreme Deity. Yet as the Prophet is silent, we need not
discuss the matter. Some of the rabbis think this statue to have been
erected as an expiation; as if Nebuchadnezzar wished to avert the effect
of his dream by this charm, as they say. But their guess is most
frivolous. We may inquire, however, whether Nebuchadnezzar deified
himself or really erected this statue to Bel the principal deity of the
Chaldeans, or invented some new-fangled divinity? Many incline to the
opinion that he wished to include himself in the number of the deities,
but this is not certain — at least I do not think so. Nebuchadnezzar
seems to me rather to have consecrated this statue to some of the
deities; but, as superstition is always joined with ambition and pride,
very likely Nebuchadnezzar was also induced by vain glory and luxury to
erect this statue. As often as the superstitious incur expense in
building temples and in fabricating idols, if any one asks them their
object, they immediately reply — they do it in honor of God! At the same
time they are all promoting their own fame and reputation. All the
superstitious reckon God’s worship valueless, and rather wish to acquire
for themselves favor and estimation among men. I readily admit this to
have been Nebuchadnezzar’s intention, and indeed I am nearly certain of
it. But at the same time some pretense to piety was joined with it; for
he pretended that he wished to worship God. Hence, also, what I formerly
mentioned appears more clear, namely, — King Nebuchadnezzar was not
truly and heartily converted, but rather remained fixed in his own
errors, when he was attributing glory to the God of Israel. As I have
already said, that confession of his was limited, and he now betrays
what he nourished in his heart; for when he erected the statue he did
not return to his own natural disposition, but; rather his impiety,
which was hidden for a time, was then detected. For that remarkable
confession could not be received as a proof of change of mind. All
therefore would have said he was a new man, if God had not wished it to
be made plain that he was held bound and tied by the chains of Satan,
and was still a slave to his own errors. God wished then to present this
example to manifest Nebuchadnezzar to be always impious, although
through compulsion he gave some glory to the God of Israel.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since our minds have so
many hidden recesses that nothing is more difficult than thoroughly to
purge them from all fiction and lying, — Grant, I say, that we may
honestly examine ourselves. Do thou also shine upon us with the light of
thy Holy Spirit; may we truly acknowledge our hidden faults and put them
far away from us, that thou mayest be our only God, and our true piety
may obtain the palm of thine approbation. May we offer thee pure and
spotless; worship, and meanwhile may we conduct ourselves in the world
with a pure conscience; and may each of us be so occupied in our duties
as to consult our brother’s advantage as well as our own, and at length
be made partakers of that true glory which thou hast prepared for us in
heaven through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.iii"></span>

<span id="ix.iii-p1"></span>Lecture Thirteenth

<span id="ix.iii-p2"></span>WE began in the last Lecture to treat of The
Golden Statue which Nebuchadnezzar erected, and placed in the plain or
open country of Dura. We stated this statue to have been erected for a
religious reason, when the ambition of that king or tyrant was at its
full sway, which we may always observe in the superstitious. For
although they always put forward the name of God, and persuade
themselves that they are worshipping *God,* yet pride always impels them
to desire the approbation of the world. Such was the desire of King
Nebuchadnezzar in erecting this statue, as its very magnitude displays.
For the Prophet says, *the height of the statue was sixty cubits, and
its breadth six cubits.* Such a mass must have cost much expense, for
the image was made of gold. Probably this gold was acquired by much
rapine and plunder; but whether it was so or not, we may here view, as I
have said, the profane king so worshipping God as to propagate the
remembrance of his own name to posterity. The region in which he placed
the image seems to imply this. Without doubt the Prophet here points out
some celebrated place which men were accustomed to frequent for the sake
of merchandise and other necessities. But as far as the king’s special
intention is concerned, we stated their conjecture to be out of place
who think the statue to have been erected for the sake of expiating his
dream. It is more probable, since the Jews were dispersed throughout
Assyria and Chaldea, that this image was erected, lest those foreigners
who were exiles from their country should introduce any novelty. This
conjecture carries some weight with it; for Nebuchadnezzar knew the Jews
to be so attached to the God of their fathers as to be averse to all the
superstitions of the Gentiles. He feared, therefore, lest they should
seduce others to their own opinions, and he wished to counteract this by
erecting a new statue, and commanding all his subjects to bow down to
it. Meanwhile, we see how quickly the acknowledgment of Israel’s God,
whose glory and power he had so lately celebrated, had vanished from his
mind! Now this trophy is erected to reproach him, as if he had been
vanquished as well as the idols of the heathen. But, we have said
elsewhere, Nebuchadnezzar never seriously acknowledged the God of
Israel, but by a sudden impulse was compelled to confess him to be the
Supreme and only God, though he was all the while drowned in his own
superstitions. Hence his confession was rather the result of
astonishment, and did not proceed from true change of heart. Let us now
come to the remainder:

<span id="ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p1"></span><span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002)<span id="ix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p2"></span>**2.** Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to
gather together the princes, the governors, and the captains, the
judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and all the
rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which
Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.

<span id="ix.iv-p3"></span>**2.** Tunc Nebuchadnezer rex misit ad
congregandum satrapas, duces, et quaestores, primates, *vel proceres,*
judices, magistratus, optinates, et omnes praefectos provinciarum, ut
venirent ad dedicationem imaginis, quam erexerat Nebuchadnezer rex.

<span id="ix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.iv-p5"></span><span id="ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.iv-p6"></span>I do not know the derivation of the word
“*Satra*p;” but manifestly all these are names of magistracies, and I
allow myself to translate the words freely, since they are not Hebrew,
and the Jews are equally ignorant of their origin. Some of them, indeed,
appear too subtle; but they assert nothing but what is frivolous and
foolish. We must be content with the simple expression — *he sent to
collect the satraps*

<span id="ix.v"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p1"></span><span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003)<span id="ix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.v-p2"></span>**3.** Then the princes, the governors, and
captains, the judges, the treasurers, the counsellors, the sheriffs, and
all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together unto the
dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up; and
they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.

<span id="ix.v-p3"></span>**3.** Tunc congregati sunt satrapae, duces,
proceres, quaestores, magistratus, judices, optimates, et onmes
praefecti provinciarum ad dedicationem imaginis, quam erexerat
Nebuchadnezer rex: et steterunt coram imagine quam erexerat
Nebuchadnezer.

<span id="ix.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.v-p5"></span>Let us add the context as the subject is
continued

<span id="ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p1"></span><span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#004)<span id="ix.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p2"></span>**4.** Then an herald cried aloud, To you it
is commanded, O people, nations, and languages,

<span id="ix.vi-p3"></span>**4.** Et praeco clamabat in fortitudine:
 <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) Vobis edicitur, populi, gentes,
et linguae,  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)

<span id="ix.vi-p6"></span>**5** *That* at what time ye hear the sound
of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds
of musick, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar
the king hath set up.

<span id="ix.vi-p7"></span>**5.** Simulae audieritis vocem cornu, *vel,
tuboe,* fistulae, citharae, sambucae, psalterii, symphoniae, et omnia
instrumenta musices: ut procidatis, et adoretis imaginem auream, quam
erexit Nebuchadnezer rex.

<span id="ix.vi-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.vi-p9"></span>I do not know of what kind these musical
instruments were.

<span id="ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p1"></span><span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#006)<span id="ix.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p2"></span>**6.** And whoso falleth not down and
worshippeth, shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning
fiery furnace.

<span id="ix.vii-p3"></span>**6.** Et quisquis non prociderit  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) et adoraverit, caderm hora,  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) projicietur in inedium fornacem ignis
ardentis, *vel, ardenteng.*

<span id="ix.vii-p6"></span>**7.** Therefore at that time, when all the
people heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery,
and all kinds of musick, all the people, the nations, and the languages,
fell down *and* worshipped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king
had set up.

<span id="ix.vii-p7"></span>**7.** Itaque simulatque, *aedem hora
atque,* audierint omnes populi vocem cornu, fistulea, citharea,
sambucae, psalterii et omniurm instrumentorum musices, prociderunt omnes
populi, gentes et linguae adorantes imagmem auream, quam erexerat
Nebuchad nezer rex.

<span id="ix.vii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.vii-p9"></span><span id="ix.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p10"></span>We see how Nebuchadnezzar wished to
establish among all the nations under his sway a religion in which
there, should be no mixture of foreign novelty. He feared dissension as
a cause of disunion in his empire. Hence we may suppose the king to have
consulted his own private ease and advantage, as princes are accustomed
to consult their own wishes rather than God’s requirements in
promulgating edicts concerning the worship of God. And from the
beginning, this boldness and rashness have increased in the world, since
those who have had supreme power have always dared to fabricate deities,
and have proceeded beyond this even to ordering the gods which they have
invented to be worshipped. The different kinds of gods are well known as
divided into three — the Philosophical, the Political, and the Poetical.
They called those gods “Philosophical” which natural reason prompts men
to worship. Truly, indeed, philosophers are often foolish when they
dispute about the essence or worship of God; but since they follow their
own fancies they are necessarily erroneous. For God cannot be
apprehended by human senses, but must be made manifest to us by his own
word; and as he descends to us, so we also in turn are raised to heaven.
(<span id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>[1Co
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span id="ix.vii-p10.1"></span>.)
But yet philosophers in their disputes have some pretexts, so as not to
seem utterly insane and irrational. But the poets have fabled whatever
pleases them, and thus have filled the world with the grossest and at
the same time the foulest errors. As all theaters resounded with their
vain imaginations, the minds of the vulgar have been imbued with the
same delusions; for we know human dispositions are ever prone to vanity.
But when the devil adds fire to the fuel, we then see how furiously both
learned and unlearned are carried away. So it; happened when they
persuaded themselves of the truth of what they saw represented in their
theaters. Thus, that; religion which was founded on the authority of the
Magi was considered certain by the heathen, as they called those gods
“Political” which were received by the common consent of all. Those also
who were considered prudent said it was by no means useful to object to
what the philosophers taught concerning the nature of the gods, since
this would tear asunder all public rites, and whatever was fixed
without; doubt in men’s minds. For both the Greeks and Latins, as well
as other barbarous nations, worshipped certain gods as he mere offspring
of opinion, and these they confessed to have once been mortal. But
philosophers at least retained this principle — the gods are eternal;
and if the philosophers had been listened to, the authority of the Magi
would have fallen away. Hence the most worldly-wise were not ashamed, as
I have mentioned, to urge the expulsion of philosophy from sacred
things.

<span id="ix.vii-p11"></span>With regard to the Poets, the most politic
were compelled to succumb to the petulance of the common people, and yet
they taught at the same time what the poets reigned and fabled
concerning the nature of the gods was pernicious. This, then, was the
almost universal rule throughout the world as to the worship of God, and
the very foundation of piety — namely, no deities are to be worshipped
except those which have been handed down from our forefathers. And this
is the tendency of the oracle of Apollo which Xenophon  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) in the character of Socrates so
greatly praises, namely, every city ought, to worship the gods of its
own country! For when Apollo was consulted concerning the best religion,
with the view of cherishing the errors by which all nations were
intoxicated, he commanded them not to change anything in their public
devotions, and pronounced that religion the best for every city and
people which had been received from the furthest antiquity. This was a
wonderful imposture of the devil, as he was unwilling to stir up men’s
minds to reflect upon what was really right, but he retained them in
that old lethargy — “Ha! the authority of your ancestors is sufficient
for you!” The greatest wisdom among the profane was, as I have said, to
cause consent to be taken for reason. Meanwhile, those who were supreme
either in empire, or influence, or dignity, assumed to themselves the
right of fashioning new deities; for we see how many dedicated temples
to fictitious deities, because they were commanded by authority. Hence
it is by no means surprising for Nebuchadnezzar to take this license of
setting up a new deity. Perhaps he dedicated this statue to Bel, who is
considered as the Jupiter of the Chaldeans; but yet he wished to
introduce a new religion by means of which his memory might be
celebrated by posterity. Virgule  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) derides this folly when he says:

<span id="ix.vii-p14"></span>And he increases the number of deities by
altars. For he means, however men may erect numerous altars on earth,
they cannot increase the number of the gods in heaven. Thus, therefore,
Nebuchadnezzar increased the number of the deities by a single altar,
that is, introduced a new rite to make the statue a monument to himself,
and his own name famous as long as that religion flourished. Here we
perceive how grossly he abused his power; for he did not consult his own
Magi as he might have done, nor even reflect within himself whether that
religion was lawful or not; but through being blinded by pride, he
wished to fetter the minds of all, and to compel them to adopt what he
desired. Hence we gather how vain profane men are when they pretend to
worship, God, while at the same time they wish to be superior to God
himself. For they do not admit any pure thought, or even apply
themselves to the knowledge of God, but they make their will law, just
as it pleases them. They do not adore God, but rather their own fiction.
Such was the pride of King Nebuchadnezzar, as appears from his own
edict.

<span id="ix.vii-p15"></span>*King Nebuchadnezzar sent to collect all
the satraps, generals, and prefects, to come to the dedication of the
image, which King Nebuchadnezzar had erected.* The name of the king is
always added, except in one place, as though the royal power raised
mortals to such a height that they could fabricate deities by their own
right! We observe how the king of Babylon claimed the right of causing
the statue to be worshipped as a god, while it was not set up by any
private or ordinary person but by the king himself. While, the royal
power is rendered conspicuous in the world, kings do not acknowledge it
to be their duty to restrain themselves within the bounds of law, so
long as they remain obedient to God. And at this day we see with what
arrogance all earthly monarchs conduct themselves. For they never
inquire what is agreeable to the word of God, and in accordance with
*sincere piety;* but they defend the errors received from their
forefathers, by the interposition of the royal name, and think their own
previous decision to be sufficient, and object to the worship of any
god, except by their permission and decree. With respect to the
dedication, we know it to have been customary among the heathens to
consecrate their pictures and statues before they adored them. And to
this day the same error is maintained in the Papacy. For as long as
images remain with the statuary or the painter, they ax not venerated;
but as soon as an image is dedicated by any private ceremony, (which the
Papists call a “devotion,”) or by any public and solemn rite, the tree,
the wood, the stone, and the colors become a god! The Papists also have
fixed ceremonies among their exorcisms in consecrating statues and
pictures. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, when he wished his image to be
esteemed in the place of God, consecrated it by a solemn rite, and as we
have said, this usage was customary among the heathen. He does not here
mention the common people, for all could not assemble in one place; but
the prefects and elders were ordered to come, and they would bring
numerous attendants with them then they bring forward the king’s edict,
and each takes care to erect some monument in his own province, whence
it may spread the appearance of all their subjects worshipping as a god
the statue which the king had erected.

<span id="ix.vii-p16"></span>It now follows — All *the satraps,
prefects, generals, elders, treasurers, and magistrates came and stood
before the image which King Nebuchadnezzar had set up.* It is not
surprising that the prefects obeyed the king’s edict, since they had no
religion but what they had received from their fathers. But obedience to
the king weighed with them more then reverence for antiquity; as in
these times, if any king either invents a new superstition, or departs
from the papacy, or wishes to restore God’s pure worship, a sudden
change is directly perceived in all prefects, and in all countries, and
senators. Why so? Because they had neither fear God nor sincerely
reverence him, but depend on the king’s will and flatter him like
slaves, and thus they all approve, and if need be applaud, whatever
pleases the king. It is not surprising then if the Chaldean elders, who
knew nothing experimentally of the true God or of true piety, are so
prone to worship this statue. Hence also, we collect the great
instability of the profane, who have never been taught true religion in
the school of God. For they will bend every moment to any breezes, just
as leaves are moved by the wind blowing among trees; and because they
have never taken root in God’s truth, they are necessarily changeable,
and are borne hither and thither with every blast. But a king’s edict is
not simply a wind, but a violent tempest, and no one can oppose their
decrees with impunity; consequently those who are not solidly based upon
God’s word, do not act from true piety, but are borne away by the
strength of the storm.

<span id="ix.vii-p17"></span><span id="ix.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p18"></span>It is afterwards added — A *herald cried
out lustily, or* among the multitude. This latter explanation does not
suit so well — the herald crying amidst the multitude — -since there
were a great concourse of nations, and the kingdom of Babylon
comprehended many provinces. *The herald,* therefore, *cried with a loud
voice, An edict is gone forth for you, O nations, peoples, and tongues.*
This would strike them with terror, since the king made no exception to
his command for every province to worship his idol; for each person
would observe the rest, and when every one sees the whole multitude
*obedient,* no one would dare to refuse; hence all liberty is at an end.
It now follows, — When *ye hear the sound of the* *trumpet or horn,
harp, pipe, psaltery, sackbut, etc., ye must fall down and adore the
image. But whoever did not fall down before it, should be cast the same
hour into a burning fiery furnace.* This would excite the greater
terror, since King Nebuchadnezzar sanctioned this impious worship with a
punishment so severe; for he was not content with a usual kind of death,
but commanded every one who did not worship the statue to be cast into
the fire. Now, this denunciation of punishment sufficiently demonstrates
now the king suspected some of rebellion. There would have been no
dispute if Jews had not been mixed with Chaldeans and Assyrians, for
they always worshipped the same gods, and it was a prevailing custom
with them to worship those deities whom their kings approved. Hence it
appears that the statue was purposely erected to give the king an
opportunity of accurately ascertaining whether the Jews, as yet
unaccustomed to Gentile superstitions, were obedient to his command. He
wished to cause the sons of Abraham to lay aside sincere piety, and to
submit to his corruption’s, by following the example of others, and
framing their conduct according to the king’s will and the practice of
the people among whom they dwelt. But we shall treat this hereafter.

<span id="ix.vii-p19"></span><span id="ix.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p20"></span>Respecting the required adoration, nothing
but outward observance was needed. King Nebuchadnezzar did not exact a
verbal profession of belief in this deity, that is, in the divinity of
the statue which he commanded to be worshipped; it was quite sufficient
to offer to it merely outward worship. We here see how idolatry is
deservedly condemned in those who pretend to worship idols, even if they
mentally refrain and only act through fear and the compulsion of regal
authority; that excuse is altogether frivolous. We see, then, how this
king or tyrant, though he fabricated this image by the cunning of the
devil, exacted nothing else than the bending the knees of all the people
and nations before the statue. And truly he had in this way alienated
the Jews from the worship of the one true God, if this had been extorted
from them. For God wishes first of all for inward worship, and
afterwards for outward profession. The principal altar for the worship
of God ought to be situated in our minds, for God is worshipped
spiritually by faith, prayer, and other acts of piety. (<span
id="ix.vii-p20.1"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="ix.vii-p20.1"></span>.)
It is also necessary to add outward profession, not only that we may
exercise ourselves in God’s worship, but offer ourselves wholly to him,
and bend before him both bodily and mentally, and devote ourselves
entirely to him, as Paul teaches. (<span id="ix.vii-p20.2"></span>[1Co
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)<span id="ix.vii-p20.2"></span>;
<span id="ix.vii-p20.3"></span>[1Th
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="ix.vii-p20.3"></span>.)
Thus far, then, concerning both the adoration and the penalty.

<span id="ix.vii-p21"></span><span id="ix.vii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p22"></span>It follows *again,* — *As soon as the burst
of the trumpets was heard and the sound of so many instruments, all
nations, peoples, and tongues fell down and adored the image which King
Nebuchadnezzar had set up* Here I may repeat what I said before — all
men were very obedient to the injunctions of their monarchs; whatever
they ordered was obeyed, so long as it did not cause complete ruin; and
they often bore the heaviest burdens with the view of perfect
conformity. But we must remark how our propensities have always a
vicious tendency. If King Nebuchadnezzar had commanded the God of Israel
to be worshipped, and all temples to be overthrown, and all altars
throughout his empire to be thrown down, very great tumults would
doubtless have arisen; for the devil so fascinates men’s minds that they
remain pertinaciously fixed in the errors which they have imbibed. Hence
the Chaldeans, Assyrians, and others would never have been induced to
obey without the greatest difficulty. But now, on the appearance of the
signal, they directly fall down and adore the golden statue. Hence we
may learn to reflect upon our own character, as in a mirror, with the
view of submitting ourselves to God’s Word, and of being immovable in
the right faith, and of standing unconquered in our consistency,
whatever kings may command. Although a hundred deaths may threaten us,
they must not weaken our faith, for unless God restrain us by his Curb,
we should instantly start aside to every species of vanity; and
especially if a king introduces corruption’s among us, we are
immediately carried away by them, and, as we said, are far too prone to
vicious and perverse modes of worship. The Prophet repeats again the
king’s name to shew us how little the multitude thought of pleasing God;
never considering whether the worship was sacred and sound, but simply
content; with the king’s nod. The Prophet deservedly condemns this easy
indifference.

<span id="ix.vii-p23"></span>We should learn also from this passage, not
to be induced, by the will of any man to embrace any kind of religion,
but diligently to inquire what worship God approves, and so to use our
judgment as not rashly to involve ourselves in any superstitions.
Respecting the use of musical instruments, I confess it to be customary
in the Church even by God’s command; but the intention of the Jews and
of the Chaldeans was different. For when the Jews used trumpets and
harps and other instruments in celebrating God’s praises, they ought not
to have obtruded this custom on God as if it was the proof of piety; but
it ought to have another object, since God wished to use all means of
stirring men up from their sluggishness, for we know how cold we grow in
the pursuits of *piety,* unless we are aroused. God, therefore, used
these stimulants to cause the Jews to worship him with greater fervor.
But the Chaldeans thought to satisfy their god by heaping together many
musical instruments. For, like other persons, they supposed God like
themselves, for whatever delights us, we think must also please the
Deity. Hence the immense heap of ceremonies in the Papacy, since our
eyes delight in such splendors; hence we think this to be required of us
by God, as if he delighted in what pleases us. This is, indeed, a gross
error. There is no doubt that the harp, trumpet, and other musical
instruments with which Nebuchadnezzar worshipped his idol, formed a part
of his errors, and so also did the gold. God, indeed, wished his
sanctuary to manifest some splendor; not that gold, silver, and precious
stones please him by themselves, but he wished to commend his glory to
his people, since under this figure they might understand why everything
precious should be offered to God, as it is sacred to him. The Jews,
indeed, had many ceremonies, and much of what is called magnificent
splendor in the worship of God, and still the principle of spiritual
worship yet remained among them. The profane, while they invented gross
deities which they reverenced according to their pleasure, thought it a
proof of perfect sanctity, if they sang beautifully, if they used plenty
of gold and silver, and if they employed showy utensils in these
sacrifices. I must leave the rest for tomorrow.

<span id="ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ix.viii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we always wander
miserably in our thoughts, and in our attempts to worship thee we only
profane the true and pure reverence of thy Divinity, and are easily
drawn aside to depraved superstition, — Grant that we may remain in pure
obedience to thy word, and never bend aside from it in any way. Instruct
us by the unconquered fortitude of thy Spirit. May we never yield to any
terrors or threats of man, but persevere in reverencing thy name even to
the end. However the world may rage after its own diabolic errors, may
we never turn out of the right path, but continue in the right course in
which thou invitees us, until, after finishing our race, we arrive at
that happy rest which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ix.ix-p1"></span>Lecture Fourteenth

<span id="ix.x"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p1"></span><span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008)<span id="ix.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p2"></span>**8.** Wherefore at that time certain
Chaldeans came near, and accused the Jews.

<span id="ix.x-p3"></span>**8.** Itaque statim,  <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) appropinquarunt viri Chaldaei, et
vociferati sunt accusationem contra Iudaeos.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="ix.x-p6"></span>**9.** They spake and said to the king
Nebuchadnezzar, O king, live for ever.

<span id="ix.x-p7"></span>**9.** Loquuti sunt, et dixerut Nebuchadnezer
regi, Rex, in aeternum vive.

<span id="ix.x-p8"></span>**10.** Thou, O king, hast made a decree, that
every man that shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut,
psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, shall fall down and
worship the golden image:

<span id="ix.x-p9"></span>**10.** Tu, rex, posuisti edictum, ut omnis
homo cum audiret vocem cornu, *vel, tuboe,* fistulae, citharae,
sambucae, psalterii, et symphoniae, et omnium instrumentorum musices,
procideret, et adoraret imaginem auream.

<span id="ix.x-p10"></span>**11.** And who so falleth not down and
worshippeth, *that* he should be cast into the midst of a burning fiery
furnace.

<span id="ix.x-p11"></span>**11.** Et qui non prociderit, et adoraverit,
projiciatur in medium, *vel, intra,* fornacem ignis ardentis.

<span id="ix.x-p12"></span>**12.** There are certain Jews whom thou hast
set over the affairs of the province of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego; these men, O king, have not regarded thee: they serve not thy
gods, nor worship the golden image which thou hast set up.

<span id="ix.x-p13"></span>**12.** Sunt viri Iudaei, quos ipsos
posuisti, *id est, proefecisti,* super administrationem, *vel, opus,*
provineiae Babylonis, Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego, viri isti non
posuerunt ad to, rex, cogitationem  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) deum tuum  <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) non colunt, et imaginem auream quam tu
erexisti non adorant.

<span id="ix.x-p16"></span> 

<span id="ix.x-p17"></span><span id="ix.x-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p18"></span>Although their intention is not here
expressed who accused Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, yet we gather
from this event that the thing was most probably done on purpose when
the king set up the golden image. We see how they were observed, and, as
we said *yesterday,* Nebuchadnezzar seems to have followed the common
practice of kings. For although they proudly despise God, yet they arm
themselves with religion to strengthen their power, and pretend to
encourage the worship of God for the single purpose of retaining the
people in obedience. When, therefore, the Jews were mingled with
Chaldeans and Assyrians, the king expected to meet with many differences
of opinion, and so he placed the statue in a celebrated place by way of
trial and experiment, whether the Jews would adopt the Babylonian rites.
Meanwhile this passage teaches us how the king was probably instigated
by his counselors, as they were indignant at strangers being made
prefects of the province of Babylon while they were slaves; for they had
become exiles by the right of warfare. Since then the Chaldeans were
indignant, they were impelled by envy to suggest this advice to the
king. For how did they so suddenly discover that the Jews paid no
reverence to the statue, and especially Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego?
Truly, the thing speaks for itself. These men watched to see what the
Jews would do and hence we readily ascertain how they, from the
beginning, laid the snare by advising the king to fabricate the statue.
And when they tumultuously accuse the Jews, we perceive how they were
filled with envy and hatred. It may be said, they were inflamed with
jealousy, since superstitious men wish to impose the same law upon all,
and then their passion is increased by cruelty. But simple rivalry, as
we may perceive, corrupted the Chaldeans, and caused them clamorously to
accuse the Jews.

<span id="ix.x-p19"></span>It is uncertain whether they spoke of the
whole nation generally, namely, of all the exiles, or pointed out those
three persons only. The accusation was probably restricted to Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego. If these three could be broken down, the victory
over the rest was easy. But few could be found in the whole people hardy
enough to resist. We may well believe these clamorers wished to attack
those whom they knew to be spirited and consistent beyond all others,
and also to degrade them from those honors which they could not bear
them to enjoy. It may be asked, then, why did they spare Daniel, since
he would never consent to dissemble by worshipping the statue which the
king commanded to be set up? They must have let Daniel alone for the
time, since they knew him to be in favor wig the king; but they brought
the charge against these three, because they could be oppressed with far
less trouble. I think them to have been induced by this cunning in not
naming Daniel with the other three, lest his favor should mitigate the
king’s wrath. The form of accusation is added — *O king, live for ever!*
It was the common salutation. *Thou, O king!* — this is emphatic, as if
they had said, “Thou hast uttered this edict from thy royal authority,
*whoever hears the sound of the trumpet,* or horn, *harp, pipe,
psaltery, and other musical instruments, shall fall down before the
golden statue; whoever should refuse to do this should be cast into the
burning fiery furnace. But here are some Jews whom thou hast set over
the administration of the province of Babylon* They add this through
hatred, and through reproving the ingratitude of men admitted to such
high honor and yet despising the king’s authority, and inducing others
to follow the same example of disrespect. We see then how this was said
to magnify their crime. *The king has set them over the province of
Babylon, and yet these men do not adore the golden image nor worship the
gods.* Here is the crime. We see how the Chaldeans, throughout the whole
speech, condemn Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego of this single crime —
a refusal to obey the king’s edict. They enter into no dispute about
their own religion, for it would not have suited their purpose to allow
any question to be raised as to the claim their own deities had to
supreme adoration. They omit, therefore, everything which they perceive
would not suit them, and seize upon this weapon — the king is treated
with contempt, because Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego do not worship
the image as the king’s edict ordered them to do.

<span id="ix.x-p20"></span>Here, again, we see how the superstitious do
not apply their minds to the real inquiry how they should piously and
properly worship God; but they neglect this duty and follow their own
audacity and lust. Since therefore the Holy Spirit sets before us such
rashness, as in a mirror, let us learn. that God cannot approve of our
worship unless it be offered. up with truth. Here human authority is
utterly unavailing, because unless we are sure that our religion is
pleasing to. God, whatever man can do for us will only add to our
weakness. While we observe those holy men charged with the crime of
ingratitude and rebellion, we in these times ought not to be grieved by
it. Those who calumniate us reproach us with despising the edicts of
kings who wish to bind us by their errors; but, as we shall see by and
bye, our defense is obvious and easy. Meanwhile we ought to undergo this
infamy before the world, as if we were disobedient and unmanageable; and
with respect to ingratitude, even if a thousand wicked men should lead
us with reproaches, we must bear their calumnies for the time patiently,
until the Lord shall shine upon us as the assertor of our innocence. It
now follows, —

<span id="ix.xi"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#013)<span id="ix.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p2"></span>**13.** Then Nebuchadnezzar in *his* rage and
fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they
brought these men before the king.

<span id="ix.xi-p3"></span>**13.** Tunc Nebuchadnezer cum iracundia et
excandescentia,  <span id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) jussit adduci
Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego: viri autem illi adduxerunt coram rege.
 <span id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179)

<span id="ix.xi-p6"></span>**14.** Nebuchadnezzar spake and said unto
them, *Is it* true, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, do not ye serve
my gods, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?

<span id="ix.xi-p7"></span>**14.** Loquutus est Nebuchadnezer, et dixit
illis, Verumne, Sadrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego, deos meos non colitis,
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) et imaginem auream quam statui,
 <span id="fr_181"></span>[182](#fn_181) non adoratis?

<span id="ix.xi-p10"></span>**15.** Now if ye be ready that at what time
ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and
dulcimer, and all kinds of musick, ye fall down and worship the image
which I have made, *well:* but if ye worship not, ye shall be cast the
same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace; and who *is* that
God that shall deliver you out of my hands?

<span id="ix.xi-p11"></span>15. Nunc ecce parati eritis,  <span
id="fr_182"></span>[183](#fn_182) simulac audiveritis vocem cornu,
*vel,* *tuboe,* fistulae, citharae, sambucae, psalterii, symphoniae, et
omnium instrumentorum musices, ut procidatis, et adoretis imaginem quam
feci. Quoad si non adoraveritis, eadem hora projiciemini in medium
fornacis ignis ardentis; et quis ille Deus qui cruat vos e manu mea?

<span id="ix.xi-p13"></span> 

<span id="ix.xi-p14"></span><span id="ix.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p15"></span>This narrative clearly assures us, how kings
consult only their own grandeur by a show of piety, when they claim the
place of their deities. For it seems very wonderful for King
Nebuchadnezzar to insult all the gods, as if there was no power in
heaven unless what he approved off *What god*, says he, *can pluck out
of my hand?* Why then did he worship any deity? Simply to retain the
people by a curb, and fires to strengthen his own power, without the
slightest affection of piety abiding within his mind. At the beginning
Daniel relates how the king was inflamed with wrath. For nothing is more
troublesome to kings than to see their authority despised; they wish
every one to be obedient to themselves, even when their commands are
most unjust After the king is cool again, he asks Shadraeh, Meshaeh, and
Abed-nego, whether they were prepared to worship his god and his golden
image? Since he addresses them doubtfully, and gives them a free choice,
his words imply moderation. He seems to free them from all blame, if
they will only bow themselves down hereafter. He now adds directly, *if
ye are not prepared, behold I will throw you into a furnace of burning
fire;* and at length breaks forth into that sacrilegious and dreadful
blasphemy — There is no god who can deliver the saints alive out of his
hand!

<span id="ix.xi-p16"></span>We see, then, in the person of
Nebuchadnezzar, how kings swell with pride, while they pretend some zeal
for piety; since in reality no reverence for God influences them, while
they expect all men to obey every command. And thus, as I have said,
they rather substitute themselves for God, than desire to worship him
and promote his glory. This is the meaning of the words, *the statue
which I have created, and which I have made;* as if he had said, You are
not allowed to deliberate about worshipping this image or not,; my
orders ought to be sufficient for you. I have erected it purposely and
designedly; it was your duty simply to obey me. We see then how he
claims the supreme power, by fashioning a god. Nebuchadnezzar is not now
treating matters of state policy; he wishes the statue to he adored as a
deity, because he had decreed it, and had promulgated his edict. And we
must always remember what I have touched upon, namely, this example of
pride is set before us, to shew us not to attach ourselves to any
religion with rashness, but to listen to God and depend on his authority
and commands, since if we listen to man, our errors would be endless.
Although kings are so proud and ferocious, yet we must be guided by this
rule — Nothing pleases God but what he has commanded in his word; and
the principle of true piety is the obedience which we ought to render to
him alone. With respect to blasphemy, it clearly demonstrates my
previous assertion, however kings put forward some desire for piety, yet
they despise every deity, and think of nothing but extolling their own
magnificence. Hence, they traffic in the name of God to attract greater
reverence towards themselves; but at the same time, if they choose to
change their deities a hundred times a-day, no sense of religion will
hinder them. Religion, then, is to the kings of the earth nothing but a
pretext; but they have neither reverence nor fear of God in their minds,
as the language of this profane king proves. *What God?* says he,
clearly there is no God. If any one reply — he speaks comparatively,
since he here defends the glory of his own god whom he worshipped, still
he utters this blasphemy against all gods, and is impelled by
intolerable arrogance and diabolical fury. We are now coming to the
principal point where Daniel relates the constancy with which Shadraeh,
Meshach, and Abed-nego were endued.

<span id="ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016)<span id="ix.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p2"></span>**16.** Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego,
answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we *are* not careful to
answer thee in this matter.

<span id="ix.xii-p3"></span>**16.** Responderunt Sadrach, Mesach, et
Abednego, et dixerunt regi; Nebuchadnezer, non sumus soliciti super hoc
sermone,  <span id="fr_183"></span>[184](#fn_183) quid respondeamus
tibi.  <span id="fr_184"></span>[185](#fn_184)

<span id="ix.xii-p6"></span>**17.** If it be *so,* our God whom we serve
is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will
deliver *us* out of thine hand, O king.

<span id="ix.xii-p7"></span>**17.** Ecce est Deus noster, quem nos
colimus, potens, *id est, potest,* liberare nos e fornace ignis
ardentis, et e manu tua, rex eruet.

<span id="ix.xii-p8"></span>**18.** But if not, be it known unto thee, O
king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image
which thou hast set up.

<span id="ix.xii-p9"></span>**18.** Et si non, notum sit tibi, O rex,
quod deos tuos nos non colimus, et imaginem auream quam erexisti, non
adorabimus.

<span id="ix.xii-p10"></span> 

<span id="ix.xii-p11"></span><span id="ix.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p12"></span>In this history it; is necessary to observe
with what unbroken spirit these three holy men persisted in the fear of
God, though they knew they were in danger of instant death. When,
therefore, this kind of death was placed straight before their eyes,
they did not turn aside from the straightforward course, but treated
God’s glory of greater value than their own life, nay, than a hundred
lives, if they had so many to pour forth, and opportunity had been given
them. Daniel does not relate all their words, but only their import, in
which the unconquered virtue of that Holy Spirit, by which they had been
instructed, is sufficiently evident; for that denunciation was
*certainly* dreadful, when the king said, *If ye are not prepared to
fall down at the sound of the trumpet before the image, its all over
with you, and ye shall be directly cast into a furnace of fire.* When
the king had so fulminated, they might have winced, as men usually do,
since life is naturally dear to us, and a dread of death seizes upon our
senses. But Daniel relates all these circumstances, to assure us of the
great fortitude of God’s servants when they are led by his Spirit, and
yield to no threats, and succumb to no terrors. They answer the king, We
do not need any long deliberation. For when they say they care not, they
mean by this word, the matter is settled; just as that sentence of
Cyprian is related by Augustine,  <span
id="fr_185"></span>[186](#fn_185) when courtiers persuaded him to
preserve his life, for it was with great reluctance that the emperor
devoted him to death, when flatterers on all sides urged him to redeem
his life by the denial of piety, he answered, There can be no
deliberation in a matter so sacred! Thus those holy men say, *We do not
care,* we do not enter into the consideration of what is expedient or
useful, no such thing! for we ought to settle it with ourselves never to
be induced by any reason to withdraw from the sincere worship of God.

<span id="ix.xii-p14"></span>If you please to read — *we ought not to
answer you,* the sense will be the same. They imply that the fear of
death was set before them in vain, because they had determined and
resolved in their inmost souls, not to depart a single inch from the
true and lawful worship of God. Besides they here give a double reason
for rejecting the king’s proposal. They say God has sufficient power and
strength to liberate them; and then, even if they must die, their life
is not of so much value as to deny God for the sake of preserving it.
Hence they declare themselves prepared to die, if the king persists in
urging his wish for the adoration of the image. This passage is
therefore worthy of the greatest attention. First of all we must observe
the answer — for when men entice us to deny the true God we must close
our ears, and refuse all deliberation; for we have already committed an
atrocious insult against God, when we even question the propriety of
swerving from the purity of his worship through any impulse or any
reason whatever. And I heartily wish every one would observe this! How
excellent and striking is the glory of God, and how everything ought to
yield to it, whenever there is danger of its being either diminished or
obscured. But at this day, this fallacy deceives the multitude, since
they think it lawful to debate whether it is allowable to swerve front
the true worship of God for a time, whenever any utility presents itself
on the opposite side. Just as in our days, we see how hypocrites, of
whom the world is full, have pretenses by which they cloak their
delinquencies, when they either worship idols with the impious, or deny
at one time openly, and at another obliquely, true piety. “Oh! what can
happen? — such a one will say — of what value is consistency? I see some
evident advantage if I can only dissemble a little, and not betray what
I am. Ingenuousness is injurious not only to me privately, but to all
around me!” If a king has none around him who endeavor to appease his
wrath, the wicked would give way to their passions, and by their greater
license would drive him to the extremity of cruelty. It is, therefore,
better to have, some mediators on the watch to observe whether the
wicked are planning anything. Thus, if they cannot openly, they may
covertly avert danger from the heads of the pious. By such reasoning as
this, they think they can satisfy God. As if Shadraeh, Meshaeh, and
Abed-nego, had not the same excuse; as if the following thought would
not occur to them — “Behold! we are armed with some power in favor of
our brethren; now what barbarity, what cruelty will be exercised against
them, if the enemies of the religion which they profess succeed us? For
as far as they can, they will overthrow and blot out our race and the
very remembrance of piety. Is it not better for us to yield for a time
to the tyranny and violent edict of the king than to leave our places
empty? which the furious will by and bye occupy, who will utterly
destroy our wretched race which is now dreadfully oppressed.” Shadraeh,
Meshaeh, and Abed-nego might, I say, collect all these pretenses and
excuses to palliate their perfidy if they had bent the knee before the
golden image for the sake of avoiding danger; but they did not act thus.
Hence, as I have already said, God retains his rights entire when his
worship is upheld without the slightest doubt, and we are thoroughly
persuaded that nothing is of such importance as to render it lawful and
right to swerve from that profession which his word both demands and
exacts.

<span id="ix.xii-p15"></span>On the whole, that security which ought to
confirm the pious in the worship of God is opposed here to all those
tortuous and mistaken counsels which some men adopt, and thus, for the
sake of living, lose life itself, according to the sentiment of even a
profane poet. For of what use is life except to serve God’s glory? but
we lose that object in life for the sake of the life itself — that is,
by desiring to live entirely to the; world, we lose the very purpose of
living! Thus, then, Daniel opposes the simplicity which ought to mark
the sons of God to all those excuses which dissemblers invent with the
view of hiding their wickedness by a covering. *We are not anxious,* say
they, and why not? Because we have already determined God’s glory to be
of more consequence than a thousand lives, and the gratification of a
thousand senses. Hence, when this magnanimity flourishes, all hesitation
will vanish, and those who are called upon to incur danger through their
testimony for the truth need never trouble themselves; for, as I before
said, their ears are closed to all the enticements of Satan.

<span id="ix.xii-p16"></span><span id="ix.xii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p17"></span>And when they add — *God is sufficiently
powerful to preserve us; and if not, we are prepared for death,* they
point out to us what ought to raise our minds above all trials, namely,
the preciousness of our life in God’s sight, since he can liberate us if
he pleases. Since, therefore, we have sufficient protection in God, let
us not think any method of preserving our life better than to throw
ourselves entirely on his protection, and to cast all our cares upon
him. And as to the second clause, we must remark this, even if the Lord
should wish to magnify his own glory by our death, we ought to offer up
this as a lawful sacrifice; and sincere piety does not flourish in our
hearts unless our minds are always prepared to make this sacrifice. Thus
I wished to remark these things shortly now, and with God’s permission,
I will explain them fully to-morrow.

<span id="ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we see the
impious carried away by their impure desires with so strong an impulse;
and while they are so puffed up with arrogance, may we learn true
humility, and so subject ourselves to thee that we may always depend
upon thy word and always attend to thy instructions. When we have
learned what worship pleases thee, may we constantly persist unto the
end, and never be moved by any threats, or dangers, or violence, from
our position, nor drawn aside from our course; but by persevering:
obedience to thy word, may we shew our alacrity and obedience, until
thou dost acknowledge us as thy sons, and we are gathered to that
eternal inheritance which thou hast prepared for all members of Christ
thy Son. — Amen.

<span id="ix.xiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p1"></span>Lecture Fifteenth

<span id="ix.xiv-p2"></span><span id="ix.xiv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xiv-p3"></span>WE said yesterday that the constancy of
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, was based upon these two
reasons:-Their certain persuasion that God was the guardian of their
life, and would free them from present death by his power if it were
useful. And also their determination to die boldly and fearlessly, if
God wished such a sacrifice to be offered. What Daniel relates of these
three men belongs to us all. Hence we may gather this general
instruction. When our danger for the truth’s sake is imminent, we should
learn to place our life in God’s hand, and then bravely and fearlessly
devote ourselves to death. As to the *first* point, experience teaches
us how very many turn aside from God and the profession of faith, since
they do not feel confidence in God’s power to liberate them. It may be
said with truth of us all — God takes care of us, since our life is
placed in his hand and will; but scarcely one in a hundred holds this
deeply and surely fixed in his heart, since every one takes his own way
of preserving his life, as if there were no virtue in God. Hence he has
made some proficiency in God’s word who has learnt to place his life in
God’s care, and to consider it safe under his protection. For if he has
made progress thus far, he may be in danger a hundred times, yet he will
never hesitate to follow whenever he is called. This one feeling frees
him from all fear and trembling, since God can extricate his servants
from a thousand deaths, as it is said in the Psalm, (<span
id="ix.xiv-p3.1"></span>[Ps 68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020)<span
id="ix.xiv-p3.1"></span>,) The issues of death are in his power. For
death seems to consume all things; but God snatches from that whirlpool
whom he pleases. So this persuasion ought to inspire us with firm and
unassailable constancy, since it is necessary for those who so repose
the whole care of their life and safety upon God, to be thoroughly
conscious and undoubtedly sure that God will defend a good cause. And
this is also expressed by these words of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego *Behold our God whom we worship* When they bring forward God’s
worship, they bear testimony to the surliness of their support, when
they undertake nothing rashly, but are worshippers of the true God, and
labor for the defense of piety. For this is the difference, between
martyrs and malefactors, who are often compelled to suffer the penalty
of their madness for attempting to overthrow all things. We see, indeed,
the majority tossed about by their own intemperance. If they happen to
suffer punishment, they are not to be reckoned among God’s martyrs; for,
as Augustine says, the martyr is made by his cause, and not by his
punishment. Hence the weight of these words, *when* these three men
attest their worship of God, since in this way they boast in their power
of enduring any urgent danger not rashly, but only as supported by the
sure worship of God. I now come to the *second* point.

<span id="ix.xiv-p4"></span>*If God be unwilling to deliver us from
death, be it known to thee, O king, we will not worship thy gods* I said
first of all, we should be constantly prepared to undergo every
conflict, to commit our life to his charge, to submit to his will and
hand, and to the protection of his custody. But the desire of this
earthly and fading life ought not; to retain its hold upon us, and to
hinder us from the free and candid confession of the truth. For God’s
glory ought to be more precious to us than a hundred lives. Hence we
cannot be witnesses for God without we lay aside all desire of this
life, and at least prefer God’s glory to it. Meanwhile, we must. remark
the impossibility of doing this, without the hope of a better life
drawing us towards itself. For where there is no promise of any eternal
inheritance implanted in our hearts, we. shall never be torn away from
this world. We are naturally desirous of existence, and that feeling
cannot be eradicated, unless faith overcome it; as Paul says, Not that
we wished to be unclothed, but clothed upon. (<span
id="ix.xiv-p4.1"></span>[2Co 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)<span
id="ix.xiv-p4.1"></span>.) Paul confesses that men cannot be naturally
induced to wish for departure from the world, unless, as we have said,
through the power of faith. But when we understand our inheritance to be
in heaven, while we are strangers upon earth, then we put off that
clinging to the life of this world to which we are too much devoted.

<span id="ix.xiv-p5"></span>These then are the two points which prepare
the sons of God for martyrdom, and remove hesitation as to their
offering their life in sacrifice to God. *First,* if they are persuaded
that God is the protector of their life and will certainly liberate them
should it be expedient; and *secondly,* when they live above the world
and aspire to the hope of eternal life in heaven, while prepared to
renounce the world. This magnanimity is to be remarked in their
language, when they say, *Be it known to thee, O king, that we do not
worship thy gods nor adore the statue which, thou hast set up* Here they
obliquely accuse the king of arrogating too much to himself, and of
wishing religion to stand or fall by his own will. *Thou hast erected
the statue,* but thy authority is of no moment to us, since we know it
to be a fictitious deity whose image thou wishest us to worship. The God
whom we worship has revealed himself to us we know him to be the maker
of heaven and earth, to have redeemed our fathers from Egypt, and to
intend our chastisement by driving us into exile. Since, therefore, we
have a firm foundation for our faith hence we reckon thy gods and thy
sway valueless. It follows:

<span id="ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#019)<span id="ix.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p2"></span>**19.** Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury,
and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego: *therefore* he spake, and commanded that they should heat the
furnace one seven times more than it was wont to be heated.

<span id="ix.xv-p3"></span>**19.** Tunc Nebuchadnezer repletus fuit
iracundia, et forma faciei ejus mutata fuit  <span
id="fr_186"></span>[187](#fn_186) erga Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego:
loquutus est, jussit, *vel, edixit,* accendi fornacem uno septies, *hoc
est, septuplo,* magis; quam solebat accendi.

<span id="ix.xv-p5"></span>**20.** And he commanded the most mighty men
that *were* in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, *and*
to cast *them* into the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="ix.xv-p6"></span>**20.** Et viris praestantibus robore, *vel,
robustis virtute,* qui erant in ejus satellitio  <span
id="fr_187"></span>[188](#fn_187) mandavit ut vincirent Sadrach, Mesach,
et Abednego, ut Projicerent *illos* in fornacem ignis ardentis.

<span id="ix.xv-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xv-p9"></span><span id="ix.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p10"></span>Here, at; first sight, God seems to desert
his servants, since he does not openly succor them. The king orders them
to be thrown into a furnace of fire: no help from heaven appears for
them. This was a living and remarkably efficacious proof of their
faithfulness. But they were prepared, as we have seen, to endure
everything. These bold answers were not prompted simply by their trust
in God’s immediate help, but by a determination to die; since a better
life occupied their thoughts, they willingly sacrificed the present
life. Hence they were not frightened at this terrible order of the
king’s, but followed on their course, fearlessly submitting to death for
the worship of God. No third way was opened for them, when a choice was
granted either to submit to death, or apostatize from the true God. By
this example we are taught to meditate on our immortal life in times of
ease, so that if God pleases, we may not hesitate to expose our souls by
the confession of the true faith. For we are so timorous when we are
attacked by calamity, we are seized with fear and torpor, and then when
we are not pressed by any urgency we feign for ourselves a false
security. When we are allowed to be at ease, we ought to apply our minds
to meditation upon a future life, so that this world may become cheap to
us, and we may be prepared when necessary to pour forth our blood in
testimony to the truth. And this narrative is not set before us simply
to lead us to admire and celebrate the courage of these three holy ones,
but their constancy is proposed to us as an example for imitation.

<span id="ix.xv-p11"></span>With reference to King Nebuchadnezzar,
Daniel here shews, as in a glass, the pride and haughtiness of kings
when they find their decrees disobeyed. Surely a mind of iron ought to
grow soft by the answer which we have just narrated, on hearing
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego committing their lives to God; but when
it heard how they could not be drawn aside from their faithfulness by
the fear of death, its anger was only increased. In considering this
fury, we ought to take into account the power of Satan in seizing and
occupying the minds of men. For there is no moderation in them, even if
they shew some great and remarkable hope of virtues, — for, as we have
seen, Nebuchadnezzar was endued with many virtues; but as Satan harassed
him, we discern nothing but cruelty and barbarity. Meanwhile, let us
remember how pleasing our constancy is to God, though it may not produce
any immediate fruit before the world. For many indulge in pleasure
through thinking they would be rash in devoting themselves to death,
without any apparent utility. And on this pretext, they excuse
themselves from not contending more boldly for the glory of God, by
supposing they would lose their labor, and their death would be
fruitless. But we hear what Christ pronounces, namely, this sacrifice is
pleasing to God, when we die for the testimony of the heavenly doctrine,
although the generation before which we bear witness to God’s name is
adulterous and perverse, nay, even hardened by our constancy. (<span
id="ix.xv-p11.1"></span>[Mt 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011)<span
id="ix.xv-p11.1"></span>, and <span id="ix.xv-p11.2"></span>[Mt
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032)<span id="ix.xv-p11.2"></span>,
and <span id="ix.xv-p11.3"></span>[Mr
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038)<span id="ix.xv-p11.3"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xv-p12"></span>And such an example is here set before us in
these three holy men; because, although Nebuchadnezzar was more inflamed
by the freedom of their confession, yet that; liberty pleased God, and
they did not repent of it, though they did not discern the fruit of
their constancy which they wished. The Prophet also expresses this
circumstance to demonstrate the king’s fury, since *he ordered the
furnace to be heated seven times hotter than before;* and then, *he
chose from his own servants the strongest of all to bind these holy men,
and cast them into the furnace of fire*

<span id="ix.xv-p13"></span>But from the result it is very evident, that
this did not occur without God’s secret impulse; for the devil will
sometimes throw discredit on a miracle, unless all doubt is removed.
Since therefore the king ordered the furnace to be heated sevenfold more
than before, next when he chose the strongest attendants, and commanded
them to follow him, God thus removed all doubts, by liberating his
servants, because light emerges more clearly from the darkness, when
Satan endeavors to shut it out. Thus God is accustomed to frustrate the
impious; and the more impious they are in opposing his glory, the more
he makes his honor and doctrine conspicuous. In like manner, Daniel here
paints, as in a picture, how King Nebuchadnezzar passed nothing by, when
he wished to strike terror into the minds of all the Jews by this cruel
punishment. And yet he obtained nothing else by his plans than a clearer
illustration of God’s power and grace towards his servants. It now
follows: —

<span id="ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#021)<span id="ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p2"></span>**21.** Then these men were bound in their
coats, their hosen, and their hats, and their *other* garments, and were
cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.

<span id="ix.xvi-p3"></span>**21.** Tunc viri illi vincti sunt, *vel,
ligati,* in suis chlamydibus,  <span id="fr_188"></span>[189](#fn_188)
et cum tiaris suis:  <span id="fr_189"></span>[190](#fn_189) in vestitu
suo: et projecti sunt in fornacem ignis ardentis.

<span id="ix.xvi-p7"></span>**22.** Therefore because the king’s
commandment was urgent, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the
fire slew those men that took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.

<span id="ix.xvi-p8"></span>**22.** Propterea quod urgebat, *vel,
festinabat, ud verbum* praeceptum regis, et fornacem vehementer jusserat
accendi, viros illos qui extulerant Sadrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego
occidit t kavilla, *alii vertunt fammam,* ignis.

<span id="ix.xvi-p9"></span>**23.** And these three men, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning
fiery furnace.

<span id="ix.xvi-p10"></span>**23.** Et viri illi tres Sadrach, Mesach
et Abednego ceciderant in medium fornacis ignis,  <span
id="fr_190"></span>[191](#fn_190) ardentis vincti.

<span id="ix.xvi-p12"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvi-p13"></span><span id="ix.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p14"></span>Here Daniel relates the miracle by which
God liberated his servants. He has two parts: first, these three holy
men walked untouched in the midst of the flame; and the fires consumed
those attendants who east them into the furnace. The Prophet diligently
enumerates whatever tends to prove the power of God. He says, *since the
king’s command was urgent,* that is, since the king ordered in such
anger the furnace to be heated, the flames devour the men who executed
his orders. For in Job, (<span id="ix.xvi-p14.1"></span>[Job
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005)<span id="ix.xvi-p14.1"></span>,)
<span id="ix.xvi-p14.2"></span>שביב, *shebib,* means “spark,” or the
extremity of a flame. The sense of the Prophet is by no means obscure,
since the extremity of the flame consumed those strong attendants by
playing round them, while Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego walked
through the fuel in the fire and flame. They were not in the extremity
of the flame; for it is as if the Prophet had said — the king’s slaves
were consumed by the very smoke, and the fire was without the slightest
effect on the servants of God. Hence he says, *these three fell down in
the furnace of fire* By saying *they fell,* it means they could not take
care of themselves or attempt to escape; for he adds, *they were bound.*
This might at first naturally suffocate them, till they were immediately
consumed; but they remained untouched, and then walked about the furnace
loose. We hereby see how conspicuous was God’s power, and how no
falsehood of Satan’s could obscure it. And next, when the very points of
the flame, or the fiery sparks, devour the servants, here again the deed
is proved to be of God. Meanwhile, the result of the history is the
preservation of these three holy men, so surprisingly beyond their
expectation.

<span id="ix.xvi-p15"></span>This example is set before us, to show us
how nothing can be safer than to make God the guardian and protector of
our life. For we ought not to expect to be preserved from every danger
because we see those holy men delivered; for we ought to hope for
liberation from death, if it be useful, and yet we ought not to hesitate
to meet it without fear, if God so please it. But we should gather from
our present narrative the sufficiency of God’s protection, if he wishes
to prolong our lives, since we know our life to be precious to him; and
it is entirely in his power, either to snatch us from danger, or to
withdraw us to a better existence, according to his pleasure. We have an
example of this in the case of Peter; for he was on one day led forth
from prison, and the next day put to death. Even then God shewed his
care of his servant’s life, although Peter at length suffered death. How
so? Because he had finished his course. Hence, as often as God pleases,
he will exert his power to preserve us; if he leads us onwards to death,
we must be assured it is best for us to die, and injurious to us to
enjoy life any longer. This is the substance of the instruction which we
may receive from this narrative. It now follows: —

<span id="ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024)<span id="ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p2"></span>**24.** Then Nebchadnezzar the king was
astonied, and rose up in haste, *and* spake, and said unto his
counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire?
They answered and said unto the king, True, O king.

<span id="ix.xvii-p3"></span>**24.** Tunc Nebuchadnezer rex contremuit,
 <span id="fr_191"></span>[192](#fn_191) et surrexit in festinatione,
*celeriter:* loquutus est, et dixit consiliariis suis:  <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) An non viros tres projecimus in
fornacem ligatos? *vinctos.* Responderunt, et dixerunt regi, Vere, rex.

<span id="ix.xvii-p6"></span>**25.** He answered and said, Lo, I see
four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt;
and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God.

<span id="ix.xvii-p7"></span>**25.** Respondit, et dixit, Atqui ego
video viros quatuor solutos, ambulantes in igne, et nulla noxa in ipsis
est: et facies quarti similis est filio Dei.

<span id="ix.xvii-p8"></span> 

<span id="ix.xvii-p9"></span><span id="ix.xvii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p10"></span>Here Daniel relates how God’s power was
manifest to the profane — to both the king and his courtiers, who had
conspired for the death of these holy men. He says, then, *the king
trembled* at that miracle; since God often compels the impious to
acknowledge his power, and when they stupidity themselves, and harden
all their senses, they are compelled to feel God’s power whether they
will or not. Daniel shews how this happened to King Nebuchadnezzar. *He
trembled,* says he, *and rose up quickly, and said to his companions,
Did we not cast three men bound into the fire?* When they say, *It is
so,* Nebuchadnezzar was doubtless impelled by Divine impulse, and a
secret instinct, to inquire of his companions to extract this confession
from them. For Nebuchadnezzar might easily approach the furnace, but God
wished to extract this confession from his enemies, that both they and
the king might allow the rescue of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, to
have proceeded from no earthly medium, but from the admirable and
extraordinary power of God. We may here remark, how the impious are
witnesses to God’s power, not willingly, but because God placed this
question in the king’s mouth, and also in his not permitting them to
escape or turn aside from the confession of the truth. But
Nebuchadnezzar says, *four men walked in the fire, and the face of the
fourth is like the son of a god* No doubt God here sent one of his
angels, to support by his presence the minds of his saints, lest they
should faint. It was indeed a formidable spectacle to see the furnace so
hot, and to be cast into it. By this consolation God wished to allay
their anxiety, and to soften their grief, by adding an angel as their
companion. We know how many angels have been sent to one man, as we read
of Elisha. (<span id="ix.xvii-p10.1"></span>[2Ki
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#015)<span id="ix.xvii-p10.1"></span>.)
And there is this general rule — *He, has given his angels charge over
thee, to guard thee in all the ways*; and also, *The camps of angels are
about those who fear God*. (<span id="ix.xvii-p10.2"></span>[Ps
91:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#011)<span id="ix.xvii-p10.2"></span>,
and <span id="ix.xvii-p10.3"></span>[Ps
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)<span id="ix.xvii-p10.3"></span>.)
This, indeed, is especially fulfilled in Christ; but it is extended to
the whole body, and to each member of the Church, for God has his own
hosts at hand to serve him. But we read again how an angel was often
sent to a whole nation. God indeed does not need his angels, while he
uses their assistance in condescension to our infirmities. And when we
do not regard his power as highly as we ought, he interposes his angels
to remove our doubts, as we have formerly said. A single angel was sent
to these three men; Nebuchadnezzar calls him a son of God; not because
he thought him to be Christ, but according to the common opinion among
all people, that angels are sons of God, since a certain divinity is
resplendent in them; and hence they call angels generally sons of God.
According to this usual custom, Nebuchadnezzar says, *the fourth man is
like a son of a god.* For he could not recognize the, only-begotten Son
of God, since, as we have already seen, he was blinded by so many
depraved errors. And if any one should say it was enthusiasm, this would
be forced and frigid. This simplicity, then, will be sufficient for us,
since Nebuchadnezzar spoke in the usual manner, as one of the angels was
sent to those three men — since, as I have said, it was then customary
to call angels sons of God. Scripture thus speaks, (<span
id="ix.xvii-p10.5"></span>[Ps
89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)<span id="ix.xvii-p10.5"></span>,
and elsewhere,) but God never suffered truth to become so buried in the
world as not to leave some seed of sound doctrine, at least as a
testimony to the profane, and to render them more inexcusable — as we
shall treat more at length in the next lecture.  <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193)

<span id="ix.xviii"></span>

<span id="ix.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since our life is
only for a moment, nay, is only vanity and smoke, that we may learn to
cast all our care upon thee, and so to depend upon thee, as not to doubt
time as our deliverer from all urgent perils, whenever it shall be to
our advantage. Grant us also to learn to neglect and despise our lives,
especially for the testimony of thy glory; and may we be prepared to
depart as soon as thou callest us from this world. May the hope of
eternal life be so fixed in our hearts, that we may willingly leave this
world and aspire with all our mind towards that blessed eternity which
thou hast testified to be laid up for us in heaven, through the gospel,
and which thine only-begotten Son has procured for us through his blood.
— Amen.

<span id="ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ix.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Sixteenth

<span id="ix.xx"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p1"></span><span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#026)<span id="ix.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p2"></span>**26.** Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the
mouth of the burning fiery furnace, *and* spake, and said, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the most high God, come forth, and
come *hither.* Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, came forth of the
midst of the fire.

<span id="ix.xx-p3"></span>**26.** Tunc accessit Nebuchadnezer ad ostium
fornacis ignis ardentis: loquutus est et dixit, Sadrach, Mesach, et
Abednego servi Dei excelsi, egredimini, et venite. Tunc egressi sunt
Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego e medio ignis.

<span id="ix.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.xx-p5"></span><span id="ix.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xx-p6"></span>HERE a sudden change is described in the mood
of this cruel and proud king. We have already seen how confidently he
extracted worship from the servants of God, and when he saw them
disobedient to his command, how mightily he raged against them. Now
Daniel shews in how short a time this pride was subdued and this cruelty
appeased; but we must remark that the king was not so changed as
entirely to put his disposition and manners. For when he was touched
with this present miracle, he gave God the glory, but only for a moment;
and still he did not return to wisdom. We cannot take too diligent
notice of examples of this kind, as many estimate the characters of
others from a single action. But the worst despisers of God can submit
to him for a short time, not merely by feigning to do so before men, but
in real seriousness, since God compels them by his power, but meanwhile
they retain their pride and ferocity within their breasts. Of this kind,
then, was the conversion of King Nebuchadnezzar. For when astonished by
the miracle, he could no longer resist the Almighty, he was still
inconsistent, as we shall afterwards see. We may also notice how the
impious, who are unregenerate by God’s Spirit, are often impelled to
worship God; but this is only temporary, and this equable tenor never
remains through their whole life. But when God renews his own, he
undertakes to govern them even to the end; he animates them to
perseverance, and confirms them by his Spirit.

<span id="ix.xx-p7"></span>We must here remark how God’s glory is
illustrated by this temporary and vanishing conversion of the reprobate;
because, whether they will or not, yet they yield to God for a time, and
thus the greatness of his power is acknowledged. God, therefore, turns
an event which does not profit the reprobate to his own glory, and at
the same time punishes them more severely. For Nebuchadnezzar’s conduct
was less excusable after his once acknowledging the God of Israel to be
the supreme and only God, and then relapsing into his former
superstitions. He says, therefore, — *He approached the door of the
furnace, and spoke thus,* — *Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, servants
of the most high God, come forth and come hither* A short time before,
he wished his own statue to be worshipped, and his own name to be
esteemed the only one in heaven and earth, since this was pleasing to
him. We then saw how he claimed the right of subjecting the religion and
worship of God to his own will and lust; but now, as if he were a new
man, he calls Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, servants of the most
high God! What place, then, was left to him and to all the Chaldeans?
How could they now worship those fictitious gods and idols which they
had fabricated? But God extracted these words from the proud and cruel
king, as when criminals and compelled, by tortures, to say what they
would otherwise refuse. Thus Nebuchadnezzar confessed God to be *the
most high God of Israel,* as if he had been tortured, but not of his own
accord, or in a composed state of mind. He does not pretend this before
men, as I have said; but his mind was neither pure nor perfect, since it
was in a ferment with this temporary commotion. And this must also be
added — the instinct was rather violent; than voluntary.

<span id="ix.xx-p8"></span>Daniel afterwards relates — *His companions
came forth from the midst of the fire* By these words he again confirms
the miracle; for God could extinguish the fire of the furnace, but he
wished it to burn in the sight of all, to render the power of this
deliverance the more conspicuous. Meanwhile we must notice *the three
men walking in the furnace,* until the king commanded them to come
forth, because God had issued no command. They saw themselves perfectly
safe and. sound in the midst of the furnace; they were content with
God’s present benefit, but still they had no free departure, until
fetched by the king’s voice. As when Noah, in the ark, saw safety
prepared for him in that tomb, yet he did not try anything until
commanded to come forth. (<span id="ix.xx-p8.1"></span>[Ge
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#016)<span id="ix.xx-p8.1"></span>.) So
also Daniel asserts that his companions did not, come forth from the
furnace till the king commanded them. Then at length they understood how
what they had heard from the king was pleasing to God; not because he
was a Prophet or teacher, but because they were cast into the furnace by
his command. So also when he recalls them, they know the end of their
cross to be arrived, and thus they pass from death unto life. It follows
—

<span id="ix.xxi"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#027)<span id="ix.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p2"></span>**27.** And the princes, governors, and
captains, and the king’s counsellors, being gathered together, saw these
men, upon whose bodies the fire had no power, nor was an hair of their
head singed, neither were their coats changed, nor the smell of fire had
passed on them.

<span id="ix.xxi-p3"></span>**27.** Et congregati sunt satrapae, duces,
praefecti, et consiliarii regis  <span id="fr_194"></span>[195](#fn_194)
ad conspiciendos viros illos, quod non dominatus esset ignis corporibus
eorum, et pilus capitis eorum non adustus esset, et vestibus eorum non
esset mutatus, et odor ignis non pervasisset, *vel, non, penetrasset,*
ad eos.  <span id="fr_195"></span>[196](#fn_195)

<span id="ix.xxi-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxi-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p8"></span>Daniel relates how the satraps were gathered
together with the leaders, prefects, and councilors of the king. The
gathering was simply a collection of numbers, and if they deliberated
about anything of importance, they all agreed. And this confirms the
miracle, since if they had been stupefied, how could the great power of
God be proposed to the eyes of the blind? Although they were so
astonished, they were not altogether foolish, And Daniel implies this by
saying, *they were assembled together* After they had discussed the
matter, he says, they came to behold that specimen of the incredible
power of God. Then he enumerates many reasons, which clearly shew these
three men not to have been preserved by any other means than God’s
singular good will. He says, *The fire had no power over their bodies*
then, a *hair of their head was not burnt* thirdly, *their garments were
unchanged* lastly, *the smell of fire had not penetrated to themselves
or their garments* He expresses more by the word *smell* than if he had
simply said, — the fire had not penetrated. For fire must naturally
consume and burn up whatever is submitted to it; but when not even the
smell of fire has passed over any substance, the miracle is more
conspicuous. Now, we understand the Prophet’s intention. On the whole,
he shews how the benefit of freedom was no, small one, since *Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego came out of the furnace.* Besides, these satraps,
prefects, and. governors, were witnesses of the power of God. Their
testimony would be the more valuable, as all the Jews were, spectators
of this grace of God, which even they scarcely believed. But since these
men were clearly and professedly enemies to true piety, they would
willingly have concealed the miracle, had it been in their power. But
God draws them against their wills, and compels them to be
eye-witnesses, and they are thus obliged to confess what cannot be in
the slightest degree doubtful. It follows-

<span id="ix.xxii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028)<span id="ix.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p2"></span>**28.** *Then* Nebuchadnezzar spake, and
said, Blessed *be* the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who hath
sent his angel, and delivered his servants that trusted in him, and have
changed the king’s word, and yielded their bodies, that they might not
serve nor worship any god, except their own God.

<span id="ix.xxii-p3"></span>**28.** Loquutus est Nebuchadnezer, et
dixit, Benedictus Deus ipsorum, nempe Sadrach, Mesach, et Abed-nego, qui
misit angelum suum, et eripuit, s*ervavit,* servos suos, qui confisi
sunt in ipso, et verbum regis mutarunt,  <span
id="fr_196"></span>[197](#fn_196) et tradiderunt corpora sua, ne
colerent, vel adorarent omnem deum,  <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197) praeter Deum suum.

<span id="ix.xxii-p6"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxii-p7"></span><span id="ix.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p8"></span>This, indeed, is no common confession, but
the event proved how suddenly King Nebuchadnezzar was acted on by
impulse, without having, the living root of the fear of God in his
heart. And I repeat this again, to shew that repentance does not consist
in one or two works, but in perseverance, as Paul says, —

<span id="ix.xxii-p9"></span>“If ye live in the Spirit, walk also in the
Spirit.”  
(<span id="ix.xxii-p9.2"></span>[Ga
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#025)<span id="ix.xxii-p9.2"></span>.)

<span id="ix.xxii-p10"></span>Here he requires constancy in the
faithful, by which they may shew themselves to be truly born again of
God’s Spirit. Nebuchadnezzar celebrated the God of Israel as if inspired
by an enthusiasm, but at the same time he mingled his idols with the
true God, so that there was no sincerity in him. So when the impious
feel God’s power, they do not dare to proceed with obstinacy against
him, but wish to appease him by a false repentance, without putting off
their natural disposition. Thus we readily conclude Nebuchadnazzar to be
always the same, although God extracted from him this *confession,* —
*Blessed, says he, be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego!* Why
does he not rather speak of him as his own God? This may be excused, had
he really devoted himself to the God of Israel, and abjured his former
superstitions. As he does not act thus, his confession is worthless; not
because he wished to obtain men’s favor or good opinion by what he said,
but he deceived himself after the manner of hypocrites. He pronounces
the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego to be blessed if he really
felt this, he must at the same time curse his idols, for the glory of
the one true God cannot be extolled without all idols being reduced to
nothing. For how can God’s praise exist without his being solely
conspicuous? If any other deity is opposed to him, his majesty is
already buried in complete obscurity. Hence we may collect that
Nebuchadnezzar was not touched with true repentance when he blessed the
God of Israel. He adds, *Who sent his angel, and delivered his
servants.* Here Daniel shews more clearly the absence of conversion in
Nebuchadnezzar, and his failure to embrace the God of Israel, and
worship him with sound and complete surrender of his affections. Why so?
Because piety is always founded upon the knowledge of the true God, and
this requires instruction. Nebuchadnezzar knew the God of Israel to be
majestic from the display of his power, for he had such a spectacle
presented to him as he could not despise, if he wished. Here he
confesses that Israel’s God was mighty, since he was taught it by a
miracle; but this, as I have reminded you, is not sufficient for solid
piety, unless instruction is added, and occupies the first place. I
allow, indeed, that miracles prepare men to believe, but if miracles
only occurred without the knowledge of God being added from his Word,
faith will vanish away — as the example sufficiently remarkable here
sets before us. We term the faith of Nebuchadnezzar to be but momentary,
because while his senses were fixed upon the miracle, he was content
with the spectacle, without inquiring into the character of the God of
Israel, and the bearing of his law. He was not anxious about a Mediator;
hence he neglected the chief point of piety, and rashly seized upon one
part of it only. We clearly observe this in many profane men, for God
often humbles them, to induce them suppliantly to fly to him for safety;
but meanwhile, they remain perplexed by their own senses; they do not
deny their own superstitions, nor regard the true worship of God. To
prove our obedience to God, we must, uphold this principle — nothing
pleases him which does not spring from faith. (<span
id="ix.xxii-p10.1"></span>[Ro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023)<span
id="ix.xxii-p10.1"></span>.) But faith cannot be acquired by any
miracle, or any perception of the Divine power; it requires instruction
also. The miracles avail only to the preparation for piety or for its
confirmation; they cannot by themselves bring men to worship the true
God. This is surprising indeed, when a profane king says *the angel was
sent by God*

<span id="ix.xxii-p11"></span>It is sufficiently evident from heathen
writings that something was always known about angels. This was, as it
were, a kind of anticipation and previous persuasion, since all people
are persuaded that angels exist, so that they had some idea of angels,
although but a partial one. For, when a short time ago Daniel said the
fourth appearance in the furnace was called by the king of Babylon “a
son of a god,” then, as I have explained it, Nebuchadnezzar professed
some belief in angels. He now says more expressly, *God sent his angel*
As angels afford supplies to the elect and the faithful, I treat the
subject here but shortly, since I am not in the habit of dwelling upon
ordinary passages. It is enough for the present passage to shew how the
impious, who have learnt nothing from either God himself or from piety
at large, were yet imbued with these principles, since God is accustomed
to use the assistance of angels to preserve his people. For this reason
Nebuchadnezzar now says; *the angel was sent by God to deliver his
servants* He next adds, *who trusted in him;* and this is worthy of
notice, since it is added as a reason why these three men were so
wonderfully preserved, through reposing all their hopes on God. Although
Nebuchadnezzar was very like a log or a stone with relation to the
doctrine of faith, yet God wished by means of this stone and log to
instruct us, to inspire us with shame, and to reprove us of incredulity,
since we are unable to conform our lives to his will, and to approach
all dangers boldly, whenever it becomes necessary. For if we are
thoroughly persuaded that God is the guardian of our life, surely no
threats, nor terrors, nor death itself, should hinder us from
persevering in our duty. But distrust is the cause of slothfulness, and
wherever we deflect from a straightforward course, we deprive God of his
honor, by becoming backsliders, while some want of faith betrays itself
and is palpably apparent. Hence let us learn, if we wish our life to be
protected by God’s hand, to commit ourselves entirely to him, since he
will never disappoint us when we confide in him. We saw how doubtful
about the event Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were; but their doubt
did not diminish their hope and confidence. They were placed in this
alternative — either God will take us from rite furnace, or, if we must
die, he will preserve us for some better state, and gather us into his
kingdom. Although they dared not persuade themselves that he would
notice them yet they reposed their lives in the hand and care of God.
Hence they are deservedly complimented by Nebuchadnezzar, when he
*said,* — *They trusted in their God,* and afterwards, *they changed the
king’s edict,* that is, reduced it to nothing, and abrogated it, because
they were endued with greater power. For whoever rests in God, easily
despises all mankind, and whatever is lofty and magnificent in the
world. And this context is worthy of observation, since faith ought to
be put as a foundation, and then fortitude and constancy must be added,
with which Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego were endowed; because any
one who reposes upon God can never be moved aside from the discharge of
his duty; and however numerous the impediments which may occur, he will
be borne aloft on the wings of his confidence. He who knows God to be on
his side, will be superior to the whole world, and will neither wonder
at the scepter and diadems of kings, nor dread their power, but rather
surpass all the majesty of the earth which may oppose him, and never to
turn aside from this course.

<span id="ix.xxii-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *they delivered up
their bodies instead of worshipping or adoring any god except their own
God.* That very thing which the king is compelled to praise in these
three men, at this day many who boast themselves to be Christians wish
to escape. For they fancy their faith to be buried in their hearths, and
bring forth no fruit of their profession. There is no doubt God wished
these things to be related by his Prophet, to shew the detestable
cunning of those who wish to defraud God of his lawful honor, and at the
same time shelter themselves from his gaze, lest he should notice their
insult. Such as these are unworthy of being convinced by the word of
God, but Nebuchadnezzar is here appointed their master, censor, and
judge. And we must diligently remark this, — Nebuchadnezzar praises
these three, because they refused to worship any other god except their
own. Why then did he mingle together a great multitude of deities? For
he did not depart from his own errors and give himself up entirely to
the God of Israel, and embrace his worship in its purity. Why then does
he praise in others what he does not imitate? But this is far too
common; for we see virtue praised and yet frozen to death, as in this
instance, for many are willing to offer him lip-service. (Juvenal, Sat.
1.) Although Nebuchadnezzar seemed here to speak seriously, yet he did
not consider himself; but he took away all pretext for excuse, since he
could not afterwards pretend ignorance and error, after asserting with
his own mouth that no other god ought to be worshipped. Hence he may
cause those who now wish to be called Christians to be ashamed, unless
they depart far away from all superstitions, and consecrate themselves
entirely to God, and retain his worship in its sincerity. We must
remember then how King Nebuchadnezzar does not simply praise the
constancy of these three men, because he does not acknowledge any god,
for he does reckon the God of Israel to be a true deity. Hence it
follows, that all others were fictitious and utterly vain. But he spoke
to no purpose, because God did not thereby touch his heart, as he
usually works in his elect when he regenerates them. It follows, —

<span id="ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029)<span id="ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p2"></span>**29.** Therefore I make a decree, That
every people, nation, and language, which speak any thing amiss against
the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and
their houses shall be made a dunghill: because there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p3"></span>**29.** Et a me positum est, *hoc est,
onitur,* edictum,  <span id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198) ut omnis
populus, natio,  <span id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199) et lingua quae
protulerit *aliquid* transversum,  <span
id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200) contra Deum ipsorum, nempe Sadrach,
Mesach, et Abednego, in frusta fiet, et domus ejus in latrinam, *vel, in
sterquilinium,* redigetur: quia non est Deus alius qui possit servare
hoc modo.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p7"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiii-p8"></span><span id="ix.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p9"></span>Here Nebuchadnezzar is urged further
forward — for we must use this phrase — since he does not take up the
worship of one God from his heart, and bid his errors finally farewell.
Hence it is as if God was thrusting him violently forward, while he
promulgates this edict. The edict is by itself pious and praiseworthy;
but, as we have already said, Nebuchadnezzar is borne along by a blind
and turbulent impulse, because piety had no root in his heart. Though he
is always intent on this miracle, his faith is only momentary, and his
fear of God but partial. Why then is Nebuchadnezzar now seen as the
patron of God’s glory? Because he was frightened by the miracle, and
thus being acted on by impulse alone, he could not; be soundly
restrained by the fear of God alone. And finally, this desire which he
expresses is nothing but an evanescent movement. It is useful to remark
this, since we see many born along by impetuous zeal and rage to
vindicate God’s glory; but they lack tact and judgment, so that they
deserve no praise. And many wander still further — as we see in the
Papacy — when many edicts of kings and princes fly about; and if any one
should ask them why they are so eager as not to spare even human blood,
they put forth indeed a zeal for God, but it is mere madness without a
spark of true knowledge. We must hold, therefore, that no law can be
passed nor any edict promulgated concerning religion and the worship of
God, unless a real knowledge of God shines forth. Nebuchadnezzar indeed
had a reason for this edict, but, as I have already said, there was a
special motive for his conduct. Some, indeed, now wish to be thought
Christian princes, and yet are only inflamed by a hypocritical zeal, and
so they pour forth innocent blood like cruel beasts. And why so? Because
they make no distinction between the true God and idols. But I shall
discuss this point at greater length to-morrow, and so pass over
casually what I shall treat at length, when the fit opportunity arrives.

<span id="ix.xxiii-p10"></span>*Every people, therefore, and nation, and
language, which shall have offered a perverse speech against their God*
Nebuchadnezzar again extolled the God of Israel, but how was he taught
the majesty of God? By this one proof of his power, for he neglected the
chief point — the ascertaining from the law and the prophets the nature
of God and the power of his will. Thus we see, on one side, how God’s
glory is asserted here, and yet the principal point in his worship, and
in true piety, is neglected and omitted. No light punishment is added —
-*he must be cut in pieces*, next, *his house must be turned into a
dunghill, since he has spoken reproachfully of the God of Israel* Hence
we gather how this severity is not to be utterly condemned, when God’s
worship is defended by severe punishments; yet a correct sentence ought
to be passed in each case. But I put this off also till to-morrow. It is
now added, *because there is no other God who can deliver after this
manner;* and. this confirms what I have formerly touched upon, namely,
King Nebuchadnezzar does not regard the law in his edict, nor yet the
other requisites of piety; but he is only impelled and moved by the
miracle, so as not to bear or desire anything to be said opprobriously
against the God of Israel. Hence the edict is deserving of blame in this
point, since he does not inquire what God’s nature is, with the view of
obtaining a sufficient reason for issuing it. It is added at length, —

<span id="ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#030)<span id="ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p2"></span>**30.** Then the king promoted Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, in the province of Babylon.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p3"></span>**30.** Tunc rex prosperare fecit,  <span
id="fr_201"></span>[202](#fn_201) Sadrach, Mesach, et Abednego, in
provincia Babylonis.

<span id="ix.xxiv-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.xxiv-p6"></span><span id="ix.xxiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p7"></span>This seems to be of slight consequence; but
yet it was not added in vain. We are to understand that the miracle was
confirmed throughout the whole province and region, because all the
Chaldeans knew those three men were cast into the furnace, and then
afterwards shared in the imperial sway and were restored to their former
honors. In consequence of this event, God’s power could not be unknown.
It was just as it God had sent forth three heralds through the whole
region, who *everywhere* proclaimed how they were wonderfully delivered
from death by God’s special interposition. Whence, also, it would be
understood how worthless were all the deities then worshipped in
Chaldea, and how that great deity whose statue Nebuchadnezzar had set up
had been despised, and how the true God proved his consistency in
snatching his servants from death.

<span id="ix.xxv"></span>

<span id="ix.xxv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="ix.xxv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
instructed us by the doctrine of thy law and Gospel, and dost daily
deign to make known thy will to us with familiarity, that we may remain
fixed in the true obedience of this teaching, in which thy perfect
justice is manifested; and may we never be moved away from thy worship.
May we be prepared, whatever happens, rather to undergo a hundred deaths
than to turn aside from the profession of true piety, in which we know
our safety to be laid up. And may we so glorify thy name as to be
partakers of that glory which has been acquired for us through the blood
of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc24008.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ix.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> Some make this word a noun appellative, and
translate it, “habitable land,” but the following translation is more
correct: — He placed an image on the plains of *Dura.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc24008.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ix.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p4"></span> Or, in the midst of the multitude; for <span
id="ix.vi-p4.1"></span>היל*, hil,* may be explained both ways. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc24008.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ix.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ix.vi-p5"></span> That is, nations of all *languages.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc24008.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ix.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p4"></span> That is, instantly — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc24008.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ix.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p5"></span> That is, *instantly.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc24008.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ix.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p12"></span> Xenophon in Comment., et Cicero de
Legibus, lib. 2: Section 8.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc24008.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ix.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.vii-p13"></span> AEneid, lib. 7 211, “.<span
id="ix.vii-p13.1"></span>et numerum Divorum altaribus addit.” Heyne
reads “<span id="ix.vii-p13.2"></span>addit;” Calvin, “<span
id="ix.vii-p13.3"></span>auget.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc24008.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ix.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p4"></span> The same hour — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc24008.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ix.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p5"></span> That is, accused them clamorously and with
tumult. Others translate, “brought forward an accusation.” For <span
id="ix.x-p5.1"></span>אכל, *akel*, signifies to, “devour,” and they say
that it is used metaphorically for “to accuse” when joined to this noun.
But since it also signifies “to cry out,” this sense is suitable, as the
accusers were *clamorous.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc24008.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ix.x-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p14"></span> Others translate, “reason.” — *Calvin*.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc24008.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ix.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ix.x-p15"></span> Or, “thy gods,” but there is not much
difference — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc24008.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ix.xi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p4"></span> Some translate, fury — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc24008.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ix.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p5"></span> We must understand, them. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc24008.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ix.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p8"></span> Or rather, my god. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_181"></span>[182](cc24008.htm#fr_181) <span
id="ix.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p9"></span> Or, I have erected — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_182"></span>[183](cc24008.htm#fr_182) <span
id="ix.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xi-p12"></span> Some read it interrogatively, Are ye
prepared? — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_183"></span>[184](cc24008.htm#fr_183) <span
id="ix.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p4"></span> Or, business. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_184"></span>[185](cc24008.htm#fr_184) <span
id="ix.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p5"></span> Others translate, we ought not to answer
thee about this business; and they think <span
id="ix.xii-p5.1"></span>ל, the letter L, to be superfluous, as it often
is. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_185"></span>[186](cc24008.htm#fr_185) <span
id="ix.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xii-p13"></span> Cyprian was martyred under the edict of
Valerian, A.D. 257. — See Euseb. Eccl. Hist., lib. 7, chapter 10.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[187](cc24008.htm#fr_186) <span
id="ix.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p4"></span> <span id="ix.xv-p4.1"></span>צלם*, tzelem,*
is here taken in a different sense from its previous one, for Daniel
sometimes uses it for “image,” but here for the “figure” or,
“countenance” of the king, which was changed. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_187"></span>[188](cc24008.htm#fr_187) <span
id="ix.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xv-p7"></span> <span id="ix.xv-p7.1"></span>היל*, hil,* is
here used for “*attendants,*” or “servants,” properly it means “army,”
but as the king is not at war, it doubtless means “attendants;” he
chose, therefore, the strongest of his attendants. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_188"></span>[189](cc24008.htm#fr_188) <span
id="ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p4"></span> Some translate sandals, or, shoes, others
hose; but the majority take the second noun for hose; but we need not
trouble ourselves too much about the words, if we only understand the
thing itself. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_189"></span>[190](cc24008.htm#fr_189) <span
id="ix.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p5"></span> We know that the Orientals then wore
turbans as they do now, for they wrap up he head; and though we do not
see many of them, yet we know the Turkish dress; then the general name
is added. — *Calvin.*

<span id="ix.xvi-p6"></span>See also the note on this passage in
Wintle’s translation, which is full of good explanatory notes.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[191](cc24008.htm#fr_190) <span
id="ix.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvi-p11"></span> That is, within the furnace of *fire.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_191"></span>[192](cc24008.htm#fr_191) <span
id="ix.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p4"></span> Or, was terrified — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_192"></span>[193](cc24008.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ix.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p5"></span> Some translate, to his companions; and the
word may be derived from either <span
id="ix.xvii-p5.1"></span>*consilium* *or* <span
id="ix.xvii-p5.2"></span>*consuetudo:* hence it might mean companions
who were around the king; but soon afterwards it means counselors, and
there is no need of variety. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_193"></span>[194](cc24008.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ix.xvii-p10.6"></span>

<span id="ix.xvii-p11"></span> See Dissertation 13 at the end of this
volume.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[195](cc24008.htm#fr_194) <span
id="ix.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p4"></span> Some translate the last “prefects,” but
badly: it properly signifies either counselors or familiar friends, as
appears from many passages. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_195"></span>[196](cc24008.htm#fr_195) <span
id="ix.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxi-p5"></span> Or,” to them,” for the relative may apply
either to their persons or their clothing, and it is of little
consequence to which. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_196"></span>[197](cc24008.htm#fr_196) <span
id="ix.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p4"></span> Transgressed, that is, deprived the king’s
edict of its confidence and authority — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_197"></span>[198](cc24008.htm#fr_197) <span
id="ix.xxii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxii-p5"></span> That is, adore any other god. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_198"></span>[199](cc24008.htm#fr_198) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p4"></span> Or, decree, — we have already explained
this *word.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_199"></span>[200](cc24008.htm#fr_199) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p5"></span> Some translate, *family.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_200"></span>[201](cc24008.htm#fr_200) <span
id="ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiii-p6"></span> <span id="ix.xxiii-p6.1"></span>שלה
*slelch,* signifies to err; hence the noun is derived, which many
translate error, and others rashness; but it means a perverse speech —
whoever, therefore, utters a perverse *speech.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_201"></span>[202](cc24008.htm#fr_201) <span
id="ix.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ix.xxiv-p4"></span> Verbally, for<span
id="ix.xxiv-p4.1"></span>צלח , *tzelech,* signifies “to prosper;” hence
the word is deduced, which signifies “to rest in a state of prosperity;”
that is, he caused those three men to become *prosperous.* — *Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4](cc24009)
