[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc24010)  [Next](cc24012) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xii"></span>

<span id="xii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="xii.i"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p1"></span><span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#001)<span id="xii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p2"></span>**1.** It pleased Darius to set over the
kingdom an hundred and twenty princes, which should be over the whole
kingdom;

<span id="xii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Placuit coram Dario, et praefecit
super regnum praesides provinciarum centum et viginti, qui essent in
toto regno.

<span id="xii.i-p4"></span>**2.** And over these three presidents; of
whom Daniel *was* first: that the princes might give accounts unto them,
and the king should have no damage.

<span id="xii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Et super illos *essent, atque ut
essent super eos,* satrapae tres, quorum Daniel unus *esset:* et ut
praesides provinciarum illis redderent rationem: et rex non pateretur
damnum.

<span id="xii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.i-p7"></span><span id="xii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.i-p8"></span>As to the translation, some translate the
last clause of the second verse, “That the king should not have any
trouble;” but since <span id="xii.i-p8.1"></span>נזק, *nezek,* signifies
“to suffer loss,” I willingly adopt this sense; because the king did not
escape trouble, through a desire for ease, as he might have done, being
an old man, but he willingly managed his own affairs, and committed the
care of them to three men, lest anything should be lost through passing
through too many hands. For experience shews us how confusion is caused
by a multitude. If there had been only there an hundred and twenty
governors of provinces, many inconveniences must have happened, and much
loss would have occurred; hence the king placed three prefects over
these hundred and twenty.

<span id="xii.i-p9"></span>Here again we may perceive how God cared for
his Prophet, not so much for any private reason or through private
respect, as by his aid the wretched captives and exiles should be
benefited. God wished to stretch forth his hand to the Jews by means of
Daniel. And we may deservedly call him God’s hand in sustaining the
Jews. The Persians, being barbarians, were not naturally more merciful
than others; hence God interposed his servant Daniel to succor them. We
must notice, in the context of this history, how Daniel alone was chosen
by Darius one of these three superior officers. He was the third in rank
under king Belshazzar, although for a moment, yet it might occasion envy
under the new king that so great an honor was conferred upon him. Very
probably Darius was informed of the previous predictions of Daniel; how
the hand appeared upon the wall, how he interpreted the writing, and
became a heaven-sent messenger to denounce destruction on king
Belshazzar. For unless this rumor held reached Darius, Daniel would
never have obtained so much authority under him. His own army abounded
in numbers, and we know how every conqueror is surrounded in war by many
dependents, all of whom wish to share in the spoil. Darius, therefore,
would never have noticed a stranger and a captive, and admitted him to
such great honor and power, unless he had understood him to be a known
Prophet of God, and also a herald in denouncing destruction against the
Babylonish monarchy. Thus we gather how providential it was for him to
be among the first satraps, and even third in the kingdom, as this
brought him more quickly under the notice of Darius. For if Daniel had
been cast down by king Belshazzar he would have remained at home in
concealment; but when he appeared clothed in royal apparel, the king
inquired who he was? He heard the means of his arriving at so high an
honor; hence he acknowledged him as God’s Prophet, and appointed him one
of the three prefects. Here also God’s providence is again set before
us, not only in preserving his servant in safety, but in providing for
the safety of the whole Church, lest the Jews should be still more
oppressed by the change of masters. But a temptation is afterwards
inflicted, by which the holy Prophet and the whole people were severely
tried; for the Prophet says:

<span id="xii.ii"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#003)<span id="xii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p2"></span>**3.** Then this Daniel was preferred above
the presidents and princes, because an excellent spirit *was* in him;
and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.

<span id="xii.ii-p3"></span>**3.** Tunc Daniel ipse fuit superior,
 <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) supra satrapas et praesides
provinciarum: propterea quod spiritus amplior, *vel, proestantior,* in
ipso *erat:* et rex cogitabat eum erigere super totum regnum.

<span id="xii.ii-p5"></span>**4.** Then the presidents and princes
sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom; but they
could find none occasion nor fault; forasmuch as he *was* faithful,
neither was there any error or fault found in him.

<span id="xii.ii-p6"></span>**4.** Tunc satrapæ, et praesides
provinciarum quaesierunt occasionem invenire contra Danielem a parte
regni,  <span id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) et omnem occasionem,
 <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280) et nullum crimen potuerunt
invenire: quia verax  <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) ipse: et
nulla culpa, et nullum crimen,  <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282)
inveniebatur in ipso.

<span id="xii.ii-p11"></span>**5.** Then said these men, We shall not
find any occasion against this Daniel, except we find *it* against him
concerning the law of his God.

<span id="xii.ii-p12"></span>**5.** Tunc viri illi dixerunt, non
inveniemus in hoc Daniele ullam occasionem, nisi inveniamus in ipso ob
legem Dei sui.

<span id="xii.ii-p13"></span> 

<span id="xii.ii-p14"></span><span id="xii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p15"></span>The Prophet now relates, as I have said,
the origin of a temptation which might naturally cast down the spirits
of the elect people as well as his own. For although Daniel alone was
cast into the lion’s-den, as we shall afterwards see, yet, unless he had
been liberated, the condition of the people would have been more
grievous and severe. For we know the wicked petulantly insult the
wretched and the innocent, when they see them suffering any adversity.
If Daniel had been torn by the lions, all men would have risen up in a
body against the Jews. God, therefore, here exercised the faith and
patience of his servant, and also proved all the Jews by the same test,
since they saw themselves liable to the most extreme sufferings in the
person of a single individual, unless God had speedily afforded the
assistance which he rendered. Daniel, first of all, says, *he excelled
all others, since a more excellent or superior spirit was in him* It
does not always happen that those who are remarkable for prudence or
other endowments obtain greater authority and rank. In the palaces of
kings we often see men of brutal dispositions holding high rank, and we
need not go back to history for this. In these days kings are often
gross and infatuated, and more like horses and asses than men! Hence
audacity and recklessness obtain the highest honors of the palace. When
Daniel says *he excelled,* he brings to our notice God’s two-fold
benefit: *first,* a greater portion of his Spirit was bestowed upon him;
and *secondly,* Darius acknowledged this, and raised him to honor when
he saw him endued with no ordinary industry and wisdom. We now
understand the Prophet’s teaching, here, as first divinely adorned with
prudence and other endowments; and then, Darius was a competent judge of
this, in estimating his prudence and other virtues, and holding them in
great repute. Since, therefore, *a noble spirit was in him,* hence *he
overcame all others,* says he; therefore *the king determined to set him
above the whole kingdom,* that is, to place him first among the three
satraps. Although it was a singular privilege with which God once
blessed his people and his Prophet, yet we ought to weep over the
heartlessness of kings in these days, who proudly despise God’s gifts in
all good men who surpass the multitude in usefulness; and at the same
time enjoy the society of the ignorant like themselves, while they are
slaves to avarice and rapine, and manifest the greatest cruelty and
licentiousness. Since, then, we see how very unworthy kings usually are
of their empire and their power, we must weep over the state of the
world, because it reflects like a glass the wrath of heaven, and kings
are thus destitute of counsel. At the last day, King Darius alone will
be sufficient to condemn them, for he had discretion enough not to
hesitate to set a captive and a foreigner over all his satraps; for this
was a royal, nay, a heroic virtue in Darius to prefer this man to all
his own friends. But now kings think of nothing else than preferring
their own panders, buffoons, and flatterers; while they praise none but
men of low character, whom God has branded with ignominy. Although they
are unworthy of being reckoned among mankind, yet they esteem themselves
the masters of their sovereigns, and treat the kings of these days as
their slaves. This happens through their mere slothfulness, and their
discarding every possible anxiety. Hence they are compelled to deliver
up their command to others, and retain nothing but the title. This, as I
said, is a sure proof of the wrath of heaven, since the world is at this
day unworthy of the government which God exercises over it by his hand.

<span id="xii.ii-p16"></span><span id="xii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p17"></span>With respect to the envy felt by the
nobles, we see this vice rampant in all ages, since the aspirants to any
greatness can never bear the presence of virtue. For, being guilty of
evil themselves, they are necessarily bitter against the virtue of
others. Nor ought it to seem surprising that the Persians who sustained
the greatest labors, and passed through numerous changes of fortune,
should be unable to bear with an obscure and unknown person, not only
associated with them, but appointed as their superior. Their envy, then,
seems to have had some pretext, either real or imaginary. But it will
always be deserving of condemnation, when we find men selfishly pursuing
their own advantage without any regard for the public good. Whoever
aspires to power and self-advancement, without regarding the welfare of
others, must necessarily be avaricious and rapacious, cruel and
perfidious, as well as forgetful of his duties. Since, then, the nobles
of the realm envied Daniel, they betrayed their malice, for they had no
regard for the public good, but desired to seize upon all things for
their own interests. In this example we observe the natural consequence
of envy. And we should diligently notice this, since nothing is more
tempting than gliding down from one vice to a worse. The envious man
loses all sense of justice while attempting every scheme for injuring
his adversary. These nobles report Daniel to have been preferred to
themselves unworthily. If they had been content with this abuse, it
would have been, as I said, a vice and a sign of a perverse nature. But
they go far beyond this, for they seek for an occasion of crime in
Daniel. We see, then, how envy excites them to the commission of crime.
Thus all the envious are perpetually on the watch, while they become
spies of the fortunes of those whom they envy, to oppress them by every
possible means. This is one point; but when they find no crime, they
trample upon justice, without modesty and without humanity, and with
cruelty and perfidy lay themselves out to crush an adversary. Daniel
relates this of his rivals. He says, *They immediately sought occasion
against him, and did not find it* Then he adds how unjustly and
perfidiously they sought occasion against him. There is no doubt they
knew Daniel to be a pious man and approved by God; hence, when they plot
against his holy Prophet, they purposely wage war with God himself,
while they are blinded with the perverse passion of envy. Whence, then,
does it spring? Surely from ambition. Thus we see how pestilential a
plague ambition is, from which envy springs up, and afterwards perfidy
and cruelty!

<span id="xii.ii-p18"></span><span id="xii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p19"></span>Besides this, Daniel admonishes us by his
own example to study to strive after integrity, and thus to deprive the
malevolent and the wicked of all occasion against us, which they seek.
We shall find no better defense against the envious and the slanderous
than to conduct ourselves righteously and innocently. Whatever snares
they may lay for us, they will never succeed, for our innocence will
repel their malice like a shield. Meanwhile we see how Daniel escaped
utter ruin, since they sought a pretext against him in something else,
namely, his worship of God. Hence let us learn how we ought to esteem
piety and an earnest desire for it of more value than life itself.
Daniel was faithful and upright in his administration: he discharged his
duty so as to close the mouth of his enemies and detractors. Thus, as I
have said, integrity is the best of all protectors. Again, Daniel was in
danger because he would not leave off the sincere worship of God and its
outward profession. Hence we must bravely undergo all dangers whenever
the worship of God is at stake. This temporary life ought not to be more
precious to us than that most sacred of all things — the preservation of
God’s honor unstained. We therefore see how we, by these means, are
urged to the cultivation of integrity, since we cannot be more secure
than when fortified by a good conscience, as Peter in his first epistle
exhorts us to the same purpose, (<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>[1Pe
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#016)<span id="xii.ii-p19.1"></span>.)
Now, whatever we may fear, and whatever events await us, even if we
become subject to a hundred deaths, we ought never to decline from the
pure worship of God, since Daniel did not hesitate to submit to death
and enter the lion’s den, because he openly professed the worship of
Israel’s God. As these nobles entered into this barbarous and cruel
counsel for oppressing Daniel under the pretense of religion, here,
again, we gather the blindness and rashness of mankind when ambition and
envy seize upon their minds. For it is a matter of no moment with them
to come into collision with the Almighty,  <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283) for they do not approach Daniel as a
fellow-creature, but they leap into an insane and sacrilegious contest
when they wish to extinguish the worship of God and give way to their
own indulgence. Thus, as I have said, we are admonished by this example
how ambition is to be guarded against and avoided, and also the envy
which arises from it. The nature of this charge — the worship of God —
afterwards follows: —

<span id="xii.iii"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p1"></span><span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#006)<span id="xii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p2"></span>**6.** Then these presidents and princes
assembled together to the king, and said thus unto him, King Darius,
live for ever.

<span id="xii.iii-p3"></span>**6.** Tunc satrapæ et provinciarum
praesides illi sociati sunt  <span id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284)
apud regem,  <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285) et sic locuti sunt
ei: Dari rex, in æternum vive.

<span id="xii.iii-p6"></span>**7.** All the presidents of the kingdom,
the governors, and the princes, the counsellors, and the captains, have
consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a firm
decree, that whosoever shall ask a petition of any God or man for thirty
days, save of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.

<span id="xii.iii-p7"></span>**7.** Consilium ceperunt omnes satrapæ
regni, proceres et praesides provinciarum, consiliarii, et duces, ut
statuatur statutum regis,  <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286) et
sanciatur edictum, ut quisquis petierit petitionem ab ullo deo et homine
usque ad dies triginta *hos,* præterquam a te, rex, projiciatur in
speluncam leonum.

<span id="xii.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="xii.iii-p10"></span><span id="xii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p11"></span>The nobles of the kingdom purposely
endeavored to ruin the holy Prophet, either by casting him into the
lion’s den to perish or else by causing him to desist from the outward
profession of worshipping God. They knew him to be so really in earnest
that he would not redeem his life by so great an act of impiety, and
hence they thought him doomed to death. We perceive in them great
cunning; but God met them on the other hand and aided his servant, as we
shall see. Meanwhile their malice was the more detestable, since they
desired to destroy Daniel by this very pretense. Although they did not
worship Israel’s God, they knew the Prophet’s mind to be pious and
straightforward, and then they experienced the power of that God who was
unknown to them. They did not condemn Daniel, nor blame the religion
which he practiced; for, as I have said, their hatred of this man urged
them to such cruelty that they rushed against the Almighty. They could
not disguise from themselves the duty of worshipping God: they
worshipped and adored unknown deities, and did not dare to condemn the
worship of Israel’s God. We see how the devil fascinated them when they
dared to impute this as a crime to the holy Prophet; while we are
ignorant of the manner in which their opinion was changed.

<span id="xii.iii-p12"></span>Some suppose this was done because Darius
could not bear with composure the glory of his son-in-law. For since he
was an old man, and his relative in the flower of his age, he thought
himself despised. Others think Darius to have been touched by secret
emulation, and that he allowed his nobles to approach him for the
purpose of deceiving the miserable and doting old man, and thus to throw
dust in his eyes. But this conjecture does not seem to me sufficiently
valid. Nor need I give myself much trouble in this matter, because it
might happen that at the beginning of a new reign they wished to
congratulate the king, and they fixed upon something new and
unaccustomed, as we see often done by flatterers of royalty. Hence the
old man might be deceived in this matter, since the monarchy was newly
established. The king had hitherto ruled over none but Medes; now
Chaldeans, Assyrians, and many other nations were added to his sway.
Such an addition might intoxicate him with vain-glory, and his nobles
might think this a plausible reason for offering to him divine honors.
This single reason seems to me sufficient; I do not inquire further, but
embrace what is probable and obvious at first sight. I defer the
remainder till to-morrow.

<span id="xii.iv"></span>

<span id="xii.iv-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.iv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, as thou didst govern
thy servant Daniel when honors were flowing around on all sides, and he
was raised to the highest dignity, and preserve him safe in his
integrity and innocency amidst the universal licentiousness, — Grant, I
pray thee, that we may learn to restrain ourselves within that
moderation to which thou restrictest us. May we be content with our
humble station and strive to prove ourselves innocent before thee and
before those with whom we have to deal; so that thy name may be
glorified in us, and we may proceed under thy shelter against the malice
of mankind. Whenever Satan besieges us on every side, and the wicked lay
snares for us, and we are attacked by the fierceness of wild beasts, may
we remain safe under thy protection, and even if we have to undergo a
hundred deaths, may we learn to live and die to thee, and may thy name
be glorified in us, through Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="xii.v"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-eighth.

<span id="xii.v-p2"></span><span id="xii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.v-p3"></span>WE said, yesterday, that the nobles who laid
snares against Daniel were inspired with great fury when they dared to
dictate to the king the edict recorded by Daniel. It was an intolerable
sacrilege thus to deprive all the deities of their honor; yet he
subscribed the edict, as we shall afterwards see, and thus put to the
test the obedience of his people whom he had lately reduced under the
yoke by the help of his son-in-law. There is no doubt of his wish to
subdue the Chaldees, who up to that time had been masters; and we know
how ferocity springs from the possession of authority. Since then the
Chaldees had formerly reigned so far and wide, it was difficult to tame
them and render them submissive, especially when they found themselves
the slaves of those who had previously been their rivals. We know how
many contests there were between them and the Medes; and although they
were subdued in war, their spirits were not yet in subjection; hence
Darius desired to prove their obedience, and this reason induced him to
give his consent. He does not purposely provoke the anger of the gods;
but through respect for the men, he forgets the deities, and substitutes
himself in the place of the gods, as if it was in his power to attract
the authority of heaven to himself! This, as I have said, was a grievous
sacrilege. If any one could enter into the hearts of kings, he would
find scarcely one in a hundred who does not despise everything divine.
Although they confess themselves to enjoy their thrones by the grace of
God, as we have previously remarked, yet they wish to be adored in his
stead. We now see how easily flatterers persuade kings to do whatever
appears likely to extol their magnificence. It follows:

<span id="xii.vi"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p1"></span><span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008)<span id="xii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p2"></span>**8.** Now, O king, establish the decree,
and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of
the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

<span id="xii.vi-p3"></span>**8.** Nunc, rex, statue edictum, et obsigna
scripturam, quae non ad mutandum,  <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287) secundum legem Medorum et Persarum,
quae non transit.

<span id="xii.vi-p5"></span>**9.** Wherefore king Darius signed the
writing and the decree.

<span id="xii.vi-p6"></span>**9.** Itaque *ipse* rex Darius obsignavit
scripturam et edictum.

<span id="xii.vi-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.vi-p8"></span><span id="xii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p9"></span>Here, as I have said, it is sufficiently
apparent how inclined to fallacies are the minds of kings when they
think they can benefit themselves and increase their own dignity. For
the king did not dispute long with his nobles but subscribed the edict;
for he thought it might prove useful to himself and his successors: if
he found the Chaldeans obedient to himself and rather prepared to deny
the existence of every god than to refuse whatever he commanded! As to
the use of the word, some, translate <span id="xii.vi-p9.1"></span>אסרא,
*asra,* by “writing,” deriving it from “*to cut in,*” as we know that
all laws were formerly graven on tablets of brass; but I interpret it
more simply of their seeking from the king a signature of the writing,
that is, he was to sign the edict after it was written. *Which cannot be
changed,* they say — meaning, the edict is unchangeable and inviolable,
*according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not pass
away* — that is, which does not vanish, as also Christ says, Heaven and
earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away, or shall never
become vain. (<span id="xii.vi-p9.2"></span>[Mt
24:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)<span id="xii.vi-p9.2"></span>;
<span id="xii.vi-p9.3"></span>[Mr
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#031)<span id="xii.vi-p9.3"></span>.)
As to his joining the Medes with the Persians, this arises from what we
said before, since Cyrus and Darius reigned in common as colleagues.
Greater dignity was granted to Darius, while the power was in the hands
of Cyrus; besides, without controversy, his sons were heirs of either
kingdom and of the Monarchy of the East, unless when they began to make
war on each other. When they say, the law of the Medes and Persians *is
immutable,* this is worthy of praise in laws, and sanctions their
authority; thus they are strong and obtain their full effect. When laws
are variable, many are necessarily injured, and no private interest is
stable unless the law be without variation; besides, when there is a
liberty of changing laws, license succeeds in place of justice. For
those who possess the supreme power, if corrupted by gifts, promulgate
first one edict and then another. Thus justice cannot flourish where
change in the laws allows of so much license. But, at the same time,
kings ought prudently to consider lest they promulgate any edict or law
without grave and mature deliberation; and secondly, kings ought to be
careful lest they be counteracted by cunning and artful plots, to which
they are often liable. Hence, constancy is praiseworthy in kings and
their edicts, if only they are preceded by prudence and equity. But we
shall immediately see how foolishly kings affect the fame of
consistency, and how their obstinacy utterly perverts justice. But we
shall see this directly in its own place. It follows:

<span id="xii.vii"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p1"></span><span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#010)<span id="xii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p2"></span>**10.** Now when Daniel knew that the
writing was signed, he went into his house; and, his windows being open
in his chamber toward Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees three times a
day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.

<span id="xii.vii-p3"></span>**10.** Daniel autem ubi cognovit quod
obsignata *esset* scriptura, venit, *vel, ingressus est,* in domum suam
(fenestrae autem apertae *erant* ei in coenaculo suo versus Jerusalem)
et temporibus tribus in die,  <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288)
inclinabat se super genua sua,  <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289)
et precabatur, et confitebatur coram Deo suo, quemadmodum fecerat a
pristino illo tempore.  <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290)

<span id="xii.vii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.vii-p8"></span><span id="xii.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p9"></span>Daniel now relates how he was clothed in
the boldness of the Spirit of God to offer his life as a sacrifice to
God, because he knew he had no hope of pardon left, if his violation of
the king’s edict had been discovered; he knew the king himself to be
completely in shackles even if he wished to pardon him — as the event
proved. If death had been before the Prophet’s eyes, he preferred
meeting it fearlessly rather than ceasing from the duty of piety. We
must remark that the internal worship of God is not treated here, but
only the external profession of it. If Daniel had been forbidden to
pray, this fortitude with which he was endued might seem necessary; but
many think he ran great risks without sufficient reason, since he
increased the chance of death when only outward profession was
prohibited. But as Daniel here is not the herald of his own virtue, but
the Spirit speaks through his mouth, we must suppose that this
magnanimity in the holy Prophet was pleasing to God. And his liberation
shewed how greatly his piety was approved, because he had rather lose
his life than change any of his habits respecting the worship of God. We
know the principal sacrifice which God requires, is to call upon his
name. For we hereby testify him to be the author of all good things;
next we shew forth a specimen of our faith; then we fly to him, and cast
all our cares into his bosom, and offer him our prayers. Since,
therefore, prayer constitutes the chief part of our adoration and
worship of God, it was certainly a matter of no slight moment when the
king forbade any one to pray to God; it was a gross and manifest denial
of piety.

<span id="xii.vii-p10"></span>And here, again, we collect how blind was
the king’s pride when he could sign so impious and foul an edict! Then
how mad were the nobles who, to ruin Daniel as far as they possibly
could, endeavored to abolish all piety, and draw down God from heaven!
For what remains, when men think they can free themselves from the help
of God, and pass him over with security? Unless he prop us up by his
special aid, we know how entirely we should be reduced to nothing. Hence
the king forbade any one to offer up any prayer during a whole month —
that is, as I have said, he exacts from every one a denial of God! But
Daniel could not obey the edict without committing an atrocious insult
against God and declining from piety; because, as I have said, God
exacts this as a principal sacrifice. Hence it is not surprising if
Daniel cordially opposed the sacrilegious edict. Now, with respect to
the profession of piety, it was necessary to testify before men his
perseverance in the worship of God. For if he had altered his habits at
all, it would have been a partial abjuration; he would not have said
that he openly despised God to please Darius; but that very difference
in his conduct would have been a proof of perfidious defection. We know
that God requires not only faith in the heart and the inward affections,
but also the witness and confession of our piety.

<span id="xii.vii-p11"></span>Daniel, therefore, was obliged to
persevere in the holy practice to which he was accustomed, unless he
wished to be the very foulest apostate! He was in the habit of praying
with his windows open: hence he continued in his usual course, lest any
one should object that he gratified his earthly king for a moment by
omitting the worship of God. I wish this doctrine was now engraven on
the hearts of all men as it ought to be; but this example of the Prophet
is derided by many, not perhaps openly and glaringly, but still clearly
enough, the Prophet seems to them too inconsiderate and simple, since he
incurs great danger, rashly, and without any necessity. For they so
separate faith from its outward confession as to suppose it can remain
entire even if completely buried, and for the sake of avoiding the
cross. they depart a hundred times from its pure and sincere profession.
We must maintain, therefore, not only the duty of offering to God the
sacrifice of prayer in our hearts, but that our open profession is also
required, and thus the reality of our worship of God may clearly appear.

<span id="xii.vii-p12"></span>I do not say that our hasty thoughts are
to be instantly spread abroad, rendering us subject to death by the
enemies of God and his gospel; but I say these things ought to be united
and never to be separated, namely, faith and its profession. For
confession is of two kinds: first, the open and ingenuous testimony to
our inward feelings; and secondly, the necessary maintenance of the
worship of God, lest we shew any sign of a perverse and perfidious
hypocrisy, and thus reject the pursuit of piety. With regard to the
first kind, it is neither always nor everywhere necessary to profess our
faith; but the second kind ought to be perpetually practiced, for it can
never be necessary for us to pretend either disaffection or apostasy.
For although Daniel did not send for the Chaldeans by the sound of a
trumpet whenever he wished to pray, yet he framed his prayers and his
vows in his couch as usual, and did not pretend to be forgetful of piety
when he saw his faith put to the test, and the experiments made whether
or not he would persevere in his constancy. Hence he distinctly says,
*he went home,* after being made acquainted with the signing of the
decree. Had he been admitted to the council, he would doubtless have
spoken out, but the rest of the nobles cunningly excluded him, lest he
should interfere with them, and they thought the remedy would be too
late, and utterly in vain as soon as he perceived the certainty of his
own death. Hence, had he been admitted to the king’s council, he would
there have discharged his duty, and heartily interposed; but after the
signing of the edict, and the loss of all opportunity for advising the
king, he retired to his house.

<span id="xii.vii-p13"></span>We must here notice the impossibility of
finding an excuse for the king’s advisers, who purposely escape when
they see that unanimity of opinion cannot be obtained, and think God
will be satisfied in this way, if they only maintain perfect silence.
But no excuse can be admitted for such weakness of mind. And, doubtless,
Daniel is unable to defend them by his example, since, as we have
already said, he was excluded by the cunning and malice of the nobles
from taking his place among them as usual, and thus admonishing the king
in time. He now says, *His windows were open towards Jerusalem* The
question arises, Whether it was necessary for Daniel thus to open his
windows? For some one may object — he did this under a mistaken opinion;
for if God fills heaven end earth, what signified his windows being open
towards Jerusalem? There is no doubt that the Prophet used this device
as a stimulus to his fervor in prayer. For when praying for the
liberation of his people, he directed his eyes towards Jerusalem, and
that sight became a stimulus to enflame his mind to greater devotion.
Hence the opening of the Prophet’s windows has no reference to God, as
if he should be listened to more readily by having the open heaven
between his dwelling and Judea; but he rather considered himself and his
natural infirmity. Now, if the holy Prophet, so careful in his prayers,
needed this help, we must see whether or not our sloth in these days has
need of more stimulants! Let us learn, therefore, when we feel ourselves
to be too sluggish and cold in prayer, to collect all the aids which can
arouse our feelings and correct the torpor of which we are conscious.
This, then, was the Prophet’s intention *in opening his windows towards
Jerusalem* Besides, he wished by this symbol to shew his domestics his
perseverance, in the hope and expectation of the promised redemption.
When, therefore, he prayed to God, he kept Jerusalem in sight, not that
his eyes could penetrate to so distant a region, but he directed his
gaze towards Jerusalem to shew himself a stranger among the Chaldeans,
although he enjoyed great power among them, and was adorned with great
authority, and excelled in superior dignity. Thus he wished all men to
perceive how he longed for the promised inheritance, although for a time
he was in exile. This was his second reason for opening his windows.

<span id="xii.vii-p14"></span>He says, He *prayed three times a-day.*
This is worthy of observation, because, unless we fix certain hours in
the day for prayer, it easily slips from our memory. Although,
therefore, Daniel was constant in pouring forth prayers, yet he enjoined
upon himself the customary rite of prostrating himself before God three
times a-day. When we rise in the morning, unless we commence the day by
praying to God, we shew a brutish stupidity, so also when we retire to
rest, and when we take our food and at other times, as every one finds
most advantageous to himself. For here God allows us liberty, but we
ought all to feel our infirmities, and to apply the proper remedies.
Therefore, for this reason, Daniel was in the habit of praying thrice. A
proof of his fervor is also added, when he says, *He prostrated himself
on his knees;* not that bending the knee is necessary in prayer, but
while we need aids to devotion, as we have said, that posture is of
importance. First of all, it reminds us of our inability to stand before
God, unless with humility and reverence; then, our minds are better
prepared for serious entreaty, and this symbol of worship is pleasing to
God. Hence Daniel’s expression is by no means superfluous: *He, fell
upon his knees whenever he wished to pray to God.* He now says, *he
uttered prayers and confessions before God,* or he praised God, for we
must diligently notice how many in their prayers mutter to God. For
although they demand either one thing or another, yet they are carried
along by an immoderate impulse, and, as I have said, they are violent in
their requests unless God instantly grants their petitions.

<span id="xii.vii-p15"></span>This is the reason why Daniel joins
praises or the giving of thanks with prayers; as, also, Paul exhorts us
respecting both. Offer up, says he, your prayers to God, with
thanksgiving, (<span id="xii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Php
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="xii.vii-p15.1"></span>,)
as if he had said, We cannot rightly offer vows and prayers to God
unless when we bless his holy name, although he does not immediately
grant our petitions. In Daniel’s case we must remark another
circumstance: he had been an exile for a long time, and tossed about in
many troubles and changes; still he celebrates God’s praises. Which of
us is endued with such patience as to praise God, if afflicted with many
trials through three or four years? Nay, scarcely a day passes without
our passions growing warm and instigating us to rebel against God! Since
Daniel, then, could persevere in praising God, when oppressed by so many
sorrows, anxieties, and troubles — this was a remarkable proof of
invincible patience. And, doubtless, he signifies a continuous act, by
using the demonstrative pronoun <span id="xii.vii-p15.2"></span>דנה,
*deneh,* which refers to his ordinary habit — *as he had done before,
and from former times* By noticing the time, he marks, as I have said
before, a perseverance, since he was not only accustomed to pray once or
twice, but by a regular constancy he exercised himself in this duty of
piety every day. It afterwards follows: —

<span id="xii.viii"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p1"></span><span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#011)<span id="xii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p2"></span>**11.** Then these men assembled, and
found Daniel praying and making supplication before his God.

<span id="xii.viii-p3"></span>**11.** Tunc viri illi sociati sunt,
 <span id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291) et invenerunt Danielem orantem
et precantem coram Deo suo.

<span id="xii.viii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.viii-p6"></span><span id="xii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p7"></span>Here the nobles of Darius display their
fraud when they observe Daniel, and unite in a conspiracy against him:
for no other object but the death of Daniel could have induced them to
dictate this edict. Hence they agree together, and find *Daniel uttering
prayers and supplications to his God* If Daniel had prayed with the
slightest secrecy, he would not have been a victim to their snares; but
he did not refuse the prospect of death. He knew the object of the
edict, and expected the arrival of the nobles. We see, then, how
willingly he submitted to instant death, and for no other purpose than
to retain the pure worship of God, together with its outward profession.
Go to, now, ye who desire to shield your perfidy, pretending that you
ought not to incur danger rashly, and when the wicked surround you on
all sides! You become cautious lest you should rashly throw away your
lives! For Daniel, in their opinion, was to be blamed for too great
simplicity and folly, since he willingly and knowingly encountered
certain danger. But we have already said, he could not escape from their
snare without indirectly revolting from God, for he might have been
immediately reproached — Why do you desist from your accustomed habit?
Why do you close your windows? Why do you not dare to pray to your God?
It appears, then, you regard the king of more importance than the
reverence and fear of God. Because God’s honor would have been thus
sullied, Daniel, as we have already seen, spontaneously offered himself
to death as a sacrifice. We are taught, also, by this example, how
snares are prepared for the sons of God, however circumspectly they act,
and however soberly they conduct themselves. But they ought to conduct
themselves so prudently as neither to be too cunning nor too anxious,
that is, they should not regard their own security so as in the meantime
to forget God’s requirements, and the preciousness of his name, and the
necessity of a confession of faith in the proper place and time. It now
follows:

<span id="xii.ix"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p1"></span><span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#012)<span id="xii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p2"></span>**12.** Then they came near, and spake
before the king concerning the king’s decree; Hast thou not signed a
decree, that every man that shall ask *a petition* of any God or man
within thirty days, save of thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of
lions? The king answered and said, The thing *is* true, according to the
law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not.

<span id="xii.ix-p3"></span>**12.** Tunc accesserunt et dixerunt  <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292) coram rege super edicto regio, An non
edictum obsignasti, ne quisquam homo peteret ab ullo deo vel homine,
usque ad triginta dies *hos,* praeterquam abs te, rex,  <span
id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293) projiceretur in speluncam leonum?
Respondit rex et dixit, Firmus est sermo secundum legem Medorum et
Persarum, quae non transit.

<span id="xii.ix-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.ix-p7"></span><span id="xii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p8"></span>Now the king’s nobles approach the king as
conquerors, but they do so cunningly; for they do not openly say
anything about Daniel, whom they knew to be a favorite with the king;
but they repeat their previous assertion concerning the impossibility of
changing the edict, since the law of the Medes and Persians is
inviolable and cannot be rendered void. Again, therefore, as far as they
possibly can, they sanction that edict, lest the king should afterwards
be free, or dare to retract what he had once commanded. We must mark the
cunning with which they indirectly circumvent the king, and entangle
him, by preventing the change of a single word; *They come,* therefore,
*and discourse concerning the royal edict.* They do not mention the name
of Daniel, but dwell upon the royal decree, so as to bind the king more
firmly. It follows — *The king answered, The discourse is true* We here
see how kings desire praise for consistency, but they do not perceive
the difference between consistency and obstinacy. For kings ought to
reflect upon their own decrees, to avoid the disgrace of retracting what
they have hastily promulgated. If anything has escaped them without
consideration, both prudence and equity require them to correct their
errors; but when they have trampled upon all regard for justice, they
desire every inconsiderate command to be strictly obeyed! This is the
height of folly, and we ought not to sanction a perseverance in such
obstinacy, as we have already said. But the rest to-morrow.

<span id="xii.x"></span>

<span id="xii.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou hast
reconciled us to thyself by the precious blood of thy Son, that we may
not be our own, but devoted to thee in perfect obedience, and may
consecrate ourselves entirely to thee: May we offer our bodies and souls
in sacrifice, and be rather prepared to suffer a hundred deaths than to
decline from thy true and sincere worship. Grant us, especially, to
exercise ourselves in prayer, to fly to thee every moment, and to commit
ourselves to thy Fatherly care, that thy Spirit may govern us to the
end. Do thou defend and sustain us, until we are collected into that
heavenly kingdom which thy only-begotten Son has prepared for us by his
blood. — Amen.

<span id="xii.xi"></span>

<span id="xii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-ninth.

<span id="xii.xi-p2"></span>WE began yesterday to explain Daniel’s
narrative of the calumny invented against him before King Darius. The
nobles of the kingdom, as we have said, used cunning in their interview
with the king; because if they had begun with Daniel, the king might
have broken his word. But, they dwell upon the royal decree; they shew
the imminence of the danger, unless the authority of all the king’s
decrees was upheld. By this artifice we see how they obtained their
object; for the king confirms their assertion respecting the wickedness
of rendering abortive what had been promulgated in the king’s name. For
kings are pleased with their own greatness, and wish their own pleasure
to be treated as an oracle. That edict was detestable and impious by
which Darius forbade entreaties to be offered to any deity; yet he
wished it to remain in force, lest his majesty should be despised by his
subjects. Meanwhile, he does not perceive the consequences which must
ensue. Hence we are taught by this example, that no virtue is so rare in
kings as moderation, and yet none is more necessary; for the more they
have in their power, the more it becomes them to be cautious lest they
indulge their lusts, while they think it lawful to desire whatever
pleases them. It now follows:

<span id="xii.xii"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013)<span id="xii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p2"></span>**13.** Then answered they and said before
the king, That Daniel, which *is* of the children of the captivity of
Judah, regardeth not thee, O king, nor the decree that thou hast signed,
but maketh his petition three times a day.

<span id="xii.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Tunc loquuti sunt, et dixerunt
coram rege: Daniel, qui *est* ex filiis captivitatis Jehudah, non posuit
super te, rex, sensum,  <span id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294) neque ad
edictum quod obsignasti: et vicibus tribus in die precatur petitionem
suam.  <span id="fr_295"></span>[296](#fn_295)

<span id="xii.xii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.xii-p7"></span><span id="xii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p8"></span>Now, when Daniel’s calumniators see that
King Darius had no wish to defend his cause, they open up more freely
what they had previously conceded; for, as we have said, if they had
openly accused Daniel, their accusation could have been instantly and
completely refuted; but after this sentiment had been expressed to the
king, their statement is final, since by the laws of the Medes and
Persians a king’s decree ought to be self-acting; hence, after this is
accomplished, they then come to the person. *Daniel,* say they, *one of
the captives of Judah, has not obeyed thy will, O king, nor the decree
which thou hast signed.* By saying, “Daniel, one of the Jewish
captives,” they doubtless intended to magnify his crime and to render
him odious. For if any Chaldean had dared to despise the king’s edict,
his rashness would not have been excused. But now when Daniel, who was
lately a slave and a Chaldean captive, dares to despise the king’s
command, who reigned over Chaldea by the right of conquest, this seemed
less tolerable still. The effect is the same as if they had said, “He
was lately a captive among thy slaves; thou art supreme lord, and his
masters to whom he was subject are under thy yoke, because thou art
their conqueror; he is but a captive and a stranger, a mere slave, and
yet he rebels against thee!” We see then how they desired to poison the
king’s mind against him by this allusion, *He is one of the captives!*
The words are very harmless in themselves, but they endeavor to sting
their monarch in every way, and to stir up his wrath against Daniel. *He
does not direct his mind to thee, O king;* that is, he does not reflect
upon who you are, and thus he despises thy majesty and *the edict which
thou hast signed* This is another enlargement: *Daniel,* therefore, *did
not direct his mind either to thee or to thy edict;* and wilt thou bear
this? Next, they recite the deed itself — he *prays three times a-day*
This would have been the simple narrative, Daniel has not obeyed thy
command in praying to his own God; but, as I have said, they exaggerate
his crime by accusing him of pride, contempt, and insolence. We see,
therefore, by what artifices Daniel was oppressed by these malicious
men. It now follows:

<span id="xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#014)<span
id="xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p2"></span>**14.** Then the king, when he heard
*these* words, was sore displeased with himself, and set *his* heart on
Daniel to deliver him: and he laboured till the going down of the sun to
deliver him.

<span id="xii.xiii-p3"></span>**14.** Tunc rex, postquam sermonem
audivit, valde tristatus est,  <span id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296)
in se: et ad Danielem apposuit cor,  <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297) ad ipsum servandum: et usque ad
occasum solis fuit solicitus ad ipsum eruendum.  <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298)

<span id="xii.xiii-p7"></span>**15.** Then these men assembled unto the
king, and said unto the king, Know, O king, that the law of the Medes
and Persians *is*, That no decree nor statute which the king
establisheth may be changed.

<span id="xii.xiii-p8"></span>**15.** Tunc conglobati sunt viri illi
 <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) ad regem, et dixerunt, Scias,
rex, quod lex Medis et Persis est, ut omne edictum et statutum quod rex
statuerit, non mutetur.

<span id="xii.xiii-p10"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiii-p11"></span><span id="xii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p12"></span>In the first place, Daniel recites that
the king was disturbed, when he perceived the malice of his nobles which
had formerly escaped him; for their intention and their object had never
occurred to him; he perceives himself deceived and entrapped, and hence
he is disturbed. Here again we are taught how cautiously kings ought to
avoid depraved counsels, since they are besieged on every side by
perfidious men, whose only object is to gain by their false
representations, and to oppress their enemies, and those from whom they
hope for booty or who may favor their evil courses. Because so many
snares surround kings, they ought to be the more cautious in providing
against cunning. They are too late in acknowledging themselves to have
been overreached, when no remedy is left, partly through fear, and
partly through wishing to consult their own credit; and they prefer
offending God to suffering any outward disrespect from men. Since,
therefore, kings consider their own honor so sacred, they persevere in
their evil undertakings, even when their conscience accuses them; and
even if justice itself were to appear visibly before them, yet this
restraint would not be sufficient to withhold them, when ambition urges
them in the opposite direction, and they are unwilling to lose the
slightest portion of their reputation among men. The case of Darius
supplies us with an example of this kind.

<span id="xii.xiii-p13"></span>First of all, it is said, *He was
sorrowful when he heard these words, and was anxious till the setting of
the sun about the way of snatching Daniel from death* He wished this to
be done, if his own honor were sound and safe, and his nobles were
satisfied. But on the one side, he fears disunion if his nobles should
conspire to produce disturbance; and on the other side, he is moved by a
foolish fear, because he does not wish to incur the charge of levity
which awaited him, and hence he is vanquished and obeys the lusts of the
wicked. Although, therefore, he labored till the setting of the sun to
free Daniel, yet that perverse shame prevailed of which I have spoken,
and then the fear of dissension. For when we do not lean upon God’s
help, we are always compelled to vacillate, although anxious to be
honestly affected. Thus Pilate wished to liberate Christ, but was
terrified by the threats of the people, when they denounced against him
the displeasure of Caesar. (<span id="xii.xiii-p13.1"></span>[Joh
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span
id="xii.xiii-p13.1"></span>.) And no wonder, since faith is alone a
certain and fixed prop on which we may lean while fearlessly discharging
our duty, and thus overcome all fears. But when we want confidence, we
are, as I have said, sure to be changeable. Hence Darius, through fear
of a conspiracy of his nobles against himself, permitted Daniel to be an
innocent sufferer from their cruelty. Then that false shame is added
which I have mentioned, because he was unwilling to appear without
consideration, by suddenly revoking his own edict, as it was a law with
the Medes and Persians that whatever proceeded from kings was
inviolable! Daniel now states this. He says, *those men assembled
together;* when they saw the king hesitate and doubt, they became fierce
and contentious with him. When it is said they meet together, this
relates to their inspiring him with fear. They say, *Know, O king!* He
knew it well enough, and they need not instruct him in any unknown
matter, but they treat him in a threatening manner. “What? dost thou not
see how utterly the royal name will be hereafter deprived of its
authority if he violates thine edict with impunity? Will you thus permit
yourself to become a laughingstock? Finally, they intimate, that he
would not be king unless he revenged the insult offered him by Daniel in
neglecting his commandment. *Know,* therefore, O king, *that the
Persians and Medes* — he was himself king of the Medes, but it is just
as if they said, What kind of rumor will be spread through all thy
subject provinces; for thou knowest how far this prevails among the
Medes and Persians — the king must not change his edict. If, therefore,
thou shouldst set such an example, will not all thy subjects instantly
rise against thee? and wilt thou not be contemptible to them?” We see,
then, how the satraps rage against their king, and frighten him from any
change of counsel. And they also join the edict with the statute, which
the king had resolved upon, with the view of impressing upon him the
necessity of not changing a single decree which he had often and
repeatedly sanctioned. It follows:

<span id="xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#016)<span id="xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p2"></span>**16.** Then the king commanded, and they
brought Daniel, and cast *him* into the den of lions. *Now* the king
spake and said unto Daniel, Thy God whom thou servest continually, he
will deliver thee.

<span id="xii.xiv-p3"></span>**16.** Tunc rex loquutus est,  <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) et adduxerunt Danielem, et projecerunt
*eum* in foveam leonum. Respondit rex, et dixit Danieli, Deus tuus quem
tu colis ipsum jugiter,  <span id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) ipse
liberabit te.  <span id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302)

<span id="xii.xiv-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xiv-p8"></span><span id="xii.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p9"></span>The king, as we have said, frightened by
the denunciation of the nobles, condemns Daniel to death. And hence we
gather the reward which kings deserve in reference to their pride, when
they are compelled to submit with servility to their flatterers. How was
Darius deceived by the cunning of his nobles! For he thought his
authority would be strengthened, by putting the obedience of all men to
this test of refusing all prayer to any god or man for a whole month. He
thought he should become superior to both gods and men, if all his
subjects really manifested obedience of this kind. We now see how
obstinately the nobles rise against him, and denounce ultimate revolt,
unless he obey them. We see that when kings take too much upon
themselves, how they are exposed to infamy, and become the variest
slaves of their own servants! This is common enough with earthly
princes; those who possess their influence and favor applaud them in all
things and even adore them; they offer every kind of flattery which can
propitiate their favor; but, meanwhile, what freedom do their idols
enjoy? They do not allow them any authority, nor any intercourse with
the best and most faithful friends, while they are watched by their own
guards. Lastly, if they are compared with the wretches who are confined
in the closest dungeon, not one who is thrust down into the deepest pit,
and watched by three or four guards, is not freer than kings themselves!
But, as I have said, this is God’s most just vengeance; since, when they
cannot contain themselves in the ordinary rank and station of men, but
wish to penetrate the clouds and become on a level with God, they
necessarily become a laughingstock. Hence they become slaves of all
their attendants, and dare not utter anything with freedom, and are
without friends, and are afraid to summon their subjects to their
presence, and to intrust either one or another with their wishes. Thus
slaves rule the kingdoms of the world, because kings assume superiority
to mortals. King Darius is an instance of this when he sent for Daniel,
and commanded him to be thrown into the den of lions; his nobles force
this from him, and he unwillingly obeys them. But we should notice the
reason. He had lately forgotten his own mortality, he had desired to
deprive the Almighty of his sway, and as it were to drag him down from
heaven! For if God remains in heaven, men must pray to him; but Darius
forbade any one from even daring to utter a prayer; hence as far as he
could he deprived the Almighty of his power. Now he is compelled to obey
his own subjects, although they exercise an almost disgraceful tyranny
over him.

<span id="xii.xiv-p10"></span>Daniel now adds — *the king said this to
him, Thy God, whom thou servest,* or worshipest, *faithfully, he will
deliver thee!* This word may be read in the optative mood, as we have
said. There is no doubt that Darius really wished this; but it may mean,
Thy God whom thou worshipest will deliver thee — as if he had said,
“Already I am not my own master, I am here tossed about by the blast of
a tempest; my nobles compel me to this deed against my will; I,
therefore, now resign thee and thy life to God, because it is not in my
power to deliver thee;” as if this excuse lightened his own crime by
transferring to God the power of preserving Daniel. This reason causes
some to praise the piety of King Darius; but as I confess his clemency
and humanity to be manifest in this speech, so it is clear that he had
not a grain of piety when he thus wished to adorn himself in the spoils
of deity! For although the superstitious do not seriously fear God, yet
they are restrained by some dread of him; but he here wished to reduce
the whole divinity to nothing. What sort of piety was this? The clemency
of Darius may therefore be praised, but his sacrilegious pride can by no
means be excused. Then why did he act so humanely towards Daniel?
Because he had found him a faithful servant, and the regard which
rendered him merciful arose from this peculiarity. He would not have
manifested the same disposition towards others. If a hundred or a
thousand Jews had been dragged before his tribunal, he would carelessly
have condemned them all because they had disobeyed the edict! Hence he
was obstinately impious and cruel. He spared Daniel for his own private
advantage, and thus embraced him with his favor; but in praising his
humanity, we do not perceive any sign of piety in him. But he says, *the
God whom thou worshipest, he will deliver thee,* because, he had
formerly known Daniel’s prophecy concerning the destruction of the
Chaldean monarchy; hence he is convinced, how Israel’s God is conscious
of all things, and rules everything by his will; yet, in the meantime,
he neither worships him nor suffers others to do so; for as far as he
could he had excluded God from his own rights. In thus attributing to
God the power of delivering him, he does not act cordially; and hence
his impiety is the more detestable, when he deprives God of his rights
while he confesses him to be the true and only one endued with supreme
power; and though he is but dust and ashes, yet he substitutes himself
in his place! It now follows, —

<span id="xii.xv"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#017)<span id="xii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p2"></span>**17.** And a stone was brought, and laid
upon the mouth of the den; and the king sealed it with his own signet,
and with the signet of his lords; that the purpose might not be changed
concerning Daniel.

<span id="xii.xv-p3"></span>**17.** Ed adductus fuit lapis unus et
positus super os speluncæ: et obsignavit eum rex annulo suo et annulo
procerum suorum, ne mutaretur placitum in Daniele.  <span
id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303)

<span id="xii.xv-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.xv-p6"></span><span id="xii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p7"></span>There is no doubt that God’s counsel
provided that the nobles should seal the stone with their own rings, and
thus close the mouth of the cave, and render the miracle more
illustrious. For when the king approached on the morrow, the rings were
all entire, and the seals all unbroken. Thus the preservation of this
servant of God was manifestly by the aid of heaven and not by the art of
men. Hence we see how boldly the king’s nobles had compelled him to
perform their pleasure. For he might seem deprived of all royal power
when he delivered up to them a subject dear and faithful to himself, and
ordered him to be thrown into the lions’ den. They are not content with
this compliance of the king; they extort another point from him — the
closing up of the mouth of the cave; and then they all seal the stone,
lest any one should release Daniel. We see, then, when once liberty has
been snatched away, all is over, especially when any one has become a
slave by his own faults, and has attached himself to the counsels of the
ungodly. For, at first, such slavery will not prevail as to induce a man
to do everything which he is ordered, since he seems to be free; but
when he has given himself up to such slavery as I have described, he is
compelled to transgress not once or twice, but constantly and without
ceasing. For example, if any one swerves from his duty through either
the fear of man or flattery, or any other depraved affection, he will
grant various things, not only when asked, but when urgently compelled.
But when he has once submitted to the loss of freedom, he will be
compelled, as I have already said, to consent to the most shameful deeds
at the nod of any one. If any teacher or pastor of the Church should
turn from the right path through the influence of ambition, the author
of his declension will come to him again and say, What! do you dare to
refuse me? Did I not obtain from you, yesterday or the day before,
whatever I wished? Thus he will be compelled to transgress a second time
in favor of the person to whom he has joined himself, and will also be
forced to repeat the transgression continually. Thus princes also, who
are not free agents through being under the tyranny of others, if they
permit themselves to be overcome contrary to their conscience, lay aside
all their authority, and are drawn aside in all directions by the will
of their subjects. This example, then, is proposed to us in the case of
King Darius, who after inflicting unjust punishment upon Daniel, adds
this, *He must be enclosed in the cave,* and then, *the stone must be
sealed,* — and for what object? — *lest the doom should be changed;*
meaning, he did not dare to attempt anything in Daniel’s favor. We see,
then, how the king submitted to the greatest disgrace, because his
nobles had no confidence in him; they refused to trust him when he
ordered Daniel to be thrown into the lions’ den, but they exacted a
guarantee against his liberation, and would not suffer him to attempt
anything. We thus see how disgracefully they withdrew their confidence
from their king; next they use their authority against him, lest he
should dare to remove the stone which had been sealed, unless he would
incur the charge of falsehood by corrupting the public signatures, and
of deception by falsifying the public documents. Hence this passage
admonishes us against prostituting ourselves in slavery to the lust of
men. Let every one serve his nearest neighbors as far as charity will
allow and as custom demands. Meanwhile, no one ought to permit himself
to be turned aside in different directions contrary to his conscience,
because when he loses his free agency, he will be compelled to endure
many affronts and to obey the foulest commands. This we see exemplified
in the case of the panders to the avarice, or ambition, or cruelty of
princes; for when once they are under the power of such men, they are
most miserable victims; they cannot avoid the most extreme necessities,
they become wretched slaves, and call down against themselves, a hundred
times over, the anger of both God and man. It now follows, —

<span id="xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#018)<span id="xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p2"></span>**18.** Then the king went to his palace,
and passed the night fasting: neither were instruments of musick brought
before him: and his sleep went from him.

<span id="xii.xvi-p3"></span>**18.** Tunc profectus est rex in palatium
suum, et pernoctavit in jejunio, *jejunus,* et instrumenta musica  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) non fuerint allata coram ipso,  <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) et somnus *etiam* discessit ab eo.

<span id="xii.xvi-p6"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvi-p7"></span><span id="xii.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p8"></span>Here Daniel relates the tardy repentance of
the king, because although he was in the greatest grief, yet he did not
correct his fault. And this occurs to many who are not hardened by
contempt of God and their own depravity; they are drawn aside by others,
and are dissatisfied with their own vices, while they still indulge in
them. Would that the examples of this evil were rare in the world! but
they occur everywhere before our eyes. Darius therefore is here proposed
to us as intermediate between the ungodly and the wicked — the righteous
and the holy. The wicked do not hesitate to stir up the Almighty against
them, and after they have dismissed all fears and all shame, they revel
in their own licentiousness. Those who are ruled by the fear of God,
although they sustain hard contests with the flesh, yet impose a check
upon themselves, and bridle their perverse affections. Others are
between the two, as I have said, not yet obstinate in their malice, and
not quite satisfied with their corruption’s, and still they follow them
as if bound to them by ropes. Such was Darius; for he ought constantly
to have repelled the calumny of his nobles; but when he saw himself so
entangled by them, he ought to have opposed them manfully, and to have
reproved them for so abusing their influence over him; yet he did not
act thus, but rather bent before their fury. Meanwhile he bewails in his
palace, and abstains from all food and delicacies. He thus shews his
displeasure at the evil conduct at which he connived. We see then how
ineffectual it is for our own conscience to smite us when we sin, and to
cause us sorrow for our faults; we must go beyond this, so that sorrow
may lead us on to repentance, as also Paul teaches us. (<span
id="xii.xvi-p8.1"></span>[2Co
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)<span id="xii.xvi-p8.1"></span>.)
Darius, then, had reduced himself to difficulties; while he bewails his
fault, he does not attempt to correct it. This was, indeed, the
beginning of repentance, but nothing more; and when he feels any
compunction, this stirs him up and allows him neither peace nor comfort.
This lesson, then, we are to learn from Daniel’s narrative of King
Darius passing the whole of that night in wailing. It follows
afterwards, —

<span id="xii.xvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019)<span
id="xii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p2"></span>**19.** Then the king arose very early in
the morning, and went in haste unto the den of lions.

<span id="xii.xvii-p3"></span>**19.** Tunc rex in aurora,  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) surrexit cum illucesceret, et in
festinatione,  <span id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) ad speluncam
leonum venit.

<span id="xii.xvii-p6"></span>**20.** And when he came to the den, he
cried with a lamentable voice unto Daniel: *and* the king spake and said
to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou
servest continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?

<span id="xii.xvii-p7"></span>**20.** Et cum appropinquasset ad foveam,
ad Danielem in voce tristi, *aut, lugubri,* clamavit, loquutus est rex,
et dixit Danieli, Daniel serve Dei viventis, Deus tuus quem tu colis
ipsum jugiter, an potuit ad servandum te a leonibus?  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308)

<span id="xii.xvii-p9"></span> 

<span id="xii.xvii-p10"></span><span id="xii.xvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p11"></span>Here the king begins to act with a little
more consistency, when he approaches the pit. He was formerly struck
down by fear as to yield to his nobles, and to forget his royal dignity
by delivering himself up to them as a captive. But now he neither dreads
their envy nor the perverseness of their discourse. *He approaches the
lions’ den early in the morning,* says he, — that is, at dawn, before it
was, light, coming during the twilight, *and in haste.* Thus we see him
suffering under the most bitter grief, which overcomes all his former
fears; for he might still have suffered from fear, through remembrance
of that formidable denunciation, — Thou wilt no longer enjoy thy supreme
command, unless thou dost vindicate thine edict from contempt! But, as I
have said, grief overcomes all fear. And yet we are unable to praise
either his piety or his humanity; because, though he approaches the cave
and calls out, “Daniel!” with a lamentable voice, still he is not yet
angry with his nobles till he sees the servant of God perfectly safe.
Then his spirits revive, as we shall see; but as yet he persists in his
weakness, and is in a middle place between the perverse despisers and
the hearty worshippers of God, who follow with an upright intention what
they know to be just.

<span id="xii.xviii"></span>

<span id="xii.xviii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.xviii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty Father, since thou
shewest us, by the example of thy servant Daniel, how we ought to
persevere with consistency in the sincere worship of thee, and thus
proceed towards true greatness of mind, that we may truly devote
ourselves to thee. May we not be turned aside in any direction through
the lust of men, but may we persist in our holy calling, and so conquer
all dangers, and arrive at length at the fruit of victory — that happy
immortality which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our Lord.
— Amen.

<span id="xii.xix"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p1"></span>Lecture Thirtieth.

<span id="xii.xix-p2"></span><span id="xii.xix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xix-p3"></span>WANT of time compelled me to break off our
last Lecture at the point where Daniel relates how *the king approached
the cave* Now he reports his words, — *O Daniel, servant of the living
God! thy God whom thou worshipest constantly, has he been able to
deliver thee?* says he. Darius declares the God of Israel to be the
living One. But if there is a living God, he excludes all those
imaginary deities whom men fancy for themselves by their own ingenuity.
For it is necessary that deity should be one, and this principle is
acknowledged by even the profane. However men may be deluded by their
dreams, yet they all confess the impossibility of having more gods than
one. They distort, indeed, God’s character, but they cannot deny his
unity. When Darius uttered this praise of the God of Israel, he
confesses all other deities to be mere fictions; but he shews how, as I
have said, the profane hold the first principle, but afterwards allow it
to escape entirely from their thoughts. This passage does not prove, as
some allege, the real conversion of King Darius, and his sincere
adoption of true piety; for he always worshipped his own idols, but
thought it sufficient if he raised the God of Israel to the highest
rank. But, as we know, God cannot admit a companion, for he is jealous
of his own glory. (<span id="xii.xix-p3.1"></span>[Isa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#008)<span id="xii.xix-p3.1"></span>.)
It was too cold, then, for Darius simply to acknowledge the God whom
Daniel worshipped to be superior to all others; because where God
reigns, all idols must of necessity be reduced to nothing; as also it is
said in the Psalms, Let God reign, and let the gods of all nations fall
before him. Darius then proceeded so far as to devote himself to the
true and only God, but was compelled to pay the greatest respect to
Israel’s God. Meanwhile he always remained sunk in his own superstitions
to which he had been accustomed.

<span id="xii.xix-p4"></span>He afterwards adds, *Thy God, whom thou
worshipest continually, could he free thee from the lions?* He here
speaks doubtfully, as unbelievers do, who seem to have some ground for
hope, but no firm or sure persuasion in their own minds. I suppose this
invocation to be natural, since a certain secret instinct naturally
impels men to fly to God; for although scarcely one in twenty leans upon
God’s word, yet all men call upon God occasionally. They wish to
discover whether God desires to assist them and to aid them in their
necessities; meanwhile, as I have said, there is no firm persuasion in
their hearts, which was the state of the mind of King Darius. *Could God
deliver thee?* says he; as if God’s power could possibly be doubted! If
he had said, Has God delivered thee? this would have been tolerable. For
God was not bound by any law to be always snatching his people from
death, since, we very well know, this rests entirely with his good
pleasure. When, therefore, he permits his people to suffer under the
lusts of the impious, his power is by no means diminished, since their
liberation depends upon his mere will and pleasure. His power,
therefore, ought by no means to be called in question. We observe, that
Darius was never truly converted, and never distinctly acknowledged the
true and only God, but was seized with a blind fear, which, whether he
would or not, compelled him to attribute the supreme honor to Israel’s
God. And this was not an ingenuous confession, but was rather extorted
from him. It now follows: —

<span id="xii.xx"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p1"></span><span id="xii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#021)<span id="xii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p2"></span>**21.** Then said Daniel unto the king, O
king, live for ever.

<span id="xii.xx-p3"></span>**21.** Tunc Daniel cum rege loquutus est,
rex, in eternum vive.

<span id="xii.xx-p4"></span>**22.** My God hath sent his angel, and hath
shut the lions’ mouths, that they have not hurt me: forasmuch as before
him innocency was found in me; and also before thee, O king, have I done
no hurt.

<span id="xii.xx-p5"></span>**22.** Deus meus misit angelum suum, et
conclusit os leonum, et non nocuerunt mihi: quoniam coram ipso
innocentia,  <span id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) inventa est in me:
atque atiam coram te, rex, pravitatem non commisi.

<span id="xii.xx-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xx-p8"></span><span id="xii.xx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p9"></span>Here Daniel answers the king moderately and
softly, although he had been cast into the cave by his command. He might
have deservedly been angry and expostulated with him, because he had
been so impiously deserted by him, for King Darius had found him a
faithful servant, and had used his services for his own advantage. When
he saw himself oppressed by unjust calumnies, the king did not take his
part so heartily as he ought; and at length, being overcome by the
threats of his nobles, he ordered Daniel to be cast into the pit. Daniel
might, as I have said, have complained of the king’s cruelty and
perfidy. He does not do this, but is silent concerning this injury,
because his deliverance would sufficiently magnify the glory of God. The
holy Prophet desired nothing else, except the king’s welfare, which he
prays for. Although he uses the ordinary phrase, yet he speaks from his
heart, when he says, *O king, live for ever!* that is, may God protect
thy life and bless thee perpetually. Many salute their kings and even
their friends in this way through mere form; but there is no doubt that
Daniel heartily wished the king the enjoyment of long life and
happiness. He afterwards adds,

<span id="xii.xx-p10"></span><span id="xii.xx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p11"></span> *My God,* says he, *sent his angel, and
shut the lions’ mouths!* Thus we see that Daniel openly assigns to
angels the duty of rendering assistance, while the whole power remains
in the hands of God himself. He says, therefore, that he was freed by
the hand and assistance of an angel, but shews how the angel was the
agent and not the author of his safety. *God,* therefore, says he, *sent
his angel* We have often seen how indistinctly the Chaldeans spoke when
mentioning the Deity; they called their deities holy, but Daniel here
ascribes the entire glory to God alone. He does not bring forward a
multitude of deities according to the prevalent opinion among the
profane. He puts prominently forward the unity of God; and then he adds
the presence of angels as assisting God’s servants, shewing how they
perform whatever is enjoined upon them. Thus the whole praise of their
salvation remains with the one God, since angels do not assist
whomsoever they please, and are not moved by their own will, but solely
in obedience to God’s commands.

<span id="xii.xx-p12"></span>We must now notice what follows: *God had
shut the lions’ mouths* For by these words the Prophet shews how lions
and the most cruel beasts are in the hands of God, and are restrained by
his secret curb, so that they can neither rage nor commit any injury
unless by God’s permission. We may thus learn that savage beasts are
only so far injurious to us as God may permit them to humble our pride.
Meanwhile, we may perceive that no beast is so cruel as to injure us by
either his claws or his teeth, unless God give him the reins. And this
instruction is worthy of especial notice, since we tremble at the least
danger, even at the noise of a falling leaf. As we are necessarily
exposed to many dangers on all sides, and surrounded by various forms of
death, hence we should be harassed by wretched anxiety unless this
principle supported us; not only is our life under God’s protection, but
nothing can injure us while he directs everything by his will and
pleasure. And this principle ought to be extended to the devils
themselves, and to impious and wicked men, for we know the devil to be
always anxious to destroy us, like a roaring lion, for he prowls about
seeking whom he may devour, as Peter says in his First Epistle, (<span
id="xii.xx-p12.1"></span>[1Pe 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="xii.xx-p12.1"></span>.) For we see how all the impious plot for our
destruction continually, and how madly they are inflamed against us. But
God, who can close the lion’s mouth, will also both restrain the devil
and all the wicked from hurting any one without his permission.
Experience also shews us how the devil and all the impious are
controlled by him, for we should perish every moment unless he warded
off by his opposing influence the numberless evils which ever hang over
us. We ought to perceive how the singular protection of God preserves us
in daily safety amidst the ferocity and madness of our foes. Daniel says
he suffered no loss of any kind, *because before God his righteousness
was found in him.* These words signify that his preservation arose from
God wishing to vindicate his own glory and worship which he had
commanded in his law. The Prophet does not here boast in his own
righteousness, but rather shews how his deliverance arose from God’s
wishing to testify by a certain and clear proof his approval of that
worship for which Daniel had contended even to death. We see, then, how
Daniel refers all things to the approval of the worship of God. The
conclusion is, he was the advocate of a pious and holy cause, and
prepared to undergo death, not for any foolish imagination, nor by any
rash impulse, nor any blind zeal, but because he was assured of his
being a worshipper of the one God. His being the defender of the cause
of piety and holiness was, as he asserts, the reason of his
preservation. This is the correct conclusion.

<span id="xii.xx-p13"></span>Hence we readily gather the folly of the
Papists who, from this and similar passages, endeavor to establish the
merit and righteousness of good works. Oh! Daniel was preserved because
righteousness was found in him before God; hence God repays every man
according to the merits of his works! But we must first consider
Daniel’s intention in the narrative before us; for, as I have said, he
does not boast in his own merits, but wishes his preservation to be
ascribed to the Deity as a testimony to his true and pure worship, so as
to shame King Darius, and to shew all his superstitions to be impious,
and especially, to admonish him concerning that sacrilegious edict by
which he arrogated to himself the supreme command, and, as far as he
could, abolished the very existence of God. With the view, then, of
admonishing Darius, the Prophet says his cause was just. And to render
the solution of the difficulty more easy, we must remark the difference
between eternal salvation and special deliverance’s. God frees us from
eternal death, and adopts us into the hope of eternal life, not because
he finds any righteousness in us but through his own gratuitous choice,
and he perfects in us his own work without any respect to our works.
With reference to our eternal salvation, our righteousness is by no
means regarded, because whenever God examines us, he only finds
materials for condemnation. But when we consider particular
deliverance’s, he may then notice our righteousness, not as if it were
naturally ours, but he stretches forth his hand to those whom he governs
by his Spirit and urges to obey his call; and if they incur any danger
in their efforts to obey his will, he delivers them. The meaning then is
exactly the same as if any one should assert that God favors righteous
causes, but it has nothing to do with merits. Hence the Papists trifle,
like children, when they use this passage to elicit from it human
merits; for Daniel wished to assert nothing but the pure worship of God,
as if he had said, not only his reason proceeded from God, but there was
another cause for his deliverance, namely, the wish of the Almighty to
shew the world experimentally the justice of his cause.

<span id="xii.xx-p14"></span>He adds, *And even before thee,* O king, *I
have committed nothing wrong* It is clear that the Prophet had violated
the king’s edict. Why, then, does he not ingenuously confess this? Nay,
why does he contend that he has not transgressed against the king?
Because he conducted himself with fidelity in all his duties, he could
free himself from every calumny by which he knew himself oppressed, as
if he had despised the king’s sovereignty. But Daniel was not so bound
to the king of the Persians when he claimed for himself as a god what
ought not to be offered to him. We know how earthly empires are
constituted by God, only on the condition that he deprives himself of
nothing, but shines forth alone, and all magistrates must be set in
regular order, and every authority in existence must be subject to his
glory. Since, therefore, Daniel could not obey the king’s edict without
denying God, as we have previously seen, he did not transgress against
the king by constantly persevering in that exercise of piety to which he
had been accustomed, and by calling on his God three times a-day. To
make this the more evident, we must remember that passage of Peter,

<span id="xii.xx-p15"></span>“Fear God, honor the king.” (<span
id="xii.xx-p15.1"></span>[1Pe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#017)<span id="xii.xx-p15.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xx-p16"></span>The two commands are connected together,
and cannot be separated from one another. The fear of God ought to
precede, that kings may obtain their authority. For if any one begins
his reverence of an earthly prince by rejecting that of God, he will act
preposterously, since this is a complete perversion of the order of
nature. Then let God be feared in the first place, and earthly princes
will obtain their authority, if only God shines forth, as I have already
said. Daniel, therefore, here defends himself with justice, since *he
had not committed any crime against the king;* for he was compelled to
obey the command of God, and he neglected what the king had ordered in
opposition to it. For earthly princes lay aside all their power when
they rise up against God, and are unworthy of being reckoned in the
number of mankind. We ought rather utterly to defy than to obey them
whenever they are so restive and wish to spoil God of his rights, and,
as it were, to seize upon his throne and draw him down from heaven. Now,
therefore, we understand the sense of this passage. It follows, —

<span id="xii.xxi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023)<span id="xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p2"></span>**23.** Then was the king exceeding glad
for him, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den.
So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of hurt was found
upon him, because he believed in his God.

<span id="xii.xxi-p3"></span>**23.** Tunc rex valde exhilaratus in se,
*vel, super eo,* Danielem jussit educi ex spelunca: et eductus fuit
Daniel ex spelunca: et nulla corruptio, *vel, laesio,* inventa fuit in
eo: quia credidit, *vel, confisus est,* Deo suo.

<span id="xii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="xii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxi-p6"></span>Daniel confirms what he had formerly
narrated concerning the feelings of King Darius. As he had departed in
anxiety to his palace, had abstained from food and drink, and had laid
aside all pleasures and delights, so also he rejoiced in hearing of the
wonderful deliverance from death of God’s holy servant. He afterwards
adds, *And by the king’s command Daniel was drawn out of the cave, and
no corruption was found in him.* This cannot be ascribed to good
fortune. Hence God made his power conspicuous in providing for Daniel’s
safety from the grasp of the lions. He would have been torn to pieces
had not God closed their mouths; and this contributes in no slight
degree to magnify the miracle, since no scratch or touch was found upon
his body. As the lions then spared him, it arose from God’s secret
counsel; and he marked this more clearly, when his calumniators were
thrown into the cave, and were immediately torn by the lions, as he will
soon add. But we must notice the reason which is given: *He was
preserved, since he trusted in his God! It* will often happen, that a
person may have a good cause, and yet succeed badly and unhappily;
because he adds to what is otherwise worthy of praise, too great a
confidence in his own counsels, prudence, and industry. Hence it is not
surprising if those who undertake good causes often fail of success, as
we often see among the profane. For the history of all ages bears
witness, to the perishing of those who cherish a just cause; but this
arises through their perverse confidence, since they never contemplated
the service of God, but rather considered their own praise and the
applause of the world. Hence, as ambition seized them, they became
pleased with their own plans. Thus arose that saying of Brutus, “Virtue
is a frivolous thing!” because he thought himself unworthily treated in
fighting for the liberty of Rome, while the gods were adverse instead of
propitious. As if God ought to have conferred upon him that aid which he
had never hoped and never sought. For we know the pride of that hero’s
disposition. I bring forward but one example; but if we diligently weigh
the motives which impel the profane when they fight strenuously for good
objects, we shall find ambition to be the prevailing motive. No wonder
then if God deserted them in this particular, since they were unworthy
of experiencing his help. For this reason Daniel states, that he was
safely preserved, *because he trusted in his God.*

<span id="xii.xxi-p7"></span>The Apostle refers to this in the eleventh
chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews, (<span
id="xii.xxi-p7.1"></span>[Heb
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033)<span id="xii.xxi-p7.1"></span>,)
where he says some were snatched away or preserved from the mouths of
lions through faith. Hence he assigns the cause of Daniel’s escaping in
safety, and recalls us to faith. But we must here consider the meaning
and force of the word “believing.” For the Prophet does not simply speak
of his deliverance as springing from believing Israel’s God to be the
true and only God, the Maker of heaven and earth, but from his
committing his life to him, from his reposing on his grace, from his
fixed determination that his end must be happy, if he worshipped him.
Since, therefore, Daniel was certainly persuaded that his life was in
God’s hand, and that his hope in him was not in vain, he boldly incurred
danger, and intrepidly suffered for the sincere worship of God; hence he
says, *he believed in God* We see then that the word “belief” is not
taken coldly, as the Papists dream, since their notion implies an
unfolded or dead and shapeless faith, for they think faith nothing else
but a confused apprehension of the Deity. Whenever men have any
conception of God at all, the Papists think this to be faith; but the
Holy Spirit teaches us far otherwise. For we must consider the language
of the Apostle, — We do not properly believe in God, unless we determine
him to be a rewarder of all who diligently seek him. (<span
id="xii.xxi-p7.2"></span>[Heb
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span id="xii.xxi-p7.2"></span>.)
God is not sought by foolish arrogance, as if by our merits we could
confer an obligation upon him; but he is sought by faith, by humility,
and by invocation. But when we are persuaded that God is the rewarder of
all who seek him, and we know how he ought to be sought, this is true
faith. So Daniel did not doubt that God would deliver him, because he
did not distrust that teaching of piety which he had learnt from a boy,
and through reliance on which he had always called upon God. This,
therefore, was the cause of his deliverance. Meanwhile, it is clear that
Daniel’s trust in God did not spring from any previous instruction
concerning the result; for he rather committed his life to God, since he
was prepared for death. Therefore Daniel could not acknowledge this
before he was cast into the cave, and exposed to the lions, being
ignorant whether God would deliver him, as we previously saw in the case
of his companions, “God, if he pleases, will deliver us; but if not, we
are prepared to worship Him, and to disobey thy edict.” If Daniel had
been taught the issue beforehand, his constancy would not have deserved
much praise; but since he was willing to meet death fearlessly for the
worship of God, and could deny himself and renounce the world, this is a
true and serious proof of his faith and constancy. *He believed
therefore in God,* not because he hoped for such a miracle, but because
he knew his own happiness to consist in persisting in the true worship
of God. So Paul says, Christ is gain to me, both in life and in death.
(<span id="xii.xxi-p7.3"></span>[Php
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#021)<span id="xii.xxi-p7.3"></span>.)
Daniel therefore rested in the help of God, but he closed his eyes to
the event, and was not remarkably anxious concerning his life, but since
his mind was erected towards the hope of a better life, even if he had
to die a hundred times, yet he never would have failed in his
confidence, because our faith is extended beyond the boundaries of this
frail and corruptible life, as all the pious know well enough. What I
have already touched upon afterwards follows, —

<span id="xii.xxii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)<span id="xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p2"></span>**24.** And the king commanded, and they
brought those men which had accused Daniel, and they cast *them* into
the den of lions, them, their children, and their wives; and the lions
had the mastery of them, and brake all their bones in pieces or ever
they came at the bottom of the den.

<span id="xii.xxii-p3"></span>**24.** Et jussit rex, et adduxerunt viros
illos qui instruxerant  <span id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310)
accusationem adversus eum, nempe Danielem; et in foveam, *speluncam,*
leonum projecti sunt ipsi, liberi ipsorum, et uxores eorum, et nondum
pervenerant ad fundum,  <span id="fr_311"></span>[312](#fn_311)
speluncae, quando dominati sunt,  <span
id="fr_312"></span>[313](#fn_312) in eos leones, et omnia ossa eorum
fregerunt.

<span id="xii.xxii-p7"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxii-p8"></span><span id="xii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p9"></span>By this circumstance God’s virtue shone
forth more clearly in preserving Daniel, because those who had accused
him were immediately destroyed by the lions. For if any one should say
that the lions were satisfied, or there was any other reason why Daniel
was not destroyed, why, when he was withdrawn, did such great madness
immediately impel those beasts to tear and devour, not one man only, but
a great multitude? Not one of the nobles was preserved; next their wives
and children were added. Lions scarcely ever proceed to such a pitch of
savageness, and yet they all perished to a man; then how did Daniel
escape? We surely see how God by this comparison wished to bear witness
to his own virtue, lest any one should object that Daniel was left by
the lions because they were already gorged, and desired no other prey,
for they would have been content with either three or four men; but they
devoured men, women, and children. Hence the mouths of the lions were
clearly restrained by the divine power, since Daniel was safe during a
whole night, but they perished immediately, as soon as they were cast
into the cave; because we again see how these beasts were impelled by
sudden madness, so that they did not wait till their prey arrived at the
bottom, but devoured them as they fell. We shall leave the rest till
to-morrow.

<span id="xii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.xxiii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we were
created and placed in this world by thee, and are also nourished by thy
bounty, for the very purpose of consecrating our life to thee, — Grant,
I pray, that we may be prepared to live and die to thee. May we seek
only to maintain the pure and sincere worship of thyself. May we so
acquiesce in thy help as not to hesitate about breaking through all
difficulties, and to offer ourselves to instant death, whenever thou
requirest it. May we rely not only on thy promise, which remains for
ever, but upon the many proofs which thou hast granted us of the present
vitality of thy mighty power. Mayest thou be our deliverer in every
sense, whether we live or die; and may we be blessed in persevering in
our confidence in thy name, and thy true confession, until at length we
are gathered into thy heavenly kingdom, which thou hast prepared for us
by the blood of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="xii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxiv-p1"></span>Lecture Thirty-first.

<span id="xii.xxiv-p2"></span>AT the end of yesterday’s Lecture, the
enemies of Daniel who had malignantly, enviously, and cruelly slandered
him, were cast into the lions’ den, and were torn to pieces with their
wives and children; and thus the miracle was more clearly conspicuous,
as we have previously said. Here, again, we may learn how lions are
governed by God’s hand, and are restrained from shewing their ferocity
everywhere and against every one, except when God permits them. As it is
said in the ninety-first Psalm, Thou shalt walk upon the lion and the
basilisk, and tread upon the lion and the dragon; (<span
id="xii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>[Ps
91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013)<span
id="xii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>.) So also, on the other hand, God denounces
against the unbelievers by the Prophet Amos, (<span
id="xii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>[Am
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019)<span id="xii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>,)
The lions shall come to meet them, if they go forth from their houses.
We see, then, how God restrains the cruelty of lions as often as he
pleases, and how he excites them to madness when he wishes to punish
mankind. With regard to their wives and children being also cast into
the den, we need not dispute with any anxiety, whether or not this
punishment was just. For it seems to be a sure rule of equity, that
punishment should not pass on to the innocent, especially when it
involves their life. In all ages, it has been the custom of well-ordered
States, for many punishments to be inflicted on children as well as
their parents, as in a public sale of goods, or any charge of violence
or treason; in criminal cases also, the infamy of parents extends to the
children, (but this is far more severe, to slay children with their
parents,) though they cannot possibly be guilty of the same crime. Yet,
although this is not one of the customary cases, we must not hastily
condemn it as unjust. We see how God orders whole families to be
exterminated from the world as a mark of his hatred; but, as a just
Judge, he always is moderate in his severity. This example, then, cannot
be precisely condemned, but we had better leave it in doubt. We are
aware of the cruel and barbarous manner in which the kings of the East
exercise their sway, or rather their tyranny, on their subjects. Hence
there is no reason why any one should fatigue himself with the question,
since King Darius was so much grieved at his being deceived. Hence he
not only exacted punishment from these wicked slanderers for oppressing
Daniel, but because he was himself affected by their injustice. He
wished rather to avenge himself than Daniel; he was not content with
retaliation, but condemned their children also to destruction. It
follows, —

<span id="xii.xxv"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#025)<span id="xii.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p2"></span>**25.** Then king Darius wrote unto all
people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be
multiplied unto you.

<span id="xii.xxv-p3"></span>**25.** Tunc Darius rex, scripsit omnibus
populis, et gentibus, et linguis qui habitabant in tota terra, Pax
vestra multiplicetur.

<span id="xii.xxv-p4"></span>**26.** I make a decree, That in every
dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel:
for he *is* the living God, and stedfast for ever, and his kingdom
*that* which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion *shall be even*
unto the end.

<span id="xii.xxv-p5"></span>**26.** A me positum est decretum in omni
dominatione,  <span id="fr_313"></span>[314](#fn_313) regni mei, ut sint
metuentes et paventes,  <span id="fr_314"></span>[315](#fn_314) a
conspectu Dei Danielis;  <span id="fr_315"></span>[316](#fn_315) quia
ipse *est* Deus vivus, et permanens in seculum: et regnum ejus non
corrumpetur, et dominatio ejus  <span id="fr_316"></span>[317](#fn_316)
usque in finem.

<span id="xii.xxv-p10"></span>**27.** He delivereth and rescueth, and he
worketh signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who hath delivered
Daniel from the power of the lions.

<span id="xii.xxv-p11"></span>**27.** Eripiens et liberans, et edens
signa et miracula  <span id="fr_317"></span>[318](#fn_317) in cœlo et in
terra: qui eripuit Danielem e manu leonum.

<span id="xii.xxv-p13"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxv-p14"></span><span id="xii.xxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p15"></span>Here Daniel adds the king’s edict, which
he wished to be promulgated. And by this edict he bore witness that he
was so moved by the deliverance of Daniel, as to attribute the supreme
glory to the God of Israel. Meanwhile, I do not think this a proof of
the king’s real piety, as some interpreters here extol King Darius
without moderation, as if he had really repented and embraced the pure
worship prescribed by the law of Moses. Nothing of this kind can be
collected from the words of the edict — and this circumstance shews it —
for his empire was never purged from its superstitions. King Darius
still allowed his subjects to worship idols; and he did not refrain from
polluting himself with such defilement’s; but he wished to place the God
of Israel on the highest elevation, thus attempting to mingle fire and
water! We have previously discussed this point. For the profane think
they discharge their duty to the true God, if they do not openly despise
him, but assign him some place or other; and, especially, if they prefer
him to all idols, they think they have satisfied God. But this is all
futile; for unless they abolish all superstitions, God by no means
obtains his right, since he allows of no equals. Hence this passage by
no means proves any true and serious piety in King Darius; but it
implies simply his being deeply moved by the miracle, and his
celebrating through all the regions subject to him the name and glory of
the God of Israel. Finally, as this was a special impulse on King
Darius, so it did not proceed beyond a particular effect; he
acknowledged God’s power and goodness on all sides; but he seized upon
that specimen which was placed directly before his eyes. Hence he did
not continue to acknowledge the God of Israel by devoting himself to
true and sincere piety; but, as I have said, he wished him to be
conspicuously superior to other gods, but not to be the only God. But
God rejects this modified worship; and thus there is no reason for
praising King Darius. Meanwhile his example will condemn all those who
profess themselves to be catholic or Christian kings, or defenders of
the faith, since they not only bury true piety, but, as far as they
possibly can, weaken the whole worship of God, and would willingly
extinguish his name from the world, and thus tyrannize over the pious,
and establish impious superstitions by their own cruelty. Darius will be
a fit judge for them, and the edict here recited by Daniel will be
sufficient for the condemnation of them all.

<span id="xii.xxv-p16"></span>He now says, *The edict was written for
all people, nations, and tongues, who dwell in the whole earth.* We see
how Darius wished to make known God’s power not only to the neighboring
people, but studied to promulgate it far and wide. He wrote not only for
Asia and Chaldea, but also for the Medes and Persians. He had never been
the ruler of Persia, yet since his father-in-law had received him into
alliance in the empire, his authority extended thither. This is the
sense of the phrase, *the whole earth* This does not refer to the whole
habitable world, but to that monarchy which extended through almost the
entire East, since the Medes and Persians then held the sway from the
sea as far as Egypt. When we consider the magnitude of this empire,
Daniel may well say, the edict was promulgated *through the whole earth.
Peace be multiplied unto you!* We know how kings in this way soothe
their subjects, and use soft persuasions for more easily accomplishing
their wishes, and thus obtain the implicit obedience of their subjects.
And it is gratuitous on their part to implore peace on their subjects.
Meanwhile, as I have already said, they court their favor by these
enticements, and thus prepare their subjects to submit to the yoke. By
the term “peace,” a state of prosperity is implied; meaning, may you be
prosperous and happy. He afterwards adds*, the decree is placed in their
sight,* that is, they display their command before all their subjects.
This, then, is the force of the phrase, *my edict has been placed;* that
is, if my authority and power prevail with you, you must thus far obey
me; *that all may fear,* or, that all may be afraid and *tremble before
the God of Daniel!* By fear and terror he means simply reverence, but he
speaks as the profane are accustomed to do, who abhor God’s name. He
seems desirous of expressing how conspicuous was the power of the God of
Israel, which ought properly to impress every one, and induce all to
worship with reverence, and fear, and trembling. And this method of
speaking is derived from a correct principle; since lawful worship is
never offered to God but when we are humbled before him. Hence God often
calls himself terrible, not because he wishes his worshippers to
approach him with fear, but, as we have said, because the souls of men
will never be drawn forth to reverence unless they seriously comprehend
his power, and thus become afraid of his judgment. But if fear alone
flourishes in men’s minds, they cannot form themselves to piety, since
we must consider that passage of the Psalm,

<span id="xii.xxv-p17"></span>“With thee is propitiation that thou
mayest be feared.”  
(<span id="xii.xxv-p17.2"></span>[Ps
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004)<span
id="xii.xxv-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xxv-p18"></span>God, therefore, cannot be properly
worshipped and feared, unless we are persuaded that he may be entreated;
nay, are quite sure that he is propitious to us. Yet it is necessary for
fear and dread to precede the humiliation of the pride of the flesh.

<span id="xii.xxv-p19"></span>This, then, is the meaning of the phrase,
*that all should fear or be afraid of the God of Daniel* The king calls
him so, not because Daniel had fabricated a God for himself, but because
he was his only worshipper. We very properly speak of Jupiter as the god
of the Greeks, since he was deified by their folly, and hence obtained a
name and a celebrity throughout the rest of the world. Meanwhile,
Jupiter, and Minerva, and the crowd of false deities received their
names from the same origin. There is another reason why King Darius
calls the God whom Daniel worshipped *Daniel*’*s God,* as he is called
the God of Abraham, not through deriving any precarious authority from
Abraham, but through his manifesting himself to Abraham. To explain this
more clearly — Why is he called the God of Daniel rather than of the
Babylonians? because Daniel had learnt from the law of Moses the pure
worship of God, and the covenant which he had made with Abraham and the
holy fathers, and the adoption of Israel as his peculiar people. He
complied with the worship prescribed in the Law, and that worship
depended on the covenant. Hence this name is not given as if Daniel had
been free to fashion or imagine any god for himself; but because he had
worshipped that God who had revealed himself by his word. Lastly, this
phrase ought to be so understood as to induce all to fear that God who
had made a covenant with Abraham and his posterity, and had chosen for
himself a peculiar people. He taught the method of true and lawful
worship, and unfolded it in his law, so that Daniel worshipped him. We
now understand the meaning of the clause. Thus we may learn to
distinguish the true God from all the idols and fictions of men, if we
desire to worship him acceptably. For many think they worship God when
they wander through whatever errors they please, and never remain
attached to one true God. But this is perverse, nay, it is nothing but a
profanation of true piety to worship God so confusedly. Hence, we must
contemplate the distinction which I have pointed out, that our minds may
be always included within the bounds of the word, and not wander from
the true God, if indeed we desire to retain him and to follow the
religion which pleases him. We must continue, I say, within the limits
of the word, and not turn away on either one side or the other; since
numberless fallacies of the devil will meet us immediately, unless the
word holds us in strict obedience. As far as concerns Darius, he
acknowledged the one true God, but as we have already said, he did not
reject that fictitious and perverse worship in which he was brought up;
— such a mixture is intolerable before God!

<span id="xii.xxv-p20"></span>He adds, *Because he is alive, and remains
for ever!* This seems to reduce all false gods to nothing; but it has
been previously said, and the circumstances prove it true, that when the
profane turn their attention to the supreme God, they begin to wander
directly. If they constantly acknowledged the true God, they would
instantly exclude all fictitious ones; but they think it sufficient if
God obtains the first rank; meanwhile they add minor deities, so that he
lies hid in a crowd, although he enjoys a slight pre-eminence. Such,
then, was the reasoning and the plan of Darius, because he held nothing
clearly or sincerely concerning the essence of the one true God; but he
thought the supreme power resident in the God of Israel, just as other
nations worship their own deities! We see, then, that he did not depart
from the superstitions which he had imbibed in his boyhood; and hence,
we have no reason for praising his piety, unless in this particular
case. But, meanwhile, God extorted a confession from him, in which he
describes his nature to us. He calls him “the living God,” not only
because he has life in himself, but out of himself, and is also the
origin and fountain of life. This epithet ought to be taken actively,
for God not only lives but has life in himself; and he is also the
source of life, since there is no life independent of him. He afterwards
adds, *He remains for ever,* and thus distinguishes him from all
creatures, in which there is no firmness nor stability. We know also how
everything in heaven, as well as heaven itself, is subject to various
changes. In this, therefore, God differs from everything created, since
he is unchangeable and invariable. He adds, *His kingdom is not
corrupted, and his dominion remains for ever.* Here he clearly expresses
what he had formerly stated respecting the firmness of God’s estate,
since he not only remains essentially the same, but exercises his power
throughout the whole world, and governs the world by his own virtue, and
sustains all things. For if he had only said, “God remains for ever,” we
are so perverse and narrow-minded as to interpret it merely as follows:
— God, indeed, is not changeable in his own essence, but our minds could
not comprehend his power as universally diffused. This explanation,
then, is worthy of notice, since Darius clearly expresses that God’s
kingdom is incorruptible and his dominion everlasting.

<span id="xii.xxv-p21"></span><span id="xii.xxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p22"></span>*Secondly,* he calls God his deliverer.
Those who consider this edict as an illustrious example of piety, will
say Darius spoke evangelically as a herald of the mercy of God. But, as
we have previously said, Darius never generally embraced what Scripture
teaches concerning God’s cherishing his people with clemency, his
helping them through his being merciful to them, and nourishing them
with a father’s kindness. King Darius knew nothing of this reason.
Daniel’s deliverance was well known; this was a particular proof of
God’s favor. If Darius had only partially perceived God’s
loving-kindness towards his servants, then he would have acknowledged
his readiness to preserve and deliver them. This would be too frigid
unless the cause was added, — *God is a deliverer!* since he has deigned
to choose his servants, and bears witness to his being their Father, and
listens to their prayers, and pardons their transgressions. Unless,
therefore, the hope of deliverance is founded on God’s gratuitous
adoption and pity, any acknowledgment of him will be but partial and
inefficient. Darius, then, does not speak here as if truly and purely
instructed in the mercy of God; but he speaks of him only as the
deliverer of his own people. He correctly asserts in general, “God is a
deliverer,” *since he snatched Daniel from the mouth of lions,* that is,
from their power and fierceness. Darius, I say, reasons correctly, when
he derives from one example the more extensive doctrine concerning the
power of God to preserve and snatch away his people whenever he pleases;
meanwhile, he acknowledges God’s visible power in a single act, but he
does not understand the principal cause and fountain of God’s affection
to Daniel to be, his belonging to the sons of Abraham, and his paternal
favor in preserving him. Hence this instruction should profit us and
touch our minds effectually, since God is our deliverer; and, in the
first place, we must confess ourselves to be admitted to favor on the
condition of his pardoning us, and not treating us according to our
deserts, but indulging us as sons through his amazing liberality. This
then is the true sense.

<span id="xii.xxv-p23"></span>He afterwards says, *he performs signs and
wonders in heaven and earth!* This ought to be referred to power and
dominion, as previously mentioned; but Darius always considers the
events before his eyes. He had seen Daniel dwelling safely with lions,
and all the rest destroyed by them; these were manifest proofs of God’s
power; hence he properly asserts, *he performs signs and wonders.* But
there is no doubt, that Darius was admonished by the other signs which
had taken place before he possessed the monarchy; he had doubtless heard
what had happened to King Nebuchadnezzar, and then to King Belshazzar,
whom Darius had slain when he seized his kingdom. He collects,
therefore, more testimonies to God’s power, for the purpose of
illustrating his glory in the preservation of Daniel. In short, if
Darius had renounced his superstitions, the confession of his piety
would have been pure, and full, and ingenuous; but because he did not
forsake the worship of his false gods, and continued his attachment to
their pollution, his piety cannot deserve our praise, and his true and
serious conversion cannot be collected from his edict. This is the
complete sense. It now follows:

<span id="xii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="xii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028)<span id="xii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p2"></span>**28.** So this Daniel prospered in the
reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p3"></span>**28.** Daniel autem ipse prospere egit
 <span id="fr_318"></span>[319](#fn_318) in regno Darii et in regno Cyri
Persae.

<span id="xii.xxvi-p5"></span> 

<span id="xii.xxvi-p6"></span><span id="xii.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p7"></span>The word <span
id="xii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>צלח, *tzelech,* properly signifies to “pass
over,” and the signification is here metaphorical, in the sense of being
prosperous. There is no doubt, however, of there being a silent contrast
between the kingdom of the Persians and the Chaldean monarchy, that is,
to speak more concisely and clearly, between the twofold condition of
Daniel. For, as we have said, he was for some time in obscurity under
Nebuchadnezzar; when this monarchy was about to perish he became
conspicuous; and throughout the whole period of the reign of the
Chaldeans he was obscure and contemptible. All indeed had heard of him
as a remarkable and illustrious Prophet, but he was rejected from the
palace. At one time he was seated at the king’s gate, in great honor and
respect, and then again he was cast out. During the continuance of the
Chaldee monarchy, Daniel was not held in any esteem; but under that of
the Medes and Persians he prospered, and was uniformly treated with
marked respect, for Cyrus and Darius were not so negligent as instantly
to forget the wonderful works of God performed by his hand. Hence the
word “passing through,” pleases me, since, as I have said, it is a mark
of the continual possession of honor; for not only King Darius, but also
Cyrus exalted him and raised him into the number of his nobles, when he
heard of his favor. It is clear that he left Babylon and went elsewhere.
Very probably he was not long among the Medes, for Darius or Cyaxares
died without any heirs, and then his whole power passed to Cyrus alone,
who was his nephew, through his sister, and his son-in-law being his
daughter’s husband. No doubt, Daniel here commends God’s favor and
kindness towards himself, because this was not the usual solace of
exile, to obtain the highest favor among foreign and barbarous nations,
or attain the largest share of their honor and reverence. God,
therefore, alleviated his sorrow by this consolation in his exile. Hence
Daniel here not only regards himself in his private capacity, but also
the object of his dignity. For God wished his name to be spread abroad
and celebrated over all those regions through which Daniel was known,
since no one could behold without remembering the power and glory of
Israel’s God. Daniel, therefore, wished to mark this. On the other hand
also, no doubt, it was a matter of grief to him to be deprived of his
country, not like the rest of mankind, but because the land of Canaan
was the peculiar inheritance of God’s people. When Daniel was snatched
away and led off to a distance, as far as Media and Persia, without the
slightest hope of return, there is no doubt that he suffered continual
distress. Nor was the splendor of his station among the profane of such
importance as to induce him to prefer it to that pledge of God’s favor
and paternal adoption in the land of Canaan. He had doubtless inscribed
on his heart that passage of David’s,

<span id="xii.xxvi-p8"></span>“I had rather be in the court of the Lord,
than in the midst of the greatest riches of the ungodly: then, I had
rather be a despised one in the house of God, than to dwell in the tents
of the unrighteous.” (<span id="xii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[Ps
84:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#010)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.)

<span id="xii.xxvi-p9"></span>Thus Daniel had been taught. Ezekiel, too,
properly includes him among the three most holy men who have lived since
the beginning of the world. (<span id="xii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>[Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)<span
id="xii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>.)  <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319)
This was of the greatest moment; for when he was a youth, or at least
but middle aged, he was joined with Job and Noah, and was the third in
rare and almost incredible sanctity! Since this was his character, he
was no doubt affected with the greatest sorrow when he perceived himself
subject to perpetual exile, without the slightest hope of return, and of
being able to worship God in his temple and to offer sacrifice with the
rest. But lest he should be ungrateful to God, he desires to express his
sense of the uncommon benevolence with which, though an exile and a
stranger, and subject to reproach among other captives, he was treated
and even honored among the Medes and Persians. This, therefore, is the
simple meaning of the passage. It is quite clear, as I have lately said,
that Cyrus, after the death of Darius, succeeded to the whole monarchy;
and we shall afterwards see in its proper place how Daniel dwelt with
Cyrus, who reigned almost thirty years longer. Thus, a long time
intervened between his death and that of Darius. This, therefore, did
not occur without the remarkable counsel of God, since the change in the
kingdom did not influence the position of Daniel, as it usually does.
For new empires we know to be like turning the world upside down. But
Daniel always retained his rank, and thus God’s goodness was displayed
in him, and wherever he went he carried with him this testimony of God’s
favor. I shall not proceed further, as we shall discuss a new prophecy
to-morrow.

<span id="xii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="xii.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since by means of a
man entangled in many errors, thou wishest to testify to us the extent
of thy power, that we may not at this day grope about in darkness, while
thou offerest us light, through the Sun of righteousness, Jesus Christ,
thy Son. Meanwhile, may we not be ashamed to profit by the words of a
heathen, who was not instructed in thy law, but who celebrated thy name
so magnificently when admonished by a single miracle: hence may we learn
by his example to acknowledge thee, not only the Supreme but the Only
God. As thou hast bound us to thyself by entering into a covenant with
us in the blood of thine only-begotten Son, may we ever cleave to thee
with true faith; may we renounce all the clouds of error, and be always
intent upon that light to which thou invitest us, and towards which thou
drawest us; until we arrive at the sight of thy glory and majesty, and
being conformed to thee, may we at length enjoy in reality that glory
which we now but partially behold. — Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_278"></span>[279](cc24011.htm#fr_278) <span
id="xii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p4"></span> The word <span id="xii.ii-p4.1"></span>נצח,
*netzech,* means to surpass; hence he was superior or more excellent. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_279"></span>[280](cc24011.htm#fr_279) <span
id="xii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p7"></span> That is, in his administration. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_280"></span>[281](cc24011.htm#fr_280) <span
id="xii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p8"></span> That is, no occasion. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_281"></span>[282](cc24011.htm#fr_281) <span
id="xii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p9"></span> Since he was faithful and thoroughly
trusty. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_282"></span>[283](cc24011.htm#fr_282) <span
id="xii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p10"></span> He repeats the noun for “crime” twice,
<span id="xii.ii-p10.1"></span>שחיתה, *shechitheh.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_283"></span>[284](cc24011.htm#fr_283) <span
id="xii.ii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="xii.ii-p20"></span> The French editions of 1562 and 1569,
<span id="xii.ii-p20.1"></span>*a Geneva,* translate the idiomatic
phrase, <span id="xii.ii-p20.2"></span>*susque deque illis est,* by
<span id="xii.ii-p20.3"></span>*ce leur est tout un;* “it is all one to
them.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_284"></span>[285](cc24011.htm#fr_284) <span
id="xii.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p4"></span> For <span id="xii.iii-p4.1"></span>רגש,
*reges,* properly signifies to “join and associate with.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_285"></span>[286](cc24011.htm#fr_285) <span
id="xii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p5"></span> That is, they made a conspiracy, and
approached the king. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_286"></span>[287](cc24011.htm#fr_286) <span
id="xii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.iii-p8"></span> That is, royal, or from the king. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_287"></span>[288](cc24011.htm#fr_287) <span
id="xii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vi-p4"></span> That is, which is immutable. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_288"></span>[289](cc24011.htm#fr_288) <span
id="xii.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p4"></span> That is, three times every day. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_289"></span>[290](cc24011.htm#fr_289) <span
id="xii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p5"></span> The verb and the noun are from the same
root; “he bent upon his knees or inclined himself.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_290"></span>[291](cc24011.htm#fr_290) <span
id="xii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.vii-p6"></span> That is, as he was accustomed to do. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_291"></span>[292](cc24011.htm#fr_291) <span
id="xii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.viii-p4"></span> Or, “collected,” as others translate. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_292"></span>[293](cc24011.htm#fr_292) <span
id="xii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p4"></span> And they have said. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[294](cc24011.htm#fr_293) <span
id="xii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.ix-p5"></span> It is preferable to translate it “that any
man should ask from any god or man, for thirty days, except of thee, O
king.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_294"></span>[295](cc24011.htm#fr_294) <span
id="xii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p4"></span> Or, has not added his own sense, or given
his mind to thee. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_295"></span>[296](cc24011.htm#fr_295) <span
id="xii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xii-p5"></span> That is, prays according to his custom, or
as usual. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_296"></span>[297](cc24011.htm#fr_296) <span
id="xii.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p4"></span> Others translate “disturbed;” others
again, “was very much displeased” or grieved, for <span
id="xii.xiii-p4.1"></span>באש, *bash,* signifies to grieve. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_297"></span>[298](cc24011.htm#fr_297) <span
id="xii.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p5"></span> There is a change in the letters here;
for <span id="xii.xiii-p5.1"></span>בל, *bel,* is put for <span
id="xii.xiii-p5.2"></span>לב, *leb;* here it means, “he applied his
heart.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_298"></span>[299](cc24011.htm#fr_298) <span
id="xii.xiii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p6"></span> Or, to deliver him; that is, he desired
to snatch him away. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc24011.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xii.xiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiii-p9"></span> That is, conspired together, as if they
approached the king in a body, to inspire the greater terror; “they
assembled themselves therefore.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc24011.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p4"></span> That is, he decreed or commanded. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc24011.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xii.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p5"></span> The pronoun is superfluous. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc24011.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xiv-p6"></span> Or, if we receive it in the manner of a
prayer — “may he deliver thee” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc24011.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xv-p4"></span> That is, “concerning Daniel.” Those who
render it “against” as if the king had purposely wished to oppose their
violence, pervert the whole sense, since it was doubtless done at their
instigation, lest the king should secretly provide for his liberation. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc24011.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p4"></span> Others translate “banquet” or “supper;”
but this does not agree, because he first said the king passed the night
fasting, therefore a different interpretation is more suitable, namely,
“musical instruments.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc24011.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvi-p5"></span> And thus all joys and delights ceased. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc24011.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p4"></span> That is, “in the morning.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc24011.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p5"></span> That is, “hastily.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc24011.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xvii-p8"></span> That is, could he preserve thee? —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc24011.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xx-p6"></span> Or, integrity. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc24011.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p4"></span> “Had enacted,” “had cried out;” <span
id="xii.xxii-p4.1"></span>*qui avoyent dresse ceste calomnie* — Calvin’s
own translation into French.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[312](cc24011.htm#fr_311) <span
id="xii.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p5"></span> Or, pavement. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_312"></span>[313](cc24011.htm#fr_312) <span
id="xii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxii-p6"></span> Or, prevailed. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_313"></span>[314](cc24011.htm#fr_313) <span
id="xii.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p6"></span> Or, throughout the whole of the dominions.
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_314"></span>[315](cc24011.htm#fr_314) <span
id="xii.xxv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p7"></span> That is, that they should fear and be
afraid. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_315"></span>[316](cc24011.htm#fr_315) <span
id="xii.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p8"></span> That is, before the God of Daniel. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_316"></span>[317](cc24011.htm#fr_316) <span
id="xii.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p9"></span> Or, power. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_317"></span>[318](cc24011.htm#fr_317) <span
id="xii.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxv-p12"></span> “Wonders,” as some translate it. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_318"></span>[319](cc24011.htm#fr_318) <span
id="xii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p4"></span> Or, passed. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_319"></span>[320](cc24011.htm#fr_319) <span
id="xii.xxvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xii.xxvi-p10"></span> See Dissertation, Number 25, at the
close of this Volume.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dissertations](cc24012)
