[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc24008)  [Next](cc24010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 24: Daniel, Part I*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x"></span>

<span id="x-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="x.i"></span>

<span id="x.i-p1"></span><span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#001)<span id="x.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p2"></span>**1.** Nebuchadnezzar the king, unto all
people, nations, and languages, that dwell in all the earth; Peace be
multiplied unto you.

<span id="x.i-p3"></span>**1.** Nebuchadnezer rex omnibus populis,
nationibus, et linguis; quae; habitant in tota terra, pax vobiscum.
multiplicetur.

<span id="x.i-p4"></span>**2.** I thought it good to shew the signs and
wonders that the high God hath wrought toward me.

<span id="x.i-p5"></span>**2.** Signa et mirabilia quae fecit mecum Deus
excelsus pulchrum coram me enarrare.

<span id="x.i-p6"></span>**3.** How great *are* his signs! and how
mighty *are* his wonders! his kingdom *is* an everlasting kingdom, and
his dominion *is* from generation to generation.

<span id="x.i-p7"></span>**3.** Signa ejus quam magna *sunt!* et
mirabilia ejus quam fortia! regnum ejus regnum seculare,  <span
id="fr_202"></span>[203](#fn_202) et dominatio ejus cum rotate, et
rotate.

<span id="x.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="x.ii"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p1"></span>Lecture Seventeenth.

<span id="x.ii-p2"></span><span id="x.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p3"></span>Some join these verses to the end of the third
chapter, but there is no reason for this; and it will clearly appear
from the context that the edict is here set forth in the king’s name,
and other events are inserted. Daniel, therefore, here, speaks in the
person of the king; he afterwards narrates what happened to the king,
and then returns to his own person. Those who separate these three
verses from the context of the fourth chapter, do not seem to have
sufficiently considered the intention and words of the Prophet. This
passage may seem harsh and rough, when Daniel introduces the king of
Babylon as speaking — then speaks in his own name — and afterwards
returns to the person of the; king. But since this variety does not
render the sense either doubtful or obscure, there is no reason why it
should trouble us. We now see how all the sentences which we shall
explain in their places are mutually united.

<span id="x.ii-p4"></span>The contents of this chapter are as follow:
Nebuchadnezzar was sufficiently instructed in the worship of the God of
Israel as one God, and was compelled at the time to confess this; yet he
did not depart from his own superstitions; his conceptions of the true
God were but momentary, and hence he suffered the punishment due to such
great ingratitude. But God intended him to become more and more blinded,
as he is accustomed to treat the reprobate and even his elect at times.
When men add sin to sin, God loosens his reins and allows them to
destroy themselves. Afterwards he either extends his hand towards them,
or withdraws them by his hidden virtue, or reduces them to order by his
rod, and completely humbles them. He treated the king of Babylon in this
way. We shall afterwards discuss the dream; but we must here briefly
notice the king’s admonition, that he might feel himself without excuse
when he was so utterly broken down. God indeed might justly punish him
as soon as he saw he was not truly converted; but before he inflicted
the final chastisement — as we shall see in its place — he wished to
admonish him, if there were any hope of his repentance. Although he
seemed to receive with the greatest modesty what God had manifested by
his dream through Daniel’s interpretation of it, yet he professed with
his mouth what he did not really possess. And he shews this
sufficiently, because, when he ought to be afraid and cautious, he does
not lay aside his pride, but glories in himself as a king of kings, and
in Babylon as the queen of the whole world! Since, then, he spoke so
confidently after being admonished by the Prophet, we perceive how
little he had profited by his dream. But God wished in this way to
render him more inexcusable, and although he did not bring forth fruit
immediately, yet a long time afterwards, when God touched his mind, he
very properly recognized this punishment to have been divinely
inflicted. Hence this dream was a kind of entrance and preparation for
repentance, and as seed seems to lie putrid in the earth before it
brings forth its fruit, and God sometimes works by gentle processes, and
provides for the teaching, which seemed for a long time useless,
becoming both efficacious and fruitful.

<span id="x.ii-p5"></span>I now come to the words themselves; the
preface to the edict is, *Nebuchadnezzar the king to all peoples,
nations, and languages, which dwell in the whole earth,* namely, under
his sway. He does not mean this to be extended to Scythia, or Gaul, or
other distant regions; but since his empire extended far and wide, he
spoke boastingly. Thus we see the Romans, whose sway did not reach near
so far, called Rome itself the seat of the empire of the whole world!
Here Nebuchadnezzar now predicts. the magnificence and mightiness of his
own monarchy. Hence he sends his edict *to all peoples, and nations, and
languages, which dwell on the earth* He afterwards adds, *it seemed to
me good to relate the signs and wonders which the mighty God hath
wrought with me* No doubt he feels himself to have paid the penalty of
his ingratitude, since he had so punctiliously ascribed the glory to one
true God, and yet had relapsed into his own superstitions, and had never
really said farewell to them. We see how often King Nebuchadnezzar was
chastised before he profited by the rod of the Almighty. Hence we need
not be surprised if God often strikes us with his hand, since the result
of experience proves us to be dull, and, to speak truly, utterly
slothful. When God, therefore, wishes to lead us to repentance, he is
compelled to repeat his blows continually, either because we are not
moved when he chastises us with his hand, or we seem roused for the
time, and then we return again to our former torpor. He is therefore
compelled to redouble his blows. And we perceive this in the narrative
before us, as in a glass. But the singular benefit of God was this,
Nebuchadnezzar, after God had often chastised him, yielded at length. It
is unknown whether or not this confession proceeded front true and
genuine repentance: I must leave it in doubt. Yet without the slightest
doubt Daniel recited this edict, to shew the king so subdued at length,
as to confess the God of Israel to be the only God, and to bear witness
to this among all people under his sway.

<span id="x.ii-p6"></span>Meanwhile we must remark, how this edict of
the king of Babylon receives the testimony of the Spirit; for Daniel has
no other object or purpose in relating the edict, than to shew the fruit
of conversion in King Nebuchadnezzar. Hence, without doubt, King
Nebuchadnezzar bore witness to his repentance when he celebrated the God
of Israel among all people, and when he proclaimed a punishment to all
who spoke reproachfully against God. Hence this passage is often cited
by Augustine against the Donatists.  <span
id="fr_203"></span>[204](#fn_203) For they wished to grant an act of
impunity to themselves, when they disturbed the Church with rashness and
corrupted pure doctrine, and even permitted themselves to attack it like
robbers. For some were then discovered to have been slain by them, and
others mutilated in their limbs. Since, then, they allowed themselves to
act so licentiously and still desired to commit crimes with impunity,
yet they held this principle as of first importance. No punishment ought
to be inflicted on those who differ from others in religious doctrine;
as we see in these days, how some contend far too eagerly about this
subject. What they desire is clear enough. If any one carefully observes
them, he will find them impious despisers of God; they wish to render
everything uncertain in religion, and as far as they can they strive to
tear away all the principles of piety. With the view then of vomiting
forth their poison, they strive eagerly for freedom from punishment, and
deny the right of inflicting punishment on heretics and blasphemers.

<span id="x.ii-p8"></span>Such is that dog Castalio  <span
id="fr_204"></span>[205](#fn_204) and his companions, and all like him,
such also were the Donatists; and hence, as I have mentioned, Augustine
cites this testimony in many places, and shews how ashamed Christian
princes ought to be of their slothfulness, if they are indulgent to
heretics and blasphemers, and do not vindicate God’s glory by lawful
punishments, since King Nebuchadnezzar who was never truly converted:
yet promulgated this decree by a kind of secret instinct. At all events,
it ought to be sufficient for men of moderate and quiet tastes to know
how King Nebuchadnezzar’s edict was praised by the approval of the Holy
Spirit. If this be so, it follows that kings are bound to defend the
worship of God, and to *execute* vengeance upon those who profanely
despise it, and on those who endeavor to reduce it to nothing, or to
adulterate the true doctrine by their errors, and so dissipate the unity
of the faith and disturb the Church’s peace. This is clear enough from
the Prophet’s context; for Nebuchadnezzar says at first, *it pleases me
to relate the signs and wonders which God has prepared for me* He had
already explained how wonderfully God had treated him; but this had
passed away. Now God seizes him a second and even a third time, and then
he confesses it to be his boast to explain the wonderful signs of God.
He afterwards breaks forth into the exclamation, *How mighty are his
signs! How remarkable his miracles! His kingdom, is a kingdom of an age,
and his dominion is from age to age* Without doubt Nebuchadnezzar wished
to excite his subjects to the attentive perusal of this edict, and to
the acknowledgment of its value, and thus to subject themselves to the
true and only God. He calls him *The High God,* meaning, doubtless, the
God of Israel; meanwhile, we do not know whether he cast away his
superstitions. I however incline to the opposite conjecture, since he
did not put off his errors, but was compelled to give glory to the Most
High God. He so acknowledged the God of Israel as to join inferior
deities with him as allies and companions, just as all unbelievers,
while admitting one supreme deity, imagine a multitude of others. So
also Nebuchadnezzar confessed Israel’s God to be Most High; yet, he did
not correct the idolatry which still flourished under his sway; nay, he
mingled and confused the false gods with the God of Israel. Thus he did
not leave behind his own corruption’s. He celebrates indeed with
magnificence the glory of the supreme God, but this is not sufficient
without; abolishing all superstitions, and promoting that religion alone
which is prescribed by the word of God, and causing his pure and perfect
worship to flourish.

<span id="x.ii-p10"></span><span id="x.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p11"></span>In fine, this preface might seem a proof of
an important conversion; but we shall directly see how far
Nebuchadnezzar was from being entirely purged of his errors. It ought,
indeed, to affect us exceedingly to behold the king wrapt up in so many
errors, and yet seized with admiration of the Divine virtue, since he
cannot express his thoughts, but exclaims*,* — *His signs how mighty!
his wonders how powerful!* He added, *His kingdom is a perpetual
kingdom, and his dominion is from age to age* Here he confesses God’s
power not to be dependent upon man’s will, since he had just before
said, the statue which he had erected was to be worshipped, because he
had chosen so to decree it. Now, however, he remits much of this pride
by confessing God’s kingdom to be a perpetual one. The narrative now
follows. Thus far we have merely a preface, because the edict was
diffused among his subjects to render them attentive to the most
important subjects.

<span id="x.iii"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p1"></span><span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#004)<span id="x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p2"></span>**4.** I Nebuchadnezzar was at rest in mine
house, and flourishing in my palace:

<span id="x.iii-p3"></span>**4.** Ego Nebuchadnezer quietus, *aut,
felix,* eram domi meae, et florens aut, *viridis* in palatio meo.

<span id="x.iii-p4"></span>**5.** I saw a dream which made me afraid,
and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.

<span id="x.iii-p5"></span>**5.** Somnium vidi, et exterruit me,  <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205) et cogitationes super cubile meum et
visiones capitis mei conturbaverunt me.

<span id="x.iii-p7"></span>**6.** Therefore made I a decree to bring in
all the wise *men* of Babylon before me, that they might make known unto
me the interpretation of the dream.

<span id="x.iii-p8"></span>**6.** Et a me positum fuit decretum, ut
adducerentur, *hoc est, accerserentur,* coram me omnes sapientes
Babylonis, qui interpretationem sorenii patefacerent mihi.

<span id="x.iii-p9"></span> 

<span id="x.iii-p10"></span><span id="x.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p11"></span>Nebuchadnezzar here explains how he
acknowledged the Supreme God. He does not relate the proofs which he had
previously received; but since his pride was subdued in this last dream,
he makes a passing allusion to it. Meanwhile, as he doubtless recalled
his former dreams to mind, and condemned himself for his ingratitude, in
burying in oblivion this great power of God, and in wiping away the
remembrance of those benefits by which God had adorned him. Here,
however, he speaks only of his last dream, which we shall see in its own
place. But before he comes as far as the dream, he says, *he was at
rest.* <span id="x.iii-p11.1"></span>שלה*, seleh,* signifies “*rest*”
and “*happiness;*” and since prosperity renders men secure, it is
metaphorically used for “*security.*” David, when he pronounces the same
sentence upon himself, uses the same words: (<span
id="x.iii-p11.2"></span>[Ps 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#006)<span
id="x.iii-p11.2"></span>,) “I said in my prosperity,” or rest; <span
id="x.iii-p11.3"></span>שלוה, *selueh,* which some translate
“abundance;” but it rather signifies a quiet or prosperous state.
Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, here marks the circumstance of time; hence we
may know him to have been divinely seized, because prosperous fortune
had rendered him stupid and drunken. There is nothing surprising in
this, for the old and common proverb is, “fullness is the parent of
ferocity,” as we see horses when too much fed, prance about and throw
their riders. Thus also it happens with men. For if God treats them
rather indulgently and liberally, they become fierce and insolent
towards all men, and strike off God’s yoke, and forget themselves to be
but men. And when this happened to David, what shall happen to the
profane and to others who are still too much devoted to the world? For
David confesses himself to have been so deceived by his quiet and
felicity, as to determine within himself that he had nothing else to
fear, — “I said in my happiness,” or my quiet, “I shall not be removed;”
and he afterwards adds,

<span id="x.iii-p12"></span>“O Lord, thou didst chastise me, and I was
laid low.” (<span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>[Ps
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)<span id="x.iii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="x.iii-p13"></span>Since, therefore, David promised himself
perpetual quiet in the world, because God spared him for a time, how
ought our tranquillity to be suspected lest we should grow torpid on our
lees? Nebuchadnezzar, then, does not recite this in vain — *I was quiet
at home, I flourished in my palace,* since this was the cause of his
confidence and pride, and of his carelessly despising God. He afterwards
adds, he *saw a dream and was disturbed* He, doubtless, wished here to
distinguish his dreams from common ones, which often arise from either a
disturbance of the brain, or our daily thoughts, or other causes, as we
have elsewhere seen. It is not *necessary* to repeat what we have
already treated more copiously. It is sufficient to state, briefly, how
this dream, in which God previously informed him of the future
punishment at hand, is separated from others which are either troubled:,
or fluctuating, or without reason. He, says, therefore*, he saw a dream,
and was disturbed,* while he was awake. He adds, *his thoughts were upon
his bed;* and then, *he was disturbed by visions of the head* These
expressions only look towards that heavenly oracle, or vision, or dream,
of which we shall afterwards speak more fully. It follows, *he put forth
a decree to summon all the wise men of Babylon to explain,* or make
manifest, *the interpretation of the dream* Doubtless the king often
dreamt, and did not always call together the Magi and soothsayers, and
astrologers, and others who were skilled in the science of divination,
or at least professed to be so. He did not consult them on all his
dreams; but because God had inscribed in his heart a distinct mark by
which he had denoted this dream, hence the king could not rest till he
heard its interpretation. As we previously saw the authority of the
first dream about the Four Monarchies and the Eternal Kingdom of Christ
confirmed, so the king perceived this one to have proceeded from heaves.
There is another difference between this dream and the one formerly
explained. For God blotted out the remembrance of the dream about the
Four Monarchies from King Nebuchadnezzar, so that it became necessary
for Daniel to bring his dream before the king, and at the same time to
add the interpretation. Daniel was then more obscure, for although he
proved himself to have excelled all the Chaldeans, yet King
Nebuchadnezzar would have wondered at him less if he had only been an
interpreter of a dream. God wished, therefore, to acquire greater
reverence for his Prophet and his doctrine, when he enjoined upon him
two duties; first, the divination of the dream itself, and then the
explanation of its sense and purpose. In this second dream Daniel is
only an interpreter. God had already sufficiently proved him to be
endued with a heavenly spirit, when Nebuchadnezzar not only called him
among the rest of the Magi, but separated him from them all. He
afterwards says:

<span id="x.iv"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p1"></span><span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007)<span id="x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p2"></span>**7.** Then came in the magicians, the
astrologers, the Chaldeans and the soothsayers: I told the dream before
them; but they did not make known unto me the interpretation thereof.

<span id="x.iv-p3"></span>**7.** Tunc ingressi sunt magi, astrologi,
Chaldaei, *hoc est, sapientes,* et physici, *vel, mathematici,* et
somnium*, inguit,* exposui ego coram ipsis, et interpretationem ejus non
patefecerunt mihi.

<span id="x.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.iv-p5"></span><span id="x.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iv-p6"></span>With respect to the words used above, we have
formerly freed ourselves from all trouble, because we cannot accurately
define what science each professed. Clearly enough they covered their
shamelessness by honorable titles, although they gave themselves up to
every possible imposture. They called themselves by the usual name of
learned men, when they were really unacquainted with any art or science,
and deluded mankind by miserable predictions; hence, by these words,
Daniel comprehended all the Magi, soothsayers, astrologers, and augurs,
who professed the art of divination. Here Nebuchadnezzar confesses that
he sent; for these men in vain. Hence it follows, this whole science was
a fallacy, or, at, least, Daniel’s exposition of the dream was not by
human skill, but by revelation from heaven. I embrace this opinion,
since Nebuchadnezzar wished clearly to express that Daniel’s power of
interpreting his dream did not spring from man, but was a singular gift
of the Spirit. He had considered it a settled point that, if any
knowledge or skill in divination existed, it must belong to the Magi,
soothsayers, augurs, and other Chaldeans who boasted in the possession
of perfect wisdom. This, therefore, was with. out controversy—that the
astrologers and the rest were most powerful in divination, and as far as
human faculties would allow, nothing escaped them. Hence it follows, on
the other hand, that Daniel was divinely instructed, since if he had
been only an astrologer or magician, he must, like others, have required
a long’ apprenticeship to this science. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore,
wishes here to extol Daniel beyond all the Magi, as if he had said—He is
a heavenly Prophet! And this, also, will appear better from what is
added, as follows:

<span id="x.v"></span>

<span id="x.v-p1"></span><span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#008)<span id="x.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p2"></span>**8.** But at the last Daniel came in before
me, whose name *was* Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and
in whom *is* the spirit of the holy gods, and before him I told the
dream, *saying,*

<span id="x.v-p3"></span>**8.** Quousque tandem coram me introductus est
Daniel cujus nomen Beltsazar secundum nomen dei mei, et in quo spiritus
deorum sanctorum: et somnium coram ipso narravi.

<span id="x.v-p4"></span>**9.** O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians,
because I know that the spirit of the holy gods *is* in thee, and no
secret troubleth thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen,
and the interpretation thereof.

<span id="x.v-p5"></span>**9.** Beltsazar princeps, *vel*, *magister*,
magorum, quia ego novi quod spiritus deorum sanctorum in te *sit,* et
nullum arcanum to anxium reddit,  <span
id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206) visiones somnii mei quod vidi, et
interpretationem ejus expone.

<span id="x.v-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.v-p8"></span><span id="x.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p9"></span>Here the king of Babylon addresses Daniel
kindly, since he saw himself deserted by his own teachers. And hence we
gather that no one comes to the true God, unless impelled by necessity.
Daniel was not either unknown or far off; for we saw him to have been in
the palace. Since then the king had Daniel with him from the first, why
did he pass him over? Why did he call the other Magi from all quarters
by his edict? Hence, as I have said, it clearly appears he would never
have given glory to God, unless when compelled by extreme necessity.
Hence he never willingly submitted to the God of Israel; and his
affections were clearly but momentary, whenever they manifested any sign
of piety. Because he besought Daniel so imploringly, we see his
disposition to have been servile; just as all proud men swell out when
they do not need any one’s help, and become overbearing in their
insolence; but when they are reduced to extremity, they would rather
lick the dust than not obtain the favor which they need. Such was the
king’s disposition, since he willingly despised Daniel, and purposely
preferred the Magi. But as soon as he saw himself left in difficulties,
and unable to find any remedy except in Daniel, this was his last
refuge; and he now seems to forget his own loftiness while speaking
softly to God’s holy Prophet. But I shall proceed with the rest
to-morrow.

<span id="x.vi"></span>

<span id="x.vi-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.vi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou here proposest
a remarkable example before our eyes, that we may learn thy power to be
so great as not to be sufficiently celebrated by any human praises: and
since we hear how its herald was a profane king, nay, even a. cruel and
proud one, and thou hast afterwards deigned to manifest thyself to us
familiarly in Christ, — Grant, that in the spirit. of humility we may
desire to glorify thee, and to cleave entirely to thee. May we declare
thee to be ours, not only in mouth and tongue, but also in works; not
only as our true and only God, but our Father, since thou hast adopted
us in thine only-begotten Son, until at length we enjoy that eternal
inheritance which is laid up for us in heaven by the same Christ our
Lord. — Amen.

<span id="x.vii"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p1"></span>Lecture Eighteenth.

<span id="x.vii-p2"></span><span id="x.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="x.vii-p3"></span>**9.** *O Belteshazzar, master of the Magi,
since I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret
can escape thee* — *or* overcome thee, as I shall soon explain the word
— *relate the visions of my sleep which I saw, and their interpretation*
We yesterday shewed King Nebuchadnezzar to be a suppliant to Daniel,
when reduced to extremity. He did not seek him at first, but consulted
his Magicians, and he is now compelled to venerate the person whom he
had despised. He calls him *Belteshazzar,* and doubtless the name
severely wounded the Prophet’s mind; for another name had been imposed
upon him by his parents from his earliest infancy; whence he could
recognize himself as a Jew, and could draw his origin from a holy and
elect nation. For his change of name was doubtless made by the tyrant’s
cunning, as we have previously said, as to cause him to forget his own
family. King Nebuchadnezzar wished, by changing his name, to render this
holy servant of God degenerate. Hence, as often as he was called by this
name, he was clearly offended in no slight degree. But this evil could
not be remedied, since he was a captive, and knew he had to deal with a
people victorious, proud, and cruel. Thus, in the last verse,
Nebuchadnezzar had used this name according to the name of his god.
Since then Daniel had a name of his own, which his parents had given him
by God’s appointment, Nebuchadnezzar wished to blot out that sacred
name, and so called him as a mark of respect Belteshazzar, which we may
believe to have been deduced from the name of an idol. Hence this
doubled the Prophet’s grief, when he was stained with that base spot in
bearing an idol’s mark on his name; but it was his duty to endure this
scourge of God among his other trials. Thus God exercised his servant in
every way by enduring a cross.

<span id="x.vii-p4"></span>He now calls him *Prince of the Magi,* and
this doubtless wounded the holy Prophet’s feelings. He wished nothing
better than separation from the Magi, who deceived the world by their
impostures and soothsaying. For although they were skilled in the
science of astrology, and knew some principles worthy of praise, yet we
are sure they corrupted all the sciences. Hence Daniel did not willingly
hear himself included among them; but he could not free himself from
this infamy. Thus we see his patience to have been divinely proved in
various ways. Now, Nebuchadnezzar adds, *because I know the spirit of
the holy gods to be in thee.* Many understand this of angels; and this
interpretation is not objectionable, as I have hinted elsewhere. For the
existence of a supreme God was known to all the nations, but they
fancied angels to be inferior deities. Whatever be the true meaning,
Nebuchadnezzar here betrays his own ignorance, since he had made no real
progress in the knowledge of the true God; because he was entangled in
his former errors, and retained many gods, as from the beginning he had
been imbued with that superstition. This passage might have been
translated in the singular number, as some do, but it would be too
forced, and the reason for such a translation is too weak; for they
think Nebuchadnezzar to have been truly converted; but the vanity of
this is proved by the whole context; and being occupied by this opinion,
they wish to relieve him from all fault. But since it is clear that in
this edict of Nebuchadnezzar many proofs of his old ignorance are
comprehended, there is no reason why we should depart from the simple
sense of the words. Hence he attributes a divine spirit to Daniel, but
meanwhile imagines many gods. Since, therefore, *the spirit of the holy
gods is in thee,* he says, *and no secret overcomes thee* Some translate
<span id="x.vii-p4.1"></span>אנס, *anes,* to be troublesome; it properly
signifies to compel, or to force; for those who translate “there is no
secret which can surpass thee,” depart from the correct sense. Others
translate it, “to be troublesome.” This would be a more tolerable
translation, but they would do better by translating, “no secret renders
thee anxious or perplexed.” If the rules of grammar would allow the
<span id="x.vii-p4.2"></span>א *aleph,* to be a servile letter, the
sense would be more suitable. For <span id="x.vii-p4.3"></span>נסה,
*neseh,* signifies to try, or prove, and also to elevate. We may
translate it, “No secret is loftier than thy understanding;” or, “No
secret proves thee;” if he had said, — Daniel was endued with a divine
spirit; — he does not examine any proposition, and has no need to make
an experiment in any science, since his answer is easy and at hand. But.
it is necessary to remember what I said,—No secret renders thee anxious,
or confounds thee. Nebuchadnezzar knew this. Then why did he not
directly call him to himself in his perplexity? As Daniel could free him
from all perplexity, the king’s ingratitude is proved, because he
admitted the Magi to his counsels, and neglected Daniel. We see then how
he always endeavored to avoid God, till he was drawn along by a violent
hand, and thereby displayed the absence of conversion. For repentance is
voluntary, and those only are said to repent, who willingly return by a
change of mind to the God from whom they had revolted; and this cannot
be done without faith and the love of God. He then asks him *to relate
his dream and its interpretation* But the dream was not unknown, and he
relates it to Daniel. There is, therefore, something superfluous in
these words, but no doubt about the sense — as Nebuchadnezzar only asks
for the explanation of his dream. It follows: —

<span id="x.viii"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p1"></span><span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010)<span id="x.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p2"></span>**10.** Thus *were* the visions of mine head
in my bed: I saw, and behold a tree in the midst of the earth, and the
height thereof *was* great.

<span id="x.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Visiones autem capitis mei super
cubile meum, Videbam, et ecce arborem in medio terrae, et altitudo ejus
magna.

<span id="x.viii-p4"></span>**11.** The tree grew, and was strong, and
the height thereof reached unto heaven, and the sight thereof to the end
of all the earth:

<span id="x.viii-p5"></span>**11.** Crevit, *multiplicata est,* arbor,
et invaluit, et altitudo ejus pertigit, *hoc est, et altitudo ejus
pertingeret,* ad coelos, et conspectus ejus ad extremum totius, *vel,
universae,* terrae.

<span id="x.viii-p6"></span>**12.** The leaves thereof *were* fair, and
the fruit thereof much, and in it *was* meat for all: the beasts of the
field had shadow under it, and the fowls of the heaven dwelt in the
boughs thereof, and all flesh was fed of it.

<span id="x.viii-p7"></span>**12.** Ramus ejus pulcher, et fructus ejus
copiosus,  <span id="fr_207"></span>[208](#fn_207) et esca omnibus in
ea: sub ea umbrabat  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) bestia
agri: et in ramis ejus habitabant  <span
id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) aves coelorum, et ex ea alebatur omnis
caro.

<span id="x.viii-p11"></span> 

<span id="x.viii-p12"></span>The following verses ought to be joined on:
—

<span id="x.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p1"></span><span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013)<span id="x.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p2"></span>**13.** I saw in the visions of my head upon
my bed, and, behold, a watcher and an holy one came down from heaven;

<span id="x.ix-p3"></span>**13.** Videbam *etiam* in visionibus capitis
mei super cubile meum, et ecce vigil et sanctus descendit e coelis.

<span id="x.ix-p4"></span>**14.** He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew
down the tree, and cut off his branches, shake off his leaves, and
scatter his fruit: let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls
from his branches:

<span id="x.ix-p5"></span>**14.** Clamavit in fortitudine, *hoc est,
fortiter,* et ita loquutus est, Succidite arborem, et diripite folia
ejus,  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) excutite ramos ejus, et
dispergite fructus ejus: fugiat bestia ex umbra ejus, *de subtus, ad
verbum,* et aves ex frondibus ejus, *vel ex ramis ejus.*

<span id="x.ix-p7"></span>**15.** Nevertheless leave the stump of his
roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender
grass of the field; and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and *let*
his portion *be* with the beasts in the grass of the earth:

<span id="x.ix-p8"></span>**15.** Tandem imum radicum ejus in terra
relinquite, et in vinculo ferri, *hoc est, ferreo,* et aeneo, in herba
agri, et pluvia coelorum irrigetur, etcum bestia sit portio ejus in
herba terrae.

<span id="x.ix-p9"></span>**16.** Let his heart be changed from man’s,
and let a beast’s heart be given unto him; and let seven times pass over
him.

<span id="x.ix-p10"></span>**16.** Cor ejus ab humano, *simpliciter, ab
heroine,* mutent,  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211) et cor
bestiae detur ei: et septem tempora transeant super eam.

<span id="x.ix-p12"></span> 

<span id="x.ix-p13"></span><span id="x.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p14"></span>Here Nebuchadnezzar relates his dream, of
which the interpretation will follow in its place. Yet because this
narrative is cold and useless unless we should say something of the
subject itself, it is necessary to make some remarks — the rest shall be
deferred. First of all, under the figure of a tree Nebuchadnezzar
himself is intended, not because it fully represents the king’s office,
but because God appointed the existence of governments in the world for
this purpose—to be like trees on whose fruits all men feed, and under
whose shadow they rest. Hence this ordinance of God flourishes, because
tyrants, however they are removed from the exercise of just and moderate
dominion, whether they wish it or *not,* are compelled to be like trees;
since it is better to live under the most cruel tyrant than without any
government at all. Let us suppose all to be on one equal level, what
would such anarchy bring forth? No one would wish to yield to others;
every one would try the extent of his powers, and thus all would end in
prey and plunder, and in the mere license of fraud and murder, and all
the passions of mankind would have full and unbridled sway. Hence I have
said, tyranny is better than anarchy, and more easily borne, because
where there is no supreme governor there is none to preside and keep the
rest in check. Wherefore they philosophize too minutely who think this
to be a description of a king endued with superior virtues; for there
was no such superiority in justice and equity in King Nebuchadnezzar.
God principally wished to shew, by this figure, with what intention and
with what political order he desires the world to be governed; and why
he sets over it kings and monarchies and other magistrates. Then he
desired to shew, *secondly,* although tyrants and other princes forget
their duty, it is still divinely enjoined upon them, and yet God’s grace
always shines forth in all governments. Tyrants endeavor to extinguish
the whole light of equity and justice, and to mingle all things; but the
Lord meanwhile restrains them in a secret and wonderful manner, and thus
they are compelled to act usefully to the human race, whether they will
or not. This then is the meaning of the figure or image of the tree.

<span id="x.ix-p15"></span>It is now added, *the birds of heaven dwelt
amidst the branches, and the beasts lived by its sustenance*—*which*
ought to be referred to mankind. For although even the beasts of the
field profit by political order, yet we know society to have been
ordained by God for the benefit of men. There is no doubt at all of the
whole discourse being metaphorical, —nay, properly speaking, it is an
allegory, since an allegory is only a continued metaphor. If Daniel had
only represented the king under the figure of a tree, it would have been
a metaphor; but when he pursues his own train of thought in a continuous
tenor, his discourse becomes allegorical. He says, therefore, *the
beasts of the field dwelt under the tree,* because we are sheltered by
the protection of magistrates; and no heat of the sun so parches and
burns up miserable men as living deprived of that shade under which God
wished them to, repose. *The birds of heaven also nestled in its boughs
and leaves* Some distinguish, with too much subtlety, between birds and
beasts. It is sufficient for us to observe the Prophet noticing how men
of every rank feel no small utility in the protection of princes; for if
they were deprived of it, it were better for them to live like wild
beasts than mutually to confide in each other. Such protection is
needful, if we reflect upon the great pride natural to all, and the
blindness of our self-love, and the furiousness of our lusts. As this is
the case, God shews, in this dream, how all orders among us need the
protection of magistrates; while *pasture and food and shelter* signify
the various forms of usefulness which political order provides for us.
For some might object—they have no need of government either for one
reason or another; for if we discharge properly all the duties of life,
we shall always. find God’s blessing sufficient for us.

<span id="x.ix-p16"></span><span id="x.ix-p16.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p17"></span>It is now added, *its height was great;*
then, *it grew till it reached even to heaven, and its aspect extended
itself to the furthest bounds of the land.* This is restricted to the
Babylonian monarchy, for there were then other empires in the world, but
they were either powerless or but slightly important. The Chaldeans,
also, were then so powerful that no prince could approach to such
majesty and power. Since, therefore, King Nebuchadnezzar was so
pre-eminent, the loftiness of the tree here described is not surprising,
though it reached to heaven; while the altitude rendered it visible
throughout the whole land. Some of the rabbis place Babylon in the
middle of the earth, because it was under the same line or parallel with
Jerusalem — which is very foolish. Those also who place Jerusalem in the
center of the earth are equally childish; although Jerome, Origen, and
other ancient authors, treat Jerusalem as in the center of the world. In
this conjecture of theirs they deserve the laughter of the Cynic who,
when asked to point out the middle of the earth:, touched the ground
with his staff immediately under his feet! Then when the questioner
objected to this determination of the center of the earth, he said,”
Then do you measure the earth!” As far as concerns Jerusalem, their
conjectures are not worth mentioning. That proud Barbinel \[Abarbanel\]
wished to seem a philosopher, but nothing is more insipid than the Jews
where they depart from their own rules of grammar; and the Lord so
blinded them and delivered them up to a reprobate sense, when he wished
them to be spectacles of horrible blindness and prodigious stupidity, —
and in a small and minute matter that silly fellow shews his absurdity.

<span id="x.ix-p18"></span>He now says, *Its boughs were beautiful, and
its fruit copious* This must be referred to the common opinion of the
vulgar; for we know men’s eyes to be dazzled by the splendor of princes.
For if any one excels others in power, all men adore him and are seized
with admiration, and are incapable of judging correctly. When the
majesty of a general or a king comes before them, they are all
astonished and perceive nothing, and they do not think it lawful for
them to inquire strictly into the conduct of princes. Since, then, the
power and wealth of King Nebuchadnezzar were so great, no wonder the
Prophet says, *His branches were beautiful, and their fruit copious* But
meanwhile we must remember what I lately said, namely, God’s blessing
shines forth in princes, even if they materially neglect their duty,
because God does not suffer all his grace in them to be extinguished;
and hence they are compelled to bring forth some fruit. It is much
better, therefore, to preserve the existence of some kind of dominion
than to have all men’s condition equal, when each attracts the, eyes of
his neighbors. And this is the meaning of what I have *said*—*there was
food and provision for all,* as I have lately explained it.

<span id="x.ix-p19"></span><span id="x.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p20"></span>The *second* part of the dream follows here.
Hitherto Nebuchadnezzar has described the beauty and excellency of his
state under the figure of a lofty tree which afforded shade to the
beasts and on whose fruit they fed, and next as giving, nests to the
birds of heaven under its boughs. The cutting down of the tree now
follows. *I saw,* says he, *in the visions of my head upon my couch,
and, behold, a watcher and a holy one came down from heaven* No doubt we
ought to understand an angel by a watcher. He is called “*a* holy one,”
which is only another form of expression for an angel; and they are
worthy of this name, because they are perpetually watchful in the
performance of God’s commands. They are not subject to slumber, they are
not nourished by either food or drink, but live a spiritual life; hence
they have no use for sleep, which is the result of drink and food.
Lastly, as angels have no bodies, their very spiritual nature makes them
watchful. But this phrase not only expresses their nature but also their
duty; because God has them at hand to fulfill his bidding, and destines
them to the performance of his commands, hence they are called
“watchers.” (<span id="x.ix-p20.1"></span>[Ps
103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020)<span id="x.ix-p20.1"></span>.)
In this Psalm angels are said to do his bidding, because, by an agility
incomprehensible to us, they run about hither and thither, and fly
directly from heaven to earth, from one end of the world to another —
from the rising even to the setting sun. Since, therefore, angels can so
easily and promptly fulfill God’s orders, they are deservedly called
“watchers ” They are called “*holy* ones,” because they are not infected
by human infirmities. But we are filled with really sins, not merely
because we are earthly, but since we have contracted pollution from our
first parents, which vitiates alike the whole body and mind. By this
expression, then, Nebuchadnezzar desired to distinguish between angels
and mortals. For although God here sanctifies his elect, yet as long as
they dwell in the prison of the body they never arrive at the holiness
of angels. Here then we mark the difference between angels and men.
Nebuchadnezzar could not understand this by himself, but he was taught
of God to perceive the destruction of the tree to arise not from man but
from the Almighty.

<span id="x.ix-p21"></span><span id="x.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p22"></span>He afterwards adds—*the angel cried with a
loud voice, cut down the tree, strip off the leaves, cut off its boughs,
scatter its fruits,* (or throw them away,) *and let the beasts flee from
its shadow, and the birds of heaven dwell no longer under its branches*
By this figure God meant to express that King Nebuchadnezzar should be
for a time like a beast. This ought not to seem absurd, although it is
but rough to speak of a tree being deprived of a human heart, since men
know trees to have no other life than that usually called vegetable. The
dignity or excellence of the tree cannot be lessened by its being
without a human heart, for it never had one originally. But though this
is rather a rough mode of expression., yet it contains in it nothing
absurd, although Daniel bends a little aside from the strictness of the
allegory; *nay,* Nebuchadnezzar himself had an allegorical dream, and
yet God mingled something with it by which he might comprehend the
meaning veiled under the image of a tree. The angel, then, orders the
tree to be deprived of its human heart, and its bough and fruit to be
torn down and cast away, after it had been cut down; next he orders the
heart of a beast to be given to it, and thus its portion might be with
the wild animals of the woods. But as this must be repeated elsewhere, I
now pass it by rather hastily. The general meaning is this; King
Nebuchadnezzar was to be deprived for a time not only of his empire but
even of his human sense, and to be in no way different from the beasts,
since he was unworthy of holding even the lowest place among mankind.
Although he seemed to surpass the human race in his elevation, yet he
must be cast down and thrown below even the lowest mortals!

<span id="x.ix-p23"></span><span id="x.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p24"></span>The reason for this punishment follows, when
it is added, *seven times shall pass over him;* and then, *do not cut
off its lowest root, but let the rain of heaven water it;* and next;
*his portion shall be with the wild beasts.* Although the chastisement
is hard and horrible, when Nebuchadnezzar is expelled from the society
of men, and rendered like wild beasts; but it is something in his favor
when God does not tear him up by the roots, but allows the root to
remain, for the tree to spring up again and flourish, and be planted
again in its own place, and recover new vigor through its roots. Here
Daniel reviews the punishment inflicted on King Nebuchadnezzar, in which
God afforded a specimen of his clemency, in sparing him and not utterly
cutting him down, but in allowing his root to remain. Some here
discourse about the mitigation of penalties when God sees those repent
whom he has chastised with rods; but I do not think it applicable here.
There was no true conversion in King Nebuchadnezzar, as we said before,
and shall see again more clearly. God did not wish to press him too
hard, and this we must attribute to his clemency; because when he seems
to set no bounds to his punishment of men’s sins, yet in all temporal
punishments he allows men to taste his pity; so that even the reprobate
remain without excuse. The assertion of some—that punishments are not
remitted without the fault being excused, is false; as we see in the
example of Ahab. For God remitted the fault to the impious king, but
because he seemed to shew some signs of repentance, God abstained from
greater punishment. (<span id="x.ix-p24.1"></span>[1Ki
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="x.ix-p24.1"></span>.)
So also we may see the same in the case of Nebuchadnezzar. God was
unwilling utterly to root him out—for the metaphor of the tree shews
this—but he desired *seven times to pass over him* Some understand seven
weeks, others seven years; but we shall treat this point more copiously
by and bye. Lastly, we must notice this; in the midst of the time during
which God’s wrath seemed to rage against this wretched king, his
benefits were also mingled with it. We learn this from the words, *his
portion shall be with the beasts of the field;* that is, he shall feed
upon some food by which life shall be preserved; and then, *it shall be
watered* or irrigated *with the rain of heaven.* For God
signifies—though he wished to punish King Nebuchadnezzar, and to render
him a remarkable example of his wrath—his knowledge of what he could
bear; hence, he so tempers his punishment as to leave hope remaining for
the future, Thus he took his food even with the beasts of the earth, but
he is not deprived of the irrigation of the dew of heaven.

<span id="x.x"></span>

<span id="x.x-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since we see it so
difficult for us. to bear prosperity without injury to the mind, that we
may remember ourselves to be mortal — may our frailty be ever present to
our eyes, and tender us humble, and lead us to ascribe the glory to
thee. Being advised by thee, may we learn to walk with anxiety and fear,
to submit ourselves to thee, and to conduct ourselves modestly towards
our brethren. May none of us despise or insult his brother, but may we
all strive to discharge our duties with moderation, until at length thou
gatherest us into that glory which has been obtained for us by the blood
of thine only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.xi"></span>

<span id="x.xi-p1"></span>Lecture Nineteenth.

<span id="x.xii"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p1"></span><span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017)<span id="x.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p2"></span>**17.** This matter *is* by the decree of the
watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones: to the intent
that the living may know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of
men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will, and setteth up over it the
basest of men.

<span id="x.xii-p3"></span>**17.** In decreto vigilum verbum,  <span
id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212) et in sermone sanctorum postulatio, ut
cognoscant viventes, quod dominator *sit* excelsus in regno hominum: et
cui voluerit tradet illud, et humilem,  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) hominum  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214) eriget super ipsum.

<span id="x.xii-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.xii-p8"></span><span id="x.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p9"></span>In this verse God confirms what he had shewn
to the king of Babylon by means of a dream. He says, then, the king was
instructed in a certain thing; since it had been so determined before
God and his angels. The full meaning is this, —Nebuchadnezzar must know
it to be impossible to escape the punishment whose image he had seen in
the dream. There is, however, some ambiguity in the words, since
interpreters find great difficulties with the second clause; for they
say the angels ask the question, to afford proof to the king of Babylon,
and that all men may acknowledge the supreme power of the one God. But
this seems to me too forced. As far as the word <span
id="x.xii-p9.1"></span>פתגמא, *pethegma,* is concerned, it signifies
“word” in Chaldee; but here I think it properly used for “edict,” as in
the first chapter of Esther, (<span id="x.xii-p9.2"></span>[Es
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020)<span id="x.xii-p9.2"></span>;)
and this is a very suitable sense, as the edict was promulgated in the
decree so that the “word” or vision might not prove vain and
inefficient; since God wished to point out to the king what was already
fixed and determined in heaven. We now understand the Prophet’s
intention. But a new question still remains, because it seems absurd to
attribute power and authority to those angels, lest in this way they
seem to be equal to God. We know God to be judge alone, and hence it is
his proper office to determine what pleases him; and if this is
transferred to angels, it seems as if it lessened his supreme authority,
because it is not becoming to make them companions of his Majesty. But
we know it to be no new thing in Scripture for God to join angels with
himself, not as equals but as attendants, and to attribute to them so
much honor as to deign to call them into counsel. Hence angels are often
called God’s counselors. As in this place they are said to decree
together with God; and not by their own will or pleasure, as they say,
but because they subscribe to God’s judgment. Meanwhile, we must remark
the double character assigned to them. In the first clause, Daniel makes
them subscribe to the decree, and afterwards uses the word *demand.* And
this suits the sense well enough; because the angels urge God by their
prayers to humble all mortals and to exalt himself alone. Thus, whatever
obscures his glory may be reduced into order. It is right for angels
constantly to desire this, since we know them to desire nothing in
comparison with the adoration of God by themselves in alliance with all
mankind. But when they see God’s authority diminished by man’s pride and
audacity, the object of their demand is that God would reduce under his
yoke the proud who erect their crests against him.

<span id="x.xii-p10"></span>We now see why Daniel says, *this was
declared in, the decree of the watchers, and was demanded in their
speech; as* if he should. say; “*thou* hast all angels opposed to thee;
for by one consent and with Gale mouth they accuse thee before God, for
as far as possible thou obscurest his glory; and God, assenting to their
prayers, has determined to cast thee away, and to render thee an object
of contempt and reproach before the whole world; and this decree has
been signed by all the angels, as if it were common between him and
them. For by their subscription and agreement he might prevail\[ in
confirming the confidence of the profane king. Without doubt God, after
his usual manner, accommodated the vision to the understanding of a man
who never was taught in his law, but only imbued with a confused notion
of his divinity, so that he could not distinguish between God and
angels. Meanwhile, this sentiment is true — the edict was promulgated at
the united consent and demand of the whole celestial host; for angels
bear with the greatest reluctance whatever detracts from God’s glory,
and all the folly of mankind when they wish to draw and attract to
themselves the peculiar attributes of the only God. This seems to be
flute genuine sense. The following sentence flows very suitably, —
*mortals must know God to be a ruler in the kingdoms of men* For Daniel
marks the end of the demand, since angels desire God’s rights to remain
entire, and to be quite unaffected by the ingratitude of mankind. But
men cannot ascribe even the slightest merit to themselves without
detracting from God’s praise; hence angels continually seek from God the
casting down of all the proud, and that he will not permit himself to be
defrauded of his proper rights, but maintain in all its integrity his
own sovereign powers. This also must. be diligently observed — *mortals
should notice how the Lord reigns in the kingdoms of men.* For even the
worst of men confess the mighty power of God; they dare not draw him
down from his heavenly throne by their blasphemies, but they imagine
themselves able to obtain and defend their worldly kingdoms, by either
their exertions or their wealth, or by some other means. Unbelievers,
therefore, willingly shut up God in heaven, just as Epicurus fancied him
to be enjoying his own delights at his ease. Hence Daniel shews God to
be deprived of his rights, *unless he is recognized as a ruler in the
kingdoms of men,* that is, on earth to humble all whom he pleases. So
also it is said in the Psalms, (<span id="x.xii-p10.1"></span>[Ps
75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007)<span id="x.xii-p10.1"></span>,)
Power springs not from either the east or the west, but; from heaven;
and elsewhere, God raises the poor out of the mire, (<span
id="x.xii-p10.2"></span>[Ps 113:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)<span
id="x.xii-p10.2"></span>.) Then in the sacred Canticle of the Virgin, he
casts down the proud from their seat, and exalts the abject and the
humble. (<span id="x.xii-p10.3"></span>[Lu
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052)<span id="x.xii-p10.3"></span>.)
All indeed confess this, but scarcely one in a hundred feels in his mind
the dominion of God over the earth, and that no man can raise himself,
or remain in any post of honor, since this is the peculiar gift of God.
Because men are persuaded of this with difficulty. Daniel eloquently
expresses it, *the Lord shall be lofty in the kingdoms of men;* that is,
shall not; only exercise his power in heaven, but also govern the human
race, and assign to every one his own grade and position. *He will give
it to whom he wills* He speaks of different empires in the singular
number; just as if God had said, some: are raised up by God’s will, and
others are cast down; and the whole happens according to God’s pleasure.
The meaning is this — -every one has his own condition divinely assigned
to him; and thus a, man’s ambition, or skill, or prudence, or wealth, or
the help of others, do not profit men in aspiring to any altitude,
unless God raises them by his stretched out hand. Paul also teaches the
same thing in other words; there is no power but from God, (<span
id="x.xii-p10.4"></span>[Ro 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span
id="x.xii-p10.4"></span>,) and afterwards Daniel often repeats the same
sentiment.

<span id="x.xii-p11"></span>He adds, *he raises up the humble man above
himself* In a change so remarkable as this, God’s power shines forth
better while he raises from the dust those who were formerly obscure and
contemptible, and even sets them above kings. When this happens, profane
men say, God is playing with them, and rolls men about like balls in his
hand, which are first tossed upwards and then thrown down upon the
ground. But they do not consider the reason why God by open proofs
wishes to shew how we are under his absolute power, on which our
condition entirely depends; when we do not comprehend this of our own
accord, examples are necessarily set before us by which we are compelled
to perceive what almost all are willingly ignorant of. We now understand
the whole intention of the Prophet. Angels seek from God by continual
prayers to declare his own power to mortals, and thus to lay prostrate
the proud who think to excel by their own power and industry, or else by
chance, or by the help of men. To induce God to punish men for their
sacrilegious deeds, the angels desire him to prostrate them, and thus to
shew himself to be not only the king and ruler of heaven, but also of
earth. Now, this not only happens in the case of a single king*,* but we
know history to be full of such proofs. Whence, then, or from what order
have kings often been created? And when there was no greater pride in
the world than in the Roman empire, we see what happened. For God
brought forward certain monsters which caused the greatest astonishment
among the Greeks and all the 0rien.tals, the Spaniards, Italians, and
Gauls; for nothing was more monstrous than some of the emperors. Then
their origin was most base and shameful, and God could not shew more
clearly their empires were not transferred by the will of man, nor even
acquired by valor, counsel, and powerful troops, but remained under his
own hand to bestow upon whomsoever he pleased. Let us go on:

<span id="x.xiii"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p1"></span><span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#018)<span id="x.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p2"></span>**18.** This dream I king Nebuchadnezzar
have seen. Now thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation thereof,
forasmuch as all the wise *men* of my kingdom are not able to make known
unto me the interpretation: but thou *art* able; for the spirit of the
holy gods *is* in thee.

<span id="x.xiii-p3"></span>**18.** Hoc somnium vidi ego Rex
Nebuchadnezer: et tu Beltsazar, interpretationem enarra,  <span
id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) quoniam cuncti sapientes regni mei non
potuerunt interpretationem patefacere mihi: tu vero potes: quia spiritus
deorum sanctorum in te.

<span id="x.xiii-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.xiii-p6"></span><span id="x.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p7"></span>Here Nebuchadnezzar repeats what he had
formerly said about seeking an interpretation for his dream. He
understood the figure which was shewn to him, but he could not
understand God’s intentions nor even determine its relation to himself.
On this point he implores Daniel’s confidence; he affirms his vision in
a dream to induce Daniel to pay great attention to its interpretation.
Then he adds, with the same purpose, *All the wise men of his kingdom
could not explain the dreary;* where he confesses all the astrologers,
and diviners, and others of this kind to be utterly vain and fallacious,
since they professed to know everything. For some were augurs, some
conjectures, some interpreters of dreams, and others astrologers, who
not only discoursed on the course, distances, and orders of the stars,
and the peculiarities of each, but wished to predict futurity from the
course of the stars. Since, therefore, they boasted so magnificently in
their superior knowledge of all events, Nebuchadnezzar confesses them to
have been impostors. But he ascribes this power in reality to Daniel,
because he was endued by the divine Spirit. Hence he excludes all the
wise men of Babylon from so great a gift through his having proved them
destitute of God’s Spirit. He does not assert this in so many words, but
this meaning is easily elicited from his expressions implying all the
variety of the Chaldean wise men. Then in the second clause he exempts
Daniel from their number, and states the reason to be his excelling in
the divine Spirit. Nebuchadnezzar, therefore, here asserts what is
peculiar to God, and acknowledges Daniel to be his Prophet and minister.
When he calls angels *holy deities,* we have mentioned this already as
an expression which ought not to seem surprising in a heathen,
uninstructed in the true doctrine of piety, and only just initiated in
its elements. But we know this common opinion respecting angels being
mingled together with the one God. Hence Nebuchadnezzar speaks in the
ordinary and received language when he says, the spirit of the holy gods
dwells in Daniel. It now follows:

<span id="x.xiv"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p1"></span><span id="x.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#019)<span id="x.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p2"></span>**19.** Then Daniel, whose name *was*
Belteshazzar, was astonied for one hour, and his thoughts troubled him.
The king spake, and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the
interpretation thereof, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My
lord, the dream *be* to them that hate thee, and the interpretation
thereof to thine enemies.

<span id="x.xiv-p3"></span>**19.** Tunc Daniel, cui nomen Beltsazar,
obstupefactus fuit circiter horam unam: et cogitationes ejus turbabant
eum. Respondit rex et dixit, Beltsazar, somnium et interpretatio *ejus*
ne conturbet to, *terreat.* Respondit Beltsazar et dixit, Domine mi,
somnium *sit* inimicis tuis, et interpretatio ejus hostibus tuis.

<span id="x.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xiv-p5"></span><span id="x.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiv-p6"></span>Here Daniel relates how he was in some sense
astonished. And I refer this to the sorrow which the holy Prophet had
*endured* from that horrible punishment which God had shewn under a
figure; nor ought it to seem surprising for Daniel to be grievously
afflicted on account of the calamity of the king of Babylon; for
although he was a cruel tyrant, and had harassed and all but destroyed
God’s Church, yet since he was under his Sway, he was bound to pray for
him. But God had deafly taught the Jews this, by means of Jeremiah, Pray
ye for the prosperous state of Babylon, because your peace shall be in
it. (<span id="x.xiv-p6.1"></span>[Jer
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#007)<span id="x.xiv-p6.1"></span>.) At
the close of seventy years it was lawful for the pious worshippers of
God to beg him to free them; but until the time predicted by the Prophet
had elapsed, it was not lawful either to indulge in hatred against the
king, or to invoke God’s wrath upon him. They knew him to be the
executor of God’s just vengeance, and also to be their sovereign and
lawful ruler. Since then Daniel was treated kindly by the king when by
the rights of warfare he was dragged into exile, he ought to be faithful
to his own king, although he exercised tyranny against the people of
God. This was the reason why he suffered so much sorrow from that sad
oracle. Others think he was in an ecstasy; but this seems to suit better
because he does not simply speak of being astonished, but even disturbed
and terrified in his thoughts. Meanwhile, we must remark, how variously
the Prophets were affected when God uses them in denouncing his
approaching judgments. Whenever God appointed his Prophets the heralds
of severe calamities, they were affected in two ways; on the one side,
they condoled with those miserable men whose destruction they saw at
hand, and still they boldly announced what had been divinely commanded;
and thus their sorrow never hindered them from discharging their duty
freely and consistently. In Daniel’s case we see both these feelings.
The sympathy, then, was right in his condoling with his king and being
silent for about an hour. And when the king commands him to be of good
courage and not to be disturbed, we have here depicted the security of
those who do not apprehend the wrath of God. The Prophet is terrified,
and yet he is free from all evil; for God does not threaten him, nay,
the very punishment which he sees prepared for the king, afforded the
hope of future deliverance. Why then is he frightened? because the
faithful, though God spares them and shews himself merciful and
propitious, cannot view his judgments without fear, for they acknowledge
themselves subject to similar penalties, if God did not treat them with
indulgence. Besides this, they never put off human affections, and so
pity takes possession of them, when they see the ungodly punished or
even subject to impending wrath. For these two reasons they suffer
sorrow and pain. But the impious, even when God openly addresses and
threatens them, are not moved, but remain stupid, or openly deride his
power and treat his threats as fabulous, till they feel them seriously.
Such is the example which the Prophet sets before us in the king of
Babylon.

<span id="x.xiv-p7"></span>*Belteshazzar,* he says, *let not thy
thoughts disturb thee; let not the dream and its interpretation frighten
thee/* Yet Daniel was afraid for his sake. But, as I have already said,
while the faithful are afraid though they feel God to be propitious, yet
the impious sleep in their security, and are unmoved and unterrified by
any threats. Daniel adds the cause of his grief, — *O my lord,* he says,
*may the dream be for thine enemies, and its interpretation to thy
foes!* Here Daniel explains why he was so astonished — because he wished
so horrible a punishment to be turned away from the person of the king;
for although he might deservedly have detested him, yet he reverenced
the power divinely assigned to him. Let us learn, therefore, from the
Prophet’s example, to pray for blessings on our enemies who desire to
destroy us, and especially to pray for tyrants if it please God to
subject us to their lust; for although they are unworthy of any of the
feelings of humanity, yet we must modestly bear their yoke, because they
could not be our governors without God’s permission; and not only for
wrath, as Paul admonishes us, but for conscience’ sake, (<span
id="x.xiv-p7.1"></span>[Ro 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#005)<span
id="x.xiv-p7.1"></span>,) otherwise we should not only rebel against
them, but against God himself. But, on the other hand, Daniel shews the
impossibility of his being changed or softened by any sentiment of pity,
and thus turned from his intended course:

<span id="x.xv"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p1"></span><span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#020)<span id="x.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p2"></span>**20.** The tree that thou sawest, which grew,
and was strong, whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight
thereof to all the earth;

<span id="x.xv-p3"></span>**20.** Arborquam vidisti, quae magna *erat*
et robusta, et cujus magnitudo pertingebat ad coels, et aspectus ejus ad
totam terram.

<span id="x.xv-p4"></span>**21.** Whose leaves *were* fair, and the
fruit thereof much, and in it *was* meat for all; under which the beasts
of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the fowls of the heaven had
their habitation:

<span id="x.xv-p5"></span>**21.** Et folium ejus pulchrum *erat,*  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) et fructus ejus copiosus: et in qua,
 <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217) cibus cunctis: sub qua
habitabant bestiae agri, et in cujus ramis quiescebant aves coeli.

<span id="x.xv-p8"></span>**22.** It *is* thou, O king, that art grown
and become strong: for thy greatness is grown, and reacheth unto heaven,
and thy dominion to the end of the earth.

<span id="x.xv-p9"></span>**22.** Tu *es* ipsc rex, qui multiplicatus es
et roboratus,  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218) ita ut magnitudo
tua multiplicata fuerit, et pertigerit ad coelos, et potestas tua ad
fines terrae.

<span id="x.xv-p11"></span> 

<span id="x.xv-p12"></span><span id="x.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p13"></span>Here we see what I have touched upon, namely,
how Daniel acted respectfully to the king, and thus was mindful of his
prophetic duty, while he punctually discharged the commands of God. We
must notice this distinction, for nothing is more difficult for
ministers of the Word than to maintain this middle course. Some are
always fulminating through a pretense of zeal, and forget themselves to
be but men: they shew no sign of benevolence, but indulge in mere
bitterness. Hence they have no authority, and all their admonitions are
hateful. Next, they explain God’s Word with pride and boasting, when
they frighten sinners without either humanity, or pain, or sympathy.
Others, again, who are wicked and perfidious flatterers, gloss over the
grossest iniquities; they object to both Prophets and Apostles,
esteeming the fervor of their zeal to have driven away all human
affections! Thus they delude miserable men, and destroy them by their
flattery. But our Prophet, as all the rest, here shews how God’s
servants ought to take a middle course. Thus Jeremiah, when prophesying
adversity, feels sorrow and bitterness of spirit, and yet does not turn
aside from unsparing reproof of the severest threats, as both sprang
from God. (<span id="x.xv-p13.1"></span>[Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001)<span id="x.xv-p13.1"></span>.) The
rest of the prophets also act in the same manner. Here Daniel, on the
one hand, pities the king, and on the other, through knowing himself to
be the herald of God’s anger, he is not frightened by any danger while
setting before the king the punishment which he had despised. Hence we
gather why he was not astonished. He felt no fear of the tyrant,
although many do not dare to discharge their duty when an odious message
is entrusted to them, which stimulates the impious and the unbelievers
to madness. Daniel, however, was not astonished with any fear of this
kind; he only wished God to act mercifully towards his king. For he says
here, *Thou art king thyself.* He does not speak with any doubt or
hesitation, neither does he use obscurity nor a number of excuses, but
plainly announces king Nebuchadnezzar to be intended by the tree which
he saw. Hence *the tree which thou sawest is large and strong, under the
shade of which the beasts of the field were dwelling, and in the boughs
of which the birds of the air were making their nests: thou, says he,
art the king. Why so? Thou hast become great and strong; thy magnitude
has extended to the heavens, and thy power to the ends of the earth*
Now, what follows?

<span id="x.xvi"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p1"></span><span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#023)<span id="x.xvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p2"></span>**23.** And whereas the king saw a watcher
and an holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew the tree down,
and destroy it; yet leave the stump of the roots thereof in the earth,
even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field;
and let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and *let* his portion *be*
with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;

<span id="x.xvi-p3"></span>**23.** Et quod vidit rex, vigilem, et
sanctum descendere e coelis, qui dixit:  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219) Suceidite arborem, et dispergite eam:
tantummodo imum radicum ejus in terra relinquite: et *sit* in vinculo
ferri et aeris in herba agri, et rore coelorum proluatur, et eum bestiis
agri portio ejus, donec septem tempora transcant super cam.

<span id="x.xvi-p5"></span>**24.** This *is* the interpretation, O king,
and this *is* the decree of the most High, which is come upon my lord
the king:

<span id="x.xvi-p6"></span>**24.** Haec interpretatio, rex, et decretum
excelsi est, quod spectat ad dominum meum regem.

<span id="x.xvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.xvi-p8"></span><span id="x.xvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p9"></span>Daniel follows up what he had begun with
perseverance, shewing judgment to be overhanging the king of Babylon. He
calls him lord, indeed, with cordiality; meanwhile he was the ambassador
of the Supreme King, he did not hesitate to elevate his discourse above
the king’s command — as all the prophets do who rise up against
mountains and hills, as Jeremiah does in <span
id="x.xvi-p9.1"></span>[Jer 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010)<span
id="x.xvi-p9.1"></span>. Thus this sentence is worthy of notice, — “I
have appointed thee over kingdoms and peoples, to pluck them up and to
plant them, to build and to destroy.” God, therefore, wishes to assert
so great a reverence for his Word, because there is nothing in the world
so magnificent or splendid which does not yield to it. Daniel, then, as
far as *concerns* human events and political order, confesses the king
to be his master; but meanwhile he goes on with the embassy entrusted to
him. *The king then,* says he, *saw a watcher descend from heaven,* he
always speaks of an angel  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) We
have stated why Scripture calls angels “*watchers,*” since they are at
hand to perform God’s commands; and we know God executes his decrees by
their agency: I said angels always discharge this duty, and keep watch
over the faithful. But the name “*watcher*” is a general one, and
implies the promptness with which angels are endued, to enable them to
discharge with the utmost celerity whatever God enjoins upon them. *Thou
hast seen, then, one descend from heaven, who said, Cut down the tree,
and scatter it abroad* He repeats what he had said before, namely, the
time of his punishment was defined here, because God would destroy the
king of Babylon and all remembrance of him. An exception is then added,
— Until *seven times pass over* I have said nothing of those times, but
their opinion is probable who take it for an indefinite number, meaning,
until a long time shall pass away. Others think months denoted; others,
years; but I willingly incline to this interpretation, since God wishes
for no short time to punish King Nebuchadnezzar. It may not seem
customary, indeed, but as he wished to put forth an example for all
ages, he desired to prolong his punishment. This, therefore, seems the
meaning of the seven years; for we know the number seven years to
signify a long time in Scripture, since it denotes perfection.

<span id="x.xvii"></span>

<span id="x.xvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.xvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since thou settest
before us our sins, and at the same time announcest thyself as our
judge, that we may not abuse thy forbearance and lay up for ourselves a
treasure of greater wrath through our sloth and torpor. Grant, also,
that we may fear thee reverently, and be anxiously cautious ourselves:
may we be frightened by thy threats, and enticed by thy sweetness, and
be willing and submissive to thee: may we never desire more than to
consecrate ourselves entirely to obey thee, and to glorify thy name
through Jesus Christ our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="x.xviii"></span>

<span id="x.xviii-p1"></span>Lecture Twentieth

<span id="x.xix"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p1"></span><span id="x.xix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025)<span id="x.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p2"></span>**25.** That they shall drive thee from men,
and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field, and they shall
make thee to eat grass as oxen, and they shall wet thee with the dew of
heaven, and seven times shall pass over thee, till thou know that the
most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he
will.

<span id="x.xix-p3"></span>**25.** Et to expellent ab hominibus, et cum
bestiis agrestibus erit habitatio tua: et herba sicut boves to pascent,
et rote coelorum to irrigabunt: et septem tempora transibunt super re,
donec cognoseas, quod dominator *sit* excelsus in regno hominum, et eui
voluerit det illud.

<span id="x.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xix-p5"></span><span id="x.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xix-p6"></span>Daniel proceeds with the explanation of the
king’s dream, to whom the last verse which I explained yesterday
applies. This ought to be expressed, because this message was sorrowful
and bitter for the king. We know how indignantly kings are usually
compelled not only to submit to orders, but even to be cited before
God’s tribunal, where they must be overwhelmed in shame and disgrace.
For we know how prosperity intoxicates the plebeian race. What, then,
can happen to kings except forgetfulness of the condition of our nature
when they attempt to free themselves from all inconvenience and trouble?
For they do not consider themselves subject to the common necessities of
mankind. As, therefore, Nebuchadnezzar could scarcely bear this message,
here the Prophet admonishes him in a few words concerning the cutting
down of the tree as the figure of that ruin which hung over him. He now
follows this up at length, when he says, *They shall cast thee out from
among men, and thy habitation shall be with the beasts of the field.*
When Daniel had previously discoursed upon the Four Monarchies, there is
no doubt about the king’s mind being at first exasperated; but this was
far more severe, and in the king’s opinion far less tolerable, as he is
compared to wild beasts, and cut off from the number of mankind, and
then he was driven into the fields and woods to feed with the wild
beasts. If Daniel had only said the king was to be despoiled of his
royal dignity, he would have been greatly offended by that disgrace, but
when he was subject to such extreme shame, he was, doubtless, inwardly
maddened by it. But God still restrained his fury lest he should desire
to be revenged upon the supposed injury which he suffered. For we shall
afterwards see from the context that he did not grow wise again. Since,
therefore, he always *cherished* the same pride, there is no doubt of
his cruelty, for these two vices were united; but the Lord restrained
his madness, and spared his holy Prophet. Meanwhile, the constancy of
God’s servant is worthy of observation, as he does not obliquely hint at
what should happen to the king, but relates clearly and at length how
base and disgraceful a condition remained for him. *They shall cast thee
out,* says he, *from among men* If he had said, thou shalt be as it were
one of the common herd, and shalt not differ from the very dregs of the
people, this would have been very severe. But when the king is ejected
from the society of mankind, so that not a single corner remains, and he
is not allowed to spend his life among ox-herds and swineherds, every
one may judge for himself how odious this would be; nor does Daniel here
hesitate to pronounce such a judgment.

<span id="x.xix-p7"></span>The following clause has the same or at least
similar weight, — *Thy dwelling,* says he, *shall be with the beasts of
the field, and its herb shall feed thee* The plural number is used
indefinitely in the original; and hence it may be properly translated,
“*Thou* shalt feed on grass; thou shalt be watered by the dew of heaven;
thy dwelling shall be with wild beasts.” I do not wish to philosophize
with subtlety, as some do, who understand angels. I confess this to be
true; but the Prophet simply teaches punishment to be at hand for the
king of Babylon, while he should be reduced to extreme ignominy, and
differ in nothing from the brutes. This liberty, therefore, as I have
said, is worthy of notice, to shew us how God’s servants, who have to
discharge the duty of teaching, cannot faithfully act their part unless
they shut their eyes and despise all worldly grandeur. Hence, by the
example of the king, let us learn our duty, and not be stubborn and
perverse when God threatens us. Although, as we have said,
Nebuchadnezzar did not grow wise, as the context will shew us, yet we
shall see how he bore the terrible judgment denounced against him. If,
therefore, we, who are but as refuse compared to him, cannot bear God’s
threats when they are set before us,-he will be our witness and judge,
who, though possessed of such mighty power, dared nothing against the
Prophet. Now, at the end of the verse, the sentence formerly explained
is repeated, — *Until thou dost acknowledge,* says he, *how great a Lord
there is in the kingdom of men, who delivers it to whomsoever he will.*
This passage teaches us again how difficult it is for us to attribute
supreme power to God. In our language, indeed, we are great heralds of
God’s glory, but still every one restricts his power, either by usurping
something to himself, or by transferring it to some one else. Especially
when God raises us to any degree of dignity, we forget ourselves to be
men, and snatch away God’s honor from him, and desire to substitute
ourselves for him. This disease is cured with difficulty, and the
punishment which God inflicted on the king of Babylon is an example to
us. A slight chastisement would have been sufficient unless this madness
had been deeply seated in his bowels and marrow, since men claim to
themselves the peculiar property of God. Hence they have need of a
violent medicine to learn modesty and humility. In these days, monarchs,
in their titles, always put forward themselves as kings, generals, and
counts, by the grace of God; but how many falsely pretend to apply God’s
name to themselves, for the purpose of securing the supreme power! For
what is the meaning of that title of kings and princes — “by the grace
of God*?*” except to avoid the acknowledgment of a superior. Meanwhile,
they willingly trample upon that God with whose shield they protect
themselves, — so far are they from seriously thinking themselves to
reign by his permission! It is mere pretense, therefore, to boast that
they reign through God’s favor. Since this is so, we may easily judge
how proudly profane kings despise God, even though they make no
fallacious use of his name, as those triflers who openly fawn upon him,
and thus profane the name of his grace! It now follows:

<span id="x.xx"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p1"></span><span id="x.xx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#026)<span id="x.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p2"></span>**26.** And whereas they commanded to leave
the stump of the tree roots; thy kingdom shall be sure unto thee, after
that thou shalt have known that the heavens do rule.

<span id="x.xx-p3"></span>**26.** Et quod dixerunt de relinquenda radice
stirpiuus arboris, regnum tuum tibi stabit, ex quo cognoveris quod
potestas *sit* coelorum.  <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)

<span id="x.xx-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.xx-p6"></span><span id="x.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p7"></span>Here Daniel closes the interpretation of the
dream, and shews how God did not treat King Nebuchadnezzar so severely
by not giving way to *clemency.* He mitigates, indeed, the extreme rigor
of the punishment, to induce Nebuchadnezzar to call upon God and repent,
through indulging the hope of pardon, as a clearer exhortation will
afterwards follow. But Daniel now prepares him for penitence, by swing
*His kingdom should stand* For God might cast him out from intercourse
with mankind, and thus he would always remain among wild beasts. He
might instantly remove him from the world; but this is a mark of his
clemency, since he wished to restore him, not to a merely moderate
station, but to his former dignity, as if it had never been trenched
upon. We see, therefore, how useful the dream was to King
Nebuchadnezzar, so long as he did not despise the Prophet’s holy
admonition, through ingratitude towards God; because Daniel not only
predicted the slaughter which was at hand, but brought at the same time
a message of reconciliation. God, therefore, had instructed the king to
some purpose, unless he had been unteachable and perverse, like the
majority of mankind. Besides, we may gather from this the general
doctrine of our being invited to repentance when God puts an end to his
chastisements; since he sets before us a taste of his clemency to induce
in us the hope of his being entreated, if we only fly to him heartily
and sincerely, We must notice also what Daniel adds in the second part
of the verse, *from which thou mayest know that there is power in
heaven:* for under these words the promise of spiritual grace is
included. Since God will not only punish the king of Babylon, to humble
him, but will work in him and change his mind, as he afterwards
fulfilled, though at a long interval.

<span id="x.xx-p8"></span>*From which thou shalt know, then,* says he,
*that power is in heaven* I have stated the grace of the Spirit to be
here promised, as we know how badly men profit, even if God repeats his
stripes an hundredfold. Such is the hardness and obstinacy of our hearts
— for we rather grow more and more obdurate, while God calls us to
repentance. And, doubtless, Nebuchadnezzar had been like Pharaoh, unless
God had humbled him, not only with outward penalties, but had added also
the inward instinct of his Spirit, to allow himself to be instructed,
and to submit himself to the judgment and power of heaven. Daniel means
this when he says, *Wherefore thou shalt know;* for Nebuchadnezzar would
never have acquired this knowledge of his own accord, unless he had been
touched by the secret movement of the Spirit. He adds, *That there is
power in heaven;* meaning, God governs the world and exercises supreme
power; for he here contrasts heaven with earth, meaning all mankind. For
if kings see all filings tranquil around them, and if no one causes them
terror, they think themselves beyond all chance of danger, as they say;
and through being desirous of certainty in their station, *they* look
round on all sides, but never raise their eyes upwards to heaven, as if
God did not concern himself to behold the kingdoms of the earth, and to
set up whom he would, and to prostrate all the proud. The princes of
this world never consider their power to be from heaven, as if this were
entirely out of God’s hands; but, as I have said, they look right and
left, before and behind. This is the reason why Daniel said, Power is
from heaven. There is a contrast then between God and all mankind, as if
he had said, Thou shalt know God reigns — as we have formerly seen. It
follows:

<span id="x.xxi"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p1"></span><span id="x.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)<span id="x.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p2"></span>**27.** Wherefore, O king, let my counsel be
acceptable unto thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine
iniquities by shewing mercy to the poor; if it may be a lengthening of
thy tranquillity.

<span id="x.xxi-p3"></span>**27.** Propterea, rex, consilium meum
placeat apud to,  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) et peccata tua
 <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) justitia redimas  <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) et iniquitatem tuam in misericordia
erga pauperes: ecce erit prolongstio pact tuae.  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225)

<span id="x.xxi-p8"></span> 

<span id="x.xxi-p9"></span><span id="x.xxi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p10"></span>Since interpreters do not agree about the
sense of these words, and as the doctrine to be derived from them
depends partly upon that, we must remark, in the *first* place, that
<span id="x.xxi-p10.1"></span>מלכי*, meleki,* means “my counsel.” Some
translate it “my king,” and both words are derived from the same, root
<span id="x.xxi-p10.2"></span>מלך, *melek,* signifying “to reign; but it
also signifies counsel”. There is no doubt flint this passage ought to
be explained thus: — *May my counsel therefore please thee, and mayest
thou redeem thy sins.* The word <span id="x.xxi-p10.3"></span>פרוק*,
peruk,* is here translated “*to* redeem;” it often signifies “*to* break
*off,*” or “*separate,*” or “abolish.” In this passage it may
conveniently be translated, “*separate* or break off thy sins” by pity
and humanity; as if he had said, Thus thou shalt make an end of sin, and
enter upon a new course, and thus thy cruelty may be changed into
clemency, and thy tyrannical violence into pity. But this is not of much
consequence. The verb often signifies to free and to preserve; the
context does not admit the sense of preserving, and it would be harsh to
say, Free thy sins by thy righteousness. Hence I readily embrace the
sense of Daniel exhorting the king of Babylon to a change of life, so as
to break off his sins in which he had too long indulged. With respect to
the clause at the end of the verse, *behold there shall be a cure for
thine error,* as I have mentioned, *the* Greeks translate, “if by chance
there should be a cure;” but the other sense seems to suit better; as if
he had said, “this is the proper and genuine medicine,” some translate,
“a promulgation,” since <span id="x.xxi-p10.4"></span>ארך, *arek,*
signifies “to produce;” and at the same time they change the
signification of the other noun, for they say, “there shall be a
prolongation to thy peace or quiet.” That sense would be tolerable, but
the other suits better with the grammatical construction; besides, *the*
more received sense is, *this medicine may be suitable to the error* A
different sense may be elicited without changing the words at all;
*there shall be a medicine for thine errors;* meaning, thou mayest learn
to cure thine errors. For length of indulgence increases the evil, as we
have sufficiently noticed. Hence this last part of the verse may be
taken, and thus Daniel may proceed with his exhortation; as if he had
said, — it is time to cease from thine errors, for hitherto thou hast
deprived thyself of all thy senses by giving unbridled license to thy
lusts. If, therefore, there is any moderation in thine ignorance, thou
mayest open thine eyes and understand at length how to repent.

<span id="x.xxi-p11"></span>I now return to the substance of the
teaching. *May my counsel please thee!* says he. Here Daniel treats the
profane king more indulgently than if he had addressed his own nation;
for he used the prophetic office. But because he knew the king did not
hold the first rudiments of piety, he here undertakes only the office of
a counselor, since he was not an ordinary teacher. As to Nebuchadnezzar
sending for him, this was not a daily thing, nor did he do this, because
he wished to submit to his doctrine. Daniel therefore remembers the kind
of person with whom he was treating, when he tempers his words and says,
*may my counsel be acceptable to thee!* He afterwards explains his
counsel in a few words, — *Break away,* says he, *thy sins* — *or* cast
them away — by *righteousness, and thy iniquities by pity to the poor*
These is no doubt that Daniel wished to exhort the king to repentance;
but he touched on only one kind, which we know was very customary with
the Prophets. For when they recall the people to obedience by
repentance, they do not always explain it fully, nor define it
generally, but touch upon it by a figure of speech, and treat only of
the outward duties of penitence. Daniel now follows this custom. If
inquiry is made concerning the nature of repentance, it is the
conversion of man towards God, from whom he had been alienated. Is this
conversion then only in the hands, and feet, and tongue. Does it not
rather begin in the mind and the heart, and then pass on to outward
works? Hence true penitence has its source in the mind of men, so that
he who wished to be wise must set aside his own prudence, and put away
his foolish confidence in his own reason. Then he must subdue his own
depraved affections and submit them to God, and thus his outward life
will follow the inward spirit. Besides this, works are the only
testimonies to real repentance; for it is a thing too excellent to allow
its root to appear to human observation. By our fruits therefore we must
testify our repentance. But because the duties of the second table, in
some sense, open the mind of man; hence the Prophets in requiring
repentance, only set before us the duties of charity, as Daniel says.
*Redeem,* therefore, *thy sins,* says he, or break away, or east them
away — but how? namely, by righteousness. Without doubt the word
“justice” means here the same as “grace” or “pity.” But those who here
transfer “grace” to “faith,” twist the Prophet’s words too violently;
for we know of nothing more frequent among the Hebrews than to repeat
one and the same thing under two forms of speech. As, therefore, Daniel
here uses sins and iniquities in the same sense, we conclude justice and
pity ought not to be separated, while the second word expresses more
fully the sense of justice. For when men see their life must be changed,
they feign for themselves many acts of obedience which scarcely deserve
the name. They have no regard for what pleases God, nor for what he
commands in his word; but just as they approve of one part or another,
they thrust themselves rashly upon God, as we see in the Papacy. For
what is a holy and religious life with them? To run about here and
there; to undertake pilgrimages imposed by vows; to set up a statue; to
found masses, as they call it; to fast on certain days; and to lay
stress on trifles about which God has never said a single word. As,
therefore, men err so grossly in the knowledge of true righteousness,
the Prophet here adds the word “pity” by way of explanation; as if he
had said, Do not think to appease God by outward pomps, which delight
mankind because they are carnal and devoted to earthly things, and
fashion for them. selves a depraved idea of God according to their own
imagination; let not then this vanity deceive you; but learn how true
justice consists in pity towards the poor. In this second clause, then,
only a part of the idea is expressed, since true just. ice is not
restricted simply to the meaning of the word, but embraces all the
duties of charity. Hence we ought to deal faithfully with mankind, and
not to deceive either rich or poor, nor to oppress any one, but to
render every one his own. But this manner of speaking ought to be
familiar to us, if we are but moderately versed in the prophetic
writings.

<span id="x.xxi-p12"></span>The meaning of the phrase is this: — Daniel
wished to shew the king of Babylon the duty of living justly, and
cultivating faith and integrity before men, without forgetting the
former table of the law. For the worship of God is more precious than
all the righteousness which men cultivate among themselves. But true
justice is known by its outward proofs, as I have said. But he treats
here the second table rather than the first: for, while hypocrites
pretend to worship God by many ceremonies, they allow themselves to
commit all kinds of cruelty, rapine, and fraud, without obeying any law
of correct living with their neighbors. Because hypocrites cover their
malice by this frivolous pretense, God sets before them a true test to
recall them to the duties of charity. This, then, is the meaning of the
verse from which we have elicited a double sense. If we retain the
future time, *behold, there shall be a medicine!* it will be a
confirmation of the former doctrine; as if he had said, We must not
travel the long and oblique circuits — there is this single remedy: or,
if we are better pleased with the word of exhortation, the context will
be suitable; may there be a medicine for thine errors! Mayest thou not
indulge thyself hereafter as thou hast hitherto done, but thou must open
thine eyes and perceive how miserably and wickedly thou hast lived, and
so desire to heal thine errors. As the Papists have abused this passage,
to shew God to be appeased by satisfactions, it is too frivolous and
ridiculous to refute their doctrine; for when they speak of
satisfactions, they mean works of supererogation. If any one could
fulfill God’s law completely, yet he could not satisfy for his sins. The
Papists are compelled to confess this; what then remains? — The offering
to God more than he demands, which they call works not required! *But*
Daniel does not here exact of King Nebuchadnezzar any work of
supererogation; he exacts justice, and afterwards shews how a man’s life
cannot be justly spent unless humanity prevails and flourishes among
men, and especially when we are merciful to the poor. Truly there is no
supererogation here! To what end then serves the law? Surely this has no
reference to satisfactions, according to the ridiculous and. foolish
notions of the Papists! But if we grant them this point, still it does
not follow that their sins are redeemed before God, as if works
compensated either their fault or penalty, as they assert; for they
confess their fault not to be redeemed by satisfactions — this is one
point gained — and then as to the penalty, they say it is redeemed; but
we must see whether this agrees with the Prophet’s intention.

<span id="x.xxi-p13"></span>I will not contend about a word; I will
allow it to mean “to redeem” — Thou mayest redeem thy sins; but we must
ascertain, whether this redemption is in the judgment of God or of man?
Clearly enough, Daniel here regards the conduct of Nebuchadnezzar as
unjust and inhuman, in harassing his subjects, and in proudly despising
the poor and miserable. Since, therefore, he had so given himself up to
all iniquity, Daniel shews the remedy; and if this remedy is treated as
a redemption or liberation, there is nothing absurd in saying, we redeem
our sins before men while we satisfy them. I redeem my sins before my
neighbor, if after I have injured him, I desire to become reconciled to
him, I acknowledge my sins and seek for pardon. If, therefore, I have
injured his fortunes, I restore what I have unjustly taken, and thus
redeem my transgression. But this does assist us in expiating sin before
God, as if the beneficence which I put in practice was any kind of
expiation. We see, therefore, the Papists to be foolish and silly when
they wrest the Prophet’s words to themselves. We may now inquire in the
last place, to what purpose Daniel exhorted King Nebuchadnezzar to break
away from or redeem his sins? Now this was either a matter of no
consequence — which would be absurd — or it was a heavenly decree, as
the king’s dream was a promulgation of the *edict,* as we have formerly
seen. But this was determined before God, and could not be changed in
any way; it was therefore superfluous to wish to redeem sins. If we
follow a different explanation, no difficulty will remain; but even if
we allow the Prophet to be here discoursing of the redemption of sins,
yet the exhortation is not without its use.

<span id="x.xxi-p14"></span>In whatever way Nebuchadnezzar ought to
prepare to bear God’s chastisement, yet this would prove most useful to
him, to acknowledge God to be merciful. And yet the time might be
contracted, during which his obstinate wickedness should extend; not as
if God changed his decree, but because he always warns by threatening,
for the purpose of treating men more kindly, and tempering vigor with
his wrath, as is evident from many other examples. This would not have
been without its use to a teachable disposition, nor yet without fruit,
when Daniel exhorted King Nebuchadnezzar to redeem his sins, because he
might obtain some pardon, even if he had paid the penalty, since not
even a single day had been allowed out of the seven years. Yet this was
a great progress, if the king had at last humbled himself before God, so
as to be in a fit state for receiving the pardon which had been
promised. For as a certain time had been fixed beforehand, or at least
shewn by the Prophet, hence it would have profited the king, if through
wishing to appease his judge he had prepared his mind for obtaining
pardon. This doctrine was therefore in every way useful, because the
same reason avails with us. We ought always to be prepared to suffer
God’s chastisements; yet it is no slight or common alleviation of our
sufferings, when we so submit ourselves to God, as to be persuaded of
his desire to be propitious to us, when he sees us dissatisfied with
ourselves, and heartily detesting our transgressions.

<span id="x.xxii"></span>

<span id="x.xxii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.xxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that we may learn to
bear patiently all adverse misfortunes, and know that thou exercisest
towards us the duties of a judge, as often as we are afflicted in this
world. Thus may we prevent thy wrath, and so condemn ourselves with true
humility, that trusting in thy pity we may always flee to thee, relying
upon the mediation of thy only-begotten Son, which thou hast provided
for us. Grant, also, that we may beg pardon of thee, and resolve upon a
true repentance, not with vain and useless fictions, but by true and
serious proofs, cultivating true charity and faith among ourselves, and
testifying in this way our fear of thy name, that thou mayest be truly
glorified in us by the same our Lord. — Amen.

<span id="x.xxiii"></span>

<span id="x.xxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-first.

<span id="x.xxiv"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="x.xxiv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028)<span id="x.xxiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p2"></span>**28.** All this came upon the king
Nebuchadnezzar.

<span id="x.xxiv-p3"></span>**28.** Hoc totum impletum fuit, *vel,
incidit,* super Nebuchadnezer regem

<span id="x.xxiv-p4"></span>**29.** At the end of twelve months he
walked in the palace of the kingdom of Babylon.

<span id="x.xxiv-p5"></span>**29.** In fine mensiron duodeeim,  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) in palatio regni, quod est in
Babylone, deambulabat.

<span id="x.xxiv-p7"></span>**30.** The king spake, and said, Is not
this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the kingdom by
the might of my power, and for the honour of my majesty?

<span id="x.xxiv-p8"></span>**30.** Loquutus est rex et dixit, An non
haec est Babylon magna, quam ego aedificavi in domum regni,  <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) in robore fortitudinis meae, et in
pretium, *vel, excellentiam,* decoris mei?

<span id="x.xxiv-p10"></span>**31.** While the word *was* in the king’s
mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, *saying, O* king Nebuchadnezzar,
to thee it is spoken; The kingdom is departed from thee:

<span id="x.xxiv-p11"></span>**31.** Adhuc sermo *erat* in ore regis,
 <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) vox e coelis cecidit, Tibi
dicunt, rex Nebuchadnezer, regnum *tuum* migravit, *vel, discessit,* abs
to.

<span id="x.xxiv-p13"></span>**32.** And they shall drive thee from men,
and thy dwelling *shall be* with the beasts of the field: they shall
make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee,
until thou know that the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and
giveth it to whomsoever he will.

<span id="x.xxiv-p14"></span>**32.** Et ex hominibus to ejicient, et cum
bestia agri habitatio tua: herbam sicuti bores gustare to facient:
 <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) aet septem tempora transibunt
super to, donec cognoscas quod dominator *sit* excelsus in regno
hominum, et cui voluerit det illud.

<span id="x.xxiv-p16"></span> 

<span id="x.xxiv-p17"></span><span id="x.xxiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p18"></span>After Nebuchadnezzar has related Daniel to
be a herald of God’s approaching judgment, he now shews how God executed
the judgment which the Prophet had announced. But he speaks in the third
person, according to what we know to be a common practice with both the
Hebrews and Chaldees. Thus Daniel does not relate the exact words of the
king, but only their substance. Hence he first introduces the king as
the speaker, and then he speaks himself in his own person. There is no
reason why this variety should occasion us any trouble, since it does
not obscure the sense. In the first, verse, Nebuchadnezzar shews the
dream which Daniel had explained not to have been in vain. Thus the
miracle shews itself to be from heaven, by its effects; because dreams
vanish away, as we know well enough. But since God fulfilled, at his own
time, what he had shewn to the king of Babylon by his dream, it is clear
there was nothing alarming in the dream, but a sure revelation of the
future punishment which fell upon the king. Its moderation is also
expressed. Daniel says, when a year had passed away, and the king was
walking in his own palace, and boasting in his greatness, at that moment
a voice came down from heaven, and repeated what he had already heard in
the dream. He afterwards relates how he had been expelled from human
society, and dwelt for a long time among the brutes, so as to differ
from them in nothing. As to the use of words, since <span
id="x.xxiv-p18.1"></span>מהלך, *mehelek,* occurs here, some think that
he walked upon the roof of his palace, *whence* he could behold all
parts of the city. The inhabitants of the east are well known to use the
roofs of their houses in this way; but I do not interpret the phrase
with such subtlety, since the Prophet seems to wish nothing else than to
shew how the king enjoyed his own ease, luxury, and magnificence. There
is nothing obscure in the rest of the language.

<span id="x.xxiv-p19"></span><span id="x.xxiv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p20"></span>I now approach the matter before us. Some
think Nebuchadnezzar to have been touched with *penitence* when
instructed by God’s anger, and thus the time of his punishment was put
off. This does not seem to me probable, and I rather incline to a
different opinion, as God withdrew his hand till the end of the year,
and thus the king’s pride was the less excusable. The Prophet’s voice
ought to have frightened him, just as if God had thundered and lightened
from heaven. He now appears to have been always like himself. I indeed
do not deny that he might be frightened by the first message, but I
leave it doubtful. *Whichever* way it is, I do not think God spared him
for a time, because he gave some signs of repentance. I confess he
sometimes indulges the reprobate, if he sees them humbled. An example of
this, sufficiently remarkable, is displayed in King Ahab. (<span
id="x.xxiv-p20.1"></span>[1Ki
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)<span id="x.xxiv-p20.1"></span>.)
He did not cordially repent, but God wished to shew how much he was
pleased with his penitence, by pardoning a king impious and obstinate in
his wickedness. The same might be said of Nebuchadnezzar, if Scripture
had said so; but as far as we can gather from these words of the
Prophet, Nebuchadnezzar became prouder and prouder, until his sloth
arrived at its height. The king continued to grow proud after God had
threatened him so, and this was quite intolerable. Hence his remarkable
stupidity, since he would have been equally careless had he lived an
hundred years after he heard that threat! Finally, I think although
Nebuchadnezzar perceived some dreadful and horrible punishment to be at
hand, yet, while frightened for the time, he did not lay aside his pride
and haughtiness of mind. Meanwhile, he might think this prediction to be
in vain; and what he had heard probably escaped from his mind for a long
time, because he thought he had escaped; just as the impious usually
abuse God’s forbearance, and thus heap up for themselves a treasure of
severer vengeance, as Paul says. (<span id="x.xxiv-p20.2"></span>[Ro
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005)<span id="x.xxiv-p20.2"></span>.)
Hence he derided this prophecy, and hardened himself more and more.
Whatever sense we attach to it, nothing else eau be collected from the
Prophet’s context, than the neglect of the Prophet’s warning, and the
oracle rendered nugatory by which Nebuchadnezzar had been called to
repentance. If he had possessed the smallest particle of soundness of
mind, he ought to flee to the pity of God, and to consider the ways in
which he had provoked his anger, and also to devote himself entirely to
the duties of charity. As he had exercised a severe tyranny towards all
men, so he ought to study *benevolence;* yet when the Prophet exhorted
him, he did not act thus, but uttered vain boastings, which shew his
mind to have been swollen with pride and contempt for God. As to the
space of time here denoted, it shews how God suspended his judgments, if
perchance those who are utterly deplorable should be reclaimed; but the
reprobate abuse God’s humanity and indulgence, as they make this an
occasion of hardening their minds, while they suppose God to cease from
his office of judge, through his putting it off for a time. *At the
end,* then, *of twelve months, the king was walking in his palace; he
spoke, and said* This doubling of the phrase shews us how the king
uttered the *feelings* of *premeditated* pride. The Prophet might have
said more simply, The king says, — but he says, *he spoke, and said. I*
know how customary it is with both the Hebrews and Chaldees to unite
these words together; but I think the repetition emphatic in this place,
since the king then uttered what he had long ago conceived and concealed
in his mind; *Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for a royal
palace, and that too in the mightiness of my valor; as I have built it
in the splendor of my excellency?* In these words we do not see any open
blasphemy which could be very offensive to God, but we must consider the
king by this language to claim to himself supreme power, as if he were
God! We may gather this from the verse, “Is not this great Babylon? says
he. He boasts in the magnitude of his city, as if he wished to raise it
giant-like to heaven; *which I,* says he — using the pronoun with great
*emphasis* — *which I have built, and that too in the greatness of my
valor* We see that by claiming all things as his own, he robs God of all
honor.

<span id="x.xxiv-p21"></span>Before I proceed further, we must see why
he asserts Babylon to have been founded by himself. All historians agree
in the account of the city being built by Semiramis. A long time after
this event, Nebuchadnezzar proclaims his own praises in building the
city. The solution is easy enough. We know how earthly kings desire, by
all means in their power, to bury the glory of others, with the view of
exalting themselves and acquiring a perpetual reputation. Especially
when they change anything in their edifices, whether palaces or cities,
they wish to seem the first founders, and so to extinguish the memory of
those by whom the foundations were really laid. We must believe, then,
Babylon to have been adorned by King Nebuchadnezzar, and so he transfers
to himself the entire glory, while the greater part ought to be
attributed to Semiramis or Ninus. Hence this is the way in which tyrants
speak, as all usurpers and tyrants do, when they draw towards themselves
the praises which belong to others. I, therefore, says he, *have built
it, by the strength of my hand* Now it is easy to see what had
displeased God in this boasting of the king of Babylon, namely, his
sacrilegious audacity in asserting the city to have been built by his
own mightiness. But God shews this praise to be peculiar to himself and
deservedly due to him. Unless God builds the city, the watchman watches
but in vain. (<span id="x.xxiv-p21.1"></span>[Ps
127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001)<span id="x.xxiv-p21.1"></span>.)
Although men labor earnestly in founding cities, yet they never profit
unless God himself preside over the work. As Nebuchadnezzar here extols
himself and opposes the strength of his fortitude to God and his grace,
this boasting was by no means to be endured. Hence it happened that God
was so very angry with him. And thus we perceive how this example proves
to us what Scripture always inculcates, — God’s resistance of the proud,
his humbling their superciliousness, and his detestation of their
arrogance. (<span id="x.xxiv-p21.2"></span>[Ps
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#027)<span id="x.xxiv-p21.2"></span>.)
Thus God everywhere announces himself as the enemy of the proud, and he
confirms it by the present example, as if he set before us in a mirror
the reflection of his own judgment. (<span id="x.xxiv-p21.3"></span>[Jas
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span id="x.xxiv-p21.3"></span>;
<span id="x.xxiv-p21.4"></span>[1Pe
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="x.xxiv-p21.4"></span>.)
This is one point. The reason also must be noticed why God declares war
on all the proud, *because* we cannot set ourselves up even a little,
without declaring war on God; for power and energy spring from him. Our
life is in his hands; we are nothing and can do nothing except through
him. Whatever, then, any one assumes to himself he detracts from God. No
wonder then if God testifies his dislike of the haughty superciliousness
of men, since they purposely weary him when they usurp anything as their
own. Cities, indeed, are truly built by the industry of men, and kings
are worthy of praise who either build cities or adorn them, so long as
*they* allow God’s praise to be inviolate. But when men exalt themselves
and wish to render their own fortitude conspicuous, they bury as far as
they can the blessing of God. Hence it is necessary for their impious
rashness to be judged by God, as we have already said. The king also
confesses his vanity when he says, *I have built it for a royal palace,
and for the excellency of my splendor.* By these words he does not
dissemble how completely he looked at his own glory in all those
buildings by which he hoped to hand down his name to posterity. Hence,
on the whole, he wishes to be celebrated in the world, both during his
life and after his death, so that God may be nothing in comparison with
himself, as I have already shewn how all the proud strive to substitute
themselves in the place of God.

<span id="x.xxiv-p22"></span><span id="x.xxiv-p22.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p23"></span>It now *follows,* — *While the speech was
in the mouth of the king, a voice descended from heaven* — *They say
unto thee, O King Nebuchadnezzar, thy kingdom has departed from thee!*
God does not now admonish the king of Babylon by either the mouth of a
Prophet or a dream by night; but he sends forth his own voice from
heaven; and as if he had not tamed down the pride by which the king was
puffed up, a voice is now heard from heaven which inspires greater
terror than either the Prophet’s *oracle* or interpretation. Thus God is
in the habit of dealing with the hardened and impenitent, since he
causes his own prophets to denounce the penalty which hangs over them.
Besides, when he sees them untouched or unaffected, he doubles the
terror, until the final execution follows, as in. the case of this
tyrant. *The word was in the king’s mouth when, the voice was heard.* We
see how God restrains in a moment the madness of those who raise
themselves *extravagantly.* But it is not surprising that the voice was
so suddenly heard, because time for repentance was allowed to King
Nebuchadnezzar. In the form of speech, *they say to thee,* it is not
necessary to inquire anxiously to whom these words apply. Some restrict
them to angels; but I do not agree to this; it seems rather to be used
in the customary *way, they say* — *meaning* “it is said,” as if
sanctioned by common consent. Hence *they say to thee, O King
Nebuchadnezzar;* God does not simply call him by his name, but uses the
word king — not for the sake of honor, but of ridicule, and to strike
away from the king all the allurements by which he deceived himself.
Thou indeed art intoxicated by thy present splendor, for while all adore
thee, thou art forgetful of thy frailty; but this royal majesty and
power will not hinder God from laying thee prostrate; for since thou:
wilt not humble thyself, thy kingdom shall be taken from thee! This
indeed appeared incredible, since Nebuchadnezzar had the tranquil
possession of the kingdom in his hand; no one dared to shew himself his
enemy; he had subdued all his neighbors; his monarchy was terrible to
all nations; hence God pronounces, *The kingdom has gassed away from
thee!* And this shews the certainty of the oracle; and thus
Nebuchadnezzar may know the time to be fulfilled, and the punishment to
be no longer delayed, because he had trifled with God’s indulgence.

<span id="x.xxiv-p24"></span><span id="x.xxiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p25"></span>It follows, — *They shall expel thee from
among men, and thy habitation shall be with the beasts of the field* —
*or* of the *country,* — *they shall make thee eat grass like oxen!*
Some think Nebuchadnezzar to have been changed into a beast; but this is
too harsh and absurd. We need not fancy any change of nature; but he was
cut off from all intercourse with men, and with the exception of a human
form, he did not differ from the brutes, — nay, such was his deformity
in his exile that, as we shall afterwards see, he became a horrid
spectacle; — all the hairs of his body stood up and grew like eagles’
feathers; his claws were like those of birds. In these points he was
like the beasts, in others like the rest of mankind. It is uncertain
whether God struck this king with madness, causing him to escape and he
hid for a length of time, or whether he was cast forth by a tumult and
conspiracy of nobles, or even the consent of the whole people. All this
is doubtful, since the history of those times is unknown to us. Whether,
then, Nebuchadnezzar was snatched away by madness, and while he
continued a maniac was separated from the society of men, or was cast
forth as many tyrants have been, his dwelling with beasts for a time,
becomes a memorable example to us. He was probably rendered stupid, by
God’s leaving him a human form while be deprived him of reason, as the
context will make evident to us. *They shall cast thee out from human
society; thy dwelling shall be with wild beasts; they shall make thee
eat grass like an ox!* that is, when deprived of all delight, nay, of
the commonest and plainest food, thou wilt find no other sustenance than
that of oxen. Thou shalt eat the grass like an animal, *and seven times
shall pass over thee.* Of the “seven times” we have spoken before. Some
restrict this to days, but this is contrary not only to every reason,
but to every pretext. Nor do I explain it of months; the space of time
would have been much too short. Hence the opinion of those who extend it
to seven years is more probable. If Nebuchadnezzar had been cast out by
a tumult, he would not have been so quickly recalled: then, since God
wished to make an example of him for all generations, I suppose him to
have been driven out from common society for a length of time. For if
the penalty had been for seven months only, we see how coolly God’s
judgments would be received in the world. Hence, with the view of
engraving this penalty more deeply in the hearts of all, he wished to
protract it longer — I will not say to seven years, since I have
previously expounded the certain number as put for an uncertain one,
implying a long space of time.

<span id="x.xxiv-p26"></span>*Seven years,* then, *shall pass away,*
says he, *until thou shalt know that there is a lofty ruler in the
kingdoms of men.* This is the end of the punishment, as we have
previously said, for I need not repeat my former remarks. But we must
remember this — God mitigates the bitterness of the penalty by making it
temporary. Then he proposed this end to induce Nebuchadnezzar to repent,
as he required many blows for this purpose, according to the old proverb
about the fool who can never be recalled to a sound mind without
suffering calamity. Thus King Nebuchadnezzar ought to be beaten with
stripes, to render him submissive to God, as he never profited by any
holy admonition or any heavenly oracle. God does not treat; all in this
way. Hence we have here a special example of his clemency, which
provides for the punishment inflicted on King Nebuchadnezzar, being both
useful and profitable. For the reprobate are more and more hardened
against God, and are ever stirred up and excited to madness. It was an
act, then, of special grace, when Nebuchadnezzar was chastised for the
time by the hand of God, to cause his repentance and his owning God’s
entire sway over the whole world.

<span id="x.xxiv-p27"></span>He says, *that God may be Lord in the
kingdom of men;* because nothing is more difficult than to persuade
tyrants to submit to the power of God. On the one side they confess
themselves to reign by his grace; but at the same time, they suppose
their own sway to be obtained by either valor or good fortune, and to be
retained by their own guards, counsels, and wealth. Hence, as far as
they can, they shut God out from the government of the world, while they
are puffed up with a false conceit of themselves, as if all things were
maintained in their present state by their valor or advice. This, then,
was an ordinary effect when Nebuchadnezzar began to feel *God to be the
ruler in the kingdom of men,* since kings wish to place him somewhere
between themselves and the multitude. They confess the people to be
subject to God’s power, but think themselves exempt from the common
order of events, and in possession of a privilege in favor of their
lusts, relieving them from the hand and empire of God. Hence, as I have
said, it was no common thing for Nebuchadnezzar to acknowledge *God to
reign in the earth;* for tyrants usually enclose God in heaven, and
think him content with his own happiness, and careless about mingling in
the concerns of men. Hence *thou mayest know him to be the ruler.* He
afterwards adds the kind of dominion, *because God raises up whomsoever
he pleases, and casts down others:* God is not only supreme in the sense
of sustaining’ all things by his universal providence, but because no
one without his will obtains empire at all. He binds some with a belt,
and looseth the bonds of others, as it is said in the book of Job.
(<span id="x.xxiv-p27.1"></span>[Job
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#018)<span id="x.xxiv-p27.1"></span>.)
We ought not, therefore, to imagine God’s power to be at rest, but we
should join it with present action, as the phrase is. Whether tyrants
obtain power, or sovereigns are pious and just, all are governed by
God’s secret counsel, since otherwise there could be no king of the
world. It follows:

<span id="x.xxv"></span>

<span id="x.xxv-p1"></span><span id="x.xxv-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033)<span id="x.xxv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxv-p2"></span>**33.** The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar: and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as
oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were
grown like eagles’ *feathers,* and his nails like birds’ *claws.*

<span id="x.xxv-p3"></span>**33.** In ilia hora sermo completus fuit
super Nebuchadnezer, et ab hominibus ejectus est, et herbam tanquam
boves comedit, et rore coelorum corpus ejus irrigatum fuit, donec
pilus.ejus quasi a.quilae crevit, et ungues ejus quasi avium.

<span id="x.xxv-p4"></span> 

<span id="x.xxv-p5"></span><span id="x.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxv-p6"></span>The Prophet concludes what he had said: As
soon as the voice had come down from heaven, Nebuchadnezzar was cast out
from mankind! Some occasion of expelling him might have preceded this;
but since the divination is uncertain, I had rather leave undetermined
what the Holy Spirit has not revealed. I only wished to touch upon this
point shortly, when he boasted in the foundation of Babylon by the
fortitude of his own energy; since his own nobles must have become
disgusted when they saw him carried away with such great pride; or he
might have spoken in this way when he thought snares were prepared for
him, or when he felt some crowds moved against him. Whatever be the
meaning, God sent forth his voice, and the same moment he expelled King
Nebuchadnezzar from the company of mankind. Hence, *in the same hour,*
says he, *the speech was fulfilled* If a long period had interposed, it
might have been ascribed to either fortune or other inferior means, as a
reason; but when such is the connection between the language and its
effect, the judgment is too clear to be obscured by the malignity of
mankind, tie says, therefore, *He was cast forth and fed with herbs,*
differing in nothing from oxen: *his body was soaked in, rain,* since he
lay out in the open air. We are ourselves often subject to the drenching
shower, and in the fields are sure to meet with it, and travelers often
reach their inn wet through. But the Prophet speaks of the continuance
of God’s judgment, since he had no roof to shelter him, and always lay
out in the fields. Hence he says, *he was moistened by the dew of heaven
until,* says he, *his nails became claws, and his hair like the wings of
eagles* This passage confirms what has been said concerning the
explanation of the seven times as a long period, for his hair could not
have grown so in seven months, nor could such great; deformity arise.
Hence this change, thus described by the Prophet, sufficiently shews
King Nebuchadnezzar to have suffered his punishment for a length of
time, for he could not be so quickly humbled, because pride is not
easily tamed in a man of moderate station, how much less then in so
great a monarch! It afterwards follows:

<span id="x.xxvi"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p1"></span><span id="x.xxvi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#034)<span id="x.xxvi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p2"></span>**34.** And at the end of the days I
Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto heaven, and mine understanding
returned unto me, and I blessed the most High, and I praised and
honoured him that liveth for ever, whose dominion *is* an everlasting
dominion, and his kingdom *is* from generation to generation:

<span id="x.xxvi-p3"></span>**34.** Eta fine dierum,  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) ego Nebuchadnezer oculos meos in
coelum extuli, et intellectus meus ad me rediit, et excelsum benedixi,
et viventem in secula laudavi et glorificavi, quia potestas eius
potestas seculi,  <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) et regnum ejus
eum aetate et tetate.  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)

<span id="x.xxvi-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.xxvi-p8"></span><span id="x.xxvi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p9"></span>The Prophet again introduces King
Nebuchadnezzar as the speaker. He says, then, *After that time had
elapsed, he raised his eyes to heaven* Without doubt, he means those
seven years. As to his then beginning to raise his eyes to heaven, this
shews how long it takes to cure pride, the disease under which he
labored. For when any vital part of the body is corrupt and decaying,
its cure is difficult and tedious; so also when pride exists in men’s
hearts, and gains an entrance within the marrow, and infects the inmost
soul, it is not easily plucked out; and this is worthy of notice. Then
we are taught how God by his word so operated upon King Nebuchadnezzar,
as not immediately and openly to withdraw the effect of his grace.
Nebuchadnezzar profited by being’ treated disgracefully during those
seven years or times, and by being driven from the society of mankind;
but he could not perceive this at once till God opened his eyes. So,
therefore, God often chastises us, and invites us by degrees, and
prepares us for repentance, but his grace is not immediately
acknowledged. But lest I should be too prolix, I will leave the rest
till to-morrow.

<span id="x.xxvii"></span>

<span id="x.xxvii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.xxvii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, (since we are nothing
in ourselves, and yet we cease not to please ourselves, and so are
blinded by our vain confidence, and then we vainly boast in our virtues,
which are worthless,) that we may learn to put off these perverse
affections. May we so submit to thee as to depend upon thy mere favor:
may we know ourselves, to stand and be sustained by thy strength alone:
may we learn so to glorify thy name that we may not only obey thy word
with true and pure humility, but also earnestly implore thy assistance,
and distrusting ourselves, may rely upon thy favor as our only support,
until at length thou gather-est us into thy heavenly kingdom, where we
may enjoy that blessed eternity which has been obtained for us by thine
only-begotten Son — Amen.

<span id="x.xxviii"></span>

<span id="x.xxviii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Second.

<span id="x.xxviii-p2"></span>I SHALL now continue the comments which
were interrupted yesterday. From Nebuchadnezzar saying, *he raised his
eyes to heaven, and his intellect returned to him, we* understand him to
have been for the time deprived of his mind. He is much astonished, in
my opinion, by feeling his own evils, but meanwhile he bites the bit and
is like a madman. Some think him to have been a complete maniac; I do
not contend about this; it is enough for me to know he was deprived of
his senses and was altogether like the brutes. But it is probable there
was no intelligence remaining, to cause him to feel torture at his
slaughter. Meanwhile, he did not raise his eyes to heaven until God drew
him to himself. God’s chastisements do not profit us unless they work
inwardly by his Spirit, as we said yesterday. The phrase only means, he
began to think God to be a just judge. For while at the time he felt the
sting of his own disgrace, yet as it is said elsewhere, he did not
regard the hand of the striker. (<span id="x.xxviii-p2.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)<span id="x.xxviii-p2.1"></span>.)
He began, therefore, to acknowledge God to be the avenger of pride,
after the aforesaid time had elapsed. For those who east their eyes down
to the earth raise their eyes to heaven. As Nebuchadnezzar ought to
awake from his stupor and rise up towards God, of whom he had been
formerly forgetful, so he ought to prostrate himself to the earth, as he
had already received the reward of his haughtiness. He had dared to
raise his head above the lot of man, when he assumed to himself what was
peculiar to God. He does not raise his eyes to heaven by any vain
confidence, as he had formerly been intoxicated by the splendor of his
monarchy; but he looked up to God, while mentally east down and
prostrate.

<span id="x.xxviii-p3"></span>He afterwards adds, *and I blessed him on
high, and praised and glorified him living for ever* This change shews
the punishment to have been chiefly and purposely inflicted on King
Nebuchadnezzar, since he spoiled God of his just honor. He here
describes the fruit of his repentance. If this feeling flowed from
repentance, and Nebuchadnezzar really blessed God, it follows that he
was formerly sacrilegious, as he had deprived God of lawful honor and
wished to raise himself into his place, as we have already said. Hence,
also, we must learn what the true praise of God really is; namely, when
reduced to nothing, we acknowledge and determine all firings to be
according to his will; for, as we shall afterwards see, he is the
Governor of heaven and earth, and we should esteem his will as the
source of law and reason, and the final appeal of justice. Per we may
sometimes celebrate the praises of God with ostentation, but it will
then be mere pretense; for no one can sincerely and heartily praise him,
without ascribing to him all the properties which we shall afterwards
see. First of all, Nebuchadnezzar says, *Because his power is eternal,
and his kingdom from age to age.* In the first place, he here confesses
God to be an eternal king; which is a great step. For human frailty is
opposed to this perpetuity; because the greatest monarchs, who excel in
power, have nothing firm; they are not only subject to chance and
change, as profane men express it — or rather depend upon the will of
God — but they utterly fade away through their vanity. We see the whole
world fluctuating like the waves of the sea. If there be any
tranquillity, in one direction or another, yet every moment something
new and sudden may happen, quite unexpectedly. As a tempest arises
directly in a calm and serene sky, so also we see it occur in human
affairs. Since it is so, no condition upon earth is firm, and monarchs
especially disturb themselves by their own turbulent agitation’s. This
is, therefore, the perpetuity which is here predicted by King
Nebuchadnezzar; because God as an absolute sovereign rules his own
empire for himself, and is thus beyond all danger of change. This is the
first point. It now follows:

<span id="x.xxix"></span>

<span id="x.xxix-p1"></span><span id="x.xxix-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#035)<span id="x.xxix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxix-p2"></span>**35.** And all the inhabitants of the earth
*are* reputed as nothing: and he doeth according to his will in the army
of heaven, and *among* the inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay
his hand, or say unto him, What doest thou?

<span id="x.xxix-p3"></span>**35.** Et omnes habitatores terrae quasi
nihil reputantur, et secundum voluntatem suam facit in exercitu
coelorum, et in habitatoribus terrae; et non est qui prohibeat manure
ejus,  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233) et dicat ei, Quid
fecisti?  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234)

<span id="x.xxix-p6"></span> 

<span id="x.xxix-p7"></span><span id="x.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxix-p8"></span>Now the opposite clause is added to complete
the contrast, because though it follows that nothing is firm or solid in
mankind, yet this principle flourishes, namely, God is eternal; yet few
reason thus, because in words all allow God to be firm and everlasting,
yet they do not descend into themselves and seriously weigh their own
frailty. Thus, being unmindful of their own lot, they rage against God
himself. The explanation then which *occurs* here is required; for after
Nebuchadnezzar praises God, because his power is eternal, he adds by way
of contrast, *all the dwellers on the earth are considered as nothing.*
Some take <span id="x.xxix-p8.1"></span>כלה, *keleh,* for a single word,
meaning “anything *complete,*” for <span id="x.xxix-p8.2"></span>כלה*,
keleh,* is to “finish,” or “complete;” it also signifies to “consume”
sometimes, whence they think the noun to be derived, because men are
limited within their own standard, but God is immense. This is harsh;
the more received opinion is, that <span id="x.xxix-p8.3"></span>ה,
*he,* is put for <span id="x.xxix-p8.4"></span>א, *a*, here; and thus
Nebuchadnezzar says, men are esteemed as of no value before God.
Already, then, we see how suitably these two clauses agree together; for
God is an eternal king, and men are as nothing in comparison with him.
For if anything is attributed to men as springing from themselves, it so
far detracts from the supreme power and empire of God. It follows, then,
that God does not; entirely receive his rights, until all mortals are
*reduced* to nothing. For although men make themselves of very great
importance, yet *Nebuchadnezzar* here pronounces himself by the Spirit’s
instinct, to be of no value before God; for otherwise they would not
attempt to raise themselves, unless they were utterly blind in the midst
of their darkness. But when they are dragged into the light they feel
their own nothingness and utter vanity. For whatever we are, this
depends on God’s grace, which sustains us every moment, and supplies us
with new vigor. Hence it is our duty to depend upon God only; *because*
as soon as he withdraws his hand and the virtue of his Spirit, we vanish
away. In God we are anything he pleases, in ourselves we are nothing.

<span id="x.xxix-p9"></span>It now follows: *God does according to his
pleasure in the army of the heavens, and among the dwellers upon earth*
This may seem absurd, since God is said to act according to his will, as
if’ there were no moderation, or equity, or rule of justice, with him.
But we must bear in mind, what we read elsewhere concerning men being
ruled by laws, since their will is perverse, and they are borne along in
any direction by their unruly lust; but God is a law to himself, because
his will is the most perfect justice. As often, then, as Scripture sets
before us the power of God, and commands us to be content with it, it
does not attribute a tyrannical empire to God, according to the
calumnies of the impious. But because we do not cease to cavil against
God, and oppose our reason to his secret counsels, and thus strive with
him, as if he did not act justly and fairly when he does anything which
we disapprove; hence God pronounces all things to be done according to
his own will, so that the Holy Spirit may restrain this audacity. We
should remember then, when mention is made of God, how impossible it is
for anything either perverse or unjust to belong’ to him; his will
cannot be turned aside by any affection, for it is the perfection of
justice. Since this is so, we should remember how extremely unbridled
and perverse our rashness is, while we dare object to anything which God
does; whence the necessity of this teaching which puts the bridle of
modesty upon us is proved, since God does all things according to his
will, as it is said in <span id="x.xxix-p9.1"></span>[Ps
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003)<span id="x.xxix-p9.1"></span>,
Our God in heaven does what he wishes. From this sentence we gather that
nothing happens by chance, but every event in the world depends on God’s
secret providence. We ought not to admit any distinction between God’s
permission and his wish. For we see the Holy Spirit — the best master of
language — here clearly expresses two things; *first,* what God does;
and *next,* what he does by his own will. But *permission,* according to
those vain speculators, differs from *will;* as if God unwillingly
granted what he did not wish to happen! Now, there is nothing more
ridiculous than to ascribe this weakness to God. Hence the efficacy of
action is added; *God does what he wishes,* says Nebuchadnezzar. He does
not speak in a carnal but in a spiritual sense, or instinct, as we have
said; since the Prophet must be attended to just as if he had *been*
sent from heaven. Now, therefore, we understand how this world is
administered by God’s secret providence, and that nothing happens but
what he has commanded and decreed; while he ought with justice to be
esteemed the Author of all things.

<span id="x.xxix-p10"></span>Some object here to the apparent absurdity
of saying God is the author of sin, if nothing is done without his will;
nay, if he himself works it! This calumny is easily answered, as the
method of God’s action differs materially from that of men. For when any
man sins, God works in his own manner, which is very different indeed
from that of man, since he exercises his own judgment, and thus is said
to blind and to harden. As God therefore commands both the reprobate and
the evil one, he permits them to indulge in all kinds of licentiousness,
and in doing so, executes his own judgments. But he who sins is
deservedly guilty, and cannot implicate God as a companion of his
wickedness. And why so? Because God has nothing in common with him in
reference to sinfulness. Hence we see how these things which we may deem
contrary to one another, are mutually accordant, since God by his own
will governs all events in the world, and yet is not the author of sin.
And why so? Because he treats Satan and all the wicked with the strict
justice of a judge. We do not always see the process, but we must hold
this principle with firmness — supreme power is in God’s hands; hence we
must not cavil at his judgments, however inexplicable they may appear to
us. Wherefore this phrase follows, *There is no one who can hinder his
hand, or can say unto him, Why dost thou act thus?* When Nebuchadnezzar
says, God’s hand cannot be hindered, he uses this method of deriding
human folly which does not hesitate to rebel against God. Already they
raise their finger to prevent, if possible, the power of his hand; and
even when convicted of weakness, they proceed in their own fury.
Nebuchadnezzar, then, deservedly displays their ridiculous madness in
conducting themselves so intemperately in wishing to restrain the
Almighty, and to confine him within their bounds, and to fabricate
chains for the purpose of restricting him. When mankind thus burst forth
into sacrilegious fury, they deserve to be laughed at, and this is here
the force of Daniel’s words.

<span id="x.xxix-p11"></span>He afterwards adds, No *one can say, Why
dost thou act thus?* We know how they gave way to the language of
extreme petulance; since scarcely one man in a hundred restrains himself
with such sobriety as to attribute the glory to God, and to confess
himself just in his works. But Nebuchadnezzar does not here consider
what men are accustomed to do, but what they ought to do. He says
therefore, and with strict justice, God cannot be corrected; since
however the reprobate chatter, their folly is self-evident, for it has
neither reason nor the pretense of reason to support it.

<span id="x.xxix-p12"></span>The whole sense is — God’s will is our law,
against which we strive in vain; and then, if he permits us sufficient
license, and our infirmity breaks forth against him, and we contend with
him, all our efforts will be futile. God himself will be justified in
his judgments, and thus every human countenance must submit to him.
(<span id="x.xxix-p12.1"></span>[Ps
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)<span id="x.xxix-p12.1"></span>.)
This is the general rule.

<span id="x.xxix-p13"></span>We must now notice the addition, *God’s
will must be done as well in the army of heaven as among the inhabitants
of earth* By “the army of heaven” I do not understand, as in other
places, the sun, moon, and stars, but angels and even demons, who may be
called heavenly without absurdity, if we consider their origin, and
their being “*princes* of the *air.*” Hence Daniel means to imply
angels, demons, and men, to be equally governed by God’s will; and
although the impious rush on intemperately, yet they are restrained by a
secret bridle, and are prevented from executing whatever their lusts
dictate. God therefore is said *to do in the army of the heavens and
also among men whatsoever he wishes;* because he has the elect angels
always obedient to him, and the devils are compelled to obey his
command, although they strive in the contrary direction. We know how
strongly the demons resist God, but yet they are compelled to obey him,
not willingly, but by compulsion. But God acts among angels and demons
just as among the inhabitants of the earth. He governs others by his
Spirit, namely, his elect, who are afterwards regenerated by his Spirit,
and they are so treated by him that his justice may truly shine forth in
all their actions. He also acts upon the reprobate, but in another
manner; for he draws them headlong by means of the devil; he impels them
with his secret virtue; he strikes them by a spirit of dizziness; he
blinds them and casts upon them a reprobate spirit, and hardens their
hearts to contumacy. Behold how God does all things according to his own
will among men and angels! There is also another mode of action, as far
as concerns our outward condition; for God raises one aloft and
depresses another. (<span id="x.xxix-p13.1"></span>[Ps
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)<span id="x.xxix-p13.1"></span>.)
Thus we see the rich made poor, and others raised from the dunghill, and
placed in the highest stations of honor. The profane call this the sport
of fortune! But the moderation of God’s providence is most just,
although incomprehensible. Thus God acts according to his will among men
and angels; but that interior action must be put in the first place, as
we have said. It now follows:

<span id="x.xxx"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p1"></span><span id="x.xxx-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#036)<span id="x.xxx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p2"></span>**36.** At the same time my reason returned
unto me; and for the glory of my kingdom, mine honour and brightness
returned unto me; and my counsellors and my lords sought unto me; and I
was established in my kingdom; and excellent majesty was added unto me.

<span id="x.xxx-p3"></span>**36.** Et in tempore illo  <span
id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235) intellectus meus rediit ad me, et ad
excellentiam regni mei,  <span id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) decor
meus et dignitas mea reversa est ad me: et me consiliarii mei et
proceres mei requisierunt: et in regno meo confirmatus sum, et dignitas
mea amplior Aucta  <span id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237) fuit mihi.

<span id="x.xxx-p7"></span> 

<span id="x.xxx-p8"></span><span id="x.xxx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p9"></span>Here Nebuchadnezzar explains at length what
he had previously touched upon but shortly; for he had recovered his
soundness of mind, and thus commends God’s mercy in being content with a
moderate and temporary chastisement; and then he stretched forth his
hand, and out of a beast formed a man again! He was not changed into a
brute, as we have said, but he was treated with such ignominy, and made
like wild beasts, and pastured with them. This deformity, then, was so
dreadful, that his restoration might be called a kind of new creation.
Hence with very good reason Nebuchadnezzar celebrates this grace of God.
*At that time,* therefore, *my intellect returned to me;* he had said
this once before, but since understanding and reason are inestimable
blessings of God, Nebuchadnezzar inculcates this truth, and confesses
himself to have experienced God’s singular grace, because he had
returned to a sound mind. And at the same time he adds, *he had returned
to the honor and glory of his kingdom; because he had been consulted
again by his counselors and elders* How this was accomplished is
unknown, since the memory of those times is buried, unless the princes
of his kingdom were inclined to clemency — which is very probable — and
desired among them the king who had been cast out. We do not say this
was done by them on purpose, because God made use of them, and they were
ignorantly carrying out his purposes. They had heard the voice from
heaven, *O King Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is said, thy kingdom is
departed from thee!* This indeed would be universally known and
understood among all men; but we know how easily oblivion creeps over
men when God speaks. These princes, then, were unaware of their doing
God’s work when they demanded their king. In this way he returned to the
dignity of his kingdom; and even additional dignity was next conferred
upon him. At length it follows:

<span id="x.xxxi"></span>

<span id="x.xxxi-p1"></span><span id="x.xxxi-p1.1"></span>[Daniel
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#037)<span id="x.xxxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxxi-p2"></span>**37.** Now I Nebuchadnezzar praise and
extol and honour the King of heaven, all whose works *are* truth, and
his ways judgment: and those that walk in pride he is able to abase.

<span id="x.xxxi-p3"></span>**37.** Nunc ego Nebuchadnezer laudo, et
extollo, et glorifico Regem coelorum: quia omnia opera ejus veritas, et
viae ejus judicium: et eos qui ambulant in superbia potest humiliare.
 <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238)

<span id="x.xxxi-p5"></span> 

<span id="x.xxxi-p6"></span><span id="x.xxxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxxi-p7"></span>At the close of the edict, Nebuchadnezzar
joins the ingenuous confession of his faults with the praises of God!
What he says of the proud, he doubtless applies properly to himself; as
if he had said, God wished to constitute me a remarkable monument of his
method of humbling the proud for the instruction of all mankind. For I
was inflated with pride, and God corrected this by so remarkable a
punishment, that my example ought to profit the world at large. Hence I
said, King Nebuchadnezzar does not simply return thanks to God, but at
the same time confesses his fault, for though subdued with deserved
harshness, yet his haughtiness could not be arrested by any lighter
remedy. First of all he says, *I praise, extol, and glorify the king of
heaven!* This heaping together of words doubtless proceeded from
vehement affection. At the same time a contrast must be understood, on
the principle formerly mentioned; since God is never rightly praised
unless the ignominy of men is detected; he is not properly extolled,
unless their loftiness is cast down; he is never glorified unless men
are buried in shame and he prostrate in the dust. Hence, while
Nebuchadnezzar here praises, extols, and glorifies God, he also
confesses himself and all mortals to be nothing — as he did before — to
deserve no praise but rather the utmost ignominy.

<span id="x.xxxi-p8"></span>He adds, *since all his works are truth*
Here <span id="x.xxxi-p8.1"></span>קשוט*, kesot,* is taken for
“*rectitude* or integrity.” For <span id="x.xxxi-p8.2"></span>דיני-אמת,
*dini-ameth,* mean true judgments, but refer here to equity. *God’s
works are* therefore *all truth,* that is, all integrity, as if he had
said, none of God’s works deserve blame. Then the explanation Follows,
*All his ways are judgments* We see here the praise of God’s perfect
justice; this ought to be referred to Nebuchadnezzar personally, as if
he had said, God does not deal with me too strictly; I have no reason
for expostulating with him, or for murmuring as if he were too severe
with me. I confess, therefore, that I deserve whatever punishment I
sustain. And why so? *All his ways are justice;* meaning the highest
rectitude. Then, *All his works are truth;* that is, nothing contrary to
equity is found there, nothing crooked, but everywhere the highest
justice will shine forth. We see then how Nebuchadnezzar by this
language condemns himself out of his own mouth by declaring God’s
justice to be in all his works. This general form of expression does not
prevent Nebuchadnezzar from openly and freely confessing himself a
criminal before God’s tribunal; but it acquires greater force by his
example, which admonishes us by the general confession of God’s justice,
rectitude, and truthfulness in whatever he does. And this is worthy of
notice, since many find no difficulty in celebrating God’s justice and
rectitude when they *are* treated just as they *like;* but if God begins
to treat them with severity, they then vomit forth their poison, and
begin to quarrel with God, and to accuse him of injustice and cruelty.
Since therefore Nebuchadnezzar here confesses God to be just and true in
all his works, without any exception, notwithstanding his own severe
chastisements, this confession is not feigned; for he necessarily utters
what he says from the lowest depths of his heart, through his having
experienced the rigor of the divine judgment.

<span id="x.xxxi-p9"></span>He now adds at last, *He can humble those
who walk in pride.* Here Nebuchadnezzar more openly displays his own
disgrace, for he is not ashamed to confess his fault before the whole
world, because his punishment was known to every one. As God then wished
his folly to be universally detested, by making so horrible an example
of him by his punishment, so Nebuchadnezzar now brings his own case
forward, and bears witness to the justice of the penalty, in consequence
of his extreme pride. Here then we see God’s power joined with his
justice, as we have previously mentioned. He does not attribute to God a
tyranny free from all law; for as soon as Nebuchadnezzar had confessed
all God’s ways to be just, he condemns himself of pride directly
afterwards. Hence he does not hesitate to expose his disgrace before
mankind, that God may be glorified. And this is the true method of
praising God, not only by confessing ourselves to be as nothing, but
also by looking back upon our failings. We ought not only to acknowledge
ourselves inwardly guilty before him, but also openly to testify the
same before all mankind whenever it is necessary. And when he uses the
word “humility,” this may be referred to outward dejection; for
Nebuchadnezzar was humbled when God east him out into the woods to pass
his life in company with the wild beasts. But he was also humbled for
another reason, as if he had been a son of God. Since this humbling is
twofold, Nebuchadnezzar wishes here to express the former kind, because
God prostrates and throws down the proud. This is one kind of
humiliation; but it becomes profitless unless God afterwards governs us
by a spirit of submission. Hence Nebuchadnezzar does not here embrace
the grace of God, which was worthy of no common praise and exaltation;
and in this edict he does not describe what is required of a pious man
long trained in God’s school; yet he shews how he had profited under
God’s rod, by attributing to him the height of power. Besides this, he
adds the praise of justice and rectitude, while he confesses himself
guilty, and bears witness to the justice of the punishment which had
been divinely inflicted on him.

<span id="x.xxxii"></span>

<span id="x.xxxii-p1"></span>PRAYER.

<span id="x.xxxii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, since the disease of
pride remains fixed in us all through our original corruption in our
father Adam, — Grant, I say, that we may learn to mortify our spirits,
and to be displeased with our conduct, as we ought; may we feel
ourselves to be deprived of all wisdom and rectitude without thee alone.
May we fly to thy pity, and confess ourselves utterly subject to eternal
death; may we rely on thy goodness which thou hast deigned to offer us
through thy Gospel; may we trust in that Mediator whom thou hast given
us; may we never hesitate to fly to thee, to call upon thee as our
Father, and having been renewed by thy Spirit, may we walk in true
humility and modesty, till at length thou shalt raise us to that
heavenly kingdom which has *been* obtained for us by the blood of thine
only-begotten Son. — Amen.

<span id="x.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="x.xxxiii-p1"></span>Lecture Twenty-Third.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_202"></span>[203](cc24009.htm#fr_202) <span
id="x.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.i-p8"></span> That is, perpetual. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_203"></span>[204](cc24009.htm#fr_203) <span
id="x.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p7"></span> <span id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>Ep. 166<span
id="x.ii-p7.1"></span>. ad Donat. et alibi

<span id="fn_204"></span>[205](cc24009.htm#fr_204) <span
id="x.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii-p9"></span> Sebastian Castalio is here referred to. He
was an opponent of Calvin, and banished from Geneva by his influence.
Being a man of extensive learning he was appointed Greek professor at
Basil. See Mosheim, cent. 16. section. 3, pt. 2, and the authorities
there quoted.

<span id="fn_205"></span>[206](cc24009.htm#fr_205) <span
id="x.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.iii-p6"></span> Or, I was terrified. The copula may be
resolved into the relative pronoun, “I saw a dream which frightened or
terrified me.” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_206"></span>[207](cc24009.htm#fr_206) <span
id="x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.v-p6"></span> Some translate, “may be troublesome to thee,”
but I shall treat this word by and bye — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_207"></span>[208](cc24009.htm#fr_207) <span
id="x.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p8"></span> <span id="x.viii-p8.1"></span>שגיא,
*segua,* signifies large, or much. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc24009.htm#fr_208) <span
id="x.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p9"></span> Verbally, took shelter — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc24009.htm#fr_209) <span
id="x.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.viii-p10"></span> Or, *nestled.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc24009.htm#fr_210) <span
id="x.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p6"></span> It is better not to repeat boughs twice, as
some do. I confess the word <span id="x.ix-p6.1"></span>ענף, *gnef*,
here used, means leaf as well as bough, but <span
id="x.ix-p6.2"></span>עפא, *gnefa,* means bough; hence the repetition is
not superfluous — seize or cut off its leaves — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc24009.htm#fr_211) <span
id="x.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="x.ix-p11"></span> That is, shall be changed, as elsewhere
appears. — *Calvin*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc24009.htm#fr_212) <span
id="x.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p4"></span> Or, edict, for it may be conveniently
translated *so.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc24009.htm#fr_213) <span
id="x.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p5"></span> Or, abject. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc24009.htm#fr_214) <span
id="x.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xii-p6"></span> Or, among men. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc24009.htm#fr_215) <span
id="x.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xiii-p4"></span> Verbally, say. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc24009.htm#fr_216) <span
id="x.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p6"></span> That is, whose leaves were *beautiful.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc24009.htm#fr_217) <span
id="x.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p7"></span> Verbally, “in *it.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc24009.htm#fr_218) <span
id="x.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.xv-p10"></span> That is, who hast become great and *strong.*
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc24009.htm#fr_219) <span
id="x.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p4"></span> Verbally, “*and* he said,” for the copula
ought to be resolved into the relative *pronoun.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc24009.htm#fr_220) <span
id="x.xvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="x.xvi-p10"></span> See Dissertation 14 at the end of this
Volume.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc24009.htm#fr_221) <span
id="x.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xx-p4"></span> Or, that there is dominion in the *heavens.*
— *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc24009.htm#fr_222) <span
id="x.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p4"></span> <span id="x.xxi-p4.1"></span>שפר*, shepher,*
signifies to be beautiful; but it is metaphorically transferred to
approbation or complacency, as the phrase is, “*therefore* my counsel
shall please *thee.*” — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc24009.htm#fr_223) <span
id="x.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p5"></span> Or, “that” for <span
id="x.xxi-p5.1"></span>ו, *vau,* may be used in this *way.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc24009.htm#fr_224) <span
id="x.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p6"></span> So it is usually translated: we shall
discuss the word by and bye. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc24009.htm#fr_225) <span
id="x.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxi-p7"></span> The Greeks translate — if by chance — or a
medicine for their error. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc24009.htm#fr_226) <span
id="x.xxiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p6"></span> That is, after twelve *months.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc24009.htm#fr_227) <span
id="x.xxiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p9"></span> That is, that it may be a royal seat. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc24009.htm#fr_228) <span
id="x.xxiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p12"></span> That is, when the speech was in the king’s
mouth. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc24009.htm#fr_229) <span
id="x.xxiv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxiv-p15"></span> Or, the grass shall feed thee as it does
oxen. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc24009.htm#fr_230) <span
id="x.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p4"></span> That is, when the time was passed *over.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc24009.htm#fr_231) <span
id="x.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p5"></span> That is, *eternal.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc24009.htm#fr_232) <span
id="x.xxvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxvi-p6"></span> That is, of perpetual *duration.* —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc24009.htm#fr_233) <span
id="x.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxix-p4"></span> Or, who can abolish; for <span
id="x.xxix-p4.1"></span>מחא, *mecha,* signifies either to blot out or to
*prohibit.* — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc24009.htm#fr_234) <span
id="x.xxix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.xxix-p5"></span> Or, why hast thou done so? — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc24009.htm#fr_235) <span
id="x.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p4"></span> Although <span id="x.xxx-p4.1"></span>זמנא,
*zemena,* properly is a time fixed before hand and determined. —
*Calvin.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc24009.htm#fr_236) <span
id="x.xxx-p4.2"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p5"></span> Namely, “I returned;” for the phrase is
elliptical. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_237"></span>[238](cc24009.htm#fr_237) <span
id="x.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxx-p6"></span> Was added. — *Calvin.*

<span id="fn_238"></span>[239](cc24009.htm#fr_238) <span
id="x.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="x.xxxi-p4"></span> That is, for humbling the *proud.* —
*Calvin.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc24010)
