<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](slaa10)  [Next](slaa12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585090441/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16OXS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sun Lore of All Ages*, by William Tyler Olcott, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

### Chapter IX

#### Solar Festivals

BECAUSE of the importance of Sun worship, and its widespread influence
upon the primitive inhabitants of the world, there were instituted in
honour of the solar deity, in many lands, great festivals and elaborate
ceremonials, the traces of which have come down to us in modified form
even to this day. Our most important ecclesiastical feast days in fact
are but survivals of ancient solar festivals.

Twice in the year the sun apparently changes its course. In midwinter,
having reached the lowest point in its path, it turns about and begins
to mount the skies; in midsummer, conversely, having attained the
highest point it reaches, the sun seems to turn about once more, and
descend the steeps of the firmament. These two epochs, the winter and
summer solstices as they are called, that mark the sun's annual course,
were regarded as supremely important by the ancients and gave rise to
great national festivals that were celebrated

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

with pomp and ceremony throughout the ancient world.

At the feast of the winter solstice men testified their gladness at
witnessing the return of the all-powerful sun. To the inhabitants of
Greenland it meant the early return of the hunting season, and all
nations regarded it as a sign that springtime and harvests were on the
way, and the dormant life of the winter season was on the wane.

In many countries this festival season was known as "Yole," or "Yuul,"
from the word Hiaul, or Huul, which even to this day signifies "the sun"
in some languages. From this we get our word "wheel," and the wheel is
one of the ancient symbols of the sun, the spokes representing the sun's
rays. As we shall see later this symbol was a prominent feature in one
of the great solar festivals.

Procopius describes how the men of Thule climbed the mountain tops at
the winter solstice, to catch sight of the nearing sun after their
thirty-five days of night. Then they celebrated their holiest feasts.

Plutarch, referring to the solar festivals of Egypt, says, that "about
the winter solstice they lead the sacred cow seven times in procession
around the temple, calling this the searching after

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

Osiris, that season of the year standing most in need of the sun's
warmth."

In China, the Great Temple of the Sun at Pekin is oriented to the winter
solstice, and the most important of all the State observances of China
takes place there December 21st, the sacrifice of the winter solstice.

In our own time a number of Christian religious observances and
festivals are of distinct solar origin. Notable among these feast days
is Christmas. "The Roman winter solstice," says Tylor, <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69.md) "as celebrated on December 25th (VIII Kal.
Jan.) in connection with the worship of the Sun-God Mithra appears to
have been instituted in this special form by Aurelian about A. D. 273,
and to this festival the day owes its apposite name of 'Birthday of the
Unconquered Sun.' With full symbolic appropriateness, though not with
historical justification, the day was adopted in the western church
where it appears to have been generally introduced by the fourth
century, and whence in time it passed to the eastern church as the
solemn anniversary of the Birth of Christ, Christmas Day. As a matter of
history no valid or even consistent early Christian tradition vouches
for it."

Many of the early dignitaries of the Church

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

reveal in their writings the solar character of this festival. Augustus
and Gregory discoursed on "the glowing light and dwindling darkness that
follow the nativity," and Leo the Great denounced in a sermon the idea
that Christmas Day is to be honoured, not for the birth of Christ, but
for the rising of the new sun.

The solar origin of the great feast is attested in Europe by bonfires,
and the burning of the Yule log, and in the Christmas service chant,
"Sol novus oritur."

Even the sacrifices offered to the Sun in pagan times at the great solar
festivals find their survival in the sacrifices of a lamb which we offer
at Eastertide, and an ox at Christmas. The lighting of the Christmas
tree is but the light to guide the Sun-God back to life, and the
festival cakes of corn and fruit, made in honour of the Sun in ancient
times, and laid on the sacred altars of the Persians as an offering of
gratitude to the Lord of Light and Life, find their prototype in the
plum pudding that graces the board at our Christmas feasts of rejoicing.
Christmas is, therefore, nothing but an old heathen celebration of the
winter solstice, the feast of rejoicing that a turning point in the
sun's course has been reached, and that the life-giving orb has attained
the end of its journey of dwindling hours of daylight, and has started
back on a course that

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

brings with it each day an increase of warmth and light.

Of equal importance to the solar Christmas festival celebrated at the
winter solstice was the great celebration of the summer solstice
recognised throughout Europe. This was preeminently a fire festival, for
the ceremonies featured the lighting of huge bonfires on the hilltops,
leaping through the flames, and rolling blazing wheels of fire from the
summits of the hills, indicating the sun's descending course in the
heavens.

According to Tylor, <span id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_70.md) "These ancient
rites attached themselves in Christendom to St. John's eve. It seems as
though the same train of symbolism which had adapted the midwinter
festival to the nativity, may have suggested the dedication of the
midsummer festival to John the Baptist, in clear allusion to his words,
'He must increase, but I must decrease.'"

Durandus, speaking of the rites of the Feast of St. John the Baptist,
informs us of the curious custom that prevailed of rolling fire wheels
down from the hills. This practice was common in France, and many North
German examples of it are on record. The following is an account of one
of these festivals, which took place at Conz on the Moselle, in 1823, as
described by Grimm:

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

"Every house delivers a sheaf of straw on the top of the Stromberg,
where the men and lads assemble towards evening, whilst the women and
girls gather about the Burbacher fountain. A huge wheel is now bound
round with straw in such a manner that not a particle of wood remains
visible; a stout pole is passed through the middle of the wheel, and the
persons who are to guide it lay hold on the ends of the pole, which
projects three feet on either side. The rest of the straw is made up
into a great number of small torches. At a signal from the mayor of
Sierk (who, according to ancient custom, receives a basket of cherries
on the occasion), the wheel is kindled with a torch and set rapidly in
motion. Everybody cheers and swings torches in the air. Some of the men
remain above, others follow the burning wheel down hill in its descent
to the Moselle. It is often extinguished before it reaches the river,
but if it burns at the moment it touches the water, that is held to be
prophetic of a good vintage, and the people of Conz have a right to levy
a fuder of white wine upon the surrounding vineyards. Whilst the wheel
is passing before the female spectators, they break out into cries of
joy, the men on the hilltops reply, and the people from the neighbouring
villages who have assembled on the banks of the river mingle their
voices in the general jubilee."

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

There is a striking analogy between the St. John fire celebrations and
the Vedic legend of Indra's fight with the midsummer demons.

"In this legend," says Keary, <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71.md) "the
demon Vritra possessed himself of the sun wheel and the treasures of
heaven, seized the women, kept them prisoners in his cavern, and laid a
curse on the waters until Indra released the captives and took off the
curse."

The significance of the ceremony lies in the details that enter into it,
the key to which is found in the following passage from a Vedic hymn:
"With thee conjoined, O Indu (Soma), did Indra straightway pull down
with force the wheel of the sun that stood upon the mighty mountain top,
and the source of all life was hidden from the great scather."

The German custom is therefore seen to be nothing but a dramatic
portrayal of the great elemental battle as depicted in the sacred books
of the ancient Hindus. The wheel of fire on the hilltop represents the
sun resting on the crest of the cloud mountain. Both the wheel and the
sun descend from their positions of prominence and are extinguished, the
wheel by the waters of the stream at the base of the hill, the sun by
the sea of clouds.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

The elements of strife and warfare enter into the scene. The descending
wheel is pursued to the water's edge by a crowd of men brandishing
torches; Indra and his hosts wage successful warfare against the army of
the demon Vritra. The fact that women are excluded from the ceremonies
emphasises the idea of a combat, for it is their province solely to
watch the battle as spectators and cheer the victors.

Another notion associated with this rite of the blazing wheel was that,
as the wheel went rolling away from them in its descending course, it
symbolised a wheel of fortune, and the ill luck of the people went
rolling away, a signal for great rejoicing.

This ceremony of the descent of the wheel was anciently observed on St.
John the Baptist's Day at Norwich, England, and even to this day it is
the custom to light huge bonfires on the hilltops in Ireland, according
to the ancient pagan usage when the Baal fires were kindled as part of
the ritual of Sun worship. Around these fires the peasants dance, and
when the fire burns low, it is the custom to lift children across the
glowing embers to secure them good luck during the year, which is
similar to the custom practised by worshippers of Baal and Moloch in
ancient times of passing children through the fire

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

that burned at the feet of the cruel and insatiable god.

There was also practised in Ireland, in connection with the midsummer
festival which celebrated the turning-point of the sun at the summer
solstice, a strange dance which was religious in its character, and
solar in its origin. The Greeks called this "the Pyrrhic dance" from
"pur" meaning fire, and practised it from the most ancient times. The
feature of the dance was its serpentine character, as the dancers
circled about in a long line simulating the coils of a serpent. In
Ireland the dance had the same characteristics, and though the esoteric
meaning of the dance had been lost, it was in all probability a mystic
rite symbolic of the course of the sun, for the dancers invariably
circled from east to west.

In Wales, the custom of lighting bonfires on Midsummer Eve is still kept
up in many villages, and the peasants gather about them dancing and
leaping through the flames. The leaping through the flames is supposed
to ward off evil spirits, prevent sickness, and bring good luck.

The connection of the ceremony of the bonfires with the old worship of
the Sun is indisputable. Its practice was general among nearly all
European nations, and in not very remote times, from Norway to the
shores of the Mediterranean,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

the glow of St. John's fires might have been seen.

In Brittany, the custom of the Baal fires is still preserved, and the
peasants dance around them all night in their holiday attire. It is said
that the maid who dances round nine St. John's fires before midnight is
sure to be married within the year. In many parishes the curé himself
goes in procession with banner and cross to light the sacred fire, and
all the ancient superstitions connected with the festival are kept alive
with unabated zeal.

The Scandinavians believed that when midsummer came the death of their
Sun-God Balder took place, and to light him on his way to the underworld
they kindled bright fires of pine branches, and when, six months later
at the winter solstice, he regains his life and mounts to greet them,
they burn the yule log and hang lights on the fir-trees to illuminate
his upward course.

Frazer tells us <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) how the fern seed,
the oak, and the mistletoe are closely associated as symbols with the
solar festivals celebrated at the winter and summer solstices:

"The two great days for gathering the fabulous fern seed, which is
popularly supposed to bloom like gold or fire on Midsummer Eve, are
Midsummer Eve and Christmas, that is, the two solstices. We

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

are led to regard the fiery aspect of the fern seed as primary, and its
golden aspect as secondary and derivative. Fern seed, in fact, would
seem to be an emanation of the sun's fire at the two turning-points of
its course, the summer and winter solstice. This view is confirmed by a
German story, in which a hunter is said to have procured fern seed by
shooting at the sun on Midsummer Day at noon. Three drops of blood fell
down, which he caught in a white cloth, and these blood drops were the
fern seed. Here the blood is clearly the blood of the sun from which the
fern seed is thus directly derived. Thus it may be taken as certain that
the fern seed is golden because it is believed to be an emanation of the
sun's golden fire.

"Now, like the fern seed, the mistletoe is gathered either at midsummer
or Christmas, that is, at the summer and winter solstice, and, like the
fern seed, it is supposed to possess the power of revealing treasures in
the earth. Now if the mistletoe discovers gold, it may be in its
character of the Golden Bough, and if it is gathered at the solstices,
must not the Golden Bough, like the golden fern seed, be an emanation of
the sun's fire? The primitive Aryans probably kindled the midsummer
bonfires as sun charms, that is, with the intention of supplying the sun
with fresh fire. But as the fire was always elicited by the friction

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

of oak wood, it must have appeared to the primitive Aryan that the sun
was periodically recruited from the fire which resided in the sacred
oak. In other words, the oak must have seemed to him the original
storehouse or reservoir of the fire which was from time to time drawn
out to feed the sun. Thus, instead of saying that the mistletoe was an
emanation of the sun's fire, it must be more correct to say that the
sun's fire was regarded as an emanation of the mistletoe."

The Christian festival of Easter has its solar characteristics. "The
very word Easter," says Proctor, "is in its real origin as closely
related to sun movements as the word East," and the notion that the Sun
dances on Easter morning as it rises is firmly believed to-day by
superstitious people. In Saxony and Brandenburg the peasants still climb
the hilltops before dawn on Easter day to witness the three joyful leaps
of the Sun, as our English forefathers used to do.

Tylor <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) tells us that "the solar rite
of the New Fire, adopted by the Roman Church as a Paschal ceremony, may
still be witnessed in Europe with its solemn curfew on Easter Eve, and
the ceremonial striking of the new holy fire."

The two great festivals of the ancient Irish were La Baal Tinné, or May
Day, the day of the Baal

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

fires, sacred to the Sun, and La Samnah, or November Eve, sacred to the
Moon. The May festival was the most important, as then it was that the
Druids lit the fire of Baal, the Sun-God, and a portion of the ceremony
at this festival consisted in driving cattle along a narrow path flanked
by two fires, singeing them with the flame of a torch, and sometimes
bleeding them, the blood being then offered as a sacrifice to the
Sun-God.

Plutarch relates that among the Egyptians there were several festivals
in honour of the Sun. A solar sacrifice was performed on the fourth day
of every month, and so important was the deity that, as propitiatory
offerings, they burnt incense three times a day, resin at its first
rising, myrrh when on the meridian, and a mixture called "kuphi" at
sunset. A festival in honour of the Sun was held on the thirtieth day of
Epiphi, called the "birthday of Horus’ eyes," when the sun and moon were
supposed to be in the same right line with the earth. On the
twenty-second of Phaophi, after the autumnal equinox, there was a
similar ceremonial to which, according to Plutarch, they gave the name
of the "nativity of the staves of the sun," intimating that the sun was
then removing from the earth, and as its light became weaker and weaker,
that it stood in need of a staff to support it.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

The most important date of the Egyptian year was the twentieth of June,
that marked the summer solstice, but more especially the rise of the
all-fertilising Nile. This was the New Year Day in Egypt. The greatest
solar festival of the Egyptians, however, was the festival of Osiris,
and the special feature of this occasion was the procession in which the
sacred ox Apis appeared.

The following description of this festival is taken from Mythology and
Fables by the Abbé Banier:

"The ox whom the priests nourished with so much care, and for whom all
Egypt had such a veneration, was looked upon as a god. To gain some
credit to this superstition, they said he represented the soul of
Osiris. Herodotus tells us that this ox was to be black over all the
body, with a square white mark upon the forehead. Upon the back he was
to have the figure of an eagle, a knot under the tongue in the figure of
a beetle, the hairs of the tail double, and according to Pliny a white
mark upon the right side, which was to resemble the crescent moon.
Porphyry says that all these marks had reference to the sun and moon, to
whom the ox Apis was consecrated, that the black hair which was to be
the colour of his body in general represented the scorching influence of
the sun upon bodies, and that the white spot which he had in his
forehead, and the crescent

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

which he bore upon the side, were symbols of the moon. The eagle and
beetle were also symbols of the sun.

"The festival of Apis lasted seven days. The people went in crowds to
bring him from the place where he was found, the priests led the
procession, and every one was desirous to receive him into his home. On
the day of the Osiris festival the priests conducted the ox Apis to the
banks of the Nile and drowned him with great ceremony. He was then
embalmed and interred at Memphis. After his death the people mourned and
made lamentation as if Osiris had been now dead. The priests cut off
their hair, which in Egypt was a sign of the deepest mourning, and this
mourning lasted till they got another ox to appear resembling the former
in the same marks, when they began to make merry as if the Prince
himself had arisen from the dead. The superstition of the Egyptians in
relation to the ox Apis was carried to great excess. They honoured him
as a god, and consulted him as an oracle; when he took what food was
offered to him it was a favourable response, and his refusing it was
looked upon as a bad presage."

In Greece there were many solar festivals inaugurated in honour of the
Sun-God Phœbus Apollo. In Sparta an annual festival, known as "Carneia,"
was held in August. It was a religious ceremony,

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

the purpose of which was to appease the dreaded god. This festival was
celebrated in Cyrene, in the islands of Rhodes and Sicily, and in many
of the Greek cities in lower Italy.

In September a festival was celebrated at which the Sun-God was invoked
as an aid in battle, and in October the first-fruits were presented as a
sacrifice.

At Athens there was an annual festival, held in May, to commemorate the
yearly tribute of youths and maidens to Crete as sacrifices to the
Minotaur. At Thebes there was a festival in honour of Apollo Ismenius,
held every eighth year, called the "Daphnephoria." At this celebration
branches of olives hung with wreaths, and representations of the sun,
moon, and stars, were carried in procession, a feature of the festival.

A festival in honour of "Hyacinthus," one of the titles of Apollo, was
celebrated annually at Sparta, in July, and lasted nine days. It began
with laments, but concluded with expressions of joy and gladness. In
honour of Apollo, the Sun-God, a festival called "Thargelia" was held at
Athens, in May, to celebrate the harvest yield. In August the Athenians
celebrated a similar festival called "Metageitnia." These celebrations
and festivals bear testimony to the importance of Sun worship among the
ancient Greeks.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

Among the Peruvians there were four solar festivals of importance
celebrated throughout the year with great pomp and display. Chief among
these was that of the winter solstice, which fell in June. It was the
festival of the diminished and growing Sun. It lasted nine days, the
first three of which were given up to fasting. On the morning of the
great day the Emperor himself officiated as high priest, and all the
people gathered at dawn in the public square to await the coming of the
supreme deity, the Sun. At sight of him great shouts of joy rose from
the multitude, who threw kisses to the orb of day, and prostrated
themselves. The chief priest then offered a libation to the Sun-God,
drinking of the cup himself, and then passing it on to his retinue, an
act of solar communion. All then marched to the temple of the Sun, where
a black llama was sacrificed, and its entrails were carefully inspected
for omens affecting the coming year. A fire, produced by the focused
rays of the sun from a mirror, was then lighted on the altar, and from
it fire was conveyed to all the Sun temples in the city. These fires
were kept burning continuously until three days before the next solstice
when they were allowed to burn out.

The second great solar festival of the Peruvians was known as the "feast
of purification," and fell in September. The object of this ceremonial
was

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

to invoke the Sun's aid and beneficent influence to secure the
prosperity, health, and security of the people. The third festival was
held in May, and was a thanksgiving harvest celebration, while still a
fourth festival took place in December known as the "festival of power."

The Hopi Indians of North America, in their elaborate festivals in
honour of the Sun, impersonated the Sun-God. The impersonator wore a
disk-shaped mask, surrounded with eagle-wing feathers, and this was
fringed with flowing strands of red horsehair to represent the sun's
rays. The sun masks were a prominent feature in the solar ceremonials of
many of the Indian tribes.

The curious and interesting custom of "need-fires," although not exactly
to be classed as solar festivals, may very properly be treated of in
this chapter, owing to the solemnity of the ceremony, the implicit faith
of the people in their efficacy, and especially owing to their solar
significance.

The "need-fires," or "forced-fires" as they are sometimes called, were
kindled at times of great epidemics among the cattle that threatened
their total annihilation, and the custom of kindling these fires is
still in vogue in certain countries. Keary <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md) thus describes the custom:

"Wherever it can be traced among people of

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> German or
Scandinavian descent, the fire is always kindled by the friction of a
wooden axle in the nave of a waggon wheel or in holes bored in one or
two posts. In either case the axle or roller is worked with a rope,
which is wound around it and pulled to and fro with the greatest
possible speed by two opposite groups of able-bodied men. The wheel was
beyond all doubt an emblem of the sun. In a few instances of late date
it is stated that an old waggon wheel was used.

"In Marburger, official documents of the year 1605, express mention is
made of new wheels, new axles, and new ropes, and these we may be
assured were universally deemed requisite in earlier times. It was also
necessary to the success of the operation that all the fires should be
extinguished in the adjacent houses, and not a spark remain in any one
of them when the work began. The wood used was generally that of the
oak, a tree sacred to the lightning god Thor, because of the red colour
of its fresh-cut bark. Sometimes, especially in Sweden, nine kinds of
wood were used The fuel for the fire was straw, heath, and brushwood, of
which each household contributed its portion, and it was laid down over
some length of the narrow lane which was usually chosen as the most
convenient place for the work. When the fire had burned down
sufficiently, the cattle were forcibly driven through

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

it two or three times in a certain order beginning with the swine, and
ending with the horses or vice versa. When all the cattle have passed
through the fire, each householder takes home an extinguished brand
which in some places is laid in the manger. The ashes were scattered to
the winds apparently that their wholesome influence may be spread far
abroad. In Sweden the smoke of the need-fires was believed to have much
virtue: it made fruit trees productive, and nets that had been hung in
it were sure to catch much fish.

"The earliest account of the need-fires in England is that quoted by
Kemble from the Chronicle of Lanercost for the year 1268. The writer
relates with pious horror how 'certain bestial persons, monks in garb
but not in mind, taught the country people to extract fire from wood by
friction, and set up a "Simulacrum Priape" as a means of preserving
their cattle from an epidemic pneumonia.' This 'Simulacrum Priape' was
unquestionably an image of the sun-god Fro or Fricco.

"Jacob Grimm was the first to make it evident that, for the Germans at
least, the wheel was an emblem of the sun, and numerous facts which have
come to light since he wrote, abundantly verify his conclusion.

"He mentions among other evidence that, in the Edda, the sun is called
'fagrahvel,' 'fair, or

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

bright wheel, 'and that the same sign ☉ which in the calendar represents
the sun stands also for the Gothic double consonant 'hw,' the initial of
the Gothic word 'hvil,' Anglo-Saxon 'hveol,' English 'wheel.'

"In the need-fires on the island of Mull, the wheel was turned,
according to Celtic usage, from east to west, like the sun. Grimm has
also noticed the use of the wheel in other German usages as well as in
the need-fire, and he is of opinion that in heathen times it constantly
formed the nucleus and centre of the sacred and purifying sacrificial
flame. There was a twofold reason for this use of the emblem of the sun,
for that body was regarded not only as a mass of heavenly fire, but also
as the immediate source of the lightning. When black clouds concealed
the sun, the early Aryans believed that its light was actually
extinguished, and needed to be rekindled. Then the pramantha <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) was worked by some god in the cold wheel
until it glowed again, but before this was finally accomplished the
pramantha often shot out as a thunderbolt from the wheel, or was carried
off by some fire robbers. The word 'thunderbolt' itself like its German
equivalents expresses the cylindrical or conical form

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

of the pramantha. When the bolts had ceased to fly from the nave, and
the wheel was once more ablaze, the storm was over."

From the foregoing, which treats merely of the more important solar
festivals, it is clear that these products of paganism are as much in
force at present from a symbolic point of view, as they ever were, and
that Christianity countenances, and in many cases has actually adopted
and practises, pagan rites whose heathen significance is merely lost
sight of because attention is not called to the sources whence these
rites have sprung.

In short, Sun worship, symbolically speaking, lies at the very heart of
the great festivals which the Christian Church celebrates to-day, and
these relics of heathen religion have, through the medium of their
sacred rites, curiously enough blended with practices and beliefs
utterly antagonistic to the spirit that prompted them.

The reason for the survival of many of the symbols of Sun worship and
the practice of many customs peculiar to this ancient form of idolatry,
lies in the fact that the early Christian teachers found the people so
wedded to their old rites and usages, that it was vain to hope for the
complete abandonment of these long-cherished practices. Hence a
compromise was wisely effected, and the old pagan customs were deprived
of the idolatry

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

that was so obnoxious to the Christian, and transferred as mere
meaningless symbols and empty forms to the Christian festivals. Old
paganism died hard, and fought long and stubbornly in its struggle with
Christianity, but time has fought for the Christian, and now even the
meaning of symbols and forms that once played such an important part in
pagan worship is lost sight of, and their former force and power is lost
for evermore.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[229:1](slaa11.htm#fr_69.md) *Primitive Culture*,
Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[231:1](slaa11.htm#fr_70.md) *Primitive Culture*,
Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[233:1](slaa11.htm#fr_71.md) *Curiosities of
Folk-Lore*, C. F. Keary.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[236:1](slaa11.htm#fr_72.md) The Golden Bough, J.
G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[238:1](slaa11.htm#fr_73.md) *Primitive Culture*,
Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[244:1](slaa11.htm#fr_74.md) *Curiosities of
Folk-Lore*, C. F. Keary.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[247:1](slaa11.htm#fr_75.md) The pramantha was the
handle of the mythical hand-mill of Frodé, the regent of the Golden Age.
This hand-mill was a flat circular stone which represented the sun's
disk, its handle was used by Indra and the Aswins to kindle the
cloud-extinguished orb of day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Solar Omens, Traditions, and Superstitions](slaa12.md)

</div>
