<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](slaa06)  [Next](slaa08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585090441/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16OXS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Sun Lore of All Ages*, by William Tyler Olcott, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### Chapter V

#### Solar Folk-Lore

THE distinction between mythology and folklore is an extremely fine one,
and though there is such a distinction, still the two subjects are so
essentially analogous it will not be strange if portions of the material
in this chapter would, according to some authorities, seem misplaced,
and more properly included in the chapter on Solar Mythology, and *vice
versa*. In view of the difficulties of an absolutely correct
classification, the author makes no claim that his is the correct one.

In the early stages of the history of man, every act of nature and the
movements of the heavenly bodies was attributed to the machinations of
some one, a mysterious personage, an all-powerful being, an unseen god.
The sun, as the chief luminary, commanded man's attention from the
earliest days, and it was but natural for primitive man to speculate on
the phenomena of his daily appearance and disappearance in terms that
seem to us now childish and puerile.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

To men who looked to the west across a vast expanse of sea, the sun at
nightfall seemed to sink directly into the waves, and, as they were
confident that the sun was an extremely large and hot body they were
convinced it would give out a hissing noise when the waters closed over
it.

From the expression of the thought to the actual fact was but a step,
and so we find Posidonius recording that the inhabitants of Cape St.
Vincent, the westernmost point of Europe, claimed that the sun
disappears each night into the sea with a great hissing noise.

We find the same idea current in the islands of Polynesia, in Iberia,
and Germany, where the people claim to have heard the mighty hissing of
the sea-quenched sun.

The Egyptians regarded the sun as a child when it was rising, and as an
old man when it was setting in the evening. These ideas were also
transferred to the annual motion of the sun. Macrobius states that the
Egyptians compared the yearly course of the sun with the phases of human
life; thus, a little child signified the winter solstice, a young man
the spring equinox, a bearded man the summer solstice, and an old man
the autumnal equinox. They also thought that Hercules had his seat in
the sun, and that he travelled with it round the moon.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

The Hindus often referred to the sun as "the eye of Mithra, Varuna, and
Agni," and at sunrise or sunset, when the sun appeared to be squatting
on the water, they likened it to a frog. This simile gave rise to a
Sanscrit story, which is found also in German and Gaelic.

"Bhekî (the frog) was a beautiful maiden. One day when she was sitting
near a well, a king rode by, and fascinated by her beauty, asked her
hand in marriage. She consented on the condition that he would never
show her a drop of water. He accepted, and they were married. One day
being tired and thirsty she asked the king for a glass of water, and
forgetting his promise, he granted her request, and his bride
immediately vanished. That is to say, the sun disappeared when it
touched the water."

The sun was also regarded as a well, and in the Semitic, Persian, and
Chinese languages the words "well" and "eye" are synonymous. Considered
as a well, the rays of the sun were likened to the moisture that flows
from the well.

In different parts of Africa we find the sun variously regarded. In
Central Africa, where it is extremely hot, the rising of the sun is
always dreaded, and the orb of day is a common enemy. It was the custom,
among certain tribes, to curse the sun at his rising for afflicting the
people with burning heat.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

In Southern Africa, on the contrary, the natives believed that they were
descended from the Sun; and if, by chance, the rising of the sun was
obscured by clouds, they thought the Sun purposely hid his face from
them because their misdeeds offended him, and straightway they performed
acts of propitiation. Work at once ceased, and the food of the previous
day was given to the old women. The men of the tribe then went in a body
to the river to purify themselves by washing in the stream. Each man
threw into the river a stone from his hearth, and replaced it with a new
one from the bed of the river. On returning to the village the chief
kindled a fire in his hut, and the members of the tribe all gathered
embers from it to light their individual hearth fires. The ceremony
concluded with a dance in which the whole tribe joined. The idea seems
to have been; that the lighting of the flame on earth would serve to
rekindle the dead solar fire. When the sun set, these people said "The
Sun dies."

The early inhabitants of Polynesia called the sun "Ra," which was also
the Egyptian sun name. They believed that it was endowed with life, and
the offspring of the gods. To account for its rise in the east each
morning, after its disappearance in the west each night, they said that
during the night it passed through a passage under the seas,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

so as to rise in its appointed place in the eastern sky each day.

In some of the islands the sun was thought to be a substance resembling
fire, and they regarded its disappearance each night as a falling of the
orb into the sea, and, as we have seen, the inhabitants of the
westernmost islands were confident that they had heard the hissing
occasioned by the sun's plunge into the ocean.

The early tribes seemed to think they could control the light of the sun
and s Lay or hasten its setting. "The Melanesians make sunshine by means
of a mock sun," says Frazer. <span id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) "A
circular stone is wound about with red braid and stuck with owl's
feathers to represent the rays of the sun, or the stone is laid on the
ground with white rods radiating from it to imitate sunbeams." A white
or red pig is sacrificed in the sunshine-making ceremony, and a black
one when rain is desired.

In New Caledonia they burnt a skeleton to make sunshine, and drenched it
with water if they wished for rain. They also had a more elaborate
ceremony for producing sunshine, which Frazer <span
id="fr_35"></span>[2](#fn_35) thus describes: "When a wizard desires to
make sunshine he takes some plants and corals to the burial ground, and
makes then into a bundle, adding two locks of hair cut from the head of
a living child

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (his own child if
possible), also two teeth, or an entire jawbone from the skeleton of an
ancestor. He then climbs a high mountain whose top catches the first
rays of the morning sun. Here he deposits three sorts of plants on a
flat stone, places a branch of dry coral beside them, and hangs the
bundle of charms over the stone. Next morning he returns to this rude
altar, and at the moment when the sun rises from the sea, he kindles a
fire on the altar. As the smoke rises he rubs the stone with the dry
coral, invokes his ancestors and says: 'Sun: I do this that you may be
burning hot, and eat up all the clouds in the sky.' The same ceremony is
repeated at sunset."

The sun, according to many traditions of primitive man, spent a part of
its time in the underworld, or in a submarine passage beneath the seas,
and if it did not go of its own volition, it was carried there by some
enemy. Thus in Servia a tale is told, that when the devils fell, their
king carried off the sun from heaven affixed to a lance. This was a
great calamity, and the Archangel St. Michael was selected to try to
recover it. He therefore set out for the underworld and succeeded in
making friends with the archfiend. As they stood together by a lake, St.
Michael proposed to the devil that they engage in a diving contest. The
latter consented, and thrusting the lance

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

which held the sun into the ground, he dived in. This was St. Michael's
opportunity, and making the sign of the cross, he grabbed the lance and
made off, hotly pursued by the Evil One. Being fleet of foot he
outdistanced him, but his pursuer was so close to him at one time that
he managed to scratch his foot. In honour of St. Michael and his valiant
deed, men, from that time on, were destined to have indented soles.

The old Germans called the sun "Wuotan's eye," and there is a German
legend that reveals the sun as the punisher of evil thinkers: It appears
that a prisoner was once on his way to execution, an object of pity to
all whom he passed, but one woman, who was engaged in hanging up her
linen to dry in the sun, remarked that he well deserved his fate.
Immediately her linen fell to the ground, nor was she able to hang it up
in this drying-place thereafter. It is further related that, at her
death, she was taken up to the sun to remain there as long as the world
endures, as a punishment for her lack of pity.

The peasants in various parts of Germany call the Milky Way the
"Mealway" or the "Millway," and say that it turns with the sun, for it
first becomes visible at the point where the sun has set. It leads,
therefore, to the heavenly mill, and its colour is that of the meal with
which it is

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

strewed. This brings us to the Norse story of "The Wonderful
Mill," <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) I an exceedingly interesting
bit of folk-lore of solar significance. "The peasants of Norway to this
day tell of the wondrous mill that ground whatever was demanded of it.
The tradition is of great antiquity. The earliest version known is as
follows: Of all beliefs, that in which man has at all times of his
history been most prone to set faith, is that of a golden age of peace
and plenty which has passed away, but which might be expected to return.
Such a period of peace and plenty, such a golden time, the Norsemen
could tell of in his mythic Frodi's reign, when gold, or Frodi's meal,
as it was called, was so plentiful that golden armlets lay untouched
from year's end to year's end on the King's highway, and the fields bore
crops unsown. In Frodi's house were two maidens of that old giant race,
Frenja and Menja. These daughters of the giant he had bought as slaves,
and he made them grind his quern or hand-mill Grotti, out of which he
used to grind peace and gold. Even in that golden age one sees there
were slaves, and Frodi, however bountiful to his thanes and people, was
a hard taskmaster to his giant handmaidens. He kept them to the mill,
nor gave them longer rest than the cuckoo's note lasted, or they could
sing a song. But that quern

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

was such that it ground everything that the grinder chose, though until
then it had ground nothing but gold and peace. So the maidens ground and
ground, and one sang their piteous tale in a strain worthy of Æschylus,
as the other rested. They prayed for rest and pity, but Frodi was deaf.
Then they turned in giant mood, and ground no longer peace and plenty,
but fire and war. Then the quern went fast and furious, and that very
night came Mysing the sea-rover and slew Frodi and all his men, and
carried off the quern, and so Frodi's peace ended. The maidens, the
sea-rover took with him, and when he got on the high seas he bade them
grind salt, so they ground, and at midnight they asked if he had not
salt enough, but he bade them grind on. So they ground till the ship was
full and sank. Mysing, maids, mill, and all, and that's why the sea is
salt."

This wonder-working mill once stood in heaven, it is said, for Frodi its
owner was no other than the Sun-God Freyr. The flat circular stone of
Frodi's quern is the disk of the sun, and its handle is the pramantha
with which Indra or the Aswins used to kindle the extinguished luminary.

To explain the circular motion of the sun, the Incas of Peru believed
that it was hung in space by a cord, and that each evening it entered
the sea, and being a good swimmer it pierced through the

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

waves, and reappeared next morning in the east.

The Incas claimed that the Sun was their own elder brother, and ruled
over the cohorts of heaven by divine right. Their legends relate that
the Sun took pity on the children of men, who, in primitive times, lived
in a state of savagery, and he therefore sent his son and daughter to
enlighten them, and teach them to live properly. They are said to have
risen from the depths of Lake Titicaca, that marvellous sheet of water
twelve thousand feet above the sea. They taught the Peruvians the
essentials of culture and education.

According to another tradition, the Peruvians traced their origin from
the first Inca, the Sun and his wife, who came from the island of the
sun in Lake Titicaca, and founded the city of Cuzco, the sacred city of
the sun. This island in the lake is therefore sacred to the Peruvians,
and many ruins of the Incas are to be found there.

The Peruvians paid particular attention to the daily meridian passage of
the sun, and observed that when it was in the zenith, it cast no shadow.

The early natives of Brazil believed that the sun was a ball of light
feathers, which some mysterious being exhibits during the day, and
covers at night with a pot.

The folk-lore of the North American Indian

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

tribes is rich in legends respecting the sun. The Indians believed that
the sun was an animated being endowed with human attributes. The
following tales are related by the Thompson River Indians:

There was once a most mischievous and incorrigible youth who one morning
strolled away from his home. On his return, he found that his parents
had deserted him, but his old grandmother, who was unable to travel, was
left behind. She taught the boy how to make a bow and arrows, and with
these he was able to provide a daily supply of food. She also made
blankets for him out of the skins of many coloured birds. These were of
such beauty that they attracted the attention of the Sun. It had always
been the custom of the Sun to travel about naked during the day, and
clothe himself only in the dark hours. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37) But when the Sun saw these beautiful
blankets, he purchased them from the boy, and wrapped them about his
body, and soon disappeared, so that at set of sun you may see the
gorgeous colouring of these robes in the western sky, especially the
blue tint of the blue-jay blanket.

Another tale relates that originally the Sun lived much nearer the earth
than now, <span id="fr_38"></span>[2](#fn_38) and preyed

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

upon mankind. It was his custom to kill people every day on his travels,
and carry them off to his home at night-fall to eat. His son lived
quietly at home clad in fine garments of many colours. There was once an
Indian who in gambling was most unlucky. One day, while much depressed,
he set out on a journey in search of adventure, and finally came to the
Sun's abode in the absence of the owner. The son received him kindly,
but fearing that his guest would be discovered by his cannibal father,
he hid him under a heap of robes. The Sun arrived in the evening
carrying a man on his back, and as he came near the house, he said:
"Mum, Mum, Mum. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) There must be a man
here," but his son persuaded him that he was mistaken. The next day the
Indian was glad to leave this dangerous locality, and returned to his
home laden with gifts from his benefactor. Out of gratitude he returned
later to the Sun's house and made his friend the present of a wife and
one for his father. This pleased the Sun so much that he gave up the
killing and eating of human beings. In the foregoing legend we find
expressed the idea, current in the traditions of many primitive people,
that celestial beings feed on human bodies.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

The following tale is told of the Sun and his daughter: <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

Originally the Sun was an eminent chief, possessed of great power and
wealth. He was also blessed with a beautiful daughter, and the fame of
her beauty spread afar. A powerful magician, entranced with the maiden,
sought her hand, and though at first repulsed, finally won the Sun's
favour and married his daughter. The Sun implored his daughter to visit
him frequently. This, however, she neglected to do, and, finally, when
she did go to her father with her two children, he transformed her into
the present Sun. This is why the Sun travels each day from east to west
in search of her father. Her children are occasionally seen as sun-dogs
closely following their mother.

The Indians of Northern California relate the following story:

Once the sun fell by accident down from the sky just about sunrise, but
the quick little mole was watching, and caught it before it touched the
earth, and succeeded in holding it up until others arrived, when, by
exerting all their strength, they

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

succeeded in replacing it where it belonged in the sky, but ever
thereafter the mole's hands were bent far back to show how he had worked
to hold up the sun.

As evidence of the Indian belief in the Sun's solicitude in their
affairs, and his protecting and saving influences, the Cheyenne tale of
"The Eagle Hunter" is told:

There was an Indian who once set out to catch an eagle. Digging a hole
in the ground he crept in, covered it over with brush, and cleverly
baited it with a skinned buffalo calf. Presently an eagle espied the
prey, flew down, and began to eat of it, when the Indian laid hold of
its feet, and held it captive; but he had underestimated the power of
the bird, which had strength enough to carry the man up to a mountain
crag, where it was impossible for him to descend. The Indian realising
his desperate plight, prayed to the Sun for deliverance, and the Sun,
taking pity on him, sent a great whirlwind which swept the hunter from
his lofty perch, and safely deposited him on the ground.

In a Maidu legend it is related that the Sun dwells in an impregnable
house of ice into which she retreats after killing people on the earth.
Once she abducted the Frog's children, and was closely pursued by their
angry mother, who finally overtook the Sun and swallowed her, but the
Sun

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

burst her open and transformed her into a Frog again.

There are many Indian tales wherein the sun figures as a target. The
Shoshone Indians believed that, in the beginning, the sun did not shine
till the Rabbit shot at him with his magical arrow (the fire drill).

In the following Mewan Indian legend, <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41) the sunlight is extinguished by the arrow
shot: "There was once a poor worthless Indian boy who got his living by
begging. At length, finding people loath to assist him, he threatened to
shoot out the sun, and as this had no effect, he made good his threat,
and shot the sun, thus letting its light out, and the whole world became
dark. It was dark for years, and every one was starving for want of
light, when the Coyote-Man discovered a dim light a long distance off,
and sent the Humming-bird to investigate. The bird, finding its way to
the sun, pecked off a piece, and returned with it under its chin, and
making repeated trips finally succeeded in restoring the full light of
the sun, and to this day you can see the marks of its burden beneath the
chin of the Humming-bird." This association of the Humming-bird with the
sun is found in the traditions of the Aztecs. In their temples was
enthroned a deity known as "the Humming-bird

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

to the left," and this bird was considered by them to be a divine being,
the emissary of the sun. In the Aztec language it is often called
"Sunbeam," or "Sun's hair."

Among the Indians there seems to have been an almost universal tradition
that originally men lived in a world of darkness, or semi-darkness,
before the sun was placed in the heavens. A Mewan legend relates that,
in the early days, the land was shrouded in fog, and was cold and dark.
It was such a poor place to live in that Coyote-Man was not satisfied
with the conditions, and set out on a journey to seek some way to better
it. He finally came to a pleasant land of sunshine, and, charmed with
it, returned to tell his people of the delightful land he had visited.
They suggested that he offer to buy the sun, so he returned to the land
of light and made this proposition, but it was rejected, so Coyote-Man
resolved to steal the sun as his people were in sore need of it.

This was a difficult matter as the sun was carefully watched by the
Turtle, who slept with one eye always open. Coyote-Man, resorting to
magic, took the form of a big oak log, and the Turtle, when out seeking
for wood, took him and threw him on the fire. But the fire did not even
singe him, and seeing the Turtle asleep, he resumed his form, seized the
sun and ran off with it to his own land.

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

The people, however, did not understand it, and bade Coyote-Man make it
go, and, as he was sorry for the people he had deprived of the sun, he
arranged a plan so that the sun could light up both lands. He carried
the sun west to the place where the sky joins the earth, and found the
place for the sun to crawl through, and where it could go down under the
earth, and come up in the eastern sky in the morning through the hole in
the east. The sun did his bidding, and thus both lands thereafter
rejoiced in the blessedness of sunshine.

The Natchez of Mississippi, the Apalachees of Florida, the Mexicans and
Peruvians, all believed that the sun is the bright dwelling-place of
their departed chiefs and warriors.

A primitive Mexican prayer offered in time of war embodies this idea:
"Be pleased, O our Lord, that the nobles who shall die in the war be
peacefully and joyously received by the sun and the earth, who are the
loving father and mother of all."

It is said that General Harrison once called the Shawnee chief,
Tecumseh, for a conference: "Come here, Tecumseh, and sit by your
father," he said. "You my father?" replied the chief with a stern air,
"No, yonder sun \[pointing toward it\] is my father, and the earth is my
mother, so I will rest on her bosom," and he sat upon the ground.

The Kootenay Indians speak of the sun as a

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

blind man who is cured by his father-in-law, Coyote-Man. Here we have
another reference to the Coyote's service to mankind in bringing
sunshine to his people.

Among the New Zealanders the sun is regarded as a great beast whom the
hunters thrashed with clubs. His blood is supposed to be used in some of
their incantations, and according to an Egyptian tradition, the sun's
blood was kneaded into clay at the making of man.

We have seen how the sun was metaphorically regarded in India and other
lands not merely as a human creature, but as the eye of a supreme and
all-seeing deity. In like manner the inhabitants of Java, Sumatra, and
Madagascar called the sun "the eye of day." This metaphor has been used
extensively even in modern poetry.

When the astronomers Galileo, Scheiner, and Fabricius discovered the
spots on the sun, the Aristotelians indignantly insisted that they were
mistaken, and that the phenomenon was due to defects in the optical
properties of their telescopes or eyes. They argued that it was quite
incompatible with the dignity of the Eye of the Universe that it should
be afflicted with such a common ailment as ophthalmia.

Tylor <span id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) tells us that the Rev. Tobias
Snowden,

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

in a book published in the last century, proved the sun to be Hell, and
the dark spots, gatherings of damned souls.

In Greece there was a general protest when the astronomers denied not
only the divinity, but the very personality of the sun, and declared it
to be nothing but a huge fiery globe. These statements were regarded as
blasphemous, and, in fact, Anaxagoras was punished with death for having
taught that the sun was not animated, and that it was nothing but a mass
of iron, about the size of the Peloponnesus.

Such a state of affairs strikes us in this enlightened age as decidedly
extraordinary, and yet in the history of the early settlers of this
country we have in the trials for witchcraft an equally absurd and
foolish state of affairs.

Every age, therefore, to be judged fairly on its merits, must be viewed
in the light of its state of progress, and, grotesque as many of the
foregoing legends related of the sun may seem, it behooves us to
withhold our mirth, and endeavour to realise how much these traditions
were a serious part of the lives of the people of unenlightened ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[123:1](slaa07.htm#fr_34) *The Golden Bough*, J.
G. Frazer.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[123:2](slaa07.htm#fr_35) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[126:1](slaa07.htm#fr_36) From Dasent's *Popular
Tales from the Norse*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[129:1](slaa07.htm#fr_37) This may have been the
Indian way of accounting for the invisibility of the sun at night.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[129:2](slaa07.htm#fr_38) It is strange that the
nebular hypothesis conforms with this idea, that the sun and earth were
close together at one time.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[130:1](slaa07.htm#fr_39) We are almost tempted
to add, "I smell the blood of an Englishman," for here we have a tale
identical in many particulars with the popular fairy tale of "Jack the
Giant Killer," which some authorities claim is of solar origin.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[131:1](slaa07.htm#fr_40) This myth is typical
of many that may well be styled Evaporation and Rainfall myths that are
thus interpreted. The water is enamoured of the cloud, the beautiful
daughter of the Sun. The Sun does not favour the suitor, and strives to
kill him by subjecting him to a number of tests. The Water achieves
success in all of these, and then receives the Sun's permission to marry
his daughter.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[133:1](slaa07.htm#fr_41) *The Dawn of the
World*, C. Hart Merriam.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[136:1](slaa07.htm#fr_42) Primitive Culture,
Edward B. Tylor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Sun Worship](slaa08)

</div>
