<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](slaa13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585090441/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16OXS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sun Lore of All Ages*, by William Tyler Olcott, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

### Chapter XII

#### Emblematic and Symbolic Forms of the Sun

THERE is much of interest in the study of the symbolic forms of the sun,
derived as they are from the mythology and worship of the ancients. Many
of the solar symbols enter into designs that embellish works of art of
ancient and modern production, but, as symbolism and worship are closely
correlated, it is in the study of ecclesiastical architecture, and the
structural and artistic adornment of edifices dedicated to worship, that
we find a fertile field for tracing these emblems and symbols to their
sources.

A knowledge of the origin and true significance of symbolic forms lends
interest to many emblems common in the everyday life of the present
time, and, in some cases, reveals the curious fact and incongruity of
the combination of pagan symbols of worship and anti-pagan ritual. This
state of affairs is in evidence in practically all of the

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

modern church edifices. The meaning of these symbols was lost sight of
as the wave of Christianity swept onward, and yet so great was the power
that these mute forms at one time possessed over men, that, in spite of
the decline and the utter extinction of the worship that created them,
they continued to live throughout the ages, and many of them in the
light of modern times have attained an altered significance, and are as
greatly revered and adored to-day as in the ancient days of heathendom.

Although the Canaanite symbol for the sun was an upright stone, the most
ancient and popular solar symbol seems to have been the eye. This symbol
was naturally suggested by, and in conformity to, the ancient idea that
the sun was an all-seeing god, whose penetrating gaze revealed
everything that was visible to man. The sun, in short, possessed to
primitive minds all the attributes of a great eye gazing down upon the
earth.

To the Persians the sun was the eye of Ormuzd. To the Egyptians it was
the right eye of Demiurge, and in the *Book of the Dead* the sun is
often represented as an eye provided with wings and feet.

To the ancient Hindus the sun was the eye of Varuna. To the Greeks it
was the eye of Zeus, and the early Teutons regarded it as the eye of
Wuotan, or Woden. Greek mythology, in fact,

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

shows us a race of sun people, the Cyclops, huge giants possessing but
one great eye in the centre of their foreheads.

Not only was the sun regarded as a symbol of the eye of the Supreme
Being, but in some cases it was thought to represent his full face and
countenance.

Vieing in importance with the eye symbol of the sun was the wheel
symbol. This was a very ancient conception, and, in this case, the rays
of the sun were represented by the spokes of the wheel. As the sun's
motion was a matter of great concern to the ancients, its motive power
was a subject of much conjecture, and there emerged the fancy that the
sun was drawn across the sky by a number of spirited steeds. According
to Hindu myth these steeds of the sun were appropriately red or golden
in colour.

The symbol of the sun at Sippara was a small circle with four triangular
rays, the four angles between being occupied by radiating lines, and the
whole circumscribed by a larger circle. The same symbol occurs
repeatedly upon the shell gorgets of the ancient Mound-Builders of the
western continent. <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md)

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

In Greece the symbols of Helios, the Sun-God, were horses' heads, a
crown of seven rays, a cornucopia, and a ripened fruit; while the
symbols of Apollo were a wolf, swan, stag, dolphin, laurel, and lyre.
The ancient Chinese solar symbol was a raven in a circle.

Given the symbol of a wheel, and that of the Sun drawn by dashing
steeds, we find in the combination of these symbols the image of the
chariot of the Sun, around which so many ancient myths and legends
cluster. From the vehicle it was but a step of the imagination to regard
the Sun as the charioteer, the supreme deity, driving his flaming car
each day across the firmament. The warlike propensities of primitive man
were responsible for another very early symbol of the sun, that of a
highly burnished shield, while, in a passage of the Persian national
epic by Firdusi, the sun is regarded as a golden key which is lost
during the night, and the lighting up of the sun each morning was looked
upon as an unlocking of the imprisoned orb of day.

Egypt has probably given us more symbols of the sun than any other
country. This is doubtless because the Egyptians had a more elaborate
form of Sun worship than existed in any other land, in that the
different aspects of the sun were, as we have seen, deified. The
best-known Egyptian

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

solar symbols were the scarabæus, hawk and globe, lion, and crocodile.

Taking them up in order, the scarabæus or beetle was, according to
Pliny, worshipped throughout the greater part of Egypt. It was a symbol
particularly sacred to the sun, and is often represented in a boat with
wings extended, holding in its claws the globe of the sun. Horapollo
claims it was chosen as a solar symbol, owing to the fact that the
creature had thirty toes, which equals the number of days in the
ordinary solar month. Frequently the claws are represented as clasping a
globe, emblematic of the action of the Sun-God Ra at mid-day.

In the great temple at Thebes, a scarab has been recovered with two
heads, one of a ram, the symbol of Amen or Ammon, the god of Thebes, the
other of the hawk, the symbol of the <span id="img_29100"></span>

|                                     |
|-------------------------------------|
| ![The Scarab Beetle](img/29100.jpg.md) |

Sun-God Horus, holding in its claws a globe emblematic of the universe.
This scarab has been thought to symbolise The Scarab the rising sun, and
the coming of the Beetle spring sun of the vernal equinox in the
zodiacal sign of the ram.

Pliny avers that the claim of the scarab as a solar symbol rests on the
fact that in this insect there is some resemblance to the operations of
the sun, as one species forms itself into a ball and rolls

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

itself along. The sculptures indicate clearly that the scarabæus
represents the orb of the sun. The earliest scarabs date back to about
3900 B.C., and they were regarded as a sacred symbol for a period of
over three thousand years. Inasmuch as the scarab was a solar symbol, it
was likewise an emblem of immortality, and thus this symbol in its day
closely resembled in its true significance the Christian symbol of the
cross. The scarab was especially sacred to the Sun-God Amen-Ra, and
further symbolised creative and fertilising power: It was the first life
appearing after the annual inundation of the river Nile.

Of equal importance to the beetle as a symbol of the sun in Egypt was
the hawk, or the hawk and globe, sacred as the emblem of the solar
deity. The Sun-God Ra was generally represented as a man with a hawk's
head surmounted by a globe or disk of the sun from which an asp issued,
and the hawk was particularly known as the type of the sun, worshipped
at Heliopolis as the sacred bird, and the representative of the deity of
the place.

The winged disk was likewise a solar symbol, and highly regarded by the
ancient Egyptians, who considered it an emblem of divine protection. It
typified the sun's light and power, transported to the earth on the
wings of a bird (possibly the hawk), and the emblem appears on many of
the

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

temple walls and over the doorway of numerous dwellings in Egypt.

Porphyry says the hawk was dedicated to the sun, being the symbol of
light and spirit, because of the quickness of its motion, and its ascent
to the higher regions of the air. Horapollo thinks that it was chosen as
a type of that luminary from its being able to look more intently
towards its rays than any other bird, whence also under the form of a
hawk they depicted the sun as the Lord of Vision.

Macrobius, Proclus, Horapollo, and others state that the lion was a
symbol of the sun, and this is substantiated by the sculptures.
Macrobius claimed further that the Egyptians employed the lion to
represent that part of the heavens where the sun was in its greatest
force during its annual revolution, the zodiacal sign Leo being called
the "abode of the Sun."

The Egyptians, Hindus, Chaldeans, Persians, and Celts all regarded the
lion as a solar symbol. Brown <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86.md) tells
us: "In the inscriptions of Daryavush I. at El-Khargeh, the oasis of
Ammon, in the Libyan desert, the great god Amen-Ra, the Invisible god
revealed in the sun god, is addressed as 'the Lion of the double lions.'
These two lions, two brothers, the two lion gods, are two solar

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

phases, as diurnal and nocturnal, Har and Set, Shu and Tefuut, and as
there is but one solar orb, so he is the lion of the double lions. In
the funeral ritual the Osirian, or soul seeking divine union and
communion with the sun god, prays: 'Let me not be surpassed by the Lion
god: Oh, the Lion of the sun, who lifts his arm in the hill \[of
heaven\]' and exclaims: 'I am the Lions, I am the sun. The white lion is
the phallus of the sun.'"

The lion and sun form the familiar national standard of Persia, and a
Persian coin by Tavernier shows the sun, horned and radiate, rising over
the back of a lion.

In many parts of Egypt, in ancient times, the crocodile appears to have
been worshipped. This worship was intimately connected with Sun worship,
and rested on the analogy between the natural habits of the crocodile
and the course of the sun;—as the crocodile spends its days on the land,
and at night-fall seeks the water, so the sun, after running its daily
course, sinks at evening into the sea. The crocodile, therefore, came to
be regarded as a solar symbol, and so figures on the sculptures.

The cat was a conspicuous solar symbol in Egypt. The female of the
species was emblematic of Bast or Bubastis, a solar deity, and the male
symbolised the great Sun-God Ra.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

The Egyptians also represented the sun by the figure of a man sailing in
a ship upon the ocean. Sometimes the ship was supported on the back of a
crocodile, and again the man appeared floating in the ship, but at the
same time seated upon the aquatic lotus, and often the ship was omitted,
and the man was supported simply by the lotus. Sometimes the man's place
in the calyx of the lotus plant is occupied by the figure of a child,
and in the Bembini table, a frog is figured squatting on the floating
lotus leaf in place of the man or child.

The Egyptians also represented the sun and moon, Osiris and Isis, as the
ox and the cow, and Lady Wilde <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_87.md) tells
us that these were used at the Irish wake ceremonials until very
recently. "There is perhaps," says Faber, <span
id="fr_88"></span>[2](#fn_88.md) "no part of the Gentile world in which the
bull and the cow were not highly reverenced, and considered in the light
of holy and mysterious symbols. Among the Chinese, the great father
Fohi, whose whole history proves him to be the scriptural Noah, is
feigned to have had the head of a bull. In the neighbouring empire of
Japan, this ancient personage is venerated under the title of 'ox-headed
prince of heaven,' and his figure is here again that of a man having the
horns of a bull."

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

Bearing in mind the nature and meaning of these solar symbols, the
Egyptian sculptures have, for those who study them, a significance that
renders them doubly interesting.

The Sun-Gods of the Hindus were represented as seated on the sacred
lotus, or floating on the surface of the great deep, either on a leaf,
or a huge serpent coiled up in a boatlike form.

In Greece there were legends of the voyage of the solar deity over the
ocean, borne in a golden cup, originated, we are told, from the
circumstance of the yellow or golden cup of the lotus being employed to
represent the ship of the Sun. Indeed, in Hindustan, the cup of the
lotus and the ship of the Sun-God Siva mean the same thing. "So
strongly," says Faber, <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89.md) "was the idea
of a mariner sun impressed upon the minds of the ancient Pagans, that
they even transferred it to the sphere. Not content with making the sun
sail over the ocean in a ship, they considered the whole solar system as
one large vessel in which the seven planets act as sailors, while the
sun as the fountain of ethereal light presides as the pilot or captain.

"These eight celestial mariners who navigate the ship of the sphere are
clearly the astronomical representatives of the eight great gods of
Egypt, all of whom, including the sun as their head, were

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

wont, according to Porphyry, to be depicted not standing on dry land,
but sailing over the ocean in a ship."

The natives of Central America represented the sun by a human head,
encircled by diverging rays, and with a great open mouth. This solar
symbol was widely spread in all that region. In this representation the
tongue is protruding, which signifies that the sun lives and speaks.
This is clearly evidenced in the famous Aztec Calendar Stone (Calendario
Azteco), also called "Stone of the Sun," which was recovered about the
middle of the seventeenth century in the subsoil of the Plaza Major,
Mexico City. Terry's *Guide-Book on Mexico* thus describes this
interesting relic of antiquity:

"A huge rectangular parallelopipedon of basaltic porphyry, twenty-two
feet in diameter, by three feet thick, which weighs twenty-four tons is
one of the most interesting of the Aztec relics . . . . This immense
specimen, which resembles an irregular mill-stone with a disk carved on
it in low relief, evidently served the Aztecs as a calendar stone, and
sun-dial. The face is carved with chronological and astronomical signs
in geometrical order. The central figure, with a protruding tongue,
represents the sun 'Tonatiuh'; the segments radiating toward the edge of
the disk are symbolic of its rays.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

"Encircling this central figure are seven rings of unequal widths; from
the third to the seventh they are incomplete. The inner ring represents
two groups of signs, each group containing four symbols. Above the face
is an arrowhead, symbolic of the wind, and beneath it a cluster of balls
and hieroglyphs. In the rectangles above and below the eagle claws at
the right and left are symbols representing the four elements, Air,
Fire, Water, and Earth. The symbols on both sides of the upper arrowhead
are supposed to represent the years. Five ornamental disks fill the
spaces between the symbols. The rectangles of the second ring contain
the names of the days of the Aztec month, they begin above the point of
the arrowhead and continue toward the left. . . . The third ring
contains forty small squares each with five balls supposed to represent
days—two hundred in all. Crossing this ring and extending to the sixth
are four large arrowheads. The latter ring is the largest of all, and is
formed by two huge serpents whose tails terminate in arrowheads
ornamented with feathers. The chronological figures between the ends of
the tails are thought to correspond to the year 1479 of our era. The
human heads ornamented with feathers, eagle claws, disks, ear pendants,
and what not represent the gods, (at the left) Tonatiuh, the sun, and
(at

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

the right) Quetzalcoatl, god of the air. The rim of the huge stone is
adorned with conical glyptics, half stars and balls symbolic of the
worlds and stars. . . . By means of this Calendario the priests kept
their own records, regulated the festivals and seasons of sacrifices,
and made their astronomical calculations. The symbols show that they had
the means of settling the hours of the day with precision, the periods
of the solstices and equinoxes, and that of the transit of the sun
across the zenith of Mexico."

Prescott describes this stone in his *Conquest of Mexico*, and it is now
on exhibition in the National Museum of the City of Mexico.

In the sculptures of the ancient Toltecs, the Sun- and Moon-Gods are
represented by the symbols of the tiger and the hare respectively.

Akin to the solar symbols of the Canaanites, the primitive Mexicans
erected columns of stone elaborately carved. These symbolised the sun,
and as Réville puts it, "The sun traces each day the shadow of these
monoliths upon the soil. He appears to caress and love them, regarding
them as his fellow-workers in measuring time." <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md)

Many of the mystic signs common to pagan worship are in evidence to-day,
"and the High Churchman decorates the edifice in which he

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

officiates with symbols similar to those which awed the worshippers of
Ashur, Ishtar, or the sun." <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md)

Chief among these ecclesiastical solar symbols is the cross, symbol of
the Christian faith, a symbol that antedated the birth of Christ, and
one that found its origin in solar worship. It occurs upon the monuments
and utensils of every primitive people, from China to Yucatan. It may be
asked, how did the cross, symbol of the sun, originate? The following
ingenious explanation has been offered:

"If any one will observe carefully a lamp, or other bright light, with
partially closed eyes, the answer will be obvious. The rays which appear
to proceed from the luminous point form a cross of some kind. This is
due to the reflection from the eyelashes, and edges of the eyelids. The
evolution of the sun symbol seems to have been as follows: He was first
represented by a circle or disk as he appears when near the horizon.
Observations made when he was shining brightly revealed the crossed
rays. This led to a combination of the circle and cross. If this is
correct the swastika is a modification of the circle and inscribed
cross. Not the least remarkable feature of this subject is the fact that
the most ancient and universal symbol of the physical sun should

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

for entirely independent reasons continue in use as the sign of the Sun
of Righteousness, and the Light of the World."

The simple cross, with perpendicular and transverse arms of equal
length, represents the nave and spokes of the solar wheel, sending forth
its rays in all directions. In the ancient parish church of Bebington,
Cheshire, England, there is to be seen to this day not only the solar
wheel, as one of the adornments of the reredos, but deltas, acorns, and
Maltese crosses (all of which are pagan symbols) enter profusely into
the decorative features of the edifice.

One of the oldest and most widely occurring forms of the cross is the
cross with crampons turned to right and left, commonly known as the
"swastika," <span id="img_30100"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30100.jpg) |

the suavastika of India, the Thor's hammer of Western Europe. Professor
Max Müller thinks that this symbol represents the vernal sun, and that
it is an emblem of life, health, and creative energy. It is thought to
have arisen from the conception of the sun as a rolling wheel.

The halo depicted as encircling the heads of the saints, and those
endowed with holy attributes, is clearly a solar symbol, and the wheel
symbol suggested by the disk of the sun was often used as an emblem of
God.

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

In the chancel of a church in New England to-day we see in the mural
decorations symbols that typify the ancient deification of the Sun, and
originated from that worship, such as the disk fringed <span
id="img_30200"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30200.jpg) |

with darting rays, the sun symbol, in the centre of which is the Christ
name symbol, a strange and incongruous combining of the symbols of
antagonistic and widely differing cults.

In another church in the same locality is the symbol of the six-pointed
star, enclosing the all-seeing eye.<span id="img_30201"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30201.jpg) |

This double equilateral triangle is one of the most sacred of all the
emblems of Pythagoras, and was revered for ages as the seal of King
Solomon. It is also an important Masonic emblem.

The strange part of this study of symbolism is that the significance of
these heathen emblems should be utterly meaningless to the multitudes
who worship in their sight, which indicates an indifference to a
knowledge of symbolism not in accord with the desire oftentimes
emphasised for it, and the great number of emblems which embellish and
adorn modern ecclesiastical edifices.

The emblems of heraldry perpetuate the symbolism expressive of the solar
worship of primitive times. We see the Royal Arms of England, supported
by the solar lion and the lunar unicorn.

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

"These two creatures," says Brown, "are naturally antagonistic. In the
ancient myth, the Unicorn, when rushing at the Lion, sticks his horn
fast in a mythic Tree, behind which his opponent has taken refuge, and
the Lion coming round devours him whilst thus defenceless. This is the
explanation of the myth. The Lion-Sun flies from the rising
Unicorn-Moon, and hides behind the Tree or Grove of the Under-world, the
Moon pursues, and sinking in his turn, is caught in this mysterious
Tree, and sunslain." <span id="fr_92"></span>[1](#fn_92.md)

In many escutcheons are to be seen solar symbols already referred to,
as, for instance, in the cut, the escutcheon of a Greek-letter
fraternity shows the winged sun disk and the all-seeing eye.

In astrology also, solar symbolism plays an important part, such as "the
rules which connect the sun with gold, with heliotrope and pæony, with
the cock which heralds day, and with magnanimous animals such as the
lion and bull."

There is to be found in certain old brick houses in England a curious
solar symbol. It consists of a flat piece of iron five or six inches in
length, shaped somewhat like the letter "S,"<span id="img_30300"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30300.jpg) |

which was placed upon the house walls about the line of division between
the

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

first and second stories. It is still used in Herefordshire. There, it
is said that these irons are in the nature of talismans, and are
supposed to protect the house from fire and collapse.

Brown tells us that "Masonic tradition is but one of the numerous
ancient allegories of the yearly passage of the personified sun among
the twelve constellations of the zodiac, being founded on a system of
astronomical symbols and emblems, employed to teach the great truths of
omnipotent God and immortality." <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) Its
symbolism, therefore, is closely associated with solar symbolism and
interesting to note in this connection. The word "Masonry" is said to be
derived from a Greek word which signifies "I am in the midst of heaven,"
alluding to the sun. Others derive it from the ancient Egyptian "Phre,"
the sun, and "Mas," a child, Phre-mas, *i.e.*, children of the sun, or
sons of light. From this we get our word "Freemason."

Masons are instructed to travel eastward in search of light, as the sun
rises in the east. The initiation into all the ancient mysteries was a
drama founded on the astronomical allegory of the death and resurrection
of the Sun, and impressed on the mind of the candidate the unity of God
and the immortality of man. These facts are taught in the ritual of the
Third Degree.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

The Sun, overwhelmed by the three autumn months, returns to life at the
vernal equinox, and is exalted at the summer solstice. In this drama the
candidate was required to represent the Sun, and a solar significance
characterises the whole ritual.

The following references to the symbolism of Masonry are taken from
*Stellar Theology* by Robert Brown, Jr.

"The Lodge should be situated East and West, because the Sun, the glory
of the Lord, rises in the East and sets in the West. A lodge has three
lights situated in the East, West, and South. The Master's place is in
the East, whence the sun rises, the Senior Warden's in the South, the
point the sun occupies at mid-day.

"E.A.M. signifies the sun, F.C.M. the moon, and M.M. the sun, Benevolent
God of Fire.

"O.G.M.H.A. is derived from two roots signifying the origin or
manifestation of light, also he who was, and is. The source of eternal
light, the sun taken as an emblem of Deity.

"O.G.M.H.A. represents the sun. The three steps delineated on the
master's carpet have an obvious reference to the three steps or degrees
by which the initiated becomes a Master-mason. They allude to the
constellations Taurus, Gemini, and Cancer (emblematic of three steps),
by means

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

of which the sun ascends to the summit of the Royal Arch.

"The emblem of the Blazing Star alludes to the Sun as a symbol of Deity.
The rite of Circumambulation has a direct solar allusion, as it was
always performed from right to left, in imitation of the apparent course
of the sun from East to West by way of the South.

"Masons celebrate June 24th and December 27th. These dates have a purely
astronomic significance, and refer to the summer and winter solstice,
the periods of great festivals and celebrations throughout the ancient
world.

"The symbol of the all-seeing eye is distinctly solar in its character.
In most of the ancient languages of Asia, eye and sun are expressed by
the same word. In like manner Masons have emblematically represented the
omniscience of the great Architect of the Universe.

"The significance of the Pillars of the Porch is of interest. In every
Lodge there are two pillars surmounted by globes. These represent the
pillars in the porch of King Solomon's temple. The Egyptian temples
always contained two such pillars, one called 'Boaz,' meaning the sun,
on the north side, the other 'Jachin,' referring to the moon, on the
south.

"The corner-stone of the Lodge is placed in the

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> North-East, as the
sun on June 21st rises in the North-East."

According to Professor Worsaal, the ring cross<span
id="img_30700"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30700.jpg) |

is a symbol of the sun, and belongs to the later stone age of
Scandinavia. It was also the Chaldean solar symbol. The same writer
places amongst the emblems of the later bronze age the symbol of the
wheel cross,<span id="img_30701"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/30701.jpg) |

which is considered a symbol of the sun.

The subject of solar symbolism has been only briefly touched upon in the
foregoing, and a close study of its many features affords a rich field
for research that should prove of fascinating interest to scholars and
antiquarians alike.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[289:1](slaa14.htm#fr_85.md) The Moqui Indian
Symbol of the sun is a Greek cross with a small circle in the centre, in
which are three marks to indicate the eyes and mouth of a face.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[293:1](slaa14.htm#fr_86.md) *The Lion and the
Unicorn*, Robert Brown, Jr.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[295:1](slaa14.htm#fr_87.md) *Ancient Legends of
Ireland*, Lady Wilde.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[295:2](slaa14.htm#fr_88.md) *The Origin of Pagan
Idolatry*, George Stanley Faber.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[296:1](slaa14.htm#fr_89.md) *The Origin of Pagan
Idolatry*, George Stanley Faber.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[299:1](slaa14.htm#fr_90.md) *Native Races of
Mexico and Peru*, Albert Réville.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[300:1](slaa14.htm#fr_91.md) *Ancient Faiths*,
Thomas Inman.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[303:1](slaa14.htm#fr_92.md) *The Unicorn*, Robert
Brown, Jr.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[304:1](slaa14.htm#fr_93.md) *Stellar Theology*,
Robert Brown, Jr.

 
