<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sky Lore](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](slaa05)  [Next](slaa07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1585090441/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002L16OXS/internetsacredte.md)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Sun Lore of All Ages*, by William Tyler Olcott, \[1914\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

### Chapter IV

#### Solar Mythology (*Continued*)

IN Norse mythology we find, as we might expect, many solar myths and sun
heroes, whose knightly qualities and redoubtable prowess enable them to
accomplish seemingly impossible tasks, and vanquish the most formidable
of foes.

Odin governs the high heavens, and the sun is referred to as Odin's eye.
Thor rules in the clouds. He is identified as a Sun-God, and, like
Hercules, distinguished himself as the enemy of the powers of cold and
darkness. He conquers the frost giants. Heimdal's realm is the rainbow,
and Balder rules the realm of light, but the sun affects them all. "It
is," says Anderson, <span id="fr_25"></span>[1](#fn_25.md) "Odin's eye,
Balder's countenance; Heimdal needs it for his rainbow, and still the
sun itself rides as a beaming maid with her horses from morning until
evening."

In the following graceful Finnish myth we find the sun represented as a
lamp illuminating the halls of Vanna Issa, the Supreme Deity, and
entrusted

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

by him to the care of two immortal servants, a youth and a maiden. "To
the maiden who is called 'Evening Twilight,' the ancient Father saith:
'My daughter, unto thee I entrust the Sun, extinguish him and hide away
the fire that no damage may ensue.' Then to the Dawn: 'My son, it is thy
duty to rekindle the light for a new course. On no day is the light to
be absent from the arch of heaven.'

"In winter he resteth a great while, but in summer his repose is short,
and Evening Twilight gives up the dying light into the very hands of
Dawn who straightway kindles it into new life. At such times they each
take one look deep into the other's dark brown eyes; they press each
other's hands, and their lips touch. Once a year only for the space of
four weeks they come together at midnight. Then Evening Twilight layeth
the dying light into the hands of Dawn, and a pressure of hands and a
kiss make them happy, and the cheeks of Evening Twilight redden, and the
rosy redness is mirrored in the sky till Dawn rekindles the light."

The following myth of the "Witch and the Sun's Sister" reveals another
type of sun myth involving the actions of members of the Sun's family.
In some of these myths the Sun's son figures, and however capricious the
Sun may act, the legends

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

that relate to his family indicate that they were kindly disposed toward
humankind, and in many of the myths they act the part of benefactors.

In a country far remote there were once a king and a queen, who had a
son named Prince Ivan, who was dumb from birth. A groom told the Prince
that he was destined to have a sister who would prove to be a terrible
witch, and advised him to flee lest harm befall him, He took the advice,
and his father provided him with a swift horse on which he took his
flight.

After wandering far he sought a dwelling-place in vain, first with two
women, then with a giant who was uprooting trees, and lastly with a
giant who was levelling mountains. Finally, he came to the dwelling of
the Sun's sister, and she received him just as if he had been her own
son. After a time, Prince Ivan longed to return to his old home, and
persuaded the Sun's sister to allow him to depart. On his homeward
journey he was enabled, by magic bestowed on him by the Sun's sister, to
assist the two women and the giants who had refused to take him in
because of trials which beset them.

On his home-coming his sister, the wicked witch, laid plans to destroy
him; but he was warned in time by a mouse, and though closely pursued by
the witch he escaped her clutches through the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

aid of those he had befriended and the Sun's sister.

The mythology of the North American Indians contains many examples of
the solar myth. One of their Sun-Gods was Michabo, whose name signifies
the Great Hare, the Great White One, or the God of the Dawn, and the
East. It is said that he slept through the winter months, and in the
fall when he was about to seek repose, he filled his great pipe, and the
blue clouds of smoke that he exhaled drifted over the landscape filling
the air with the veil-like haze of Indian Summer.

Michabo was regarded by the Indians as their common ancestor, and the
ruler of the numerous tribes, the founder of their religious ritual and
the inventor of their art of picture-writing. He controlled the weather,
and was the creator and preserver of heaven and earth. The totem or clan
which was dedicated to him was revered with the greatest respect.

In *Myths and Myth Makers*, by John Fiske, we read the following
poetical description of Michabo, the Indian solar deity:

"From a grain of sand brought from the bottom of the primeval ocean he
fashioned the habitable land, and set it floating on the waters till it
grew to such a size that a strong young wolf running

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

constantly died of old age ere he reached its limits. He was also like
Nimrod a mighty hunter. <span id="fr_26"></span>[1](#fn_26.md) One of his
footsteps measured eight leagues. The Great Lakes were the beaver dams
he built, and when the cataracts impeded his progress, he tore them away
with his hands. Sometimes he was said to dwell in the skies with his
brother, the Snow, or like many great spirits to have built a wigwam in
the far north in some floe of ice in the Arctic Ocean. In the oldest
accounts of the missionaries he was alleged to reside toward the east.
He is the personification of the solar life-giving power, which daily
comes forth from its home in the east making the earth to rejoice."

A Modoc Indian myth relates that every day the Sun is utterly destroyed,
and reduced to a heap of ashes, but inasmuch as the Sun is immortal, the
disk lies dormant in the ashes waiting its summons to renewed life. Some
one must, therefore, rouse the slumbering Sun each morning, as a slave
is called to daily labour, and this office is performed by the morning
star. At the summons to awake, the golden disk springs from the ashes
rejuvenated, and goes forth to run his course. Here we have

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

a legend similar to that of the Phœnix, the mythical bird which rose
from lifeless ashes once in five centuries.

The following Cherokee legend is one of the most interesting solar myths
related by the Indians:

"The Sun lived on the other side of the sky vault but her daughter lived
in the middle of the sky directly above the earth, and every day as the
Sun was climbing along the sky arch to the west, she used to stop at her
daughter's house for dinner.

"Now the Sun hated the people of the earth because they could never look
straight at her without screwing up their faces. She said to her
brother, the Moon: 'My grandchildren are ugly, they grin all over their
faces when they look at me.' But the Moon said: 'I like my younger
brothers.' They always smiled pleasantly at him when they saw him in the
sky for his rays were milder. The Sun was jealous and planned to kill
all the people. So every day when she got near her daughter's house she
sent down such sultry rays that there was a great fever, and the people
died by hundreds. They went for help to the Little Men who said the only
way to save themselves was to kill the Sun. The Little Men made
medicine, and changing two men to snakes sent them to bite the old Sun
when she came next day, but the light of the Sun blinded them, and they
were unable to harm the Sun.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Again the Little
Men were appealed to, and changing a man into a rattlesnake they sent
him to bite the Sun, but instead of the Sun the snake bit the Sun's
daughter, and she died from the bite. Now was the Sun sad and people did
not die any more, but now the world was dark all the time because the
Sun would not come out. Again they appealed to the Little Men who told
them they must appease the Sun by bringing back her daughter from the
ghost country. Seven men were chosen to seek the daughter, and bring her
back in a box. They were charged not to open the box after she was put
into it. They succeeded in their quest, and started home with the
daughter safe in a box. She pleaded so hard to be let out that when they
were almost home they opened the box only a little way, but this was
enough, and something flew past them into a thicket, and they heard a
red bird cry, 'Kwish,' 'Kwish,' in the bushes. They shut down the lid
but when they got home the box was empty. The Sun had been glad when
they started for the ghost country, but when they came back without her
daughter she grieved and cried and wept until her tears made a flood
upon the earth, and people were afraid the world would be drowned.

"They held another council and sent their handsomest young men and women
to amuse her

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

so that she would stop crying. They danced before the Sun and sang their
best songs, but for a long time she kept her face covered and paid no
attention until at last the drummer suddenly changed the song, when she
lifted up her face and was so pleased at the sight that she forgot her
grief and smiled." <span id="fr_27"></span>[1](#fn_27.md)

It is a significant fact that we find here a legend in respect to the
propitiation of the sun identical with the Japanese myth related above,
where, because of the retirement of the Sun-Goddess into her cave, men
made every effort to conciliate her, and, finally, by a ceremony of
singing and dancing, they won her back to her place in the sky.

Another Cherokee Indian myth relates that several young warriors once
set out on a journey to the sunrise land. On the way they had many
strange adventures, and finally they came to the sun's rising place,
where the sky touches the ground. They discovered that the sky was an
arch of solid rock hanging above the earth, and it seemed to swing
slowly up and down, so that as it rocked it left a little opening at its
base through which the sun rose each morning.

The adventurers waited for the sun to come out and presently it
appeared. It had a human figure, but it was too bright to permit of
their seeing its

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

features clearly. As soon as it had emerged through the opening they
tried to leap through the narrow orifice before it was closed, but just
as the first warrior was passing through, the rock rim of the sky closed
and crushed out his life. The others were afraid to make the attempt
after this fatality, and returned home, and the return trip took them
such a long time that when they at length reached the end of their
journey they were all old men.

In another version of this myth, three brothers undertook the journey,
and the two younger ones succeeded in leaping through the opening. The
older brother attempted to follow, but he was crushed by the great rock
rim of the sky. The two successful brothers continued journeying in a
land where everything is different, and presently met their elder
brother. They all proceeded to the house of the Supreme Deity, whose
messenger the Sun was, and were purified and built over. They now
possessed magic qualities which enabled them to perform wonderful feats
of speed and strength. After a time they returned to their native
village, but, like Rip Van Winkle, no one knew them save an old woman.

One of the most beautiful of the solar myths of the Indians is the
Algonquin "Legend of the Red Swan" which is as follows: <span
id="fr_28"></span>[1](#fn_28.md)

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

"The hunter Ojibwa had just killed a bear, and begun to skin him when
suddenly something red tinged all the air around. Reaching the shore of
a lake the Indian saw it was a beautiful red swan whose plumage
glittered in the sun. In vain the hunter shot his shafts, for the bird
floated unharmed and unheeding, but at last he remembered three magic
arrows at home which had been his father's. The first and second arrows
flew near and nearer, the third struck the swan, and flapping its wings
it flew slowly towards the sinking of the sun."

Longfellow has adapted this beautiful episode as a sunset picture in one
of his Indian poems:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Can it be the sun descending  
O’er the level plain of water?  
Or the Red Swan floating, flying,  
Wounded by the magic arrow,  
Staining all the waves with crimson  
With the crimson of its life-blood  
Filling all the air with splendour  
With the splendour of its plumage?</span>

</div>

The story goes on to tell how the hunter speeds westward in pursuit of
the Red Swan. "At lodges where he rests, they tell him she has often
passed there, but those who followed her have never returned. She is the
daughter of an old magician who has lost his scalp which Ojibwa succeeds
in

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

recovering for him and puts back on his head, and the old man rises from
the earth no longer aged and decrepit but splendid in youthful glory.
Ojibwa departs and the magician calls forth the beautiful maiden, now
not his daughter, but his sister, and gives her to his victorious
friend. It was in after days when Ojibwa had gone home with his bride
that he travelled forth and coming to an opening in the earth descended
and came to the abode of departed spirits, there he could behold the
bright western region of the good, and the dark cloud of wickedness. But
the spirits told him that his brethren at home were quarrelling for the
possession of his wife, and at last after long wandering this Red Indian
Odysseus returned to his mourning, constant Penelope, laid the magic
arrows to his bow, and stretched the wicked suitors dead at his feet.

"Thus savage legends from Polynesia and America may well support the
theory that Odysseus visiting the Elysian fields and Orpheus descending
to the land of Hades to bring back the wide-shining Eurydikê are but the
Sun himself descending to and ascending from the world below."

The Algonquin deity Manabozho was a personification of the sun, for, in
an Ottawa myth, he is referred to as the elder brother of the Spirit of
the West, God of the country of the dead in the region

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

of the setting sun, and his solar character is further revealed in the
legend of his vain pursuit of the West, his brother, to the brink of the
world.

According to a Peruvian myth, Viracocha, the Supreme God of the
Peruvians, rose from the bosom of Lake Titicaca, and journeying westward
overcame all the foes that opposed him, and disappeared at length into
the western sea, thus portraying his true solar character.

Faber <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29.md) tells us that the ancient
Mexicans believed that the world was made by the gods, but professed
ignorance as to the precise mode in which it was formed. "They imagined
that since the creation four suns had successively appeared and
disappeared, and they maintained that that which we now behold is the
fifth. The first sun perished by a deluge of water, and with it all
living creatures. The second fell from heaven at a period when there
were many giants in the country and by the fall everything that had life
was again destroyed. The third was consumed by fire and the fourth was
dissipated by a tempest of wind. At that time mankind did not perish as
before but were changed into apes, yet when the fourth sun was blotted
out there was a darkness which continued twenty-five years. At the end
of the fifteenth

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

year their chief god formed a man and a woman who brought forth
children, and at the end of the other ten years appeared the fifth sun
then newly born. Three days after this last sun became visible all the
former gods died, then in process of time were produced those whom they
have since worshipped."

The Egyptians had a legend which in some respects is so similar to that
of the Mexican myth related above that it would almost appear as if the
two originated from the same source. They told Herodotus that, according
to their records, the sun had four times deviated from his regular
course, having twice risen in the west, and twice set in the east. This
change, however, had produced no alteration in the climate of Egypt,
neither had a greater prevalence of disease been the consequence.

Among the Maoris of New Zealand we find a myth that depicts dramatically
the setting sun as it goes to its death through the western portals of
the night. Because of its interest as a pronounced type of the solar
myth it is given in detail:

"Maui, the New Zealand cosmic hero, at the end of his glorious career
came back to his father's country and was told that here perhaps he
might be overcome, for here dwelt his mighty ancestress
'Great-Woman-Night,' whom you may see flashing,

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

and as it were opening and shutting there where the horizon meets the
sky. What you see yonder shining so brightly red are her eyes, and her
teeth are as sharp and hard as pieces of volcanic glass. Her body is
like that of a man, and as for the pupils of her eyes they are jasper.
Her hair is like the tangles of long seaweed, and her mouth is like that
of a barracouta.

"Maui boasted of his former exploits, and said: 'Let us fearlessly seek
whether men are to die or live forever.' But his father called to mind
an evil omen that when he was baptising Maui he had left out part of the
fitting prayers and therefore he knew that his son must perish, yet he
said: 'O my last born, and the strength of my old age, . . . be bold, go
and visit your great ancestress who flashes so fiercely there where the
edge of the horizon meets the sky.' Then the birds came to Maui to be
his companions in the enterprise, and it was evening when they went with
him, and they came to the dwelling of his mighty ancestress, and found
her fast asleep. Maui charged the birds not to laugh when they saw him
creep into the old chieftainess, but when he had got altogether inside
her, and was coming out of her mouth, then they might laugh long and
loud. So Maui stripped off his clothes and crept in. The birds kept
silence, but when he was in up to his

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

waist the little tiwakawaka could hold its laughter no longer, and burst
out loud with its merry note, then Maui's ancestress awoke, closed on
him, and caught him tight and he was killed. Thus died Maui, and thus
death came into the world.

"The New Zealanders hold that the sun descends at night into his cavern,
bathes in the water of Life, and returns at dawn from the underworld;
hence we may interpret their thought that if Man could likewise descend
into Hades and return, his race would be immortal.

"It is seldom that solar characteristics are more distinctly marked in
the several details of a myth than they are here. Great-Woman-Night who
dwells on the horizon is the New Zealand Hades. The birds are to keep
silence as the sun enters night, but may sing when he comes forth from
her mouth, the mouth of Hades. The tiwakawaka describes the cry of the
bird which is only heard at sunset." <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30.md)

 

One of the most wide-spread and best-known sun myths relates to the
devouring of the day by the night monster at set of sun, and the
disgorging of the victim by the devourer in the morning. A Zulu legend
describes the maw of this sun-devouring monster as a land teeming with
human life,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

and its environment, and when the monster is cut open, all the creatures
issue forth from the state of darkness, the cock leading, exclaiming: "I
see the world."

The well-known fairy tale of "Little Red Riding-Hood" is a sun myth of
this type, and in Germany there is added to the tale the fact that,
after the wolf had devoured his victim, a hunter slew the wolf, ripped
him open, when out stepped the little maiden in her red cloak, safe and
sound.

There is a legend current in Germany that relates to a frog that wooed
the daughters of a queen. The youngest daughter consented to become his
bride, and this gracious act on her part freed the frog from a magic
spell, and he was transformed into a handsome youth.

"This tale," says Professor Max Müller, <span
id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31.md) "is solar in its character, and but
another version of the Sanscrit story of Bhekî the frog who became the
wife of a king only to vanish at the sight of a glass of water, a legend
that grew out of a phrase which was possibly, 'the sun dies at the sight
of water.'"

Another ancient myth that has come down to us relates to the mystic
meeting of the sunlight and moonlight. The light of the sun was a king's
daughter who, on a certain day asked to be allowed

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

to walk unattended in the streets of a great city. The king consented,
and ordered all the citizens to remain indoors behind closed shutters on
that day and refrain from looking out. A minister, who was really the
moonlight, could not restrain his curiosity. He stepped out on his
balcony and was seen by the king's daughter, who beckoned to him and he
joined her at the foot of a tree. Thus did the sunlight and moonlight
mingle their beams of light. The king was told of their meeting and set
out for the trysting-place, but before his arrival the minister's wife,
realising her husband's peril, sought him and so disguised him that he
resembled a monster. When the king finally found his daughter, and saw
no one near her but a monster, he was convinced that he had been
misinformed, and that his daughter had met no one.

The association of the sun with a floating island is revealed in many
legends, and in solar symbolism we find the sun depicted as seated on a
floating lotus leaf.

Herodotus tells us that near Buto there was a deep and broad lake in
which was a reputed floating island. In this island was a large temple
dedicated to the sun. The island was once firm, but it is said when
Typhon, who was the sea, was once roaming round the world in pursuit of
the solar deity Horus, Latona, who was one of the

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

primitive eight gods who dwelt in the city of Buto, received him in
trust from Isis and concealed him in the island of Chemmis, which then
first began to float. Afterwards he became sufficiently powerful to
leave his place of refuge and to expel Typhon who had usurped his
dominions, and his own reign then commenced.

The myth of Phœbus Apollo is substantially identical with this, and the
island of Delos, the birthplace of the Sun-God, corresponds to the
floating island Chemmis.

There is another parallel legend among the Peruvians. When all mankind
were swept away by the waters of the Deluge, a personage named Viracocha
emerged from Lake Titicaca and became the founder of the sacred city of
Cuzco. Viracocha was the Sun-God of the Peruvians, and the common
ancestor of the race of Incas.

In Lake Titicaca, which is considered sacred by the Peruvians, there is
a small island where they claim the Sun-God hid himself and saved his
life when the world was destroyed by the waters of the Deluge. On this
island there was a temple dedicated to the sun, as there was on the
island of Chemmis, the Egyptian island, and the Greek island Delos.
These islands were considered holy places.

Faber <span id="fr_32"></span>[1](#fn_32.md) tells us: "The sun is further
represented

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

as peculiarly delighting to haunt the sacred mountain which first raised
its head above the retiring waters, and which received the ark. This
mountain top, therefore, had the appearance of a floating island which
doubtless gave rise to the many myths that represent the sun as
navigating the deep.

"The favourite residence of the Greek solar deity was Parnassus. In the
Zend Avesta the sun is described as ruling over the world from the top
of Mount Albordi which is said to have been the first land that appeared
above the waves of the retreating flood.

"The old Orphic poet, the priests of Egypt, and the Brahmas of Hindostan
agree in maintaining that the sun was born out of an egg which had
floated on the ocean, and which had been tossed about at the mercy of
the elements."

The following extremely interesting solar myth of Irish extraction is
related in *Myths and Myth Makers* by John Fiske:

"Long before the Danes ever came to Ireland, there died at Muskerry a
Sculloge, or country farmer, who by dint of hard work and close economy
had amassed enormous wealth. His only son did not resemble him. When the
young Sculloge looked about the house, the day after his father's death,
and saw the big chests full of gold

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and silver, and the cupboards shining with piles of sovereigns, and the
old stockings stuffed with large and small coin, he said to himself,
'Bedad, how shall I ever be able to spend the likes o’ that?' And so he
drank, and gambled, and wasted his time in hunting and horse-racing,
until after a while he found the chests empty and the cupboards
poverty-stricken, and the stockings lean and penniless. Then he
mortgaged his farmhouse and gambled away all the money he got for it,
and then he bethought him that a few hundred pounds might be raised on
his mill. But when he went to look at it, he found the dam broken and
scarcely a thimbleful of water in the mill-race, and the wheel rotten,
and the thatch of the house all gone, and the upper millstone lying flat
on the lower one, and a coat of dust and mould over everything. So he
made up his mind to borrow a horse and take one more hunt to-morrow and
then reform his habits.

"As he was returning late in the evening from his farewell hunt, passing
through a lonely glen he came upon an old man playing backgammon,
betting on his left hand against his right, and crying and cursing
because the right would win. 'Come and bet with me,' said he to
Sculloge. 'Faith, I have but a sixpence in the world,' was the reply;
'but if you like, I'll wager that on the right.'

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Done,' said the
old man, who was a Druid; 'if you win I'll give you a hundred guineas.'
So the game was played, and the old man, whose right hand was always the
winner, paid over the guineas and told Sculloge to go to the Devil with
them.

"Instead of following this bit of advice, however, the young farmer went
home and began to pay his debts, and next week he went to the glen and
won another game, and made the Druid rebuild his mill. So Sculloge
became prosperous again, and by and by he tried his luck a third time,
and won a game played for a beautiful wife. The Druid sent her to his
house the next morning before he was out of bed, and his servants came
knocking at the door and crying, 'Wake up, wake up, Master Sculloge,
there's a young lady here to see you.' 'Bedad, it's the vanithee <span
id="fr_33"></span>[1](#fn_33.md) herself,' said Sculloge; and getting up in
a hurry, he spent three-quarters of an hour in dressing himself. At last
he went downstairs, and there on the sofa was the prettiest lady ever
seen in Ireland. Naturally, Sculloge's heart beat fast and his voice
trembled, as he begged the lady's pardon for this Druidic style of
wooing, and besought her not to feel obliged to stay with him unless she
really liked him. But the young lady, who was a king's daughter from a
far country, was wondrously

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

charmed with the handsome farmer, and so well did they get along that
the priest was sent for without further delay, and they were married
before sundown. Sabina was the vanithee's name; and she warned her
husband to have no more dealings with Lassa Buaicht, the old man of the
glen. So for a while all went happily, and the Druidic bride was as good
as she was beautiful. But by and by Sculloge began to think he was not
earning money fast enough. He could not bear to see his wife's hands
soiled with work, and thought it would be a fine thing if he could only
afford to keep a few more servants, and drive about with Sabina in an
elegant carriage, and see her clothed in silk and adorned with jewels.

"'I will play one more game and set the stakes high,' said Sculloge to
himself one evening, as he sat pondering over these things; and so,
without consulting Sabina, he stole away to the glen, and played a game
for ten thousand guineas. But the evil Devil was now ready to pounce on
his prey, and he did not play as of old. Sculloge broke into a cold
sweat with agony and terror as he saw the left hand win. Then the face
of Lassa Buaicht grew dark and stern, and he laid on Sculloge the curse
which is laid upon the solar hero in misfortune, that he should never
sleep twice under the same roof, or ascend the couch of the dawn-nymph,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

his wife, until he should have procured and brought to him the sword of
light. When Sculloge reached home, more dead than alive, he saw that his
wife knew all. Bitterly they wept together, but she told him that with
courage all might be set right. She gave him a Druidic horse, which bore
him swiftly over land and sea, like the enchanted steed of the Arabian
Nights, until he reached the castle of his wife's father, who, as
Sculloge now learned, was a good Druid, the brother of the evil Lassa
Buaicht. This good Druid told him that the sword of light was kept by a
third brother, the powerful magician Fiach O’Duda, who dwelt in an
enchanted castle, which many brave heroes had tried to enter, but the
dark sorcerer had slain them all. Three high walls surrounded the
castle, and many had scaled the first of these, but none had ever
returned alive. But Sculloge was not to be daunted, and taking from his
father-in-law a black steed, he set out for the fortress of Fiach
O’Duda. Over the first high wall nimbly leaped the magic horse, and
Sculloge called aloud to the Druid to come out and surrender his sword.
Then came out a tall, dark man, with coal-black eyes and hair and
melancholy visage, and made a furious sweep at Sculloge with the flaming
blade. But the Druidic beast sprang back over the wall in the twinkling
of an eye and rescued his rider, leaving,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

however, his tail behind in the court-yard. Then Sculloge returned in
triumph to his father-in-law's palace, and the night was spent in
feasting and revelry.

"Next day Sculloge rode out on a white horse, and when he got to Fiach's
castle, he saw the first wall lying in rubbish. He leaped the second,
and the same scene occurred as the day before, save that the horse
escaped unharmed. The third day Sculloge went out on foot, with a harp
like that of Orpheus in his hand, and as he swept its strings the grass
bent to listen and the trees bowed their heads. The castle walls all lay
in ruins, and Sculloge made his way unhindered to the upper room, where
Fiach lay in Druidic slumber, lulled by the harp. He seized the sword of
light, which was hung by the chimney sheathed in a dark scabbard, and
making the best of his way back to the good king's palace, mounted his
wife's steed, and scoured over land and sea until he found himself in
the gloomy glen where Lassa Buaicht was still crying and cursing and
betting on his left hand against his right.

"'Here, treacherous friend, take your sword of light'; shouted Sculloge
in tones of thunder; and as he drew it from its sheath the whole valley
was lighted up as with the morning sun, and next moment the head of the
wretched Druid was

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

lying at his feet, and his sweet wife, who had come to meet him, was
laughing and crying in his arms."

Some authorities claim that the legend of William Tell is a sun myth. He
is admittedly a skilful navigator, a practised archer, and, as the myth
relates, after he had successfully emerged from the storm and tempest he
leaps at dawn, rejoicing in his freedom on the land, and slays the
tyrant who had enslaved him. These facts are all well in accord with
those predominating in the typical solar myth.

It is quite impossible in a volume treating of sun lore in all its
phases to discuss the solar myth exhaustively. An attempt has been made
to indicate that primitive man, wherever he was situated, strove to
interpret natural phenomena in the familiar language of his daily
existence, and to attribute to the manifestations of physical laws a
human agency. The result of this close observation of nature led to the
deification of its powers and paved the way for a wealth of imagery, a
treasure of myth and legend, which lends colour and brightness to the
more sombre pages of the early history of man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[91:1](slaa06.htm#fr_25.md) *Norse Mythology*, R.
B. Anderson.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[95:1](slaa06.htm#fr_26.md) In this connection it
is interesting to note the unexplained association of Orion, the
personification of Nimrod, the mighty hunter, and the timid hare. In the
constellations we find Orion and Lepus contiguous. That they were
designed to be thus closely associated in the heavens cannot be doubted.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[98:1](slaa06.htm#fr_27.md) From the 19th Report of
the Bureau of Ethnology.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[99:1](slaa06.htm#fr_28.md) *Primitive Culture*,
Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[102:1](slaa06.htm#fr_29.md) *The Origin of Pagan
Idolatry*, George Stanley Faber.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[105:1](slaa06.htm#fr_30.md) *Primitive Culture*,
Edward B. Tylor.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[106:1](slaa06.htm#fr_31.md) *Chips from a German
Workshop*, Professor Max Müller.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[108:1](slaa06.htm#fr_32.md) *The Origin of Pagan
Idolatry*, G. S. Faber.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[111:1](slaa06.htm#fr_33.md) Lady of the house.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Solar Folk-Lore](slaa07.md)

</div>
