<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](busc13)  [Next](busc15.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

### XI

### THE QUESTIONS OF MĀLUNKYĀPUTTA

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">On</span> the subject of
this discourse and the two following compare the Introduction, [p.
14](busc03.htm#page_14.md).</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Thus</span> have I heard: The Lord was once
dwelling near Sāvatthi, at Jetavana in the park of Anāthapindika. Now
the elder Mālunkyāputta had retired from the world, and as he meditated
the thought arose: "These theories have been left unexplained by the
Lord, set aside, and rejected, whether the world is eternal or not
eternal, whether the world is finite or not, whether the soul (life) is
the same as the body, or whether the soul is one thing and the body
another, whether a Buddha (Tathāgata) exists after death or does not
exist after death, whether a Buddha both exists and does not exist after
death, and whether a Buddha is non-existent and not non-existent after
death—these things the Lord does not explain to me, and that he does not
explain them to me does not please me, it does not suit me. I will
approach the Lord, and ask about this

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

matter. . . . If the Lord does not explain to me, I will give up the
training, and return to a worldly life."

\[When Mālunkyāputta had approached and put his questions the Lord
replied:\] "Now did I, Mālunkyāputta, ever say to you, 'Come,
Mālunkyāputta, lead a religious life with me, and I will explain to you
whether the world is eternal or not eternal \[and so on with the other
questions\]?'" "You did not, reverend sir." "Anyone, Mālunkyāputta, who
should say 'I will not lead a religious life with the Lord, until the
Lord explains to me whether the world is eternal or not eternal \[etc.\]
. . .' that person would die, Mālunkyāputta, without its being
explained. It is as if a man had been wounded by an arrow thickly
smeared with poison, and his friends, companions, relatives, and kinsmen
were to get a surgeon to heal him, and he were to say, 'I will not have
this arrow pulled out, until I know by what man I was wounded, whether
he is of the warrior caste, or a brahmin, or of the agricultural, or the
lowest caste.' Or if he were to say, 'I will not have this arrow pulled
out until I know of what name or family the man is . . . or whether he
is tall, or short, or of middle height . . . or whether he is black, or
dark, or yellowish . . . or whether he comes from such and such a
village, or town, or city . . . or until I know whether the bow with
which I was

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

wounded was a chāpa or a kodanda, or until I know whether the bow-string
was of swallow-wort, or bamboo-fibre, or sinew, or hemp, or of milk-sap
tree, or until I know whether the shaft was from a wild or cultivated
plant . . . or whether it was feathered from a vulture's wing or a
heron's or a hawk's, or a peacock's, or a sithilahanu-bird's . . . or
whether it was wrapped round with the sinew of an ox, or of a buffalo,
or of a ruru-deer, or of a monkey . . . or until I know whether it was
an ordinary arrow, or a razor-arrow, or a vekanda, or an iron arrow or a
calf-tooth arrow, or one of a karavīra leaf.' That man would die,
Mālunkyāputta, without knowing all this.

"It is not on the view that the world is eternal, Mālunkyāputta, that a
religious life depends; it is not on the view that the world is not
eternal that a religious life depends. Whether the view is held that the
world is eternal, or that the world is not eternal, there is still
re-birth, there is old age, there is death, and grief, lamentation,
suffering, sorrow, and despair, the destruction of which even in this
life I announce. It is not on the view that the world is finite . . . It
is not on the view that a Tathāgata exists after death . . . Therefore,
Mālunkyāputta, consider as unexplained what I have not explained, and
consider as explained what I have explained. And what, Mālunkyāputta,
have I not explained?

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Whether the world
is eternal I have not explained, whether the world is not eternal . . .
whether a Tathāgata is both non-existent and not nonexistent after death
I have not explained. And why, Mālunkyāputta, have I not explained this?
Because this, Mālunkyāputta, is not useful, it is not concerned with the
principle of a religious life, does not conduce to aversion, absence of
passion, cessation, tranquillity, supernatural faculty, perfect
knowledge, Nirvana, and therefore I have not explained it.

"And what, Mālunkyāputta, have I explained? Suffering have I explained,
the cause of suffering, the destruction of suffering, and the path that
leads to the destruction of suffering have I explained. For this,
Mālunkyāputta, is useful, this is concerned with the principle of a
religious life; this conduces to aversion, absence of passion,
cessation, tranquillity, supernatural faculty, perfect knowledge,
Nirvana, and therefore have I explained it. Therefore, Mālunkyāputta,
consider as unexplained what I have not explained, and consider as
explained what I have explained." Thus spoke the Lord, and with joy the
elder Mālunkyāputta applauded the words of the Lord. (*Majjh. Nik.* I.
426 ff.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. The Questions of Uttiya](busc15.md)

</div>
