<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc07)  [Next](busc09) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

### V

### THE CHAIN OF CAUSATION

<span class="smallcaps">Gotama</span>, on his retirement, went to
Rājagaha, the capital of Magadha, and studied under several teachers.
Then for six years he practised severe penance with five disciples.
Finally he came to see the vanity of self-mortification as the means of
enlightenment, and abandoned it, whereupon his disciples deserted him.
It was soon after this, under the Bodhi-tree at Uruvelā near Rājagaha,
after a day of doubts and conflicts, represented in the accounts as the
temptations of the evil one Māra and his demons, that he attained
enlightenment (Bodhi), and became Buddha, "the enlightened."

The Chain of Causation is said to have been his first utterance as
Buddha. Its exact interpretation is not a simple matter, especially
apart from a discussion of the Indian philosophies in the midst of which
Buddhism developed. It should be noticed that the series extends over
more than one life. The following is chiefly drawn from Prof. Bern's
interpretation.

Grief, suffering, misery, old age, sickness, death, and other such evils
exist. Why do they exist? Because birth exists. Birth \[*i.e.* rebirth\]
is a consequence of becoming. Becoming presupposes matter or effort,
which is produced by desire. Desire is a consequence of sensation,
sensation a consequence of contact (with an object which rouses the
sensation). There is contact because there are six senses (the five
bodily senses and mind), and because these senses belong to an organized
being. Now an organized being consists of name and form \[mind and
body\]; hence consciousness

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

<span class="small">exists. This depends on predispositions \[in a
previous birth\], and the predispositions are the consequence of
ignorance. Hence ignorance is the base of that which exists, and in
order to put an end to existence which involves death, sickness, and
sorrow, it is only necessary to suppress the base.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="smallcaps">At</span> that time the Lord Buddha was dwelling at
Uruvelā on the banks of the Neranjarā, at the foot of the Bodhi-tree,
just after he had attained complete enlightenment. Now the Lord sat
cross-legged at the foot of the Bodhi-tree for seven days, experiencing
the bliss of emancipation. And the Lord during the first watch of the
\[first\] night meditated on the chain of causation in direct and in
reverse order: from ignorance come predispositions \[sankhāras, mental
predispositions resulting from actions in previous existences\], from
predispositions consciousness, from consciousness name and form \[mind
and body\], from name and form the six organs of sense \[*i.e.* the five
senses and mind or the inner sense\], from the organs of sense contact,
from contact feeling, from feeling craving, from craving clinging to
existence, from clinging to existence becoming, from becoming rebirth,
from rebirth old age and death, grief, lamentation, suffering, sorrow,
and despair. Such is the cause of this whole aggregation of suffering.
Now by the complete and trackless destruction of ignorance the
predispositions are destroyed, by the destruction of the predispositions
consciousness is

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

destroyed, by the destruction of consciousness name and form are
destroyed, by the destruction of name and form the six senses are
destroyed, by the destruction of the six senses contact is destroyed, by
the destruction of contact feeling is destroyed, by the destruction of
feeling craving is destroyed, by the destruction of craving clinging to
existence is destroyed, by the destruction of clinging to existence
becoming is destroyed, by the destruction of becoming rebirth is
destroyed, by the destruction of rebirth old age and death, grief,
lamentation, suffering, sorrow, and despair are destroyed. Such is the
destruction of this whole aggregation of suffering. So the Lord knowing
this at that time gave utterance to this solemn verse:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">When clear the true nature of things appeareth  
To the brahmin ardently meditating,  
Then all his doubts vanish, for he perceiveth  
Of natural things all the effects and causes.  
                                      (*Vin. Mahāv.* I. 1.)</span>

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. The Beginning of Buddha's Preaching](busc09)

</div>
