<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](busc04)  [Next](busc06) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

### II

### THE BIRTH OF GOTAMA

<span class="small"><span class="smallcaps">The</span> personal name of
Buddha was Siddhattha, "one who has accomplished his aim." Whether it
was actually the name given to him as a child we do not know. His family
name was Gotama, and it is as "sir, Gotama" (*bho Gotama*) or "the
ascetic Gotama," that members of other sects are represented as
addressing him. By the Buddhists he is called up to the time of his
enlightenment the Bodhisatta, "being of enlightenment," a term applied
to any one who is destined to become a Buddha. After his enlightenment
he is called the Buddha "the enlightened one," and addressed as
Bhagavan, "the Lord." Buddha, when speaking of himself, calls himself
the Tathāgata, literally "one who has gone thus." The exact significance
is disputed, but it probably means, "one who has gone in the way of
previous Buddhas."</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> queen Mahāmāyā, bearing the
Bodhisatta like oil in a vessel for ten months, desired, when her time
was come, to go to her relatives’ home, and addressed king Suddhodana,
"Your Majesty, I wish to go to Devadaha, the city of my people." "Good,"
said the king, and he caused the road from Kapilavatthu to the city of
Devadaha to be made smooth, adorned it with plantains in pots, flags and
banners, seated the queen in a

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

golden palanquin borne by a thousand courtiers, and sent her forth with
a great retinue. Between the two cities, and belonging to the
inhabitants of both, is a pleasure-grove of sal-trees, called the
Lumbini grove. At that time from the roots to the ends of the branches
the whole grove was in full flower, and among the branches and flowers
were numberless bees of the five colours, and flocks of various kinds of
birds, singing with sweet sounds. The whole Lumbini grove seemed like
the heavenly Cittalatā grove or like an adorned banqueting pavilion for
a mighty king.

When the queen saw it, the desire arose in her heart of sporting
therein. The courtiers with the queen entered the sal-grove. She went to
the foot of a royal sal-tree, and desired to take hold of a branch. The
sal-tree branch, like the tip of a supple reed, bowed down, and came
within reach of the queen's hand. She put out her hand and seized the
branch. Then she was shaken by the pangs of birth. The multitude put
round her a curtain and retired. Taking hold of the sal-branch and
standing up she was delivered. And even at that moment the four
pure-minded Mahābrahmas \[of the different Brahma-heavens\] came and
brought a golden net, and with the golden net they received the
Bodhisatta and set him before his mother, "Rejoice, O queen, a mighty
son is born to thee," they said. And as other beings at their birth

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

are born with disagreeable impurity and stain, so was not the
Bodhisatta. But the Bodhisatta, like a preacher of the doctrine
descending from his seat of doctrine, like a man descending stairs,
stretched forth his two hands and feet, and standing unsoiled, unstained
by any impurity from the sojourn of his birth, like a jewel placed in
Benares cloth, thus brilliant did he descend from his mother. And yet in
honour of the Bodhisatta and the Bodhisatta's mother two showers of
water descended from the sky on the body of the Bodhisatta and his
mother. (*Jāt. Introd.* I. 52 ff.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. The Four Signs](busc06)

</div>
