<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Wisdom of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](busc24)  [Next](busc26.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Buddhist Scriptures*, by E.J. Thomas, \[1913\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

### XXII

### THE NON-EXISTENCE OF INDIVIDUALITY

<span class="smallcaps">For</span> the two following passages from the
*Questions of Milinda* see the Introduction, pp.
[14](busc03.htm#page_14), [19](busc03.htm#page_19.md).

The denial of the individual in the following is not the denial of a
fact of existence, but of the theory which was then and is still held,
that there is some permanent entity behind the passing phenomena, which
gives unity to what we call the individual. Our own theory of the soul,
which has come down from Plato, has much in common with the ātman-theory
opposed by Nāgasena. In one respect both Plato and Nāgasena make the
same logical point. If you infer an entity behind an individual man, you
must also logically infer it behind every individual thing, such as a
chariot. Nāgasena rejects both entities, and Plato equally logically
accepts both. His solution is not identical with the Indian view, but it
is an acceptance of the view that it is more than the constituent parts
which makes a thing what it is. In each thing—a bed, is Plato's
example—he assumes "the existence of some one Form, which includes the
numerous particular things to which we apply the same name" (*Rep*. X).

Now king Milinda approached the elder Nāgasena, and, having approached,
he exchanged friendly greetings with him, and after the customary
salutations he sat down at one side. And the elder Nāgasena returned the
greeting, whereby he won the heart of king Milinda. Then king Milinda
said to Nāgasena, "How is your reverence

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

known, what is your name?" "O king, I am known as Nāgasena, my fellow
brethren address me as Nāgasena, but whether parents give the name
Nāgasena, or Sūrasena, or Vīrasena, or Sīhasena, nevertheless, O king,
Nāgasena and so on is a term, appellation, designation, a mere name, for
in this matter the individual does not exist."

So king Milinda said, "Let the five hundred Greeks and eighty thousand
brethren hear me. Thus says this Nāgasena, that in this matter the
individual does not exist; is it a wise thing to approve of this?" Then
king Milinda said to Nāgasena, "If, reverend Nāgasena, the individual
does not exist, who then gives you your robes, bowls, dwellings, and
medicines necessary for the sick? Who enjoys them? Who keeps the
commandments? Who practises meditation? Who realizes Nirvana of great
fruit? Who destroys life? Who takes what is not given? Who indulges in
evil lusts? Who speaks untruth? Who drinks intoxicants? Who commits the
five crimes <span id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md) that bring their fruit
even in this life? Therefore there is no good, no bad, there is no doer
of good or evil deeds, and no one who causes them to be done. There is
no fruit or ripening of the fruit of good and bad actions. If, reverend
Nāgasena, any one were to kill you, he would not

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

be guilty of taking life, nor have you even a teacher, or instructor, or
ordination. When you say that your fellow brethren call you Nāgasena,
who in this matter is Nāgasena? Can it be, reverend sir, that Nāgasena
is the hair <span id="fr_23"></span>[1](#fn_23.md)?" "No, O king." "Is he
the hair of the body?" "No, O king." "Is Nāgasena the nails, teeth,
skin, flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, abdomen,
spleen, lungs, intestines, mesentery, stomach, excrement, bile, phlegm,
pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, serum, saliva, mucus, lubricating fluid,
urine, or brain in the head?" "No, O king." "Can the body be Nāgasena?"
"No, O king." "Or the sensations, the perceptions, the predispositions
\[elements of the mental and moral character\], or the consciousness?"
"No, O king." "Then, reverend sir, is Nāgasena the body, sensations,
perceptions, predispositions, and consciousness combined?" "No, O king."
"Well, reverend sir, is Nāgasena anything else than these five?" "No, O
king."

"Reverend sir, I ask and ask you, and do not perceive Nāgasena. Is
Nāgasena anything but a mere word? Who is Nāgasena in this matter? You
are uttering a falsehood: there is no Nāgasena."

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

Then the elder Nāgasena said to king Milinda, "You, O king, are of noble
birth and very delicately nurtured; when you walk at midday with your
feet on the hot ground and burning gravel, treading the hard pebbles and
stones, your feet hurt, your body is wearied, your mind is afflicted,
and the consciousness arises that your body is pained. Now, did you come
on foot, or in a carriage?" "I did not come on foot, reverend sir, I
came in a chariot." "If your majesty came in a chariot, explain to me
what a chariot is. Can the chariot-pole be the chariot, O king?" "No,
reverend sir." "Is the axle the chariot?" "No, reverend sir." "Are the
wheels, or the frame, or the banner-staff, or the yoke, or the reins, or
the goad, the chariot?" "No, reverend sir." "Then, O king, is the
chariot all these parts?" "No, reverend sir." "Well, O king, is the
chariot anything else than these?" "No, reverend sir." "O king, I ask
and ask you, and do not perceive a chariot. Is 'chariot' anything but a
mere word? What is a chariot in this matter? Your majesty is uttering a
falsehood: there is no chariot. You are the first king in all India: of
whom are you afraid in uttering a falsehood? Let the five hundred Greeks
and eighty thousand brethren hear me. Thus says this king Milinda, that
he came in a chariot, but when he is asked, 'If your majesty came in a
chariot, explain to me what a

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

chariot is,' he does not produce a chariot; is it a wise thing to
approve of this?"

At these words the five hundred Greeks applauded the elder Nāgasena, and
said to king Milinda, "Now let your majesty talk if you can."

So king Milinda said to the elder Nāgasena, "I utter no falsehood,
reverend Nāgasena: resulting from the chariot-pole, the axle, the
wheels, the frame, the banner-pole, there is that which goes under the
term, designation, and name of chariot." "Well does your majesty
understand what a chariot is, and even so, resulting from my hair, and
so on \[the thirty-two parts of the body, and the other groups of
elements\], there is that which goes under the term, designation, and
name of Nāgasena. But in the strict sense there is no individual in the
matter. And it was said by the sister Vajirā, O king, in the presence of
the Lord:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">For just as when its parts are joined,  
A chariot, as ’tis termed, exists,  
So when the khandhas are combined,  
A being then exists, we say.</span>

</div>

"Wonderful, reverend Nāgasena, marvellous, reverend Nāgasena, most
excellently have the intricate questions been answered. If the Buddha
were to stand here, he would applaud. Well done, well done, Nāgasena,
excellently have the intricate questions been answered." (*Questions of
Milinda*, 25 ff.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[119:1](busc25.htm#fr_22.md) The first five of the
six great crimes mentioned in the Jewel Discourse, see [p.
101](busc21.htm#page_101.md).

<span id="fn_23"></span>[120:1](busc25.htm#fr_23.md) This list is the
Formula of the thirty-two parts of the body, a subject of meditation for
realizing the doctrine of the impermanence of things. It occurs in the
first section of the Miscellaneous Collection of Discourses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIII. Non-Individuality and Moral Responsibility](busc26.md)

</div>
