<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act016)  [Next](act018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md)

[Acts 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 17:3</span></span>

Opening and alleging

The latter word is rather propounding, or setting forth (παρατιθέμενος).
See on set before, [Luk 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016.md); and
commit, [Pe1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#019.md). Bengel remarks,
"Two steps, as if one, having broken the rind, were to disclose and
exhibit the kernel."

[Acts 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 17:4</span></span>

Consorted with (προσεκληρώθησαν)

Only here in New Testament. More strictly, "were added or allotted to."

Chief women

The position of women in Macedonia seems to have been exceptional.
Popular prejudice, and the verdict of Grecian wisdom in its best age,
asserted her natural inferiority. The Athenian law provided that
everything which a man might do by the counsel or request of a woman
should be null in law. She was little better than a slave. To educate
her was to advertise her as a harlot. Her companions were principally
children and slaves. In Macedonia, however, monuments were erected to
women by public bodies; and records of male proper names are found, in
Macedonian inscriptions, formed on the mother's name instead of on the
father's. Macedonian women were permitted to hold property, and were
treated as mistresses of the house. These facts are borne out by the
account of Paul's labors in Macedonia. In Thessalonica, Beroea, and
Philippi we note additions of women of rank to the church; and their
prominence in church affairs is indicated by Paul's special appeal to
two ladies in the church at Philippi to reconcile their differences,
which had caused disturbance in the church, and by his commending them
to his colleagues as women who had labored with him in the Lord ([Phi
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#002.md), [Phi
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003).md).

[Acts 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 17:5</span></span>

Of the baser sort (ἀγοραίων)

From ἀγορά, the market-place; hence loungers in the market-place; the
rabble. Cicero calls them subrostrani, those who hung round the rostra,
or platform for speakers in the forum; and Plautus, subbasilicani, the
loungers round the court-house or exchange. The word occurs only here
and [Act 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#038.md), on which see note.

Gathered a company (ὀχλοποιήσαντες)

Rev., better, a crowd. Only here in New Testament.

[Acts 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 17:6</span></span>

Rulers of the city (πολιτάρχας)

Another illustration of Luke's accuracy. Note that the magistrates are
called by a different name from those at Philippi. Thessalonica was not
a colony, but a free city (see on colony, [Act
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012).md), and was governed by its own
rulers, whose titles accordingly did not follow those of Roman
magistrates. The word occurs only here and [Act
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#008.md), and has been found in an
inscription on an arch at Thessalonica, where the names of the seven
politarchs are mentioned. The arch is thought by antiquarians to have
been standing in Paul's time.

[Acts 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 17:7</span></span>

Contrary to the decrees of Caesar

The charge at Philippi was that of introducing new customs; but as
Thessalonica was not a colony, that charge could have no force there.
The accusation substituted is that of treason against the emperor; that
of which Jesus was accused before Pilate. "The law of treason, by which
the ancient legislators of the republic had sought to protect popular
liberty from the encroachments of tyranny,...was gradually concentrated
upon the emperor alone, the sole impersonation of the sovereign people.
The definition of the crime itself was loose and elastic, such as
equally became the jealousy of a licentious republic or of a despotic
usurper" (Merivale, "History of the Romans under the Empire").

[Acts 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 17:9</span></span>

Security (τὸ ἱκανὸν)

See on [Luk 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#006.md). Bail, either personal
or by a deposit of money. A law term. They engaged that the public peace
should not be violated, and that the authors of the disturbance should
leave the city.

[Acts 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 17:11</span></span>

Searched

Or examined. See on [Luk 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#014.md).

[Acts 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 17:12</span></span>

Honorable women

See on [Act 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#004.md), and [Mar
15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043.md).

[Acts 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 17:15</span></span>

They that conducted (καθιστῶντες)

Lit., brought to the spot. Note the different word employed, [Act
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003) (see note there.md).

[Acts 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 17:16</span></span>

Was stirred (παρωξύνετο)

Better, as Rev., was provoked. See on the kindred word contention
(παροξυσμὸς), [Act 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039.md).

Saw (θεωροῦντι)

Better, beheld. See on [Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md).

Wholly given to idolatry (κατείδωλον)

Incorrect. The word, which occurs only here in the New Testament, and
nowhere in classical Greek, means full of idols. It applies to the city,
not to the inhabitants. "We learn from Pliny that at the time of Nero,
Athens contained over three thousand public statues, besides a countless
number of lesser images within the walls of private houses. Of this
number the great majority were statues of gods, demi-gods, or heroes. In
one street there stood before every house a square pillar carrying upon
it a bust of the god Hermes. Another street, named the Street of the
Tripods, was lined with tripods, dedicated by winners in the Greek
national games, and carrying each one an inscription to a deity. Every
gateway and porch carried its protecting god. Every street, every
square, nay, every purlieu, had its sanctuaries, and a Roman poet
bitterly remarked that it was easier in Athens to find gods than men"
(G. S. Davies, "St. Paul in Greece").

[Acts 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 17:18</span></span>

Epicureans

Disciples of Epicurus, and atheists. They acknowledged God in words, but
denied his providence and superintendence over the world. According to
them, the soul was material and annihilated at death. Pleasure was their
chief good; and whatever higher sense their founder might have attached
to this doctrine, his followers, in the apostle's day, were given to
gross sensualism.

Stoics

Pantheists. God was the soul of the world, or the world was God.
Everything was governed by fate, to which God himself was subject. They
denied the universal and perpetual immortality of the soul; some
supposing that it was swallowed up in deity; others, that it survived
only till the final conflagration; others, that immortality was
restricted to the wise and good. Virtue was its own reward, and vice its
own punishment. Pleasure was no good, and pain no evil. The name Stoic
was derived from stoa, a porch. Zeno, the founder of the Stoic sect,
held his school in the Stoa Poecile, or painted portico, so called
because adorned with pictures by the best masters.

Babbler (σπερμολόγος)

Lit., seed-picker: a bird which picks up seeds in the streets and
markets; hence one who picks up and retails scraps of news. Trench
("Authorized Version of the New Testament") cites a parallel from
Shakespeare:

"This fellow picks up wit as pigeons peas,

And utters it again when Jove doth please.

He is wit's pedler, and retails his wares

At wakes, and wassails, meetings, markets, fairs."

Love's Labor's Lost, v., 2.

Setter-forth (καταγγελεὺς)

See on declare, [Act 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023.md). Compare
[Pe1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#004.md), [Pe1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012.md).

Strange

Foreign.

[Acts 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 17:19</span></span>

Areopagus

The Hill of Mars: the seat of the ancient and venerable Athenian court
which decided the most solemn questions connected with religion.
Socrates was arraigned and condemned here on the charge of innovating on
the state religion. It received its name from the legend of the trial of
Mars for the murder of the son of Neptune. The judges sat in the open
air upon seats hewn out in the rock, on a platform ascended by a flight
of stone steps immediately from the market-place. A temple of Mars was
on the brow of the edifice, and the sanctuary of the Furies was in a
broken cleft of the rock immediately below the judges' seats. The
Acropolis rose above it, with the Parthenon and the colossal statue of
Athene. "It was a scene with which the dread recollections of centuries
were associated. Those who withdrew to the Areopagus from the Agora,
came, as it were, into the presence of a higher power. No place in
Athens was so suitable for a discourse upon the mysteries of religion"
(Conybeare and Hewson).

[Acts 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 17:20</span></span>

Strange (ξενίζοντα)

A participle: surprising. Compare [Pe1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#004.md), [Pe1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012.md).

[Acts 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 17:21</span></span>

All the Athenians

No article. Lit., "Athenians, all of them." The Athenian people
collectively.

Strangers which were there (οἱ ἐπιδημοῦντες ξένοι)

Rev., more correctly, the strangers sojourning there. See on [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md).

Spent their time (εὐκαίρουν)

The word means to have good opportunity; to have leisure: also, to
devote one's leisure to something; to spend the time. Compare [Mar
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031.md); [Co1
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#012.md).

Something new (τι καινότερον)

Lit., newer: newer than that which was then passing current as new. The
comparative was regularly used by the Greeks in the question what news?
They contrasted what was new with what had been new up to the time of
asking. The idiom vividly characterizes the state of the Athenian mind.
Bengel aptly says, "New things at once became of no account; newer
things were being sought for." Their own orators and poets lashed them
for this peculiarity. Aristophanes styles Athens the city of the gapers
("Knights," 1262). Demades said that the crest of Athens ought to be a
great tongue. Demosthenes asks them, "Is it all your care to go about up
and down the market, asking each other, 'Is there any news?'" In the
speech of Cleon to the Athenians, given by Thucydides (iii., 38), he
says: "No men are better dupes, sooner deceived by novel notions, or
slower to follow approved advice. You despise what is familiar, while
you are worshippers of every new extravagance. You are always hankering
after an ideal state, but you do not give your minds even to what is
straight before you. In a word, you are at the mercy of your own ears."

[Acts 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 17:22</span></span>

I perceive (θεωρῶ)

I regard you, in my careful observation of you. See on [Luk
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018.md).

Too superstitious (δεισιδαιμονεστέρους)

This rendering and that of the Rev., somewhat superstitious, are both
unfortunate. The word is compounded of δείδω, to fear, and δαίμων, a
deity. It signifies either a religious or a superstitious sentiment,
according to the context. Paul would have been unlikely to begin his
address with a charge which would have awakened the anger of his
audience. What he means to say is, You are more divinity-fearing than
the rest of the Greeks. This propensity to reverence the higher powers
is a good thing in itself, only, as he shows them, it is misdirected,
not rightly conscious of its object and aim. Paul proposes to guide the
sentiment rightly by revealing him whom they ignorantly worship. The
American revisers insist on very religious. The kindred word
δεισιδαιμονία occurs [Act 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#019.md), and
in the sense of religion, though rendered in A. V. superstition. Festus
would not call the Jewish religion a superstition before Agrippa, who
was himself a Jew. There is the testimony of the Ephesian town-clerk,
that Paul, during his three years' residence at Ephesus, did not rudely
and coarsely attack the worship of the Ephesian Diana. "Nor yet
blasphemers of your goddess" ([Act
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#037).md).

[Acts 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 17:23</span></span>

As l passed by (διερχόμενος)

More strictly, "passing through (διά)" your city, or your streets.

Beheld (ἀναθεωρῶν)

Only here and [Heb 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007.md). Rev., much
better, observed. The compound verb denotes a very attentive
consideration (ἀνά and down, throughout).

Devotions (σεβάσματἀ)

Wrong. It means the objects of their worship - temples, altars, statues,
etc.

An altar (βωμὸν)

Only here in New Testament, and the only case in which a heathen altar
is alluded to. In all other cases θυσιαστήριον is used, signifying an
altar of the true God. The Septuagint translators commonly observe this
distinction, being, in this respect, more particular than the Hebrew
scriptures themselves, which sometimes interchange the word for the
heathen altar and that for God's altar. See, especially, Joshua 22,
where the altar reared by the Transjordanic tribes is called βωμὸς as
being no true altar of God ([Jos
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010.md), [Jos
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011.md), [Jos
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016.md), [Jos
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019.md), [Jos
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#023.md), [Jos
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026.md), [Jos
22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034).md); and the legitimate altar,
θυσιαστήριον ([Jos 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019.md), [Jos
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#028.md), [Jos
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#029).md).

To the unknown God (ἀγνώστῳ Θεῷ)

The article is wanting. Render, as Rev., to an unknown God. The origin
of these altars, of which there were several in Athens, is a matter of
conjecture. Hackett's remarks on this point are sensible, and are borne
out by the following words: "whom therefore," etc. "The most rational
explanation is unquestionably that of those who suppose these altars to
have had their origin in the feeling of uncertainty, inherent, after
all, in the minds of the heathen, whether their acknowledgment of the
superior powers was sufficiently full and comprehensive; in their
distinct consciousness of the limitation and imperfection of their
religious views, and their consequent desire to avoid the anger of any
still unacknowledged god who might be unknown to them. That no deity
might punish them for neglecting his worship, or remain uninvoked in
asking for blessings, they not only erected altars to all the gods named
or known among them, but, distrustful still lest they might not
comprehend fully the extent of their subjection and dependence, they
erected them also to any other god or power that might exist, although
as yet unrevealed to them....Under these circumstances an allusion to
one of these altars by the apostle would be equivalent to his saying to
the Athenians thus: 'You are correct in acknowledging a divine existence
beyond any which the ordinary rites of your worship recognize; there is
such an existence. You are correct in confessing that this Being is
unknown to you; you have no just conceptions of his nature and
perfections.'"

Ignorantly (ἀγνοοῦντες)

Rather, unconsciously: not knowing. There is a kind of play on the words
unknown, knowing not. Ignorantly conveys more rebuke than Paul intended.

Declare I (καταγγέλλω)

Compare καταγγελεὺς, setter-forth, in [Act
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md). Here, again, there is a play
upon the words. Paul takes up their noun, setter-forth, and gives it
back to them as a verb. "You say I am a setter-forth of strange gods: I
now set forth unto you (Rev.) the true God."

[Acts 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 17:24</span></span>

God

With the article: "the God."

The world (τὸν κόσμον)

Originally, order, and hence the order of the world; the ordered
universe. So in classical Greek. In the Septuagint, never the world, but
the ordered total of the heavenly bodies; the host of heaven
(Deuteronomy 4:19; 17:3; Isaiah 24:21; 40:26). Compare, also, [Pro
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006.md), and see note on [Jam
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006.md). In the apocryphal books, of the
universe, and mainly in the relation between God and it arising out of
the creation. Thus, the king of the world (2 Maccabees 7:9); the creator
or founder of the world (2 Maccabees 7:23); the great potentate of the
world (2 Maccabees 12:15). In the New Testament: 1. In the classical and
physical sense, the universe ([Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005.md); [Joh
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025.md).; [Rom
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020.md); [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004), etc..md). 2. As the order of things
of which man is the centre ([Mat
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038.md); [Mar
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#015.md); [Luk
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#025.md); [Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021.md); [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md); [Ti1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007).md). 3. Humanity as it manifests
itself in and through this order ([Mat
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md); [Pe2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005.md); [Pe2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006.md); [Rom
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019).md). Then, as sin has entered and
disturbed the order of things, and made a breach between the heavenly
and the earthly order, which are one in the divine ideal - 4. The order
of things which is alienated from God, as manifested in and by the human
race: humanity as alienated from God, and acting in opposition to him
([Joh 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010.md); [Joh
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031.md); [Joh
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#018.md), [Joh
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019.md); [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021.md); [Jo1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#015), etc..md). The word is used here in
the classical sense of the visible creation, which would appeal to the
Athenians. Stanley, speaking of the name by which the Deity is known in
the patriarchal age, the plural Elohim, notes that Abraham, in
perceiving that all the Elohim worshipped by the numerous clans of his
race meant one God, anticipated the declaration of Paul in this passage
("Jewish Church," i., 25). Paul's statement strikes at the belief of the
Epicureans, that the world was made by "a fortuitous concourse of
atoms," and of the Stoics, who denied the creation of the world by God,
holding either that God animated the world, or that the world itself was
God.

Made with hands (χιεροποιήτοις)

Probably pointing to the magnificent temples above and around him.
Paul's epistles abound in architectural metaphors. He here employs the
very words of Stephen, in his address to the Sanhedrim, which he very
probably heard. See [Act 7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048.md).

[Acts 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 17:25</span></span>

Is worshipped (θεραπεύεται)

Incorrect. Render, as Rev., served. Luke often uses the word in the
sense of to heal or cure; but this is its primary sense. See on [Luk
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#015.md). It refers to the clothing of the
images of the gods in splendid garments, and bringing them costly gifts
and offerings of food and drink.

As though he needed (προσδεόμενος)

Properly, "needed anything in addition (πρός) to what he already has."

[Acts 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 17:26</span></span>

Before appointed (προτεταγμένους)

The Rev., properly, omits before, following the reading of the best
texts, τεταγμένους assigned.

Bounds (ὀροθεσίας)

Only here in New Testament. The word, in the singular, means the fixing
of boundaries, and so is transferred to the fixed boundaries themselves.

[Acts 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 17:27</span></span>

Might feel after

See on handle, [Luk 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#039.md). Compare
Tennyson:

"I stretch lame hands of faith, and grope

And gather dust and chaff, and call

To what I feel is Lord of all."

In Memoriam, lv.

[Acts 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 17:28</span></span>

We are also his offspring

A line from Aratus, a poet of Paul's own province of Cilicia. The same
sentiment, in almost the same words, occurs in the fine hymn of
Cleanthes to Jove. Hence the words, "Some of your own poets."

[Acts 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 17:29</span></span>

The Godhead (τὸ θεῖον)

Lit., that which is divine.

Like to gold, etc

These words must have impressed his hearers profoundly, as they looked
at the multitude of statues of divinities which surrounded them.

Graven (χαράγματι)

Not a participle, as A. V., but a noun, in apposition with gold, silver,
and stone: "a graving or carved-work of art," etc.

[Acts 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 17:30</span></span>

Winked at (ὑπεριδὼν)

Only here in New Testament. Originally, to overlook; to suffer to pass
unnoticed. So Rev., overlooked.

[Acts 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 17:32</span></span>

Resurrection

This word was the signal for a derisive outburst from the crowd.

Mocked (ἐχλεύαζον)

From χλεύη, a jest. Only here in New Testament, though a compound,
διαχλευάζω, mock, occurs, according to the best texts, at [Act
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#013.md). The force of the imperfect,
began to mock, should be given here in the translation, as marking the
outbreak of derision.

In this remarkable speech of Paul are to be noted: his prudence and tact
in not needlessly offending his hearers; his courtesy and spirit of
conciliation in recognizing their piety toward their gods; his wisdom
and readiness in the use of the inscription "to the unknown God," and in
citing their own poets; his meeting the radical errors of every class of
his hearers, while seeming to dwell only on points of agreement; his
lofty views of the nature of God and the great principle of the unity of
the human race; his boldness in proclaiming Jesus and the resurrection
among those to whom these truths were foolishness; the wonderful
terseness and condensation of the whole, and the rapid but powerful and
assured movement of the thought.

[Acts 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 17:34</span></span>

Clave

See on [Luk 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#011.md); and [Luk
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#015.md); and [Act
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#013.md).

The Areopagite

One of the judges of the court of Areopagus. Of this court Curtius
remarks: "Here, instead of a single judge, a college of twelve men of
proved integrity conducted the trial. If the accused had an equal number
of votes for and against him, he was acquitted. The Court on the hill of
Ares is one of the most ancient institutions of Athens, and none
achieved for the city an earlier or more widely spread recognition. The
Areopagitic penal code was adopted as a norm by all subsequent
legislators" ("History of Greece," i., 307).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 18](act018.md)

</div>
