<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1010)  [Next](co1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 11:1</span></span>

Followers (μιμηταί)

Lit., imitators, as Rev. This verse belongs to the closing section of
ch. 10.

[1 Corinthians 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 11:2</span></span>

Ordinances - delivered (παραδόσεις - παρέδωκα)

There is a play of two hundred words, both being derived from παραδίδωμι
to give over. Ordinances is a faulty rendering. Better, Rev.,
traditions. By these words Paul avoids any possible charge of imposing
his own notions upon the Church. He delivers to them what had been
delivered to him. Compare [Ti1 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#011);
[Th2 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#015).

[1 Corinthians 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 11:4</span></span>

Having his head covered (κατὰ κεφαλῆς ἔχων)

Lit., having something hanging down from his head. Referring to the
tallith, a four-cornered shawl having fringes consisting of eight
threads, each knotted five times, and worn over the head in prayer. It
was placed upon the worshipper's head at his entrance into the
synagogue. The Romans, like the Jews, prayed with the head veiled. So
Aeneas: "And our heads are shrouded before the altar with a Phrygian
vestment" (Virgil, "Aeneid," iii., 545). The Greeks remained bareheaded
during prayer or sacrifice, as indeed they did in their ordinary outdoor
life. The Grecian usage, which had become prevalent in the Grecian
churches, seems to have commended itself to Paul as more becoming the
superior position of the man.

[1 Corinthians 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 11:5</span></span>

Her head uncovered

Rev., unveiled. The Greek women rarely appeared in public, but lived in
strict seclusion. Unmarried women never quitted their apartments, except
on occasions of festal processions, either as spectators or
participants. Even after marriage they were largely confined to the
gynaeconitis or women's rooms. Thus Euripides: "As to that which brings
the reproach of a bad reputation upon her who remains not at home,
giving up the desire of this, I tarried in my dwelling" ("Troades,"
649). And Menander: "The door of the court is the boundary fixed for the
free woman." The head-dress of Greek women consisted of nets, hair-bags,
or kerchiefs, sometimes covering the whole head. A shawl which enveloped
the body was also often thrown over the head, especially at marriages or
funerals. This costume the Corinthian women had disused in the christian
assemblies, perhaps as an assertion of the abolition of sexual
distinctions, and the spiritual equality of the woman with the man in
the presence of Christ. This custom was discountenanced by Paul as
striking at the divinely ordained subjection of the woman to the man.
Among the Jews, in ancient times, both married and unmarried women
appeared in public unveiled. The later Jewish authorities insisted on
the use of the veil.

All one as if she were shaven

Which would be a sign either of grief or of disgrace. The cutting off of
the hair is used by Isaiah as a figure of the entire destruction of a
people by divine retribution. [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020) Among the Jews a woman convicted
of adultery had her hair shorn, with the formula: "Because thou hast
departed from the manner of the daughters of Israel, who go with their
head covered, therefore that has befallen thee which thou hast chosen."
According to Tacitus, among the Germans an adulteress was driven from
her husband's house with her head shaved; and the Justinian code
prescribed this penalty for an adulteress, whom, at the expiration of
two years, her husband refused to receive again. Paul means that a woman
praying or prophesying uncovered puts herself in public opinion on a
level with a courtesan.

[1 Corinthians 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 11:6</span></span>

Shorn or shaven (κείρασθαι ἢ ξυρᾶσθαι)

To have the hair cut close, or to be entirely shaved as with a razor.

[1 Corinthians 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 11:7</span></span>

Image and glory (εἰκὼν καὶ δόξα)

For image, see on [Rev 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014). Man
represents God's authority by his position as the ruler of the woman. In
the case of the woman, the word image is omitted, although she, like the
man, is the image of God. Paul is expounding the relation of the woman,
not to God, but to man.

[1 Corinthians 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 11:10</span></span>

Power on her head (ἐξουσίαν)

Not in the primary sense of liberty or permission, but authority. Used
here of the symbol of power, i.e., the covering upon the head as a sign
of her husband's authority. So Rev., a sign of authority.

Because of the angels

The holy angels, who were supposed by both the Jewish and the early
Christian Church to be present in worshipping assemblies. More, however,
seems to be meant than "to avoid exciting disapproval among them." The
key-note of Paul's thought is subordination according to the original
divine order. Woman best asserts her spiritual equality before God, not
by unsexing herself, but by recognizing her true position and fulfilling
its claims, even as do the angels, who are ministering as well as
worshipping spirits ([Heb 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)). She is
to fall in obediently with that divine economy of which she forms a part
with the angels, and not to break the divine harmony, which especially
asserts itself in worship, where the angelic ministers mingle with the
earthly worshippers; nor to ignore the example of the holy ones who keep
their first estate, and serve in the heavenly sanctuary.

[1 Corinthians 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 11:14</span></span>

Nature (φύσις)

The recognized constitution of things. In this case the natural
distinction of the woman's long hair.

[1 Corinthians 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 11:16</span></span>

Custom

Not the custom of contentiousness, but that of women speaking unveiled.
The testimonies of Tertullian and Chrysostom show that these injunctions
of Paul prevailed in the churches. In the sculptures of the catacombs
the women have a close-fitting head-dress, while the men have the hair
short.

[1 Corinthians 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 11:17</span></span>

I declare (παραγγέλλω)

Wrong. It means in the New Testament only command. See on [Luk
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#014); see on [Act
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#004).

[1 Corinthians 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 11:18</span></span>

In the church (ἐν ἐκκλησίᾳ)

See on [Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018). Not the church
edifice, a meaning which the word never has in the New Testament, and
which appears first in patristic writings. The marginal rendering of the
Rev. is better: in congregation.

[1 Corinthians 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 11:19</span></span>

Heresies (αἱρἐσεις)

See on [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001). In Paul only here and
[Gal 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#020). Better, parties or
factions, as the result of the divisions.

[1 Corinthians 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 11:20</span></span>

This is not (οὐκ ἔστιν)

Rev., correctly, it is not possible.

The Lord's Supper (κυριακὸν δεῖπνον)

The emphasis is on Lord's. Δεῖπνον supper, represented the principal
meal of the day, answering to the late dinner. The Eucharist proper was
originally celebrated as a private expression of devotion, and in
connection with a common, daily meal, an agape or love-feast. In the
apostolic period it was celebrated daily. The social and festive
character of the meal grew largely out of the gentile institution of
clubs or fraternities, which served as savings-banks, mutual-help
societies, insurance offices, and which expressed and fostered the
spirit of good-fellowship by common festive meals, usually in gardens,
round an altar of sacrifice. The communion-meal of the first and second
centuries exhibited this character in being a feast of contribution, to
which each brought his own provision. It also perpetuated the Jewish
practice of the college of priests for the temple-service dining at a
common table on festivals or Sabbaths, and of the schools of the
Pharisees in their ordinary life.

Indications of the blending of the eucharistic celebration with a common
meal are found here, [Act 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042); [Act
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007), and more obscurely, [Act
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#035).

[1 Corinthians 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 11:21</span></span>

Taketh before other

Not waiting for the coming of the poor to participate.

[1 Corinthians 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 11:22</span></span>

Them that have not

Not, that have not houses, but absolutely, the poor. In thus shaming
their poorer comrades they imitated the heathen. Xenophon relates of
Socrates that, at feasts of contribution, where some brought much and
others little, Socrates bade his attendant either to place each small
contribution on the table for the common use, or else to distribute his
share of the same to each. And so those who had brought much were
ashamed not to partake of that which was placed for general use, and
not, in return, to place their own stock on the table ("Memorabilia,"
iii., 14, 1).

[1 Corinthians 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 11:23</span></span>

I received (ἐγὼ παρέλαβον)

I is emphatic, giving the weight of personal authority to the statement.
The question whether Paul means that he received directly from Christ,
or mediately through the apostles or tradition, turns on a difference
between two prepositions. Strictly, ἀπὸ from or of, with the Lord, would
imply the more remote source, from the Lord, through the apostles; but
Paul does not always observe the distinction between this and παρά, from
the preposition of the nearer source (see Greek, [Col
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007); [Col
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024)); and this latter preposition
compounded with the verb received, the emphatic I, and the mention of
the fact itself, are decisive of the sense of an immediate communication
from Christ to Paul.

Also (καὶ)

Important as expressing the identity of the account of Jesus with his
own.

He was betrayed (παρεδίδετο)

Imperfect tense, and very graphic. He was being betrayed. He instituted
the Eucharist while His betrayal was going on.

[1 Corinthians 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 11:24</span></span>

Had given thanks (εὐχαριστής)

Eucharistesas. Hence in post-apostolic and patristic writers, Eucharist
was the technical term for the Lord's Supper as a sacrifice of
thanksgiving for all the gifts of God, especially for the "unspeakable
gift," Jesus Christ. By some of the fathers of the second century the
term was sometimes applied to the consecrated elements. The formula of
thanksgiving cited in "The Teaching of the Twelve Apostles" is, for the
cup first, 'We give thanks to Thee, our Father, for the holy vine of
David Thy servant, which Thou hast made known to us through Jesus, Thy
servant: to Thee be the glory forever." And for the bread: "We give
thanks to Thee, our Father, for the life and knowledge which Thou hast
made known to us through Jesus Thy servant: to Thee be the glory
forever. As this broken bread was scattered upon the mountains and,
gathered together, became one, so let Thy Church be gathered together
from the ends of the earth into Thy Kingdom, for Thine is the glory and
the power through Jesus Christ forever."

Brake

Bengel says: "The very mention of the breaking involves distribution and
refutes the Corinthian plan - every man his own" ([Co1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#021)).

Do (ποιεῖε)

Be doing or continue doing.

In remembrance (εἰς)

Strictly, for or with a view to, denoting purpose. These words do not
occur in Matthew and Mark. Paul's account agrees with Luke's.
Remembrance implies Christ's bodily absence in the future.

[1 Corinthians 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 11:25</span></span>

After supper

Only Luke records this detail. It is added to mark the distinction
between the Lord's Supper and the ordinary meal.

Testament (διαθήκη)

Rev., correctly, covenant. See on [Mat
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028). The Hebrew word is derived from
a verb meaning to cut. Hence the connection of dividing the victims with
the ratification of a covenant. See [Gen
15:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#009). A similar usage appears in
the Homeric phrase ὅρκια πιστὰ ταμεῖν, lit., to cut trustworthy oaths,
whence the word oaths is used for the victims sacrificed in ratification
of a covenant or treaty. See Homer, "Iliad," ii., 124; 3. 73, 93. So the
Latin foedus ferire "to kill a league," whence our phrase to strike a
compact. In the Septuagint proper, where it occurs nearly three hundred
times, διαθήκη, in all but four passages, is the translation of the
Hebrew word for covenant (berith). In those four it is used to render
brotherhood and words of the covenant. In Philo it has the same sense as
in the Septuagint, and covenant is its invariable sense in the New
Testament.

[1 Corinthians 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 11:26</span></span>

Ye do shew (καταγγέλλετε)

Rev., better, proclaim. It is more than represent or signify. The Lord's
death is preached in the celebration of the Eucharist. Compare [Exo
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#008), thou shalt shew. In the Jewish
passover the word Haggadah denoted the historical explanation of the
meaning of the passover rites given by the father to the son. Dr. Schaff
says of the eucharistic service of the apostolic age: "The fourteenth
chapter of first Corinthians makes the impression - to use an American
phrase - of a religions meeting thrown open. Everybody who had a
spiritual gift, whether it was the gift of tongues, of interpretation,
of prophecy, or of sober, didactic teaching, had a right to speak, to
pray, and to sing. Even women exercised their gifts" ("Introduction to
the Didache"). See, further, on [Co1
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#033).

[1 Corinthians 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 11:27</span></span>

Unworthily (ἀναξίως)

Defined by "not discerning the Lord's body," [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029).

Guilty (ἔνοχος)

See on [Mar 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029); see on [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010).

[1 Corinthians 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 11:28</span></span>

So

After self-examination and consequent knowledge of his spiritual state.

[1 Corinthians 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 11:29</span></span>

Unworthily

Omit.

Damnation (κρῖμα)

See on [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016); see on [Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039). This false and horrible
rendering has destroyed the peace of more sincere and earnest souls than
any other misread passage in the New Testament. It has kept hundreds
from the Lord's table. Κρῖμα is a temporary judgment, and so is
distinguished from κατάκριμα condemnation, from which this temporary
judgment is intended to save the participant. The distinction appears in
[Co1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032) (see note). The A.V. of the
whole passage, [Co1 11:28-34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#028), is
marked by a confusion of the renderings of κρίνειν to judge and its
compounds.

Not discerning (μὴ διακρίνων)

Rev., if he discern not, bringing out the conditional force of the
negative particle. The verb primarily means to separate, and hence to
make a distinction, discriminate. Rev., in margin, discriminating. Such
also is the primary meaning of discern (discernere to part or separate),
so that discerning implies a mental act of discriminating between
different things. So Bacon: "Nothing more variable than voices, yet men
can likewise discern these personally." This sense has possibly become a
little obscured in popular usage. From this the transition is easy and
natural to the sense of doubting, disputing, judging, all of these
involving the recognition of differences. The object of the
discrimination here referred to, may, I think, be regarded as complex.
After Paul's words ([Co1 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020), [Co1
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#022)), about the degradation of the
Lord's Supper, the discrimination between the Lord's body and common
food may naturally be contemplated; but further, such discernment of the
peculiar significance and sacredness of the Lord's body as shall make
him shrink from profanation and shall stimulate him to penitence and
faith.

The Lord's body

Omit Lord's and read the body. This adds force to discerning.

[1 Corinthians 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 11:30</span></span>

Weak and sickly

Physical visitations on account of profanation of the Lord's table.

Many sleep (κοιμῶνται ἱκανοί)

The word for many means, primarily, adequate, sufficient. See on [Rom
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#023). Rev., not a few hardly
expresses the ominous shading of the word: quite enough have died.
Sleep. Better, are sleeping. Here simply as a synonym for are dead,
without the peculiar restful sense which christian sentiment so commonly
conveys into it. See on [Act 7:60](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#060); see
on [Pe2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004).

[1 Corinthians 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 11:31</span></span>

We would judge (διεκρίνομεν)

An illustration of the confusion in rendering referred to under [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029). This is the same word as
discerning in [Co1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029), but the A.V.
recognizes no distinction between it, and judged (ἐκρινόμεθα)
immediately following. Render, as Rev., if we discerned ourselves; i.e.,
examined and formed a right estimate.

We should not be judged (οὐκ ἀν ἐκρινόμεθα)

By God. Here judged is correct. A proper self-examination would save us
from the divine judgment.

[1 Corinthians 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 11:32</span></span>

When we are judged (κρινόμενοι)

Correct. The same word as the last. With this construe by the Lord; not
with chastened. The antithesis to judging ourselves is thus preserved.
So Rev., in margin.

Condemned (κατακριθῶμεν)

Signifying the final condemnatory judgment; but in [Co1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#029) the simple κρῖμα temporary
judgment, is made equivalent to this. See note.

[1 Corinthians 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 11:33</span></span>

Tarry (ἐκδέχεσθε)

In the usual New-Testament sense, as [Joh
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#003); [Act
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#016); though in some cases the idea
of expectancy is emphasized, as [Heb
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013); [Heb
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#010); [Jam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007). Some render receive ye one
another, in contrast with despising the poorer guests; but this is not
according to New-Testament usage.

[1 Corinthians 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 11:34</span></span>

Will I set in order (διατάξομαι)

Referring to outward, practical arrangements. See on [Mat
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001), and compare [Co1
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#014); [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 12](co1012)

</div>
