<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2012)  [Next](gal000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 13:1</span></span>

The third time

The great mass of modern expositors hold that Paul made three visits to
Corinth, of the second of which there is no record.

I am coming

The third visit which I am about to pay. Alford observes that had not
chronological theories intervened, no one would ever have thought of any
other rendering. Those who deny the second visit explain: this is the
third time that I have been intending to come.

[2 Corinthians 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 13:2</span></span>

I told you before and foretell you (προείρηκα καὶ προλέγω)

Rev., I have said beforehand, and I do say beforehand. The renderings of
the A.V. and Rev. should be carefully compared. The difference turns
mainly on the denial or assumption of the second visit; the A.V.
representing the former, and the Rev. the latter. I have said beforehand
thus refers to the second visit; I do say beforehand, to his present
condition of absence.

As if I were present, the second time (ὡς παρὼν τὸ δεύτερον)

Rev., as when I was present the second time; thus making a distinct
historical reference to the second visit. Note the comma after present
in A.V. According to this, the second time is connected with προλέγω, I
say beforehand the second time. Another explanation, however, on the
assumption of only two visits is, as if I were present this next time.

And being absent now I write to them which heretofore, etc. (καὶ ἀπὼν
νῦν γράφω)

I write must be omitted; now connected with being absent; and to them
which connected with I say beforehand. Render, so now being absent (I
say beforehand) to them which, etc.

[2 Corinthians 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 13:3</span></span>

A proof of Christ speaking in me (δοκιμὴν τοῦ ἐν ἐμοὶ λαλοῦντος Χριστοῦ)

Lit., of the Christ that speaks in me. An experimental proof of what
kind of a being the Christ who speaks in me is.

In you (ἐν ὑμῖν)

Better, among you. He is speaking, not of Christ as He dwells in them,
but as He works with reference to them (εἰς) and among their number,
inflicting punishment for their sin.

Through (ἐξ)

Lit., out of, marking the source of both death and life.

Are weak in Him

The parallel with [Co2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md) must be
carefully noted. Christ will prove Himself not weak, but mighty among
you. He was crucified out of weakness, but He is mighty out of the power
of God. A similar weakness and power will appear in our case. We are
weak in Him, in virtue of our fellowship with Him. Like Him we endure
the contradiction of sinners, and suffer from the violence of men: in
fellowship with His risen life we shall be partakers of the power of God
which raised Him from the dead, and shall exhibit this life of power
toward you in judging and punishing you.

Toward you

Construe with we shall live.

[2 Corinthians 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 13:5</span></span>

Examine yourselves (ἑαυτοὺς πειράζετε)

Yourselves is emphatic. Instead of putting Christ to the test, test
yourselves. Rev., try, is better than examine. Examination does not
necessarily imply a practical test. It may be merely from curiosity.
Trial implies a definite intent to ascertain their spiritual condition.

The faith

See on [Act 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007.md). In a believing
attitude toward Christ.

Prove (δοκιμάζετε)

As the result of trying.

Or know ye not, etc.

Assuming that you thus prove yourselves, does not this test show you
that Christ is in you as the result of your faith in him?

Reprobates (ἀδόκιμοι)

An unfortunate translation. A reprobate is one abandoned to perdition.
The word is kindred to the verb prove (δοκιμάζετε), and means
disapproved on trial. See on [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 13:7</span></span>

Not that we should appear approved, etc.

The sense of the verse is this: We pray God that you do no evil, not in
order that your good conduct may attest the excellence of our teaching
and example, so that we shall be approved; but in order that you may do
what is good, thus rendering it impossible for us to prove our apostolic
authority by administering discipline. In that case we shall be as men
unapproved. Stanley remarks that, in the light of this verse, Paul might
have added to [Co2 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#009.md), as without
proof and yet as aprroved.

[2 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 13:8</span></span>

For we can do nothing against the truth

Your well doing is what we truly aim at. For, if we had any other aim,
with a view to approving ourselves, we should fail, because we should be
going in the face of the truth - the Gospel; and against that we are
powerless. In that case we should be unapproved before God.

[2 Corinthians 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 13:9</span></span>

We are weak

Practically the same as unapproved. When your good conduct deprives us
of the power of administering discipline, we are weak.

Perfection (κατάρτισιν)

Only here in the New Testament. See on be perfect, [Co2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md). Rev., perfecting.

[2 Corinthians 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 13:10</span></span>

Use sharpness (ἀποτόμως χρήσωμαι)

Rev., more literally and correctly, deal sharply, thus giving the force
of the adverb. For sharply see on the kindred ἀποτομία severity, [Rom
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#022.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 13:11</span></span>

Finally (λοιπόν)

Lit., as for the rest. Sometimes rendered now, as [Mat
26:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045.md). "Sleep on now," for the time
that remains. Besides, as [Co1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016.md).
It remaineth, [Co1 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029.md). Henceforth,
[Ti2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008.md); [Heb
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013.md). Often as here, finally. In
every case the idea of something left over is at the bottom of the
translation.

Farewell (χαίρετε)

In the classics used both at meeting and at parting. Lit., hail! See on
[Jam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md). Rev., in margin, has
rejoice. It is somewhat doubtful whether it ever has the meaning
farewell in the New Testament. Edersheim says that, on Sabbaths, when
the outgoing course of priests left the temple, they parted from each
other with a farewell, reminding us of this to the Corinthians: "He that
has caused His name to dwell in this house cause love, brotherhood,
peace, and friendship to dwell among you" ("The Temple," p. 117).

Be perfect (καταρτίζεσθε)

Rev., be perfected. See on [Luk 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040.md);
see on [Pe1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010.md). Paul speaks both of
individual perfection and of the perfection of the Church through the
right adjustment of all its members in Christ. Compare [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md). The verb is kindred with
perfecting, [Co2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 13:12</span></span>

Kiss

In [Pe1 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#014.md), called the kiss of
charity. The practice was maintained chiefly at the celebration of the
Eucharist. In the "Apostolic Constitutions" it is enjoined that, before
the communion, the clergy kiss the bishop, the laymen amongst each
other, and so the women. This latter injunction grew out of the reproach
of looseness of manners circulated by the heathen against the
Christians. On Good Friday it was omitted in commemoration of Judas'
kiss. In the West the practice survives among the Glassites or
Sandemanians. In the Latin Church, after the end of the thirteenth
century, there was substituted for it a piece of the altar furniture
called a Pax (peace), which was given to the deacon with the words Peace
to thee and to the Church. In the East it is continued in the Coptic and
Russian Churches.

[2 Corinthians 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 13:14</span></span>

The grace, etc.

The most complete benediction of the Pauline epistles. In most of the
epistles the introductory benedictions are confined to grace and peace.
In the pastoral epistles mercy is added. In the closing benedictions
uniformly grace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Introduction](gal000.md)

</div>
