<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal001)  [Next](gal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

[Galatians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 2:1</span></span>

Fourteen years after (διὰ δεκατεσσάρων ἐτῶν)

Rev. after the space of fourteen years. Comp. δἰ ἐτῶν πλειόνων after
several years, [Act 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017); δἰ ἡμερῶν
after (some) days, [Mar 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#001). Διὰ means
after, that is, a given number of years being interposed between two
points of time. Not, in the course of (Rev. marg.).

[Galatians 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gal 2:2</span></span>

By revelation (κατὰ ἀποκάλυψιν)

It was specially and divinely revealed to me that I should go. In what
way, he does not state.

Communicated (ἀνεθέμην)

Only here and [Act 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014). Ἀνά up,
τιθέναι to set. To set up a thing for the consideration of others: to
lay it before them.

Unto them (αὐτοῖς)

The Christians of Jerusalem generally.

Privately (κατ' ἰδίαν)

The general communication to the Jerusalem Christians was accompanied by
a private consultation with the leaders. Not that a different subject
was discussed in private, but that the discussion was deeper and more
detailed than would have befitted the whole body of Christians.

To them which were of reputation (τοῖς δοκοῦσιν)

Lit. to those who seem; are reputed. Men of recognized position, James,
Cephas, John. Not his adversaries who were adherents of these three. It
is not to be supposed that he would submit his gospel to such. The
expression is therefore not used ironically. Paul recognizes the
honorable position of the three and their rightful claim to respect. The
repetition of the phrase ([Gal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006),
[Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)) may point to a favorite
expression of his opponents in commending these leaders to Paul as
models for his preaching; hardly (as Lightfoot) to the contrast between
the estimation in which they were held and the actual services which
they rendered to him. He chooses this expression because the matter at
stake was his recognition by the earlier apostles, and any ironical
designation would be out of place.

Lest by any means I should run or had run in vain

Better, should be running. Comp. [Phi
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016). This is sometimes explained as
implying a misgiving on Paul's part as to the soundness of his own
teaching, which he desired to have set at rest by the decision of the
principal apostles. On this explanation μή πως will be rendered lest in
some way or other. But such a misgiving is contrary to Paul's habitual
attitude of settled conviction respecting that gospel which he had
received by revelation, and in the preaching of which he had been
confirmed by experience. In consulting the Christians at Jerusalem Paul
had principally in view the formal indorsement of his work by the church
and its leaders. Their formal declaration that he had not been running
in vain would materially aid him in his mission. Μή πως is therefore to
be taken as marking an indirect question, whether - not possibly; and
the sense of the whole passage is as follows: "I laid before them that
gospel which I preach to the Gentiles, that they might examine and
settle for themselves the question whether I am not possibly running or
had run in vain." The investigation was to be for their satisfaction,
not for Paul's. Run (τρέχειν) is a favorite metaphor with Paul. See [Rom
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016); [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024), [Co1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#026); [Gal
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#007); [Phi
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#016); [Phi
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013), [Phi
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#014).

[Galatians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 2:3</span></span>

Neither (οὐδὲ)

More correctly, not even. So far were they from pronouncing my labor in
vain, that not even Titus was compelled to be circumcised, although he
was a Greek. Though approving Paul's preaching, the apostles might, for
the sake of conciliation, have insisted on the circumcision of his
Gentile companion.

Being a Greek (Ἕλλην ὤν)

Or, although he was a Greek. Const. closely with σὺν ἐμοι, with me. It
was a bold proceeding for Paul to take an uncircumcised Gentile with him
to the conference at Jerusalem.

Was compelled to be circumcised (ἠναγκάσθη περιτμηθῆναι)

That is. no constraint was applied by the Jerusalem church and its
authorities for the circumcision of Titus. The statement is not that
such an attempt was pressed but successfully resisted, but that
circumcision was not insisted on by the church. The pressure in that
direction came from "the false brethren" described in the next verse.

[Galatians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gal 2:4</span></span>

The false brethren (τοὺς ψευδαδέλφους)

Only here and [Co2 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026). Christians
in name only; Judaisers; anti-Paulinists. The article marks them as a
well known class.

Unawares brought in (παρεισάκτους)

N.T.o. Lit. brought in by the side, and so insidiously, illegally. Vulg.
subintroductos. olxx. Strabo (xvii. 1) uses it as an epithet of Ptolemy,
"the sneak." Comp. παρεισάξουσιν shall privily bring in, [Pe2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001); and παρεισεδύησαν crept in
privily, [Jde 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#004). Brought in, not
from Jerusalem into the church at Antioch, nor into the Pauline churches
generally, but into the Christian brotherhood to which they did not
rightfully belong.

Who (οἵτινες)

The double relative introduces the explanation of the two preceding
epithets: false brethren, privily brought in, since they came in privily
to spy out our liberty.

Came in privily (παρεισῆλθον)

Lit. came in beside. Only here and [Rom
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020), where it implies nothing evil or
secret, but merely something subsidiary. The aorist has a pluperfect
sense, indication the earlier intrusion of these persons into the
Christian community.

To spy out (κατασκοπῆσαι)

N.T.o. In lxx, of spying out a territory, [Sa2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#003); [Ch1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#003).

Liberty (ἐλευθερίαν)

Freedom from Mosaism through justification by faith.

Bring us into bondage (καταδουλώσουσιν)

Only here and [Co2 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#020). Bring us
into subjection to Jewish ordinances. The compound verb indicates abject
subjection.

[Galatians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gal 2:5</span></span>

We gave place by subjection (εἴξαμεν τῇ ὑποταγῇ)

We, Paul and Barnabas. Gave place or yielded, N.T.o By the subjection
which was demanded of us. The noun only in Paul and the Pastorals, and
always in the sense of self-subjection. Comp. [Co2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#013); [Ti1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#011); [Ti1
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#004).

[Galatians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 2:6</span></span>

Render the passage as follows: "But to be something from (at the hands
of) those who were of repute, whatever they were, matters nothing to me
(God accepteth not man's person), for those who were of repute imparted
nothing to me."

To be something (εἶναί τι)

Comp. [Gal 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003); [Act
5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036); [Co2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#011). To be in good standing as an
evangelist or apostle, approved and commissioned by high authorities.

From those who were of repute (ἀπὸ τῶν δοκούντων)

From, at the hands of; as receiving my indorsement or commission from
them. Comp. [Gal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001). Of repute, see
on [Gal 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#002).

Whatsoever they were (ὁποῖοι ποτὲ ἦσαν)

Ποτέ in N.T. is invariably temporal, and points here to the preeminence
which these apostles had formerly, up to the time of Paul's visit,
enjoyed, because of their personal connection with Jesus.

Maketh no matter to me (οὐδέν μοι διαφέρει)

Paul does not say, as A.V. and Rev., that the standing and repute of the
apostles were matters of indifference to him, but that he was
indifferent about receiving his commission from them as recognized
dignitaries of the church. The construction is: "To be something (εἶναί
τι) at the hands of (ἀπὸ) those who were of repute matters nothing to
me."

God accepteth no man's person

Or more strictly, accepteth not the person of man. Parenthetical.
Λαμβάνειν πρόσωπον to receive or accept the face is a Hebraism. See on
[Jam 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001). In O.T. both in a good and a
bad sense; to be gracious, and to show favor from personal or partisan
motives. In N.T. only here and [Luk
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#021), both in a bad sense. Similar
Hebraistic expressions are βλέπειν εἰς πρόσωπον to look at the face,
[Mat 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#016) : θαυμάζειν πρόσωπα to
admire the countenances, [Jde 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016) :
καυχᾶσθαι ἐν προσώπῳ to glory in the face, [Co2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012).

For - to me

Explaining the previous statement. To be of consequence because
commissioned by those in repute matters nothing to me (God accepteth not
man's person), for although they might have asserted their high repute
and authority to others, to me they did not, as shown by their imposing
on me no new requirements.

In conference added nothing (οὐδὲν προσανέθεντο)

In conference is an attempt to conform the sense to [Gal
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#016). The verb without the accusative,
as there, means to confer with. Here, with the accusative, the meaning
is laid upon or imposed on. Rend. therefore, imposed nothing on me. They
imposed on me no new (πρὸς additional) requirements; no conditions or
limitations of my missionary work.

[Galatians 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 2:7</span></span>

The gospel of the uncircumcision (τὸ εὐαγγέλιον τῆς ἀκροβυστίας)

The phrase only here in N.T. The gospel which was to be preached to the
uncircumcised - the Gentiles. Lightfoot aptly says: "It denotes a
distinction of sphere, and not a difference of type."

[Galatians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gal 2:8</span></span>

He that wrought effectually (ὁ ἐνεργήσας)

See on [Th1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013). Rev. omits
effectually, but it is fairly implied in the verb. Comp. [Co1
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006); [Phi
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013); [Col
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029). The reference is to God, not to
Christ.

In Peter (Πέτρῳ)

Better, for Peter. In Peter would be ἐν Πέτρῳ.

Unto the apostleship (εἰς)

Not merely with reference to the apostleship, but with the design of
making him an apostle. Comp. [Co2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012); [Col
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#029). Observe how Paul puts himself on
an equality with Peter.

Unto the Gentiles (εἰς τὰ ἔθνη)

To make me an apostle to the Gentiles.

[Galatians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gal 2:9</span></span>

Who seemed to be pillars (οἱ δοκοῦντες στύλοι εἶναι)

Better, who are in repute as pillars. The metaphor of pillars, applied
to the great representatives and supporters of an institution, is old,
and common in all languages.

The grace (τὴν χάριν)

Including all the manifestations of divine grace in Paul - his mission,
special endowment, success in preaching the gospel - all showing that he
was worthy of their fellowship. He is careful to speak of it as a gift
of God, δοθεῖσαν.

They gave the right hands of fellowship (δεξιὰς ἔδωκαν κοινωνίας)

The phrase only here in N.T. A token of alliance in the apostolic office
of preaching and teaching. The giving of the right hand in pledge was
not a distinctively Jewish custom. It appears as early as Homer.
Deissmann cites an inscription from Pergamum, 98 B. C., in which the
Pergamenes offer to adjust the strife between Sardes and Ephesus, and
send a mediator δοῦναι τὰς χεῖρας εἰς σύλλυσιν to give hands for a
treaty. See δεξιὰν or δεξιὰς διδόναι 1 Macc. 6:58; 11:50, 62; 2 Macc.
11:26; 12:11; 13:22; and δεξ. λαμβάνειν to receive right hand or hands,
1 Macc. 11:66; 13:50; 2 Macc. 12:12; 14:19. The custom prevailed among
the Persians, from whom it may have passed to the Jews. See Joseph.
Antiq. 18:9, 3. Images of right hands clasped were sometimes exchanged
in token of friendship (see Xen. Anab. ii. 4, 1). Tacitus (Hist. i. 54)
says: "The state of the Lingones had sent, according to an ancient
institution, right hands, as gifts to the legions, a signal token of
good will." On Roman coins often appear two hands joined, with various
inscriptions, as Exercituum Fides; Concordia; Consensus. To give the
hand in confirmation of a promise occurs [Eze
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019). In [Isa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008), God swears by his right hand.

[Galatians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 2:10</span></span>

Only

With only this stipulation.

We should remember (μνημονεύωμεν)

The only instance in N.T. of this verb in the sense of beneficent care.
No instance in lxx. In [Psa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012),
there is the thought but not the word.

The poor (τῶν πτωχῶν)

The poor Christians of Palestine. Comp. [Act
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017); [Rom
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026), [Rom
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#027); [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003); [Co2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#001). For the word, see on [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003). In lxx ordinarily of those who
are oppressors, or of those who are quiet in contrast with the lawless.

The same which (ὃ - αὐτὸ τοῦτο)

Lit. which, this very thing. The expression is peculiarly emphatic, and
brings out the contrast between Judaising hostility and Paul's spirit of
loving zeal. Rev. which very thing.

[Galatians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 2:11</span></span>

To the face (κατὰ πρόσωπον)

As [Act 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013). The meaning is expressed
in the familiar phrase faced him down. It is, however, rarely as strong
as this in N.T. Rather before the face, or in the face of, meaning
simply in the sight or presence of ([Luk
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#031)), or according to appearance
([Co2 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#007)). The explanation that Paul
withstood Peter only in appearance or semblance (so Jerome, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, and other Fathers) is one of the curiosities of exegesis, and
was probably adopted out of misplaced consideration for the prestige of
Peter.

He was to be blamed (κατεγνωσμένος ἦν)

A.V. is wrong. Rev. correctly, he stood condemned. Not by the body of
Christians at Antioch; rather his act was its own condemnation.

[Galatians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gal 2:12</span></span>

Did eat with (συνήσθιεν)

A.V. misses the force of the imperfect, marking Peter's custom. Not only
at church feasts, but at ordinary meals, in defiance of the Pharisaic
that this prohibition was not binding ([Act
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#028); [Act
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#008), [Act
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#009)), and had defended that position
in the apostolic conference ([Act 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)
ff.).

Withdrew and separated himself (ὑπέστελλεν καὶ ἀφώριζεν ἑαυτόν)

Or, began to withdraw, etc. Ὑποστέλλειν only here in Paul. It means,
originally, to draw in or contract. Thus of furling sails, closing the
fingers. Middle voice, to draw or shrink back from through fear. Hence,
to dissemble or prevaricate. There seems to be no special reason for
making it either a military metaphor, as Lightfoot, or a nautical
metaphor, as Farrar. See on [Act
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#020).

[Galatians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 2:13</span></span>

Dissembled with him (συνυπεκρίθησαν)

N.T.o. Peter's course influenced the other Jewish Christians as Antioch,
who had previously followed his example in eating with Gentiles.

Was carried away (συναπήχθη)

Lit. was carried away with them (συν). In Paul only here and [Rom
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#016), on which see note. In lxx once,
[Exo 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#006).

With their dissimulation (αὐτῶν τῇ ὑποκρίσει)

Not to or over to their dissimulation. Paul uses a strong word, which is
employed only in [Ti1 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002). The kindred
verb ὑποκρίνεσθαι to play a part, and the noun ὑποκριτής hypocrisy do
not occur in his letters. Their act was hypocrisy, because it was a
concealment of their own more liberal conviction, and an open profession
of still adhering to the narrow Pharisaic view. It was "a practical
denial of their better spiritual insight" (Wieseler).

[Galatians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gal 2:14</span></span>

See additional note at the end of this chapter.

Walked not uprightly (ὀρθοποδοῦσιν)

Lit. are not walking. N.T.o. olxx. oClass. Lit. to be straight-footed.

Being a Jew (ὑπάρχων)

The verb means originally to begin; thence to come forth, be at hand, be
in existence. It is sometimes claimed that ὑπάρχειν as distinguished
from εἶναι implies an antecedent condition - being originally. That is
true in some cases. But, on the other hand, it sometimes denotes a
present as related to a future condition. The most that can be said is
that it often is found simply in the sense of to be.

Livest after the manner of Gentiles (ἐθνικῶς ζῇς)

Ἑθνικῶς, N.T.o. The force of the present livest must not be pressed. The
reference is not strictly temporal, either as referring to Peter's
former intercourse with the Gentile Christians, or as indicating that he
was now associating with them at table. It is rather the statement of a
general principle. If you, at whatever time, act on the principle of
living according to Gentile usage. At the time of Paul's address to
Peter, Peter was living after the manner of Jews (Ἱουδαΐκῶς).

Compellest (ἀναγκάζεις)

Indirect compulsion exerted by Peter's example. Not that he directly
imposed Jewish separatism on the Gentile converts.

To live as do the Jews (Ἱουδαΐ̀ζειν)

N.T.o. Once in lxx, [Est 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#017). Also in
Joseph. B. J. 2:18, 2, and Plut. Cic. 7. It is used by Ignatius, Magn.
x. Χριστιανίζειν to practice Christianity occurs in Origen.

[Galatians 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 2:15</span></span>

We, etc.

Continuation of Paul's address; not the beginning of an address to the
Galatians. Under we Paul includes himself, Peter, and the Jewish
Christians of Antioch, in contrast with the Gentile Christians. The
Galatians were mostly Gentiles.

Who are Jews, etc.

The who is wrong. Render we are Jews. The expression is concessive. We
are, I grant, Jews. There is an implied emphasis on the special
prerogatives and privileges of the Jews as such. See [Rom
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001) f.; [Rom
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001) ff.

Sinners of the Gentiles (ἐξ ἐθνῶν ἁμαρτωλοί)

Lit. sinners taken from the Gentiles, or sprung from. Sinners, in the
conventional Jewish sense; born heathen, and as such sinners; not
implying that Jews are not sinners. The Jew regarded the Gentile as
impure, and styled him a dog ([Mat
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#027)). See [Rom
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012); [Co1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001); [Co1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#021); [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012); [Luk
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#032); [Luk
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#007). Possibly Paul here cites the
very words by which Peter sought to justify his separation from the
Gentile Christians, and takes up these words in order to draw from them
an opposite conclusion. This is quite according to Paul's habit.

[Galatians 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gal 2:16</span></span>

Justified (δικαιοῦται)

See on [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026). The meaning to declare or
pronounce righteous cannot be consistently carried through Paul's
writings in the interest of a theological fiction of imputed
righteousness. See, for example, [Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025); [Co1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011); and all passages where the word
is used to describe justification by works of the law, as here, [Gal
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#011); [Gal
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004). If one is a real righteousness,
founded upon his conformity to the law. Why is the righteousness of
faith any less a real righteousness?

By the works of the law (ἐξ ἔργων νόμου)

Lit. out of the works, etc. Comp. [Rom
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020). Works are characteristic of a
legal dispensation. Paul often puts "works" alone as representing legal
righteousness. See [Rom 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002), [Rom
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006); [Rom
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011), [Rom
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032); [Rom
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#006); [Eph
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#009).

But by faith (ἐὰν μὴ)

As the Greek stands, it would read, "Is not justified by the works of
the law save through faith." So, unfortunately, Rev. This would mean, as
the Romish interpreters, not through works of the law except they be
done through faith in Christ, and would ascribe justification to works
which grow out of faith. Paul means that justification is by faith
alone. The use of ἐὰν μὴ is to be thus explained: A man is not justified
by the works of the law: (he is not justified) except by faith in Jesus
Christ. Ἑὰν μὴ retains its exceptive force, but the exception refers
only to the verb. Comp. εἰ μὴ in [Mat
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#004); [Luk
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#026), [Luk
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027); [Gal
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#019); [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027).

Flesh (σάρξ)

See on [Rom 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005). For no flesh see on
[Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020).

[Galatians 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gal 2:17</span></span>

Are found (εὑρέθημεν)

More correctly, were found: were discovered and shown to be. See [Rom
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010); [Co1
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#015); [Co2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003); [Phi
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008); [Phi
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009).

Sinners (ἁμαρτωλοί)

Like the Gentiles, [Gal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015). Paul
assumes that this was actually the case: that, seeking to be justified
in Christ, they were found to be sinners. To seek to be justified by
Christ is an admission that there is no justification by works; that the
seeker is unjustified, and therefore a sinner. The effort to attain
justification by faith in Christ develops the consciousness of sin. It
compels the seeker, whether Jew or Gentile, to put himself upon the
common plane of sinners. The Jew who calls the Gentile a sinner, in
seeking to be justified by faith, finds himself a sinner also. The law
has failed him as a justifying agency. But Paul is careful to repudiate
the false inference from this fact, stated in what immediately follows,
namely, that Christ is a minister of sin.

Minister of sin

A promoter of sin by causing us to abandon the law.

God forbid (μὴ γένοιτο)

See on [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004). Not a reply merely to
the question "is Christ a minister of sin?" but to the whole supposition
from "if while we seek." The question is not whether Christ is in
general a minister of sin, but whether he is such in the case supposed.
Paul does not assume that this false inference has been drawn by Peter
or the other Jewish Christians.

[Galatians 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gal 2:18</span></span>

I build again the things which I destroyed (ἃ κατέλυσα ταῦτα πάλιν
οἰκοδομῶ)

Peter, by his Christian profession, had asserted that justification was
by faith alone; and by his eating with Gentiles had declared that the
Mosaic law was no longer binding upon him. He had thus, figuratively,
destroyed or pulled down the Jewish law as a standard of Christian faith
and conduct. By his subsequent refusal to eat with Gentiles he had
retracted this declaration, had asserted that the Jewish law was still
binding upon Christians, and had thus built again what he had pulled
down. Building and pulling down are favorite figures with Paul. See [Rom
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020); [Rom
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#020); [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001), [Co1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#010); [Co1
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#023); [Co1
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#017); [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020) f. For καταλύειν destroy, see on
[Rom 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#020); see on [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001).

I make myself (ἐμαυτὸν συνιστάνω)

Better, prove myself. The verb originally means to put together: thence
to put one person in contact with another by way of introducing him and
bespeaking for him confidence and approval. To commend, as [Rom
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#001); comp. [Rom
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#008); [Co2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001); [Co2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#002); [Co2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012). As proof, or exhibition of the
true state of a case is furnished by putting things together, the word
comes to mean demonstrate, exhibit the fact, as here, [Rom
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005); [Co2
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011).

A transgressor (παραβάτην)

See on [Jam 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011), and see on παράβασις
transgression, [Rom 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023). In
reasserting the validity of the law for justification, which he had
denied by seeking justification by faith in Christ, he proves himself a
transgressor in that denial, that pulling down.

[Galatians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 2:19</span></span>

For (γὰρ)

Justifying the previous thought that the reerection of the law as a
standard of Christian life and a means of justification is a
condemnation of the faith which relies on Christ alone for
righteousness.

I, through the law, am dead to the law (ἐγὼ διὰ νόμου νόμῳ ἀπέθανον)

For am dead, render died. Faith in Christ created a complete and
irreparable break with the law which is described as death to the law.
Comp. [Rom 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#004), [Rom
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#006). The law itself was the instrument
of this break, see next verse Ἑγὼ is emphatic. Paul appeals to his
personal experience, his decided break with the law in contrast with
Peter's vacillation.

Might live unto God (θεῷ ζήσω)

With death to the law a new principle of life entered. For the phrase,
see [Rom 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#010), [Rom
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011).

[Galatians 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gal 2:20</span></span>

I am crucified with Christ (Χριστῷ συνεσταύρωμαι)

This compound verb is used by Paul only here and [Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006). In the gospels, [Mat
27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044); [Mar
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#032); [Joh
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032). The statement explains how a
believer dies to the law by means of the law itself. In the crucifixion
of Christ as one accursed, the demand of the law was met (see [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)). Ethically, a believer is
crucified with Christ ([Rom 6:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003);
[Phi 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010); [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031); [Co2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)), and thus the demand of the law
is fulfilled in him likewise. Paul means that, "owing to his connection
with the crucified, he was like him, legally impure, and was thus an
outcast from the Jewish church." He became dead to the law by the law's
own act. Of course a Jew would have answered that Christ was justly
crucified. He would have said: "If you broke with the law because of
your fellowship with Christ, it proved that both he and you were
transgressors." But Paul is addressing Peter, who, in common with
himself, believed on Christ ([Gal
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#016)).

I live; yet not I (ζῶ δὲ οὐκέτι ἐγώ)

The semicolon after live in A.V. and Rev. should be removed. Rend: and
it is no longer I that live, but Christ, etc. The new life of Christ
followed his crucifixion, [Rom 6:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009).
He who is crucified with Christ repeats this experience. He rises with
Christ and shares his resurrection-life. The old man is crucified with
Christ, and Christ is in him as the principle of his new life, Romans
4-11.

I now live

Emphasis on νῦν now, since the beginning of my Christian life, with an
implied contrast with the life in the flesh before he was crucified with
Christ. Then, the I was the center and impulse of life. Now, it is no
longer I, but Christ in me.

By the faith of the Son of God (ἐν πίστει τῇ τοῦ υἱοῦ τοῦ θεοῦ)

Better, as Rev., in faith, the faith which is in the Son of God. Thus
the defining and explicative force of the article τῆ after πίστει is
brought out. In faith is better than by faith, although ἐν is sometimes
used instrumentally. In corresponds better with ἐν σαρκὶ in the flesh.
It exhibits faith as the element in which the new life is lived.

And gave himself (καὶ παραδόντος ἑαυτὸν)

Καὶ and has an explanatory force: loved me, and, as a proof of his love,
gave himself. For παραδόντος gave, see on was delivered, [Rom
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025).

"For God more bounteous was himself to give

To make man able to uplift himself,

Than if he only of himself had pardoned."

Dante, Paradiso, vii. 115-117

For me (ὑπὲρ ἐμοῦ)

See on for the ungodly, [Rom 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#006).

[Galatians 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gal 2:21</span></span>

Frustrate (ἀθετῶ)

Annul or invalidate. Comp. [Mar 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#009);
[Co1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019); [Gal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015).

The grace of God (τὴν χάριν τοῦ θεοῦ)

Χάρις is, primarily, that which gives joy (χαρά). Its higher, Christian
meaning is based on the emphasis of freeness in a gift or favor. It is
the free, spontaneous, absolute loving kindness of God toward men. Hence
often in contrast with the ideas of debt, law, works, sin. Sometimes for
the gift of grace, the benefaction, as [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003); [Co2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006), [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019); [Pe1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010), [Pe1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013). So here: the gracious gift of
God in the offering of Christ.

Is dead (ἀπέθανεν)

More correctly, died; pointing to the historical incident.

In vain (δωρεὰν)

Groundlessly, without cause. See on [Th2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#008). The sense here is not common. It
is not found in Class., and in N.T. only [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025). In lxx, see Psalm 34:7, 19;
108:3; 118:161; 1 Samuel 19:5; Sir. 20:23; 29:6. Comp. Ignatius, Trall.
v. Paul says: "I do not invalidate the grace of God in the offering of
Christ, as one does who seeks to reestablish the law as a means of
justification; for if righteousness comes through the law, there was no
occasion for Christ to die."

Additional Note on [Gal 2:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014).

The course of thought in Paul's address to Peter is difficult to follow.
It will help to simplify it if the reader will keep it before him that
the whole passage is to be interpreted in the light of Peter's false
attitude - as a remonstrance against a particular state of things.

The line of remonstrance is as follows. If you, Peter, being a Jew, do
not live as a Jew, but as a Gentile, as you did when you ate with
Gentiles, why do you, by your example in withdrawing from Gentile
tables, constrain Gentile Christians to live as Jews, observing the
separative ordinances of the Jewish law? This course is plainly
inconsistent.

Even you and I, born Jews, and not Gentiles - sinners - denied the
obligation of these ordinances by the act of believing on Jesus Christ.
In professing this faith we committed ourselves to the principle that no
one can be justified by the works of the law.

But it may be said that we were in no better case by thus abandoning the
law and legal righteousness, since, in the very effort to be justified
through Christ, we were shown to be sinners, and therefore in the same
category with the Gentiles. Does it not then follow that Christ is
proved to be a minister of sin in requiring us to abandon the law as a
means of justification?

No. God forbid. It is true that, in seeking to be justified in Christ,
we stood revealed as sinners, for it was Christ who showed us that we
could not be justified by the works of the law; that all our legal
strictness only left us sinners. But the inference is false that Christ
is thereby shown to be a minister of sin.

For to say that Christ is a minister of sin, is to say that I, at his
bidding, became a transgressor by abandoning the law, that the law is
the only true standard and medium of righteousness. If I reassert the
obligation of the law after denying that obligation, I thereby assert
that I transgressed in abandoning it, and that Christ, who prompted and
demanded this transgression, is a minister of sin.

But this I deny. The law is not the true standard and medium of
righteousness. I did not transgress in abandoning it. Christ is not a
minister of sin. For it was the law itself which compelled me to abandon
the law. The law crucified Christ and thereby declared him accursed. In
virtue of my moral fellowship with Christ, I was (ethically) crucified
with him. The act of the law forced me to break with the law. Through
the law I died to the law. Thus I came under a new principle of life. I
no longer live, but Christ lives in me. If I should declare that
righteousness is through the law, by reasserting the obligation of the
law as you, Peter, have done, I should annul the grace of God as
exhibited in the death of Christ: for in that case, Christ's death would
be superfluous and useless. But I do not annul the grace of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 3](gal003)

</div>
