<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](plm001)  [Next](heb001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 0:0</span></span>

The Epistle to the Hebrews

Introduction

"Who wrote the Epistle God only knows." Such was the verdict of Origen,
and modern criticism has gotten no farther. That it is not the work of
Paul is the almost unanimous judgment of modern scholars. Its
authenticity as a Pauline writing has been challenged from the earliest
times. In the Eastern church, both Clement and Origen regarded the Greek
Epistle as Paul's only in a secondary sense; Clement holding that it was
written by Paul in Hebrew and translated by Luke. Origen knew only that
some held Clement of Rome and some Luke to be the author. Its position
and designation in the Peshitto Version shows that it was regarded as
not strictly one of Paul's epistles, but as an appendix to the
collection. Eusebius's testimony is inconsistent. He holds a Hebrew
original, and a translation by Clement, and cites the letter as Pauline
(H.E. 38). Again, he expressly classifies it with antilegomena (vi. 13);
but in iii. 25 he evades the question, naming the Pauline Epistles as
homologumena, but without stating their number.

In the West the epistle was known to Clement of Rome, who frequently
quotes it, but without naming the author. The Pauline authorship was
expressly denied by Hippolytus: the Muratorian Canon does not mention
it, and reckons only seven churches to which Paul wrote: Tertullian in
Africa apparently knew nothing of a Pauline Epistle to the Hebrews, but
spoke of an Epistle of Barnabas to the Hebrews. It was not recognized by
Cyprian. From the fourth century its canonical authority was admitted in
the West, partly on the assumption of its Pauline authorship; but the
influence of the earlier suspicion remained, and Jerome declared that
the custom of the Latins did not receive it as St. Paul's. Augustine
agreed substantially with Jerome. It was authorized as canonical by two
councils of Carthage (397, 419 a.d.); but the language of the former
council was peculiar: "Thirteen Epistles of Paul, and one of the same to
the Hebrews." The decree of the latter council was "fourteen Epistles of
Paul."

From this time the canonical authority and authorship of the epistle
were generally accepted until the age of the Reformation, when the old
doubts were revived by Cajetan and Erasmus. The council of Trent
(1545-1563) decreed fourteen Pauline Epistles; yet different views have
been current among Roman Catholic theologians, as Bellarmine, Estius,
and others. Luther denied the Pauline authorship, and placed the epistle
along with James, Jude, and Revelation, after "the right-certain, main
books of the New Testament." Melanchthon treated it as anonymous. The
Magdeburg Centuriators (1559-1574) denied that it was Paul's, as did
Calvin. Under Beza's influence it was separated from the Pauline letters
in the Gallican Confession (1571). The Belgic and Helvetic Confessions
declared it Pauline. The hypothesis of the Pauline authorship was
conclusively overthrown by Bleek in 1868.

The conclusion of modern scholarship rests upon:

\(1\) The Style and Diction. - While Paul's style is marked by frequent
irregularities, anacolutha, unclosed parentheses, and mixed metaphors,
this epistle is written in a flowing, symmetrical, and artistically
elaborated style. The difference is as marked as that between a chapter
of Gibbon and one of Sartor Resartus. The rhetorical art of Hebrews
appears in the careful arrangement of the words, the rhythmical
structure of sentences, and the sonorous compounds. The paragraphs are
sometimes arranged in a regular series of premises and conclusions, with
parentheses which do not lose their connection with the main topic,
while the whole is developed in regular sequence, without anacolutha.

\(2\) The Methods of Thought and the Points of View. - These differ from
those of the Pauline Epistles. The two do not materially disagree. They
reach, substantially, the same conclusions, but by different processes
and from different positions. The points of emphasis differ. Topics
which, in the Pauline letters, are in the foreground, in Hebrews fall
into the shade or are wholly passed over.

\(a\) The conception of faith. In Paul, faith is belief in Jesus Christ
as a means of justification, involving a sharp opposition to the works
of the law as meriting salvation. In Hebrews, faith is trust in the
divine promises as distinguished from seeing their realization, a phase
of faith which appears rarely in Paul. Both agree that faith is the only
true medium of righteousness; but Hebrews sets forth two great factors
of faith, namely, that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them which
diligently seek him.

\(b\) The mode of presenting the contrast between the covenant of works
and the covenant of grace through faith. Both Paul and the author of
Hebrews recognize a relation and connection between the two covenants.
The one prefigures and prepares the way for the other. The Christian
church is "the Israel of God," "the people of God," "the seed of
Abraham." Both teach that forgiveness of sin and true fellowship with
God cannot be attained through the law, and that Christianity represents
the life-giving Spirit, and Judaism the letter which killeth. Both
assert the abrogation of the old covenant by Christ. Paul, however,
views Judaism almost entirely as a law to be fulfilled by men; while our
writer regards it as a system of institutions designed to represent a
fellowship between God and his worshippers. Paul, accordingly, shows
that the law cannot put man into right relation with God, because man
cannot fulfill it; while Hebrews shows that the institutions of the old
covenant cannot, by reason of their imperfection, establish a real
fellowship with God. To Paul, the reason why the old covenant did not
satisfy lay, not in the law, which "is, holy and just and good," but in
the relation of man to the law, as unable to fulfill its demands. It
cannot effect justification, and it works to make man conscious of his
sin, and to drive him to the true source of righteousness. To our writer
the reason is to be sought in the fact that the atoning and purifying
institutions of the law cannot remove the sins which prevent fellowship
with God.

From Paul's point of view he might have been expected to show that, in
the Old Testament economy, it devolved on the sacrificial institution,
centered in the high-priesthood, to meet the want which was not met by
legal obedience. To his assertion that men could not fulfill the demands
of the law, it might have been answered that the sacrifices, not in
being works of the law, but in being ordained by God himself as
atonements for sin, changed men's defective righteousness into a
righteousness which justified them before God. But Paul does not meet
this. He nowhere shows the insufficiency of the Old Testament
sacrifices. He does not treat the doctrine of the high-priesthood of
Christ. He regards the system of sacrifices less as a divinely-ordained
means of atonement than as a work performed by men, and therefore in the
line of other works of the law.

This gap is filled by the writer to the Hebrews, in showing that the
ceremonial economy did not and could not effect true fellowship with
God. He, no doubt, perceived as clearly as Paul that the observance of
the ritual was of the nature of legal works; but he speaks of the ritual
system as only a presumed means of grace intended to define and enforce
the idea of fellowship with God, and to give temporary comfort to the
worshipper, but practically impotent to institute and maintain such
fellowship in any true and deep sense. Therefore he emphasizes the topic
of the priesthood. He dwells on the imperfect and transient nature of
the priestly office: he shows that the Levitical priesthood was only a
foreshadowing of a better and permanent priesthood. Christ as the great
high priest, who appears nowhere in the Pauline Epistles, is the central
figure in the Epistle to the Hebrews. He treats of the ritual system and
its appliances as mere types of an enduring reality: he characterizes
the whole body of Levitical ordinances and ceremonies as fleshly; and
through all runs the one, sad note, accentuated again and again, "they
can never take away sins:" "they can never make the comers thereunto
perfect:" "they are mere ordinances of the flesh, imposed until the time
of reformation."

\(c\) The view of the condition in which the subject of the law's
dominion is placed. To Paul it is a condition of bondage, because the
law is a body of demands which man must fulfill (Romans 7). To our
writer it is a condition of unsatisfied longing for forgiveness and
fellowship, because of the insufficiency of the ritual atonement.
Accordingly, Hebrews points to the satisfaction of this longing in
Christ, the great high priest, perfecting by one offering those who are
being sanctified, purging the conscience from dead works to serve the
living God. Paul points to the fact that Christ has put an end to the
tyranny of the law, and has substituted freedom for bondage. The
conception of freedom does not appear in Hebrews. Neither ἐλεύθερος,
ἐλευθερία, nor ἐλευθεροῦν occur in the epistle.

\(d\) The doctrine of the resurrection of Christ. This emerges
everywhere in Paul's epistles. There is but one allusion to it in
Hebrews ([Heb 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020)), although it is
implied in the doctrine of Christ's high-priesthood, he being a priest
"according to the power of an indissoluble life" ([Heb
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#016)).

\(e\) The Gentiles. There is no mention of the Gentiles in relation to
the new covenant, a topic which constantly recurs in Paul.

\(f\) Sin. Sin is not treated with reference to its origin as by Paul.
The vocabulary of terms for sin is smaller than in the Pauline writings.

\(g\) Repentance. The denial of the possibility of repentance after a
lapse ([Heb 6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#004), comp. [Heb
10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#026)) is not Pauline.

\(3\) The Use of Divine Titles. - Κύριος Lord, very common in Paul, is
comparatively rare in Hebrews. Similarly, Ἰησοῦς Χριστός Jesus Christ,
which occurs thirty times in Romans alone. Χριστός Ἰησοῦς, which is
characteristically Pauline, does not appear at all, neither does σωτὴρ
savior, which is found in Ephesians and Philippians.

\(4\) The General Scheme of Treatment. - This is broader than that of
Paul, viewing man not only in his relation to the law, but to God's
original ideal, and to the harmony with God's entire economy in nature
and revelation. Man, nature, history, alike illustrate the incarnation.
The Son of God, through whom the worlds were made, is the heir of all
things, and, as creator and heir, interprets all life. He not only
creates, but bears on all things by the word of his power toward the
consummation - complete harmony with the divine archetype. As high
priest he makes God and man at one in every sphere of being. He stands
for the solidarity of humanity. He is not perfected without the
community of sons ([Heb 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)). He is
himself a son, a partaker of human nature.

With Paul, the law is chiefly a law of ordinances to be replaced by the
gospel. It is abolished in Christ. It cannot be perfectly observed. It
generates the knowledge of sin. It cannot generate righteousness.
Christianity is a manifestation of the righteousness of God apart from
the law. Faith is counted for righteousness to him that worketh not but
believeth. The law works wrath, and is unto death. It is subsidiary,
with a special view to the concrete development of sin. Equally our
epistle shows the insufficiency of the law to reconcile men to God, but
in a different way. Paul emphasizes the substitution of the gospel for
the law: Hebrews the germ of a saving economy contained in the law, and
the necessity of its development by the gospel. Paul does not overlook
the fact that the law was our pedagogue to bring us to Christ, but he
does not show how, as our writer does. The latter emphasizes the unity
of the divine plan, shows how the Levitical institutions pointed forward
to Christ, and how the heavenly archetype was foreshadowed in the ritual
system. With all Paul's strong assertion of the holiness of the law, he
never dwells on it with the sad tenderness for the vanishing system
which marks the Epistle to the Hebrews. With Paul the break with the law
was sharp and complete. The law, as a champion of which he had been a
persecutor of Christ, is thrown into sharp relief against Christ and the
gospel. With James and Peter the case was different. It would not be
strange if some writing should issue from their circle as "the last
voice of the apostles of the circumcision," contemplating with
affectionate sympathy that through which they had been led to see the
meaning of the gospel, and finding in it "a welcome, though imperfect
source of consolation, instead of a crushing burden, as in Paul's case"
(Westcott).

\(5\) The Personal Authority of the Writer Is Wholly in the Background.
- This is in marked contrast with the epistles of Paul. He appears to
place himself in the second generation of believers to whom the
salvation preached by Christ had been certified by ear-witnesses; while
Paul refuses to be regarded as a pupil of the apostles, and claims to
have received the gospel directly from the Lord, and to have been
certified of it by the Spirit.

If Paul was not the author, who was? One claim is about as good as
another, and no claim has any substantial support. That of Apollos is
founded solely upon [Act 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#024) f.;
[Co1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012); [Co1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004) ff. The most that can be deduced
from these is that Apollos might have written it. There is no evidence
that he wrote anything, and that he was learned and mighty in the
Scriptures might easily have been true of others. Some modern critics
incline to Barnabas, on the strength of the words of Tertullian alluded
to above, but this is as unsatisfactory as the rest.

As regards the destination of the epistle, we are equally in the dark.
By ecclesiastical writers from the earliest time it is cited under the
title to the Hebrews, a fact which is entitled to some weight. It is
evidently addressed to a definite circle of readers, and that circle
could hardly have been a mixed church of Jews and Gentiles, since it
would have been impossible in that case for the letter to avoid
allusions to the relations between the two, whereas it contains no
allusion to Gentile Christians.

An hypothesis which has obtained considerable currency in modern
criticism is, that the epistle was not addressed to Jewish Christians at
all, but to Gentile Christians, as a warning against relapsing into
heathenism, by showing them from the Old Testament the superiority of
Christianity to Judaism.

But this hypothesis presents formidable difficulties. This would seem to
be a roundabout way of impressing Gentiles with the superior claims of
Christianity. It would appear to have been the more natural course to
institute a direct comparison between Christianity and paganism. See on
[Heb 13:7-15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007).

It is true that Gentile Christians were familiar with the Old Testament,
and that Paul's epistles to Gentile readers contain frequent allusions
to it; and, further, that Clement of Rome, in his epistle to the Gentile
church at Corinth, makes much use of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and
cites freely from the Old Testament. But to illustrate one's thoughts
and arguments by occasional references to the Old Testament is a very
different thing from drawing out an elaborate argument on the basis of a
contrast between a new and an older order, designed to show, not only
that the new is superior to the old, but that the new is enfolded in the
old and developed from it. To this there is no parallel in the New
Testament in writings addressed to Gentiles. It would have been
superfluous to prove, as this epistle does, that the old order did not
satisfy. The Gentiles never supposed that it did.

Moreover, in almost every case of Paul's allusion to the Jewish
institutions, the reference is called out by some feature of the Mosaic
economy which lay directly in his track and compelled him to deal with
it. Thus, in Romans, he is forced to discuss the doctrine of salvation
by faith with reference to the Jewish doctrine of salvation by the works
of the law. The Galatians had been tempted by Judaising emissaries to
return to the law of circumcision. In Corinth, Paul's authority and
teaching had been assailed by Jewish aggressors. In Philippians we have
no allusion to the law until the writer comes to deal with "the dogs,"
"the evil workers," "the concision." In Colossians, Jewish ceremonialism
is a distinct factor of the heresy which is attacked; but nowhere in
Paul's epistles is there a didactic development of a thesis from the
point of view of the Old Testament economy collectively.

The same remarks will apply to the case of Clement of Rome. In his
Epistle to the Corinthians there are about twenty allusions to the
Epistle to the Hebrews or quotations from it. Two of these relate to the
majesty of God; one to Christ as high priest; in two or three there is a
mere imitation of the phraseology of Hebrews, and the most of the
passages are practical exhortations to the cultivation of moral virtues,
enforced by allusions to the Old Testament worthies. Any of these
passages might have occurred in an address to either Jews or Gentiles.
They prove nothing as to the point in question. If we did not know from
other sources that Clement's epistle was addressed to a Gentile church,
we could not infer that fact from these quotations and allusions.
Moreover, Clement's fondness for the Old Testament and the Epistle to
the Hebrews is easily explained, if, as there is very good reason for
believing, Clement himself was of Jewish origin, a Hellenist.

The whole argument of the Epistle to the Hebrews is technically Jewish,
and not of a character to appeal to Gentile readers. The argument, for
example, for the superiority of Christ to the angels, would have much
force addressed to Jews, since the doctrine of the communication of the
Mosaic revelation through the ministration of angels was a familiar
tradition. Between the writer and Jewish readers there would be no
question as to the angelic mediation of the Sinaitic legislation; but
the point would have no interest and no pertinency for the average
Gentile. The Jew would readily apprehend that no theophany is a direct
manifestation of God to the physical sense. The Gentile mode of thought
would be the other way. The Jew would understand that angels were the
administrators of the old covenant, and would instinctively catch the
turn of the whole argument to the effect that with the exaltation of
Christ the angelic sway of the old dispensation ceased.

The same thing might be said of the doctrine of the high-priesthood of
Christ. If this was a point to make with Gentiles, it is strange that
Paul nowhere alludes to it; and what did the Gentile care about
Melchisedec or the relation of Christ's priesthood to his?

It is indeed true that, in the practical warnings of the epistle,
nothing is directly said about apostasy to Judaism; but the admonitions
are enforced by distinctively Jewish references, as, for example, the
warning against failure to enter into God's rest, which is pointed by
the example of the Israelites in failing to enter Canaan. Would a writer
have said to a Gentile convert that, in case of his committing willful
sin, there was no expiation for him? But he might properly say to a
Jewish Christian who was tempted to return to Judaism: "If you abandon
Christ, and return to Judaism, you have no more sacrifice for sins. Your
whole system of Levitical sacrifices is abolished. It is Christ or
nothing."

It is very strongly urged that the warning against departing from the
living God ([Heb 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012)) might very
properly be given to Gentiles as against a relapse into heathenism,
while it would be utterly inappropriate to a Jewish Christian, because
the living God is common to both Jews and Christians; and a relapse into
Judaism could not, therefore, be a departure from the living God. But
the objection overlooks the intent of the whole epistle, which is to
show that the living God of the Jewish economy has revealed himself in
the Christian economy, thereby superseding the former. It is the God of
the Christian dispensation who is commended to the readers; the living
God under a new and grander manifestation of life. God who spake by the
prophets, now speaks by his Son the effulgence of his glory and the very
image of his substance To go back to the old economy of types and
shadows, the economy of partial access to God, would be literally to
depart from the living God. It would be, practically, to deny him as a
living God by denying all development and expansion in his revelation of
his own life, and confining that revelation to the narrow limits of the
Mosaic system, in other words to identify the living God with the dead
system. To depart from Christ, the Life, and to seek the God of the Old
Testament revelation, would be to fall back from a living to a dead God.

Again, it is claimed that the words at the beginning of Chapter 6 could
not be properly addressed to Jewish Christians: that only a heathen
would need to lay such a foundation on his first acceptance of Christ.
On the contrary, all the points here enumerated would have had to be
expounded to a Jew on becoming a Christian. See notes on that passage.

A still more difficult question is the local destination of the epistle.
By those who supposed it to be the work of Paul, attempts were made to
place this destination within the circle of Paul's recorded missionary
labors; and it was accordingly assigned to almost every place visited or
supposed to have been visited by him, - Macedonia, Corinth, Antioch,
Spain, etc.

A plausible hypothesis assigned its destination to Jewish Christians in
Alexandria. This was based on the fact that the Muratorian Canon
(170-210), while omitting Hebrews, notes an Epistle to the Alexandrians
(Ad Alexandrinos). It was argued that, since the Canon contains a list
both of Paul's genuine epistles and of those falsely ascribed to him,
and since Hebrews is not mentioned, the Alexandrian epistle can mean
only the Epistle to the Hebrews. It was further urged that Alexandria
had, next to Jerusalem, the largest resident Jewish population in the
world, and that at Leontopolis in Egypt was another temple, with the
arrangements of which the notices in Hebrews corresponded more nearly
than with those of the Jerusalem temple. Moreover, the Alexandrian
character of the phraseology of the epistle was supposed to point to
Alexandrian readers.

But, (a) We have no positive history of the church in Egypt in apostolic
times. (b) Although there are numerous notices of the epistle by early
Alexandrian writers, there is no hint of its having been addressed to
their own church. (c) In the Muratorian Canon the Epistle to the
Alexandrians is distinctly stated to be a forgery in the name of Paul.
(d) It cannot be shown that the temple at Leontopolis exercised the same
power over the Alexandrian Jews as the temple at Jerusalem did over the
Palestinian Jews. Even in Egypt the Jerusalem temple was recognized as
the true center of worship. Moreover, the Christian church at Alexandria
was a mixed church. (e) The furniture of the temple at Jerusalem was
more like that of the tabernacle described in Hebrews than that of the
Egyptian temple.

A widely-accepted view is that the epistle was addressed to Jewish
Christians in Palestine and Jerusalem. Unmixed Jewish-Christian churches
were to be found nowhere else; and only there would there be likely to
exist that attachment to the old worship which is assumed in the
epistle, while it treats only incidentally of those rites to which, in
the Dispersion, the greatest importance was naturally assigned -
ablutions, etc. The claim that the epistle was addressed to Rome
involves a mixed church. The Roman church became more Gentile after
Paul's residence in Rome. On the assumption that Jewish Christians were
addressed, it is difficult to account for the Roman destination, unless
the letter was intended for a distinct circle of Jewish Christians in
Rome, which is not impossible. That the epistle was used by Clement
proves nothing. The phrase ἀσπάζονται ὑμᾶς οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς Ἰταλίας they from
Italy salute you might seem to point to Rome as the residence of the
parties saluted; but that is by no means certain. The meaning of the
expression must first be settled. It may mean "those in Italy send
greeting from Italy," or, "those who are from Italy (whose home is
there, but who are now with me) send greeting to you (whoever may be
addressed)." The latter meaning is the more probable; but on that
supposition the words afford no reliable indication of the residence of
those addressed. They mean merely that certain Italians in the writer's
company greet the writer's correspondents, who may have been in
Palestine, Asia, or Egypt.

The Palestinian hypothesis is not free from difficulty. It appears, at
first sight, unlikely that the author would have written in Greek to
Palestinian Jewish Christians, whose language was Aramaic, and would
have used the Septuagint exclusively in citations from the Old
Testament. Nevertheless, Greek was understood and spoken in Palestine:
many Greek-speaking Jews resided in Jerusalem ([Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009)), and there were in that city
synagogues of the Cyrenians and Alexandrians, in which Greek and the
Septuagint would certainly be used. The Hellenists were numerous and
influential enough to carry their point in the matter of ministration to
their widows ([Act 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001) ff.). Finally,
it is not impossible that the writer of the epistle was not sufficiently
acquainted with Aramaic to write effectively in that language.

The decisive settlement of the date of the epistle is practically given
up by critics. The most that can be done is to try and fix approximately
the limits within which the composition was possible. Only one point is
definitely fixed. It must have been written before Clement's Epistle to
the Corinthians (95). If addressed to Jewish Christians, or indeed to
Gentiles, it is highly probable that it was written before the
destruction of Jerusalem (70), since it is most unlikely that the writer
would have omitted an allusion to an event which furnished such a
striking confirmation of his teaching. This probability would be
strengthened if it could be proved that the Jewish sacrifices were still
being offered at the time when the epistle was composed: but this cannot
be conclusively shown. The use of the present tense in [Heb
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004) ff.; [Heb
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#006), [Heb
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#009); [Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001) ff.; [Heb
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#010) ff., is not decisive. Attempts
to identify the persecution alluded to in [Heb
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#002) are the merest guess-work. To
refer it to the Neronian persecution (64) is to assume that it was
addressed to Rome, and is, therefore, to beg the question. The reference
of [Heb 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036) and [Heb
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003) to the persecution of Domitian
(95), is utterly without foundation, to say nothing of the fact that it
is not certain that those two passages refer to persecution at all.
Against a date near 95 is the use of the epistle by Clement, unless the
Roman address can be proved. Otherwise, some time would be required for
it to obtain such currency and recognition as would account for
Clement's familiarity with it. Against a very late date is also the fact
that Timothy appears as an active evangelist, which could hardly have
been the case if the letter was written as late as 90. Against a very
early date is the admitted fact that a second generation of Christians
is addressed; and that the references to persecution apparently point to
a comparatively distant time. If we are to lay stress on the omission of
all reference to the destruction of Jerusalem, as I think we must do, it
seems to me that the epistle was written not far from 67.

There is no reason for disputing the author's acquaintance with the
writings of Paul, as there is none for asserting his dependence upon
them. There are lexical resemblances and resemblances in thought and
phrasing, but nothing to show that the writer of Hebrews drew upon Paul
to any considerable extent. The coincidences with Galatians which are
pointed out are superficial, and may be fairly traced to common Jewish
ideas with which both writers were familiar. As to Romans, Ephesians,
and Corinthians, the resemblances are, in a number of cases, due to
quotation from the same source; in other cases they occur in warnings
from the example of the Israelites; in others again there is a
coincidence of a current phrase, such as "if God permit," which any
author might use. In some other instances cited the resemblance is too
remote to be significant.

As to the influence of Philo, we may freely admit the evidences of the
writer's Alexandrian training, and the possibility, probability, of his
acquaintance with Philo's writings. The epistle does exhibit certain
points of resemblance to Philo, such as similar forms of quotation,
similar use of Old Testament passages and narratives, and statements
like those of Philo, such as those respecting the sinlessness of the
Logos-Priest, the heavenly home of the patriarchs, and the λόγος τομεύς
the dividing word ([Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)): but
Philo's meaning differs radically from that of the epistle. Our writer's
Christology has no affinity with that of Philo. On certain leading
topics, such as the two ages of the world, the mediation of the law by
angels, the Sabbath-rest, the heavenly sanctuary, and the heavenly
Jerusalem, he exhibits more affinity with Palestinian than with
Alexandrian thought. The most that can be claimed is that the Epistle to
the Hebrews returns echoes of Philo, and exhibits formal and limited
resemblances to him.

Words Which Occur Only in Hebrews

ἀγενεαλόγητος

ἀγνόημα

ἀθέτησις

ἄθλησις

αἴγειος

αἱματεκχυσία

αἴνεσις

αἰσθητήριον

αἴτιος

ἀκατάλυτος

ἀκλινής

ἀκροθίνιον

ἀλυσιτελής

ἀμετάθετος

ἀμήτωρ

ἀνακαινίζω

ἀναλογίζομαι

ἀναρίθμνητος

ἀνααταυρόω

ἀνταγωνίζομαι

ἀντικαθίστημι

ἀπαράβατος

ἀπάτωρ

ἀπαύγασμα

ἄπειρος

ἀποβλέπω

ἀπόστολος (of Christ)

ἁρμός

ἀφανής

ἀφανισμός

ἀφομοιόομαι

βοηθός

βοτάνη

γενεαλογέομαι

γεωργέομαι

γνόφος

δάμαλις

δεκάτη

δεκατόω

δέος

δέρμα

δημιουργός

δήπου

διάταγμα

διαφορώτερος

διηνεκής

διινκνέομαι

διόρθωσις

δοκιμασία

δυσερμήνευτος

ἐάνπερ

ἔγγυος

ἐκβαίνω

ἐκδοχή

ἐκλανθάνομαι

ἔκτρομος

ἔλεγχος

ἐμπαιγμός

ἐνκαινίζω

ἐνυβρίζω

ἕξις

ἐπεισαγωγή

ἐπιλείπω

ἕπος

εὐαρεστέω

εὐαρέστως

εὐθύτης

εὐλάβεια

εὐλαβέομαι

εὐπερίστατος

εὐποιΐ̀α

θεατρίζομαι

θέλησις

θεράπων

θύελλα

θυμιατήριον

ἱερωσύνη

ἱκετήριος

καθαρότης

κακουχέομαι

καρτεωέω

καταγωνίζομαι

κατάδηλος

καταναλίσκω

κατασκιάζω

κατάσκοπος

καῦσις

κεφαλίς

κοπή

κριτικός

κῶλον

λειτουργικός

λευειτικός

μερισμός

μεσιτεύω

μετάθεσις

μετέπειτα

μετριοπαθέω

μηδέπω

μηλωτή

μήν

μισθαποδοσία

μισθαποδότης

μυελός

νέφος

νόθος

νομοθετέω

νωθρός

ὄγκος

ὀλιγωρέω

ὀλοθρεύω

ὁμοιότης

ὁρκωμοσία

πανήγυρις

παραδειγματίζω

παραπικραίνω

παραπικρασμός

παραπίπτω

παραπλησίως

παραρέω

πεῖρα

πήγνυμι

πολυμερῶς

πολυτρόπως

πρίζω

προβλέπομαι

πρόδρομος

προσαγορεύω

προσοχθίζω

πρόσφατος

πρόσχυσις

πρωτοτόκια

σαββατισμός

στάμνος

συναπολλύμαι

συνδεόμαι

συναπιμαρτυρέω

συνκακουχεόμαι

συνπαθέω

τελειωτής

τιμωρία

τομός

τράγος

τραχηλίζομαι

τρίμηνος

τροχία

τυμπανίζω

ὑπείκω

ὑοστολή

φαντάζομας

φοβερός

χαρακτήρ

χεουβείν

Words Found in Hebrews and Elsewhere, But Not in Paul

\[Words which occur in the Pastorals are marked \*.\]

ἀγγαλλίασις

ἄγκυρα

αἰτία\*

ἄκανθαι

ἄκρον

ἀμελέω\*

ἀμίαντος

ἀναδέχομαι

ἀναθεωρέω

ἀνακάμπτω

ἀνατέλλω

ἀναφέρω

ἀνορθόω

ἀντιλογία

ἀντίτυπος

ἀνυπότακτος

ἀνωτέρον

ἀνωτέρον

ἀνωφελής\*

ἀπαλλάσσω

ἀποβάλλω

ἀπογράφομαι

ἀποδεκατόω

ἀποδοκιμάζω

ἀποκαθίστημι

ἀπόλαυσις\*

ἀπολείπω

ἀπολύω

ἀρέομαι\*

ἁρπαγή

ἀρχηγός

ἀρχιερεύς

ἀσάλευτος

ἀστεῖος

ἄστρον

ἀφιλάργυρος\*

βαπτισμός

βέβηλος\*

βλαστάνω

βοήθεια

βραχύς

γάμος

γηράσκω

γυμνάζω\*

διαβαίνω

διαλέγομαι

διαστέλλομαι

διατίθεμαι

διηγέομαι

δίστομος

ἔθος

εἰρηνικός

εἰσάγω

εἴσειμι

εἰσφέρω\*

ἐκλείπω

ἑκουσίως

ἐκτρέπομαι\*

ἐκφέρω\*

ἔκφοβος

ἔλαιον

ἐλαττόω

ἐλεήμων

ἐμπίπτω\*

ἐμφανίζω

ἐνθύμησις

ἔννοια

ἐνοχλέω

ἐντέλλομαι

ἔντρομος

ἐξάγω

ἔξοδος

ἐπιγράφω

ἐπιδείκνυμι

ἐπιλαμβάνομαι\*

ἐπισκέπτομαι

ἐπισκοπέω

ἐπίσταμαι\*

ἐπιστέλλω

ἔριον

ἑρμηνεύω

ἐρυθρός

ἐσώτερος

εὔκαιρος

ἐχθές

ζόφος

ζῶον

ἦχος

θεωρέω

θηρίον

ἰάομαι

ἱερατεία

ἱερεύς

ἱλάσκομαι

ἵλεως

ἱμάτιον

καθαρισμός

καίτοι

κάμνω

καταπατέω

κατάπαυσις

καταπαύω

καταπέτασμα

κατασκευάζω

καταφεύγω

κεφάλαιον

κίβωτος

κλίνω

κοινόω

κόκκινος

κοσμικός\*

κριτής\*

κυκλόω

λανθάνω

λέων\*

λιθοβολέω

λούω

λύτρωσις

λυχνία

μάννα

μαστιγόω

μάστιξ

μεγαλωσύνη

μεταλαμβάνω\*

μέτοχος

μήποτε\*

μιαίνω\*

μονογενής

μόσχος

μυριάς

ξενίζω

ξηρός

ὅθεν

ὁλοκαύτωμα

ὀμνύω

ὀπή

ὀρέγομαι\*

ὀρθός

ὅρκος

ὅσιος\*

ὀστέον

παλαιόω

παντελής

πάντοθεν

παραβολή

παραδέχομαι\*

παραιτέομαι\*

παραλύομαι

παραφέρω

παρεμβολή

παρεπίδημος

παρίημι

παροικέω

παροξυσμός

πατριάρχης

πατρίς

περιέρχομαι\*

περικαλύπτω

περίκειμαι

πλῆθος

ποικίλος\*

πολίτης

πόρρωθεν

πρεσβύτερος\*

προάγω\*

πρόδηλος\*

προσέρχομαι\*

προσέχω\*

προφφέρω

πύλη

ῥαντίζω

ῥαντισμός

σείω

σκηνή

σπήλαιον

σποδός

στάσις

στερεός\*

στεφανόω\*

συναντάω

συντέλεια

σχεδόν

ταῦρος

τάχειον\* (variant)

τελείωσις

τελευτάω

τεχνίτης

τρίβολος

τροφή

ὑετός

ὑμνέω

ὕπαρξις

ὑπόδειγμα

ὑποκάτω

ὑποπόδιον

ὕσσωπος

ὕστερον

ὕψιστος

φύω

χείρων\*

χρονίζω

χρύδεος\*

χωλός

ψηλαφάω

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 1](heb001)

</div>
