<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

Have (ἔχετε)

Rev., hold, not in the sense of hold fast, cleave to, but of possessing,
occupying, and practising, as a matter of habit. Thus we say that a man
holds his property by a certain tenure. A rented estate is a holding. So
of an opinion, or set of opinions, with which one is publicly
identified. We say that he holds thus and so.

With respect of persons (ἐν προσωπολημψίαις)

From πρόσωπον, the countenance, and λαμβάνω, to receive. To receive the
countenance is a Hebrew phrase. Thus Leviticus 19:15 (Sept.): Οὐ λήψῃ
προσωπον πτωχοῦ: Thou shalt not respect the person (receive the
countenance) of the poor. Compare [Luk
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#021); [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011); and [Jde
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016).

The Lord of glory

Compare [Co1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008); [Act
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002); [Eph
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#017).

[James 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 2:2</span></span>

Assembly (συναγωγὴν)

The word synagogue is a transcript of this. From σύν, together, and ἄγω,
to bring. Hence, literally, a gathering or congregation, in which sense
the word is common in the Septuagint, not only of assemblies for
worship, but of gatherings for other public purposes. From the meeting
itself the transition is easy to the place of meeting, the synagogue;
and in this sense the term is used throughout the New Testament, with
the following exceptions: In [Act
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#043), it is rendered congregation by
the A. V., though Rev. gives synagogue; and in [Rev
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009); [Rev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009), the unbelieving Jews, as a body,
are called synagogue of Satan. As a designation of a distinctively
Jewish assembly or place of worship it was more sharply emphasized by
the adoption of the word ἐκκλησία, ecclesia, to denote the Christian
church. In this passage alone the word is distinctly applied to a
Christian assembly or place of worship. The simplest explanation appears
to be that the word designates the place of meeting for the Christian
body, James using the word most familiar to the Jewish Christians; an
explanation which receives countenance from the fact that, as Huther
observes, "the Jewish Christians regarded themselves as still an
integral part of the Jewish nation, as the chosen people of God." As
such a portion they had their special synagogue. From [Act
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009), we learn that there were numerous
synagogues in Jerusalem, representing different bodies, such as the
descendants of Jewish freedmen at Rome, and the Alexandrian or
Hellenistic Jews. Among these would be the synagogue of the Christians,
and such would be the case in all large cities where the dispersed Jews
congregated. Alford quotes a phrase from the "Testaments of the Twelve
Patriarchs:" the synagogue of the Gentiles. Compare [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025), "the assembling together
(ἐπισυναγωγὴν) of yourselves."

With a gold ring (χρυσοδακτύλιος)

Only here in New Testament. Not a man wearing a single gold ring (as A.
V. and Rev.), which would not attract attention in an assembly where
most persons wore a ring, but a gold-ringed man, having his hands
conspicuously loaded with rings and jewels. The ring was regarded as an
indispensable article of a Hebrew's attire, since it contained his
signet; and the name of the ring, tabbath, was derived from a root
signifying to impress a seal. It was a proverbial expression for a most
valued object. See [Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024); [Hag
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#023). The Greeks and Romans wore them
in great profusion. Hannibal, after the battle of Cannae, sent as a
trophy to Carthage, three bushels of gold rings from the fingers of the
Roman knights slain in battle. To wear rings on the right hand was
regarded as a mark of effeminacy; but they were worn profusely on the
left. Martial says of one Charinus that he wore six on each finger, and
never laid them aside, either at night or when bathing. The fops had
rings of different sizes for summer and winter. Aristophanes
distinguishes between the populace and those who wear rings, and in his
comedy of "The Clouds" uses the formidable word σφραγιδονυχαργοκομῆται,
lazy, long-haired fops, with rings and well-trimmed nails. Demosthenes
was so conspicuous for this kind of ornament that, at a time of public
disaster, it was stigmatized as unbecoming vanity. Frequent mention is
made of their enormous cost. They were of gold and silver, sometimes of
both; sometimes of iron inlaid with gold. The possible beauty of these
latter will be appreciated by those who have seen the elegant gold and
iron jewellery made at Toledo, in Spain. Sometimes they were of amber,
ivory, or porcelain. The practice of wearing rings was adopted by the
early Christians. Many of their rings were adorned with the symbols of
the faith - the cross, the anchor, the monogram of Christ, etc. Among
the rings found in the catacombs are some with a key, and some with both
a key and a seal, for both locking and sealing a casket.

Goodly apparel (ἐσθῆτι λαμπρᾷ)

Lit., bright or shining clothes. Rev., fine clothing.

Vile (ῥυπαρᾷ)

Compare [Jam 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#021); and see on [Pe1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#021).

[James 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 2:3</span></span>

Ye have respect (ἐπιβλέψητε)

Lit., ye look upon, with the idea of respectful consideration; ye
regard. Compare [Luk 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048); [Luk
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#038).

In a good place (καλῶς)

Lit., honorably; in a seat of honor.

Under

Not literally underneath, but down on the ground beside. Compare [Mat
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006), on the fondness of the Jews for
the chief places in the synagogue.

[James 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 2:4</span></span>

Are ye not partial in yourselves? (οὐ διεκρίθητε ἐν ἑαυτοῖς)

Wrong. The constant sense of the verb in the New Testament is doubt,
except [Act 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#002); [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009), where it means dispute. Compare
[Jam 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006). The meaning here is,
therefore, that, in making a distinction between the rich and the poor,
they expressed a doubt concerning the faith which they professed, and
which abolished such distinctions. Hence, Rev., rightly, Are ye not
divided in your own mind?

Judges of evil thoughts (κριταὶ διαλογισμῶν πονηρῶν)

Better, as Rev., "judges with evil thoughts." The form of expression is
the same as in [Luk 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#006), κριτὴς τῆς
ἀδικίας, the judge of injustice, i.e., the unjust judge. So [Jam
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025), a hearer of forgetfulness. The
word thoughts is, rather, reasonings. See on deceiving yourselves ([Jam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022)). Compare [Luk
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#021). Their evil processes of thought
lead to these unjust discriminations.

[James 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 2:5</span></span>

Hearken, my beloved brethren

Alford cites this phrase as one of the very few links which connect this
epistle with the speech of James in [Act
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013).

The poor of this world (τοὺς πτωχοὺς τοῦ κόσμου)

But the correct reading is τῷ κόσμῳ, to the world; and the expression is
to be explained in the same way as ἀστεῖος τῷ Θεῷ, fair unto God, [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020), and δυνατὰ τῷ Θεῷ, mighty
through (Rev., before) God, [Co2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004).
So Rev., poor as to the world, in the world's esteem. Poor, see on [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003).

Rich in faith

The Rev., properly, inserts to be, since the words are not in apposition
with poor, but express the object for which God has chosen them. Faith
is not the quality in which they are to be rich, but the sphere or
element; rich in their position as believers. "Not the measure of faith,
in virtue of which one man is richer than another, is before the
writer's mind, but the substance of the faith, by virtue of which every
believer is rich" (Wiesinger, cited by Alford).

[James 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 2:6</span></span>

Despised (ἠτιμάσατε)

Not strong enough. They had manifested their contempt; had done despite
to them. Rev., correctly, dishonored. From the use of the aorist tense,
ye dishonored, which the A. V. and Rev. render as a perfect, ye have
dishonored, the reference would appear to be to a specific act like that
described in [Jam 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002), [Jam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003).

Oppress (καταδυναστεύουσιν)

Only here and [Act 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038). The
preposition κατά, against, implies a power exercised for harm. Compare
being lords over, [Pe1 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#003), and
exercise dominion, [Mat 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025), both
compounded with this preposition.

Draw (ἕλκουσιν)

Not strong enough. The word implies violence. Hence, better, as Rev.,
drag. Compare Livy's phrase, "a lictoribus trahi, to be dragged by the
lictors to judgment;" [Act 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003), of
Saul haling or hauling men and women to prison; and [Luk
12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058).

Judgment-seats (κριτήρια)

Only here and [Co1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002), [Co1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#004).

[James 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 2:7</span></span>

They (αὐτοὶ)

Emphatic. "Is it not they who blaspheme?"

Worthy (καλὸν)

Rev., better, because stronger, honorable. By this epithet the
disgracefulness of the blasphemy is emphasized.

By the which ye are called (τὸ ἐπικληθὲν ἐφ' ὑμᾶς)

Lit., which is called upon you; the name of Christ, invoked in baptism.
The phrase is an Old-Testament one. See [Deu
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010), where the Septuagint reads that
the name of the Lord has been called upon race. Also, [Ch2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#014); [Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001). Compare [Act
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017).

[James 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 2:8</span></span>

Fulfil the royal law (νόμον τελεῖτε βασιλικὸν)

The phrase occurs only here and [Rom
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027). Τελεῖν, fulfil, is stronger than
the more common word τηρεῖν, observe or keep, which appears in [Jam
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010). Compare, also, [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017); [Mat
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003); [Joh
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#015), etc. James here speaks of a
single commandment, the proper word for which is ἐντολή, while νόμος is
the body of commandments. It is appropriate here, however, since this
special commandment sums up the entire law. See [Rom
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010); [Gal
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#014). It is the royal law; the king of
all laws.

The phrase royal law is of Roman origin (lex regia). In the kingly
period of Roman history it did not signify a law promulgated by the
absolute authority of the king, but a law passed by a popular assembly
under the presidency of the king. In later times the term was applied to
all laws the origin of which was attributed to the time of the kings.
Gradually the term came to represent less of the popular will, and to
include all the rights and powers which the Roman people had formerly
possessed, so that the emperor became what formerly the people had been,
sovereign. "It was not," says Gibbon, "before the ideas and even the
language of the Romans had been corrupted, that a royal law (lex regia)
and an irrevocable gift of the people were created....The pleasure of
the emperor, according to Justinian, has the vigor and effect of law,
since the Roman people, by the royal law, have transferred to their
prince the full extent of their own power and sovereignty. The will of a
single man, of a child, perhaps, was allowed to prevail over the wisdom
of ages and the inclinations of millions; and the degenerate Greeks were
proud to declare that in his hands alone the arbitrary exercise of
legislation could be safely deposited" ("Decline and Fall," ch. xliv.).

[James 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 2:9</span></span>

Ye have respect to persons (προσωπολημπτεῖτε)

Only here in New Testament. See on [Jam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001).

Ye commit sin (ἁμαρτίαν ἐργάζεσθε)

Lit., "work sin." Compare [Mat 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023);
[Act 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035); [Heb
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#033). The phrase is rather stronger
than the more common ἁμαρτίαν ποιεῖν, to do sin, [Joh
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#034); [Jam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#015); [Pe1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022). The position of sin is emphatic:
"it is sin that ye are working."

And are convinced (ἐλεγχόμενοι)

Rather, as Rev., convinced. The word, which is variously rendered in A.
V. tell a fault, reprove, rebuke, convince, while it carries the idea of
rebuke, implies also a rebuke which produces a conviction of the error
or sin. See on [Joh 8:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#046). Compare [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020); [Joh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009); [Co1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#024), [Co1
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#025).

[James 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 2:10</span></span>

Keep (τηρήσῃ)

See on [Jam 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008).

Offend (πταίσῃ)

Lit., as Rev., stumble.

He is guilty (γέγονεν ἔνοχος)

Lit., he is become guilty. Ἔνοχος, guilty, is, strictly, holden; within
the condemning power of. Compare [Mat
26:66](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#066); [Mar
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029); [Co1
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#027). Huther cites a Talmudic
parallel: "But if he perform all, but omit one, he is guilty of every
single one."

[James 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 2:11</span></span>

A transgressor (παραβάτης)

From παρά, beyond, and βαίνω, to go. A transgressor, therefore, is one
who goes beyond the line. So, also, trespass, which is transpass, from
the Latin trans, across, and passus, a step. A similar word occurs in
Homer, ὑπερβασία, a transgression or trespass, from ὑπέρ, over, and
βαίνω, to go.

[James 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 2:12</span></span>

So

With reference to what follows, speak and do.

[James 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 2:13</span></span>

He shall have judgment without mercy that hath shewed no mercy (ἡ γὰρ
κρίσις ἀνίλεως τῷ μὴ ποιήσαντι ἔλεος)

Lit., as Rev., judgment is without mercy to him that hath shewed no
mercy. Both A. gr. and Rev. omit the article "the judgment," that,
namely, which is coming. Hath shewed, or, lit., shewed (aorist tense).
The writer puts himself at the stand-point of the judgment, and looks
backward.

Rejoiceth (κατακαυχᾶται)

The simple verb καυχάομαι means to speak loud, to be loud-tongued;
hence, to boast. Better, therefore, as Rev., glorieth. Judgment and
mercy are personified. While judgment threatens condemnation, mercy
interposes and prevails over judgment. "Mercy is clothed with the divine
glory, and stands by the throne of God. When we are in danger of being
condemned, she rises up and pleads for us, and covers us with her
defence, and enfolds us with her wings" (Chrysostom, cited by Gloag).

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

What doth it profit? (τί τὸ ὄφελος)

Lit., what is the profit? Ὄφελος, profit, only here, [Jam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016), and [Co1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032).

[James 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 2:15</span></span>

Be (ὑπάρχωσιν)

The distinction between this word and the simple εἶναι, to be, is very
subtle. The verb ὑπάρχω originally means to make a beginning; hence, to
begin or to come into being; and, though used substantially as a synonym
of εἶναι, of a thing actually existing and at hand, it has a backward
look to an antecedent condition which has been protracted into the
present. Thus we might paraphrase here, "If a brother or sister, having
been in a destitute condition, be found by you in that condition."
Εἶναι, on the other hand, would simply state the present fact of
destitution. See on [Pe2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008).

Destitute (λειπόμενοι)

Lit., left behind; and hence lacking, as Rev. Compare [Jam
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#004), [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005). This usage of the word occurs in
James only.

Daily (ἐφημέρου)

Only here in New Testament.

[James 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 2:16</span></span>

Depart in peace (ὑπάγετε ἐν εἰρήνῃ)

Compare ὕπαγε or πορεύου εἰς εἰρηνήν, go into peace, [Mar
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034); [Luk
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#050).

Be filled (χορτάζεσθε)

See on [Mat 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006).

Those things which are needful (τὰ ἐπιτήδεια)

Only here in New Testament.

[James 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 2:17</span></span>

Being alone (καθ' ἑαυτήν)

Wrong. Rev., correctly, in itself. The phrase belongs to dead. It is
dead, not merely in reference to something else, but absolutely.

[James 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 2:18</span></span>

Without (χωρὶς)

Rev., more literally, apart from.

And I will shew thee, etc

The Rev. brings out the antithesis more sharply by keeping more closely
to the Greek order: I by my works will shew, etc.

[James 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 2:19</span></span>

Tremble (φρίσσουσιν)

Only here in New Testament. It means, originally, to be rough on the
surface; to bristle. Hence, used of the fields with ears of corn; of a
line of battle bristling with shields and spears; of a silver or golden
vessel rough with embossed gold. Aeschylus, describing a crowd holding
up their hands to vote, says, the air bristled with right hands. Hence,
of a horror which makes the hair stand on end and contracts the surface
of the skin, making "gooseflesh." Rev., much better, shudder.

[James 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 2:20</span></span>

Vain (κενέ)

Lit., empty, without spiritual life.

Dead (νεκρά)

But the best texts read ἀργή, idle; as of money which yields no
interest, or of land lying fallow.

[James 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 2:21</span></span>

When he had offered (ἀνενέγκας)

Incorrect. For the participle states the ground of his justification. By
works gives the general ground; offered, etc., the specific work.
Compare [Gen 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016), [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017). Rev., correctly, in that he
offered. The word ἀνενέγκας is, lit., brought up to; and means, not
actually to offer up in sacrifice (though Isaac was morally sacrificed
in Abraham's will), but to bring to the altar as an offering See on [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005).

[James 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 2:22</span></span>

Wrought with his works (συνήργει τοῖς ἔργοις)

There is a play on the words in the Greek: worked with his works.

[James 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 2:23</span></span>

Was fulfilled (ἐπληρώθη)

Not was confirmed, which the word does not mean either in New-Testament
or in classical usage, but was actually and fully realized. James here
uses the formula which in the Old Testament is employed of the realizing
of a former utterance. See [Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027);
2 Chronicles 36:22 (Sept.).

Imputed (ἐλογίσθη)

Lit., as Rev., reckoned.

He was called the friend of God

The term, however, does not occur either in the Hebrew or Septuagint,
though it is found in the A. V. and retained in Rev. Old Testament. In 2
Chronicles 20:7 (Sept.), thy friend is τῷ ἠγαπημένῳ, thy beloved. In
Isaiah 41:8 (Sept.), my friend is ὃν ἠγάπησα, whom I loved. "The friend
of God" is still the favorite title of Abraham among the Jews and
Mohammedans.

[James 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 2:25</span></span>

Rahab

Also referred to in [Heb 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031), among
the examples of faith. Dante places her in the third heaven:

"Thou fain wouldst know who is within this light

That here beside me thus is scintillating,

Even as a sunbeam in the limpid water.

Then know thou, that within there is at rest

Rahab, and being to our order joined,

With her in its supremest grade 'tis sealed.

First of Christ's Triumph was she taken up.

Full meet it was to leave her in some heaven,

Even as a palm of the high victory

Which he acquired with one palm and the other,

Because she favored the first glorious deed

Of Joshua upon the Holy Land."

Paradise, ix., 112-125.

Rahab became the wife of Salmon, and the ancestress of Boaz, Jesse's
grandfather. Some have supposed that Salmon was one of the spies whose
life she saved. At any rate, she became the mother of the line of David
and of Christ, and is so recorded in Matthew's genealogy of our Lord, in
which only four women are named. There is a peculiar significance in
this selection of Rahab with Abraham as an example of faith, by James
the Lord's brother.

Sent them out (ἐκβαλοῦσα)

Better, thrust them forth, implying haste and fear. Compare [Mar
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#012); [Luk
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029); [Act
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037).

Another way

Than that by which they entered. Through the window. See [Jos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#015).

[James 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 2:26</span></span>

Works (τῶν ἔργων)

Note the article: the works belonging or corresponding to faith; its
works.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003)

</div>
