<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh018)  [Next](joh020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

[John 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 19:1</span></span>

Scourged (ἐμαστίγωσεν)

Matthew and Mark use the Greek form of the Latin word flagellare,
φραγελλόω, which occurs only in those two instances in the New
Testament. John uses the more common Greek word, though he has
φραγελλίον (flagellum), scourge, at [Joh
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015). Matthew and Mark, however, both
use μαστιγόω elsewhere ([Mat 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#017);
[Mat 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029); [Mar
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#034)). Its kindred noun, μάστιξ,
occurs several times in the metaphorical sense of a plague. See on [Mar
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#010), and compare [Mar
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#029), [Mar
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034); [Luk
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#021). The verb is used metaphorically
only once, [Heb 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#006). Scourging was
the legal preliminary to crucifixion, but, in this case, was inflicted
illegally before the sentence of crucifixion was pronounced, with a view
of averting the extreme punishment, and of satisfying the Jews. ([Luk
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022)). The punishment was horrible,
the victim being bound to a low pillar or stake, and beaten, either with
rods, or, in the case of slaves and provincials, with scourges, called
scorpions, leather thongs tipped with leaden balls or sharp spikes. The
severity of the infliction in Jesus' case is evident from His inability
to bear His cross.

[John 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 19:2</span></span>

Crown (στέφανον)

So Matthew and Mark. Luke does not mention the crown of thorns. See on
[Pe1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004).

Of thorns (ἐξ ἀκανθῶν)

So Matthew. Mark has ἀκάνθινον, the adjective, made of thorns, which
John also uses in [Joh 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005). All
attempts to define the botanical character of the thorns used for
Christ's crown are guesses. The word for thorns used here is the only
one that occurs in the New Testament; the σκόλοψ (thorn in the flesh) of
[Co2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007), being properly an
impaling-stake.

Both the crowning with thorns and the flagellation are favorite subjects
in Christian art. Some of the earliest representations of the latter
depict the figure of the Lord as fully draped, and standing unbound at
the column, thus illustrating the voluntariness of His sacrifice. In a
MS. of the fourteenth century, in the British Museum, He stands, wholly
clothed, holding a book in one hand, and blessing with the other. The
more devout feeling which predominated in such representations was
gradually overpowered by the sense of physical suffering. The earlier
paintings represented the back turned toward the spectator, and the
face, turned in a forced attitude, exhibited in profile. Later, the face
and figure are turned full to the front, and the strokes fall upon the
chest. Hence Jerome, in his commentary on Matthew, says that the
capacious chest of God (!) was torn with strokes. The standing position
is the accepted one, but instances occur in which the Savior is on the
ground attached to the column by one hand. Such is the revolting picture
by L. Caracci in the Bologna gallery, in which the soldier clutches
Jesus by the hair as he plies the bundle of twigs. In a Psalter of the
fifteenth century the Savior stands in front of the column, covering His
face with His hands.

According to the later type, the moment chosen is when the execution of
the sentence is just beginning. One man is binding the hands to the
pillar, another is binding together a bundle of loose switches. The
German representations are coarser than the Italian, but with more
incident. They lack the spiritual feeling which appears in the best
Italian specimens.

A field for a higher feeling and for more subtle treatment is opened in
the moments succeeding the scourging. One of the very finest examples of
this is the picture of Velasquez, "Christ at the Column," in the
National Gallery of London. The real grandeur and pathos of the
conception assert themselves above certain prosaic and realistic
details. The Savior sits upon the ground, His arms extended, and leaning
backward to the full stretch of the cord which binds His crossed hands.
The face is turned over the left shoulder full upon the spectator. Rods,
ropes, and broken twigs lie upon the ground, and slender streams of
blood appear upon the body. A guardian angel behind the figure of the
Lord, stands bending slightly over a child kneeling with clasped hands,
and points to the sufferer, from whose head a ray of light passes to the
child's heart. The angel is a Spanish nursery-maid with wings, and the
face of the child is of the lower Spanish type, and is in striking
contrast with the exquisite countenance of Murillo's Christ-child, which
hangs next to this picture, and which is of the sweetest type of
Andalusian beauty. The Savior's face is of a thoroughly manly, indeed,
of a robust type, expressing intense suffering, but without contortion.
The large, dark eyes are ineffably sad. The strong light on the right
arm merges into the deep shadow of the bound hands, and the same shadow
falls with startling effect across the full light on the left arm,
marked at the wrist by a slight bloody line.

In the portrayal of the crowning with thorns, in a few instances, the
moment is chosen after the crown has been placed, the action being in
the mock-worship; but the prevailing conception is that of the act of
crowning, which consists in pressing the crown upon the brow by means of
two long staves. A magnificent specimen is Luini's fresco in the
Ambrosian Library at Milan. Christ sits upon a tribune, clad in a
scarlet robe, His face wearing an expression of infinite sweetness and
dignity, while a soldier on either side crowds down the crown with a
staff. The Italian artists represent the crown as consisting of pliable
twigs with small thorns; but the northern artists "have conceived," to
quote Mrs. Jameson, "an awful structure of the most unbending, knotted
boughs, with tremendous spikes half a foot long, which no human hands
could have forced into such a form." In a few later instances the staves
are omitted, and the crown is placed on the head by the mailed hand of a
soldier.

Put on (περιέβαλον)

Literally, threw about. Rev., arrayed.

Purple (πορφυροῦν)

An adjective. Found only here, [Joh
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005), and [Rev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016). Mark uses the noun πορφύρα,
purple, which also occurs in [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004); [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012). See on [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019). Matthew has κοκκίνην, scarlet.

Robe (ἱμάτιον)

Better, as Rev., garment, since robe gives the impression of a trailing
garment. See on [Mat 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040). Matthew has
χλαμύδα, a short military cloak ([Mat
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#028)). Luke describes the garment as
λαμπρὰν, gorgeous, bright or brilliant ([Luk
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011)).

[John 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 19:3</span></span>

And said

Add καὶ ἤρχοντο πρὸς αὐτόν, and kept coming unto Him, before and said or
kept saying. The imperfect denotes the successive acts of homage of the
soldiers as they came up one after the other.

They smote Him with their hands (ἐδίδουν αὐτῷ ῥαπίσματα).

Literally, kept giving Him blows with their hands. See on [Joh
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022).

[John 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 19:5</span></span>

Came Jesus forth

From the Praetorium.

Wearing (φορῶν)

Not φέρων, bearing, but the frequentative form of that verb, denoting an
habitual or continuous bearing; hence, wearing, as though it were His
natural dress.

[John 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 19:6</span></span>

They cried out

See on [Joh 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#040).

Crucify

The best texts omit Him.

Take ye Him (λάβετε αὐτὸν ὑμεῖς)

According to the Greek order, "take Him ye." Rev., take Him yourselves.
See on [Joh 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031).

[John 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 19:7</span></span>

We have a law

We, emphatic. Whatever your decision may be, we have a law, etc.

By our law

The best texts omit our: Read by that law, as Rev.

[John 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 19:8</span></span>

The more afraid

"These words of the Jews produced an effect on Pilate for which they
were not prepared. The saying gives strength to a dreadful presentiment
which was gradually forming within him. All that he had heard related of
the miracles of Jesus, the mysterious character of His person, of His
words and of His conduct, the strange message which he had just received
from his wife - all is suddenly explained by the term "Son of God." Was
this extraordinary man truly a divine being who had appeared on the
earth? The truth naturally presents itself to his mind in the form of
pagan superstitions and mythological legends" (Godet).

[John 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 19:11</span></span>

He that delivered

Caiaphas.

[John 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 19:12</span></span>

From thenceforth (ἐκ τούτου)

Incorrect. Rev., rightly, upon this.

Sought (ἐζήτει)

Imperfect tense. Made repeated attempts.

Caesar's friend

A title conferred, since the time of Augustus, upon provincial
governors. Probably, however, not used by the Jews in this technical
sense, but merely as a way of saying "Thou art not true to the emperor."

Caesar (τῷ Καίσαρι)

Literally, the Caesar. The term, which was at first a proper name, the
surname of Julius Caesar, adopted by Augustus and his successors, became
an appellative, appropriated by all the emperors as a title. Thus the
emperor at this time was Tiberius Caesar. A distinction was, however,
introduced between this title and that of Augustus, which was first
given to Octavianus the first emperor. The title "Augustus" was always
reserved for the monarch, while "Caesar" was more freely communicated to
his relations; and from the reign of Hadrian at least (a.d. 117-138) was
appropriated to the second person in the state, who was considered as
the presumptive heir of the empire.

[John 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 19:13</span></span>

That saying (τοῦτον τὸν λόγον)

The best texts read τῶν λόγων τούτων, these words. He was afraid of an
accusation at Rome before Tiberius, an accusation which could be
justified by his misrule.

Judgment-seat (βήματος)

See on [Act 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005). The best texts omit
the article, which may indicate that the tribunal was an improvised one.

The Pavement (Λιθόστρωτον)

From λίθος, stone, and στρωτός, strewn or spread.

Gabbatha

From the Hebrew gab, "back," and meaning, therefore, a raised place.
Thus the Aramaic term is not a translation of the Greek term, which
indicates that the place, wherever it was, was distinguished by a mosaic
or tessellated pavement. Suetonius relates that Julius Caesar used to
carry about with him on his expeditions a portable tessellated pavement
for his tribunal. It is not likely, however, that there is any allusion
to such a practice here. Westcott explains Gabbatha as the ridge of the
house.

[John 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 19:14</span></span>

Sixth hour

See on [Joh 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039).

[John 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 19:15</span></span>

They (οἱ)

The best texts read ἐκεῖνοι, those (people). The pronoun of remote
reference isolates and sharply distinguishes them from Jesus. See on
[Joh 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027).

Away with him (ἆρον)

Literally, take away.

We have no king but Caesar

These words, uttered by the chief priests, are very significant. These
chief representatives of the theocratic government of Israel thus
formally and expressly renounce it, and declare their allegiance to a
temporal and pagan power. This utterance is "the formal abdication of
the Messianic hope."

[John 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 19:16</span></span>

Delivered

Luke says, delivered to their will ([Luk
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#025)). Pilate pronounced no sentence,
but disclaimed all responsibility for the act, and delivered Christ up
to them (αὐτοῖς), they having invoked the responsibility upon
themselves. See [Mat 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024), [Mat
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025).

And led Him away

The best texts omit.

[John 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 19:17</span></span>

Bearing (βαστάζων)

See on [Joh 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006); see on [Joh
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031).

His cross (τὸν σταυρὸν αὑτοῦ)

The best texts read αὑτῷ or ἑαυτῷ, "bearing the cross for Himself." John
does not mention the impressment of Simon of Cyrene for this service.
Compare [Mat 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032); [Mar
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021); [Luk
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#026).

Skull

See on [Mat 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033).

[John 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 19:18</span></span>

In the midst

All the Synoptists describe the character of the two who were crucified
with Jesus. Matthew and Mark, robbers; Luke, malefactors (κακούργους).
All three use the phrase, one on the right, the other on the left, and
so, substantially, John: on either side one. John says nothing about the
character of these two, but simply describes them as two others.

[John 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 19:19</span></span>

Title (τίτλον)

Only here and [Joh 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020), in the New
Testament. John uses the technical Roman term titulus, a placard or
notice. Used for a bill or notice of sale affixed to a house. Thus Ovid,
of a heartless creditor: "She sent our household goods under the placard
(sub-titulum);" i.e., put the house and furniture up for sale ("Remedia
Amoris," 302). Meaning also the title of a book; an epitaph. Matthew has
αἰτίαν, accusation; Mark, ἐπιγραφὴ τῆς αἰτίας superscription of the
accusation; Luke, ἐπιγραφὴ superscription. John alone mentions the fact
that Pilate wrote the inscription.

Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews

The wording of the title is differently given by each Evangelist.

Matthew: This is Jesus the King of the Jews.

Mark: The King of the Jews.

Luke: This is the King of the Jews.

John: Jesus the Nazarene the King of the Jews.

The essential element of the superscription, King of the Jews, is common
to all. It expressed, on its face, the main intent of Pilate, which was
to cast contempt on the Jews. "In the sense of the man Pilate, it meant:
Jesus, the King of the Jewish fanatics, crucified in the midst of Jews,
who should all be thus executed. In the sense of the Jews: Jesus, the
seditionary, the King of the rebels. In the sense of the political
judge: Jesus, for whose accusation the Jews, with their ambiguous
accusation, may answer. In the sense of the divine irony which ruled
over the expression: Jesus, the Messiah, by the crucifixion become in
very truth the King of the people of God" (Lange).

[John 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 19:20</span></span>

Hebrew, Greek, Latin

Some editors vary the order. Rev., Latin, Greek. Such inscriptions in
different languages were not uncommon. Julius Capitolinus, a biographer
(a.d. 320), in his life of the third Gordian, says that the soldiers
erected his tomb on the Persian borders, and added an epitaph (titulum)
in Latin, Persian, Hebrew, and Egyptian characters, in order that it
might be read by all. Hebrew was the rational dialect, Latin the
official, and Greek the common dialect. As the national Hebrew, King of
the Jews was translated into Latin and Greek, so the inscription was
prophetic that Christ should pass into civil administration and common
speech: that the Hebrew Messiah should become equally the deliverer of
Greek and Roman: that as Christ was the real center of the religious
civilization of Judaism, so He should become the real center of the
world's intellectual movement as represented by Greece, and of its legal
and material civilization as represented by Rome. The three
civilizations which had prepared the way for Christ thus concentrated at
His cross. The cross is the real center of the world's history.

[John 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 19:21</span></span>

The chief priests of the Jews

A unique expression, possibly by way of contrast with the King of the
Jews.

[John 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 19:23</span></span>

Four parts

All the Synoptists relate the parting of the garments. The four pieces
to be divided would be, the head-gear, the sandals, the girdle, and the
tallith or square outer garment with fringes. Delitzsch thus describes
the dress of our Lord: "On His head He wore a white sudar, fastened
under the chin and hanging down from the shoulders behind. Over the
tunic which covered the body to the hands and feet, a blue tallith with
the blue and white fringes on the four ends, so thrown over and gathered
together that the gray, red-striped undergarment was scarcely
noticeable, except when the sandal-shod feet came into view" ("A Day in
Capernaum").

Coat (χιτῶνα)

Or tunic. See on [Mat 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040).

Without seam (ἄῤῥαφος, or ἄραφος)

Only here in the New Testament. From ἀ, not, and ῥάπτω, to sew together.
Like the tunic of the High-Priest. Only John records this detail.

Woven (ὑφαντὸς)

Only here in the New Testament.

[John 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 19:24</span></span>

Vesture (ἱματισμόν)

Clothing, collectively. Rev., garments, for ἱμάτια, is better than
raiment, which is collective, while the word is used of the separate
pieces of clothing.

[John 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 19:25</span></span>

There stood

Imperfect tense, were standing.

Mary Magdalene

Strictly, the (ἡ) Magdalene. She is introduced abruptly, as well known.

[John 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 19:26</span></span>

Woman

See on [Joh 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004).

Behold

Canon Westcott remarks upon the four exclamations in this chapter -
Behold the man! Behold your King! Behold thy son! Behold thy mother! as
a remarkable picture of what Christ is, and what He reveals men to be.

[John 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 19:27</span></span>

His own home (τὰ ἴδια)

See on [Joh 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011).

[John 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 19:28</span></span>

Were accomplished (τετέλεσται)

Rev., with stricter rendering of the perfect tense, are finished.
Finished corresponds better with it is finished, [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030). This sentence may be taken with
the preceding one, or with that which follows.

[John 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 19:29</span></span>

Vinegar

See on [Mat 27:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#048).

Hyssop

Matthew and Mark have καλάμῳ, a reed. Luke says merely that they offered
Him vinegar. The vinegar mingled with gall ([Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034)), or the wine mingled with myrrh
([Mar 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023)) was offered to Jesus
before his crucifixion as a stupefying draught. The hyssop gives a hint
of the height of the cross, as the greatest length of the hyssop reed
was not more than three or four feet. The vinegar in this case was
offered in order to revive Christ. John does not mention the stupefying
draught.

[John 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 19:30</span></span>

Gave up the ghost (παρέδωκε τὸ πνεῦμα)

Rev., his spirit. Matthew, ἀφῆκεν dismissed. Mark, ἐξέπνευσεν, breathed
forth (his life). So Luke, who adds, "Father, into thy hands I commend
(παρατίθεμαι, see on [Luk 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016)) my
spirit."

[John 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 19:31</span></span>

The Jews - Sabbath

The Jews, who had so recently asserted their sole allegiance to Caesar,
are now scrupulous about observing the letter of the law.

[John 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 19:32</span></span>

Brake the legs

A detail recorded only by John. This crurifragium, leg-breaking,
consisted in striking the legs with a heavy mallet in order to expedite
death. It was sometimes inflicted as a punishment upon slaves. Some
horrible illustrations are furnished by Suetonius, in his lives of
Augustus and Tiberius.

[John 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 19:34</span></span>

With a spear (λόγχῃ)

Only here in the New Testament. Properly, the head of a spear. So
Herodotus, of the Arabians: "They also had spears (αἰχμὰς) tipped with
an antelope's horn sharpened like a spear-point (λόγχης)" (vii., 96).
Used also, as here, for the spear itself.

Pierced (ἔνυξεν)

Only here in the New Testament. The question has been raised whether the
Evangelist means to describe a gash or a prick. Another verb is rendered
pierced in [Joh 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037), the quotation
from [Zac 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010), ἐξεκέντησαν, which
occurs also at [Rev 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007), with
reference to Christ's crucifixion, and is used in classical Greek of
putting out the eyes, or stabbing, and in the Septuagint of Saul's
request to his armor-bearer: "Draw thy sword and thrust me through
therewith" ([Ch1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#004)). The verb used
here, however, νύσσω, is also used to describe severe and deadly wounds,
as in Homer:

"As he sprang

Into his car, Idomeneus, expert

To wield the ponderous javelin, thrust (νύξ) its blade

Through his right shoulder. From the car he fell,

And the dark night of death came over him."

"Iliad," v. 45-47.

It has been suggested that the body was merely pricked with the spear to
ascertain if it were yet alive. There seems, on the whole, no reason for
departing from the ordinary understanding of the narrative, that the
soldier inflicted a deep thrust on the side of Jesus (compare [Joh
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025), [Joh
20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)); nor is it quite apparent why,
as Mr. Field urges, a distinction should be kept up between the two
verbs in [Joh 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034) and [Joh
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037).

Blood and water

It has been argued very plausibly that this was a natural phenomenon,
the result of a rupture of the heart which, it is assumed, was the
immediate cause of death, and which was followed by an effusion of blood
into the pericardium. This blood, separated into its thicker and more
liquid parts, flowed forth when the pericardium was pierced by the
spear. I think, however, with Meyer, that John evidently intends to
describe the incident as something entirely unexpected and marvelous,
and that this explanation better suits the solemn asseveration of [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035). That the fact had a symbolic
meaning to the Evangelist is evident from [Jo1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#006).

[John 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 19:35</span></span>

He that saw it bare record (ὁ ἑωρακῶς μεμαρτύρηκεν)

Rev., rendering the perfect tense in both verbs, he that hath seen hath
born witness. This can refer only to the writer of this Gospel. Compare
[Jo1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001).

True (ἀληθινὴ)

Genuine, according to the true ideal of what testimony should be. See on
[Joh 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009).

And he (κακεῖνος)

This pronoun is urged by some as a reason for regarding the witness as
some other than John, because it is the pronoun of remote reference. But
[Joh 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#037) shows clearly that a speaker
can use this pronoun of himself; and it is, further, employed in this
Gospel to indicate a person "as possessing the quality which is the
point in question in an eminent or even exclusive degree" (Godet). See
[Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018); [Joh
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#039).

True (ἀληθῆ)

Literally, true things. As distinguished from false. Thus, by the use of
the two words for true, there are brought out, as Westcott remarks, "the
two conditions which testimony ought to satisfy; the first, that he who
gives it should be competent to speak with authority; and the second,
that the account of his experience should be exact."

[John 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 19:38</span></span>

A disciple of Jesus

Matthew calls him a rich man; Mark, an honorable counselor, i.e., a
member of the Sanhedrim; and Luke, a counselor, good and just.

Besought (ἠρωτησε)

Better, as Rev., asked. See on [Joh
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#022); see on [Joh
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023). Mark adds that he went in
boldly, which is suggestive in view of John's statement of his secret
discipleship, a fact which is passed over by the Synoptists.

Gave him leave

According to Roman law. Ulpian, a Roman jurist of the third century,
says: "The bodies of those who are capitally punished cannot be denied
to their relatives. At this day, however, the bodies of those who are
executed are buried only in case permission is asked and granted; and
sometimes permission is not given, especially in the cases of those who
are punished for high treason. The bodies of the executed are to be
given for burial to any one who asks for them." Avaricious governors
sometimes sold this privilege. Cicero, in one of his orations against
Verres, has a terribly graphic passage describing such extortions. After
dwelling upon the tortures inflicted upon the condemned, he says: "Yet
death is the end. It shall not be. Can cruelty go further? A way shall
be found. For the bodies of the beheaded shall be thrown to the beasts.
If this is grievous to parents, they may buy the liberty of burial" (v.,
45). Compare [Mat 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#012); [Act
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002).

[John 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 19:39</span></span>

Came Nicodemus - came by night

The contrast is marked between his first and his second coming.

Mixture (μίγμα)

Only here in the New Testament. Some authorities read ἕλιγμα, a roll.

Pounds

Roman pounds, of nearly twelve ounces. The large quantity may be
explained by the intention of covering the entire body with the
preparation, and by the fact that a portion was designed for the couch
of the body in the grave. Compare the account of the burial of Asa, [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014). "Extraordinary reverence in its
sorrowful excitement does not easily satisfy itself" (Meyer).

[John 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 19:40</span></span>

Linen cloths (ὀθονίοις)

Used only by John, if [Luk 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#012) is
rejected, as by some editors. The Synoptists all have σινδών, linen
cloth. See on [Mar 14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051). Matthew and
Luke have ἐντύλιξεν, rolled or wrapped, and Mark ἐνείλησεν, wound,
instead of John's ἔδησαν bound.

With the spices

Spread over the sheet or bandages in which the body was wrapped.

The manner of the Jews

As contrasted with that of the Egyptians, for instance, which is thus
described by Herodotus: "They take first a crooked piece of iron, and
with it draw out the brains through the nostrils, thus getting rid of a
portion, while the skull is cleared of the rest by rinsing with drugs;
next they make a cut along the flank with a sharp Ethiopian stone, and
take out the whole contents of the abdomen, which they then cleanse,
washing it thoroughly with palm-wine, and again, frequently with an
infusion of pounded aromatics. After this they fill the cavity with the
purest bruised myrrh, with cassia, and every other sort of spicery
except frankincense, and sew up the opening. Then the body is placed in
natrum (subcarbonate of soda) for seventy days, and covered entirely
over. After the expiration of that space of time, which must not be
exceeded, the body is washed, and wrapped round, from head to foot, with
bandages of fine linen cloth, smeared over with gum" (ii., 86). Or,
possibly, a contrast may be implied with the Roman custom of burning the
bodies of the dead. Tacitus says of the Jews: "The bodies of the
deceased they choose rather to bury than burn, following in this the
Egyptian custom; with whom also they agree in their attention to the
dead" ("History," v., 5).

To bury (ἐνταφιάζειν)

Properly, to prepare for burial. See on [Joh
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007). Compare Septuagint, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002), where the same word is used for
embalming the body of Joseph.

[John 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 19:41</span></span>

A garden

Mentioned by John only.

New (καινὸν)

See on [Mat 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029). John omits the
detail of the tomb being hewn in the rock, which is common to all the
Synoptists.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 20](joh020)

</div>
