<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh011)  [Next](joh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

[John 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 12:1</span></span>

Which had been dead

(Omit.)

He raised

For He, read Jesus.

[John 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 12:3</span></span>

A pound (λίτραν)

Only here and [Joh 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039). Matthew and
Mark, ἀλάβαστρον, a flask.

Of spikenard (νάρδου πιστικῆς)

So Mark. See on [Mar 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003).

Very precious (πολυτίμου)

Literally, of much value. Matthew has βαρυτίμου, of weighty value.

Anointed

See on [Joh 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#002).

Feet

The Synoptists mention only the pouring on the head.

[John 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 12:4</span></span>

Simon's son

Omit.

[John 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 12:5</span></span>

Three hundred pence (τριακοσίων δηναρίων)

Or three hundred denarii. On the denarius, see on [Mat
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#002). Mark says more than three
hundred pence. Three hundred denarii would be about fifty dollars, or
twice that amount if we reckon according to the purchasing power.

The poor (πτωχοῖς)

See on [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003). No article: to poor
people.

[John 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 12:6</span></span>

And had the bag, and bare what was put therein (καὶ τὸ γλωσσόκομον εἶχε,
καὶ τὰ βαλλόμενα ἐβάσταζεν)

The best texts read ἔχων, having, and omit the second καὶ and. The
rendering would then be, and having the bag bare, etc.

The bag (γλωσσόκομον)

Only here and [Joh 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029). Originally a
box for keeping the mouth-pieces of wind instruments. From γλῶσσα,
tongue, and κομέω, to tend. The word was also used for a coffin.
Josephus applies it to the coffer in which the golden mice and emerods
were preserved ([Sa1 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#011)). In the
Septuagint, of the chest which Joash had provided for receiving
contributions for the repairing of the Lord's house ([Ch2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#008)). Rev. gives box, in margin.

Bare (ἐβάσταζεν)

Carried away or purloined. This meaning is rather imparted by the
context than residing in the verb itself, i.e., according to New
Testament usage (see on [Joh 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#021)).
Unquestionably it has this meaning in later Greek, frequently in
Josephus. Render, therefore, as Rev., took away. The rendering of the
A.V. is tautological.

[John 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 12:7</span></span>

Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this (ἄφες
αὐτήν εἰς τὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ ἐνταφιασμοῦ)

This passage presents great difficulty. According to the reading just
given, the meaning is that Mary had kept the ointment, perhaps out of
the store provided for Lazarus' burial, against the day of Christ's
preparation for the tomb. The word ἐνταφιασμοῦ is wrongly rendered
burial. It means the preparation for burial, the laying out, or
embalmment. It is explained by [Joh
19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040), as the binding in linen cloths
with spices, "as the manner of the Jews is ἐνταφιάζειν to prepare for
burial," not to bury. It is the Latin pollingere, to wash and prepare a
corpse for the funeral pile. Hence the name of the servant to whom this
duty was committed was pollinctor. He was a slave of the libitinarius,
or furnishing undertaker. Mary, then, has kept the ointment in order to
embalm Jesus with it on this day, as though He were already dead. This
is the sense of the Synoptists. Matthew ([Mat
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#012)) says, she did it with reference
to my preparation for burial. Mark, she anticipated to anoint.

The reading of the Received Text is, however, disputed. The best textual
critics agree that the perfect, τετήρηκεν, she hath kept, was
substituted for the original reading τηρήσῃ, the aorist, she may keep,
or may have kept, by some one who was trying to bring the text into
harmony with [Mar 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008); not
understanding how she could keep for His burial that which she poured
out now. Some, however, urge the exact contrary, namely, that the
perfect is the original reading, and that the aorist is a correction by
critics who were occupied with the notion that no man is embalmed before
his death, or who failed to see how the ointment could have been kept
already, as it might naturally be supposed to have been just purchased.
(So Godet and Field.)

According to the corrected reading, ἵνα, in order that, is inserted
after ἄφες αὐτὴν, let her alone, or suffer her; τετήρηκεν, hath kept, is
changed to τηρήσῃ, may keep, and the whole is rendered, suffer her to
keep it against the day of my burying. So Rev.

But it is difficult to see why Christ should desire to have kept for His
embalmment what had already been poured out upon Him. Some, as Meyer,
assume that only a part of the ointment was poured out, and refer αὐτό,
it, to the part remaining. "Let her alone, that she may not give away to
the poor this ointment, of which she has just used a portion for the
anointing of my feet, but preserve it for the day of my embalmming."
Canon Westcott inclines to this view of the use of only a part. But the
inference from the synoptic narratives can be only that the whole
contents of the flask were used, and the mention of the pound by John,
and the charge of waste are to the same effect. There is nothing
whatever to warrant a contrary supposition.

Others explain, suffer her to have kept it, or suffer that she may have
kept it. So Westcott, who says: "The idiom by which a speaker throws
himself into the past, and regards what is done as still a purpose, is
common to all languages."

Others, again, retain the meaning let her alone, and render ἵνα, in
order that, with an ellipsis, thus: "Let her alone: (she hath not sold
her treasure) in order that she might keep it," etc.

The old rendering, as A.V., is the simplest, and gives a perfectly
intelligible and consistent sense. If, however, this must be rejected,
it seems, on the whole, best to adopt the marginal reading of the Rev.,
with the elliptical ἵνα: let her alone: it was that she might keep it.
This preserves the prohibitory force of ἄφες αὐτήν, which is implied in
[Mat 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#010), and is unquestionable in
[Mar 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#006). Compare [Mat
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#014); [Mat
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014); [Mat
27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049).

Note that the promise of the future repute of this act ([Mat
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#013); [Mar
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#009)) is omitted by the only
Evangelist who records Mary's name in connection with it.

[John 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 12:9</span></span>

Much people (ὄχλος πολὺς)

The best texts insert the article, which converts the expression into
the current phrase, the common people. So Rev.

Knew (ἔγνω)

Rev., more correctly, learned. They came to know.

[John 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 12:10</span></span>

The chief priests

See on [Joh 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047).

[John 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 12:11</span></span>

Went away (ὑπῆγον)

Withdrew from their company.

[John 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 12:12</span></span>

A great multitude (ὄχλος πολὺς)

Some editors add the article and render, the common people.

[John 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 12:13</span></span>

Branches of palms (τὰ βαΐ́α τῶν φοινίκων)

The A.V. overlooks both the articles, the branches of the palms. βαΐ́α
occurs only here in the New Testament, and means palm branches, or,
strictly, tops of the palms where the fruit is produced. Of the palms
may have been added by John for readers unacquainted with the technical
term, but the expression palm branches of the palms, is similar to
housemaster of the house (οἰκοδεσπότης τῆς οἰκίας, [Luk
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#011)). The articles are commonly
explained as marking the trees which were by the wayside on the route of
the procession. Some think that they point to the well-known palm
branches connected with the Feast of Tabernacles. On the different terms
employed by the Evangelists for "branches," see on [Mar
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#008).

To meet (εἰς ὑπάντησιν)

Very literally, to a going to meet.

Cried (ἔκραζον)

Imperfect, kept crying as he advanced.

Hosanna

Meaning O save!

Blessed (εὐλογημένος)

A different word from the blessed of [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003) (μακάριος). This is the perfect
participle of the verb εὐλογέω, to speak well of, praise, hence our
eulogy. Matthew's word applies to character; this to repute. The
ascription of praise here is from [Psa
118:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#025), [Psa
118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026). This Psalm, according to
Perowne, was composed originally for the first celebration of the Feast
of Tabernacles after the completion of the sacred temple. The words of
the twenty-fifth verse were sung during that feast, when the altar of
burnt-offering was solemnly compassed; that is, once on each of the
first six days of the feast, and seven times on the seventh day. This
seventh day was called "the Great Hosanna," and not only the prayers for
the feast, but even the branches of trees, including the myrtles which
were attached to the palm branch, were called "Hosannas."

The King of Israel

The best texts add καὶ, even the king, etc.

[John 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 12:14</span></span>

A young ass (ὀνάριον)

Only here in the New Testament. Matthew mentions an ass and a colt; Mark
and Luke a colt only.

[John 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 12:18</span></span>

Met (ὑπήντησεν)

The verb means to go to meet. Hence Rev., went and met.

[John 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 12:19</span></span>

Is gone after Him (ὀπίσω αὐτοῦ ἀπῆλθεν)

The phrase occurs only here. Literally, is gone away.

[John 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 12:20</span></span>

Greeks (Ἕλληνες)

Gentiles, not Hellenists. See on [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001). Jesus comes into contact with the
Gentile world at His birth (the Magi) and at the close of His ministry.

[John 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 12:22</span></span>

Philip - Andrew

They appear together in [Joh 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045);
[Joh 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#007), [Joh
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#008). Compare [Mar
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#018).

[John 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 12:23</span></span>

Answered (ἀπεκρίνατο)

The best texts read ἀποκρίνεται, answereth.

The hour is come, that (ἐλήλυθεν ἡ ὥρα ἵνα)

This is not equivalent to "the hour is come in which." The hour is used
absolutely: the critical hour is come in order that the Son, etc.

[John 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 12:24</span></span>

Verily, verily

See on [Joh 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051); see on [Joh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001).

A corn (ὁ κόκκος)

Properly, the corn or grain. The article should be inserted in the
translation, because Jesus is citing the wheat-grain as a familiar type
of that which contains in itself the germ of life. So wheat has the
article: the corn of the wheat. The selection of the corn of wheat as an
illustration acquires a peculiar interest from the fact of its being
addressed to Greeks, familiar with the Eleusinian mysteries celebrated
in their own country. These mysteries were based on the legend of
Dionysus (Bacchus). According to the legend his original name was
Zagreus. He was the son of Zeus (Jupiter) by his own daughter Persephone
(Proserpina), and was destined to succeed to supreme dominion and to the
wielding of the thunderbolt. The jealousy of Here (Juno), the wife of
Zeus, incited the Titans against him, who killed him while he was
contemplating his face in a mirror, cut up his body, and boiled it in a
caldron, leaving only the heart. Zeus, in his wrath, hurled the Titans
to Tartarus, and Apollo collected the remains of Zagreus and buried
them. The heart was given to Semele, and Zagreus was born again from her
under the form of Dionysus. The mysteries represented the original birth
from the serpent, the murder and dismemberment of the child, and the
revenge inflicted by Zeus; and the symbols exhibited - the dice, ball,
top, mirror, and apple - signified the toys with which the Titans
allured the child into their power. Then followed the restoration to
life; Demeter (Ceres) the goddess of agriculture, the mother of food,
putting the limbs together, and giving her maternal breasts to the
child. All this was preparatory to the great Eleusinia, in which the
risen Dionysus in the freshness of his second life was conducted from
Athens to Eleusis in joyful procession. An ear of corn, plucked in
solemn silence, was exhibited to the initiated as the object of mystical
contemplation, as the symbol of the god, prematurely killed, but, like
the ear enclosing the seed-corn, bearing within himself the germ of a
second life.

With this mingled the legend of Persephone, the daughter of Demeter, who
was carried off by Pluto to the infernal world. The mother wandered over
the earth seeking her daughter, and having found her, applied to Zeus,
through whose intervention Persephone, while condemned to Hades for a
part of the year, was allowed to remain upon earth during the other
part. Thus the story became the symbol of vegetation, which shoots forth
in spring, and the power of which withdraws into the earth at other
seasons of the year. These features of the mysteries set forth, and with
the same symbol as that employed by Christ here, the crude pagan
conception of life rising out of death.

Alone (αὐτὸς μόνος)

Literally, itself alone. Rev., by itself alone.

[John 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 12:25</span></span>

Life (ψυχὴν)

See on [Mar 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#030); see on [Luk
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#046).

Shall lose (ἄπολέσει)

The best texts read ἀπολλύει, loseth. See on [Luk
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#025).

In this world

This earthly economy, regarded as alien and hostile to God. The words
are added in order to explain the strong phrase, hateth his life or
soul.

Shall keep (φυλάξει)

See on [Pe1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004).

[John 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 12:26</span></span>

Serve (διακονῇ)

See on [Mat 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026); see on [Mar
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#035); see on [Pe1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#012).

Me (ἐμοὶ)

Notice the emphatic recurrence of the pronoun in this verse.

My Father

Rev., rightly, the Father. "Very much of the exact force of St. John's
record of the Lord's words appears to depend upon the different
conceptions of the two forms under which the fatherhood of God is
described. God is spoken of as 'the Father' and as 'my Father.'
Generally it may be said that the former title expresses the original
relation of God to being, and specially to humanity, in virtue of man's
creation in the divine image; and the latter more particularly the
relation of the Father to the Son incarnate, and so indirectly to man in
virtue of the incarnation. The former suggests those thoughts which
spring from the consideration of the absolute moral connection of man
with God; the latter, those which spring from what is made known to us
through revelation of the connection of the incarnate Son with God and
with man. 'The Father' corresponds, under this aspect, with the group of
ideas gathered up in the Lord's titles, 'the Son' 'the Son of man;' and
'my Father' with those which are gathered up in the title 'the Son of
God,' 'the Christ'" (Westcott).

[John 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 12:27</span></span>

My soul

See reff. on [Joh 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025). The soul,
ψυχή, is the seat of the human affections; the spirit (πνεῦμα) of the
religious affections.

Is troubled (τετάρακται)

The perfect tense; has been disturbed and remains troubled. The same
verb as in [Joh 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033). Notice that
there it is said. He groaned in the spirit (τῷ πνεύματι). His inward
agitation did not arise from personal sorrow or sympathy, but from some
shock to His moral and spiritual sense.

What shall I say?

A natural expression out of the depths of our Lord's humanity. How shall
I express my emotion? Some commentators connect this with the following
clause, shall I say, Father, save me, etc. But this does not agree with
the context, and represents a hesitation in the mind of Jesus which
found no place there.

Save me

The shrinking from suffering belongs to the human personality of our
Lord (compare [Mat 26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039)); but the
prayer, save me from this hour, is not for deliverance from suffering,
but for victory in the approaching trial. See [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007). The expression is very vivid.
"Save me out of this hour."

For this cause

Explained by glorify thy name. For this use, namely, that the Father's
name might be glorified.

[John 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 12:28</span></span>

Glorify (δόξασον)

(Wyc., clarify, as the Vulgate clarifca.)

Name

See on [Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019).

[John 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 12:30</span></span>

For my sake

Emphatic in the Greek order. It is not for my sake that this voice hath
come.

[John 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 12:31</span></span>

The prince of this world (ὁ ἄρχων ροῦ κόσμου τούτου)

The phrase occurs only in the Gospel; here, [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011).

Shall be cast out (ἐκβληθήσεται ἔξω)

In every case but one where the word ἐκβάλλω occurs in John, it is used
of casting out from a holy place or society. See [Joh
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015); [Joh
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#034), [Joh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003); [Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010); [Rev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#002). Compare [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004).

[John 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 12:32</span></span>

Be lifted up (ὑψωθῶ)

See on [Joh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014). The primary
reference is to the cross, but there is included a reference to the
resurrection and ascension. Bengel says: "In the very cross there was
already something tending towards glory." Wyc., enhanced.

From the earth (ἐκ τῆς γῆς)

Literally, out of the earth.

Will draw (ἑλκύσω)

See on [Joh 6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044).

All men (πάντας)

Some high authorities read πάντα, all things.

Unto Me (πρὸς ἐμαυτόν)

Rev., rightly, unto myself: in contrast with the prince of this world.

[John 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 12:34</span></span>

The law

See on [Joh 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034).

[John 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 12:35</span></span>

With you (μεθ' ὑμῶν)

The best texts read πάντα, among you.

While ye have (ἕως)

The best texts read ὡς, as: walk in conformity with the fact that you
have the Light among you.

Lest darkness come upon you (ἵνα μὴ σξοτία ὑμᾶς καταλάβῃ)

Rev., better, that darkness overtake you not. On overtake see on taketh,
[Mar 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#018); and see on perceived, [Act
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013).

[John 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 12:40</span></span>

He hath blinded, etc.

These words of Isaiah are repeated five times in the New Testament as
the description of the Jewish people in its latest stage of decay. [Mat
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013); [Mar
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#012); [Luk
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#010); [Joh
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#040); [Act
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026).

Hardened (πεπώρωκεν)

See on the kindred noun πώρωσις, hardness, [Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005).

Understand (νόησωσιν)

Rev., better, perceive. Mark has συνιῶσιν, understand. See on
understanding, [Luk 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#047).

Be converted (ἐπιστραφῶσιν)

See on [Mat 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015); see on [Luk
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#032). Rev., more accurately, turn,
with the idea of turning to or toward something (ἐπί).

[John 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 12:41</span></span>

When (ὅτε)

The best texts read ὅτι, because.

His glory

In the vision in the temple, [Isa 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001),
[Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003), [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005).

Of Him

Christ.

[John 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 12:42</span></span>

Among the chief rulers (καὶ ἐκ τῶν ἀρχόντων)

Rev., more neatly and accurately, even of the rulers.

Believed on Him (ἐπίστευσαν εἰς αὐτόν)

See on [Joh 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012). It is to be noted
that John here uses of this imperfect faith which refused to complete
itself in confession, the formula for complete faith. Compare believed
in His name ([Joh 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#023)), and see note
there.

Confess Him (ὡμολόγουν)

The Him, or, Rev., it, is not in the text. The verb is used absolutely.
They did not make confession. See on [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023); see on [Mat
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032); see on [Mat
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007).

Lest they should be put out of the synagogue (ἵνα μὴ ἀποσυνάγωγοι
γένωνται)

Better, that they should not be, etc. Compare Rev., [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035). On the phrase, be put out of
the synagogue, see on [Joh 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022).

[John 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 12:43</span></span>

Praise (δόξαν)

Much better, Rev., glory, because suggesting a contrast with the vision
of divine glory referred to in [Joh
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#041). Compare [Joh
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#044).

Than (ἤπερ)

The word cannot be rendered by a corresponding word in English The force
is, "more than the glory of God, though He is so much more glorious."
The word is found nowhere else in the New Testament. Some authorities
read ὕπερ, above.

[John 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 12:44</span></span>

Cried (ἔκραξεν)

This is not meant to relate a reappearance of Jesus in public. The close
of His public ministry is noted at [Joh
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#036). It is in continuation of the
Evangelist's own remarks, and introduces a summary of Jesus' past
teaching to the Jews.

Believeth - on Him that sent Me (πιστεύει - εἰς τὸν πέμψαντά με)

This is the first and almost the only place in the Gospel where the
words believe on are used with reference to the Father. This rendering
in [Joh 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024) is an error. See [Joh
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001). The phrase is constantly
associated with our Lord. At the same time it is to be noted that it
contemplates the Father as the source of the special revelation of
Christ, and therefore is not absolutely an exception to the habitual
usage. The same is true of [Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001).

[John 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 12:45</span></span>

Seeth (θεωρεῖ)

Rev., properly, beholdeth. Compare [Joh
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009). The word is purposely chosen to
mark an intent, continuous contemplation of Christ, issuing in ever
larger knowledge of the Father.

I am come (ἐλήλυθα)

The perfect tense, pointing to the abiding result of His manifestation.
Compare [Joh 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#043); [Joh
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028); [Joh
8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042); [Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028); [Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037).

Abide in darkness

The phrase occurs only here. Compare [Jo1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#009), [Jo1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011); also [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035).

[John 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 12:47</span></span>

Believe not (μὴ πιστεύσῃ)

The best texts read φυλάξῃ, keep (them).

Came (ἦλθον)

The aorist tense, pointing to the purpose of the coming, as I am come
([Joh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046)) to the result. Compare
[Joh 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014); [Joh
9:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#039); [Joh
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#010); [Joh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027), [Joh
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047); [Joh
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022). Both tenses are found in [Joh
8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042); [Joh
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#028).

[John 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 12:48</span></span>

Rejecteth (ἀθετῶν)

See on [Luk 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030).

The word (ὁ λόγος)

Comprehending all the sayings (ῥήματα).

The same (ἐκεῖνος)

That. The pronoun of remote reference Westcott finely remarks: "The
resumptive, isolating pronoun places in emphatic prominence the teaching
which is regarded as past, and separated from those to whom it was
addressed. It stands, as it were, in the distance, as a witness and an
accuser."

The last day

Peculiar to John. See [Joh 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039).

[John 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 12:49</span></span>

Of myself (ἐξ ἐμαυτοῦ)

Out of myself. This formula occurs only here. The usual expression is
ἀπ' ἐμαυτοῦ. Ἁπό, from, as distinguished from ἐκ, out of, marks rather
the point of departure, while ἐκ, including this idea, emphasizes the
point of departure as the living and impelling source of that which
issues forth. In [Joh 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017), we read,
"whether it be out of God (ἐκ τοῦ Θεοῦ), or whether I speak from myself
(ἀπ' ἐμαυτοῦ)."

Gave (ἔδωκεν)

The best texts read δέδεκεν, the perfect tense, hath given, the result
of the gift still abiding. So Rev.

Say - speak (εἴπω - λαλήσω)

The former relating to the substance, and the latter to the form of
Jesus' utterances.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 13](joh013)

</div>
