<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](luk024)  [Next](joh001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 0:0</span></span>

The Gospel According to John

Introduction

The life of John covers a period from near the beginning of the first
century to the beginning of the second. He was a native of Galilee, and,
according to tradition, of the town of Bethsaida, which was on the
western shore of the Lake, not far from Capernaum and Chorazin. His
father was Zebedee. His mother, Salome ([Mar
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001); [Mat
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020)), was among the women who
supported the Lord with their substance ([Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003)), and attended Him to His
crucifixion ([Mar 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040)). The family
was not without worldly means. Zebedee was a fisherman, and had hired
servants in his employ ([Mar 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#020)).
Salome ministered to Jesus, and John seems to have had his own house
([Joh 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#027)). He was, apparently, one
of the disciples of John the Baptist; and while engaged in his father's
craft, was found and called by Jesus ([Mat
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#021); [Mar
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#019)). Of the two mentioned in [Joh
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035), only one, Andrew, is named ([Joh
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040)); the other is commonly supposed
to have been John, who suppresses his own name, as in other instances
where he refers to himself ([Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023); [Joh
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015); [Joh
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#026); [Joh
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002), [Joh
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#004), [Joh
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#008); [Joh
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020)).

As soon as Jesus was made known to him, he became His enthusiastic
disciple. His peculiar intimacy with our Lord is marked by the phrase
"the disciple whom Jesus loved," and also by the fact that he was one of
the three chosen to be with Him at certain special and momentous crises.
He was admitted to the death-chamber of the ruler's daughter ([Mar
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#037)) and witnessed her restoration to
life; he was present at the Transfiguration ([Luk
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028)), and with Peter and James was
chosen by the Master to bear Him company during His agony in Gethsemane
([Mar 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033)). He accompanied Jesus,
after His arrest, into the palace of the High Priest, and secured
entrance for Peter ([Joh 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015), [Joh
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#016)). He stood by the cross with the
mother of Jesus, and to his care Jesus committed her ([Joh
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#025)). With Peter he ran to the
sepulchre on the morning of the Resurrection at the summons of Mary
Magdalene, entered the empty tomb, and saw and believed ([Joh
20:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#002)). After the Resurrection he
appears engaged in his former employment on the Lake of Galilee. He is
the first to recognize the risen Lord standing upon the shore ([Joh
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007)), and is the subject of Peter's
inquiry, "Lord, what shall this man do?" when he is seen by Peter to be
following Jesus ([Joh 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#020)).

His apostolic activity was in the first thirty years after the
Ascension. In Jerusalem his position among the apostles was not
exceptionally prominent. At the time of the Stephanic persecution he
remained with the other apostles at Jerusalem ([Act
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#001)); but when Paul, three years after
his conversion, came to that city ([Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018)), he met there only Peter, and
James the Lord's brother. From this, however, it does not follow that
the remaining apostles had permanently departed from Jerusalem and
settled elsewhere. In [Gal 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009), Paul
alludes to John as having been present in Jerusalem at the time of the
council (Acts 15). The narrative in Acts does not mention him in
connection with the council, but Paul, in the Galatian letter, refers to
him as one of the pillars of the church with James and Cephas.

The commonly received tradition represents him as closing his apostolic
career in Asia and at Ephesus. An old tradition affirms that he left
Jerusalem twelve years after the death of Christ. In no case, therefore,
did he go immediately to Ephesus. Definite notices as to his abode in
the interval are wholly wanting. It is a noteworthy fact that the lives
of so many of the world's leaders include spaces which remain a blank to
the most careful biographer, and into which the world's curiosity can
never penetrate. Such is the period of Paul's retirement in Arabia, of
Dante's exile, and, to some extent, of Jesus' temptation in the
wilderness. Some later traditions assert that he visited Parthia, and
Jerome groundlessly conjectures that he had preached in Judaea. There is
some plausibility in the supposition that he may have betaken himself to
Antioch at the time of Paul's first missionary journey. It is certain
that, much later, John was a successor of Paul at Ephesus. Neither at
the departure of Paul to Miletus (Acts 20) nor during the composition of
the Ephesian letter is there a trace of John's presence at Ephesus.

Tradition is also agreed that John was banished to the isle of Patmos by
the Roman authority. Irenaeus says that he was banished in the reign of
Domitian: another tradition assigns the exile to the reign of Nero. From
this exile he was permitted to return, it is said, under Nerva (a.d.
96-98). The date of his death is unknown. Jerome places it sixty-eight
years after the death of Christ.

The dominant characteristic of John's nature is contemplative
receptivity. Every word of his Lord is taken into his deepest heart,
held fast and pondered. "He does not ask, 'What shall I do?' but 'What
does he do?'" Hence it is clear why the finest and subtlest flavor of
Jesus' personality has been caught by him. With this receptiveness goes
a power of impartation. "Every man," says Ebrard, "can see the
sunset-glow on an Alp, but not everyone can paint it." John, like a
mirror, not only received but reflected. While the other Evangelists
perceived that element of Jesus' teaching and work which produced the
most immediate and striking outward results, as the Sermon on the Mount,
for instance, John discerned the meaning and the bearing of less
prominent incidents, such as the conversation at Jacob's well. Paul,
like John, has the quality of inwardness, but Paul reasons where John
contemplates. John is tenacious and intense; Paul equally so, but more
deft than John. John broods over his thought; Paul thrusts and parries
with it.

Yet John is no sentimentalist. He is not the lovely, effeminate youth of
picture. His mental and moral fiber is strong. He received the title
"Son of Thunder" from One who never misread character. Not irascible, as
some have too hastily inferred from [Luk
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054), he illustrates the peculiarity
of many affectionate and contemplative natures, which flash into a
startling impetuosity on occasions which appeal to their more radical
view of truth and to their longer range of vision. John was incapable of
half-enthusiasms and of suspended faith. To whatever he addressed
himself, he was totus in illis. In his own way, he is no less
plain-spoken and severe than Paul. He is direct where Paul is sometimes
ironical. He is neither gentle nor vague in his language concerning
those who deny that Jesus is the Christ ([Jo1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022)), nor concerning the lineage of
him that committeth sin ([Jo1 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#008)) and
the moral quality of him that hateth his brother ([Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015); [Jo1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020)). In the Apocalypse he enters
with profoundest sympathy into the divine indignation against evil, and
contemplates with unfeigned joy its wholesale and crushing defeat and
punishment. He seems to cheer the progress of the Conqueror upon the
white horse. The issues between truth and falsehood, life and death,
light and darkness, love and hatred are stated by him with a stern and
decisive sharpness, and as absolute finalities. The quality of sin is
conceived according to the scale of his adoring love for Christ. He
deals with it as wickedness rather than as weakness, though not
overlooking the latter. For him the victory of the Gospel is not a
prophecy, but an accomplished fact. Faith overcometh the world. The
overcoming Christ is already present in every believer.

Such a character would not have been adapted to Paul's work. It was not
sufficiently versatile and many-sided. John had not Paul's pioneer
instinct, his pushing activity, and his executive power. He was fitted
to raise the superstructure rather than to lay foundations; to be a
teacher rather than an evangelist. It was his to complete the teaching
of the other apostles by unfolding the speculative mystery of the
incarnation and the secret of the inward union of the believer with
Christ; to purge the Church from speculative error, and to hold up, over
against the Gnostic caricature, the true image of the Son of Man.

The writings ascribed to John are the Gospel, three Epistles, and the
Apocalypse or Revelation.

The Gospel

The nearly unanimous tradition of the Church assigns the fourth Gospel
to John. It is unquestionably the work of a Jew, an eyewitness, and a
disciple of Jesus. It was probably written toward the close of the first
century, and therefore later than the other three Gospels. According to
the earliest evidence, it was composed at Ephesus, at the request of
John's intimate friends, who desired to have his oral teaching recorded
for the permanent use of the Church.

There are three theories as to the motive of its composition. According
to the first, known as the "supplementary" theory, John wrote the fourth
Gospel as a supplement to its predecessors, in order to supply what was
wanting in the synoptic narrative. This Gospel is indeed supplementary
in fact, but not in motive. It is supplementary in that the writer
constantly assumes that certain facts are already known to his readers,
and adds other facts from his own special information. But the Gospel
itself expressly disclaims all intention to be complete ([Joh
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)), and is an original conception,
both in form and substance, having a distinct plan of its own, and
presenting a fresh aspect of the person and teaching of our Lord. "It is
the picture of one who paints, not because others have failed to catch
the ideal he would represent, but because his heart is full and he must
speak."

The second theory is that the Gospel is "polemical" or controversial,
designed to oppose the errors of the Nicolaitanes and of Cerinthus. But
the Gospel is polemical only incidentally, as the presentation of the
positive truth suggests particular points of error. The point of view is
not controversial. The writer is moved by the pressure of his great
theme to set it forth in its positive aspects, and not with special
reference to the errors of his time.

The third theory, known as the "irenic" or conciliatory, maintains that
the Gospel was intended to reconcile divergent religious views, and to
bring into their right relation truths which heresy perverted. The
Gospel is conciliatory in fact, not from definite intent, but from the
very nature of the subject - the Word made flesh, in which all religious
controversies are reconciled. "Just as it rises above controversy while
it condemns error, it preserves the characteristic truths which heresy
isolated and misused. The fourth Gospel is the most complete answer to
the manifold forms of Gnosticism, yet it was the writing most used by
the Gnostics. It contains no formal narrative of the institution of
sacraments, and yet it presents most fully the idea of sacraments. It
sets forth with the strongest emphasis the failure of the ancient
people, and yet it points out most clearly the significance of the
dispensation which was committed to them. It brings the many oppositions
- antitheses - of life and thought, and leaves them in the light of the
one supreme fact which reconciles all, the Word became flesh; and we
feel from first to last that this light is shining over the record of
sorrow and triumph, of defeat and hope" (Westcott).

The object is distinctly stated in the Gospel itself. "These are written
that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that,
believing, ye may have life in His name" ([Joh
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030), [Joh
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)). The last of these three - life
in Christ through faith - is the key to the two others. The readers were
already disciples; and in vindicating the two propositions that Jesus is
the Christ and that Jesus is the Son of God, the object was not to lead
to the acknowledgment of His divine mission, but to exhibit these as the
ground of a living communion of believers with God, and of a richer
spiritual life. The character of the Gospel is predominantly historic.
Even the doctrinal portions have a historic background and a historic
embodiment. The doctrine, for instance, of the essential antagonism
between light and darkness, it set forth in the narrative of the hostile
attitude of the Jews toward Christ; and the discussions with them have
their root and material in this same antagonism. The historical material
is carefully selected with a view to its bearing on the particular
conception of Christ's person and work which is announced in the
Prologue. The history is the practical exhibition of the Logos-doctrine
in the person and earthly life of the Man Jesus. The miracles are
invariably termed signs, and are regarded as expressions and evidences
of the divine personality of the worker.

The Gospel is characterized by the profuse employment of symbolism. This
accords with its Hebrew fiber, and also, largely, with the nature of its
subject. For not only was John a Jew, familiar with the symbolic economy
and prophecy of the Old Testament, but Jesus, the central figure of his
Gospel was, pre-eminently the fulfiller of the Law and of the
Prophecies. Christ's own teaching, too, was largely symbolic; and John's
peculiar, profound spiritual insight detected in His ordinary acts that
larger meaning which belonged to them in virtue of Jesus' position as
the representative of humanity; and that unity of the natural and
spiritual worlds which was assumed in the utterances of our Lord in
which the visible was used as the type of the invisible. "John," says
Lange, "gives us not only a symbolism of the Old Testament word, of Old
Testament institutions, histories, and persons; he gives also the
symbolism of nature, of antiquity, of history and of personal life;
hence the absolute symbolism, or the ideal import of all real existence,
in significant outlines."

The relation of the Gospel to the Old Testament is pronounced. The
center of the Old Testament system is the manifestation of the glory of
God - the Shekinah. John declares that this glory appears essentially in
Christ. He recognizes the divine preparation among the nations for
Christ's coming, and the special discipline of Israel with a view to the
advent of the Messiah. In the Jews he discerns the special subjects of
the Messianic economy. Nathanael is an Israelite indeed: the temple is
the Father's house: salvation is from the Jews: the Jewish Scriptures
testify of Christ: the testimonies to Christ are drawn from the three
successive periods of the people's training - the patriarchal, the
theocratic, and the monarchical: the Serpent in the wilderness
prefigures Christ's "lifting up," and the Passover His own sacrifice as
the Lamb of God.

The fourth Gospel is the only one of the four which is developed
according to a prearranged and systematic plan. This plan may be
generally described as the exhibition of "the parallel development of
faith and unbelief through the historical presence of Christ." The
Gospel accordingly falls into two general divisions: the Prologue
(1:1-18); the Narrative (1:19-21:23). The narrative consists of two
parts: the self-revelation of Christ to the world (1:19-12:50); the
self-revelation of Christ to the disciples (13-21). In the development
of this plan the author dwells upon three pairs of ideas: witness and
truth; glory and light; judgment and life. "There is the manifold
attestation of the divine mission; there is the progressive
manifestation of the inherent majesty of the Son; there is the
continuous and necessary effect which this manifestation produces on
those to whom it is made; and the narrative may be fairly described as
the simultaneous unfolding of these three themes, into which the great
theme of faith and unbelief is divided" (Westcott). The plan is
foreshadowed in the Prologue. He who was the Word, in the beginning with
God, by whom all things came into being, was life and light - the light
of men. To Him witness was born by John, who was sent to testify of Him
that all men might believe on Him. But though He was made flesh and
dwelt among men, though He came unto His own home, though He was full of
grace and truth, the world knew Him not, and His own people refused to
receive him. There were, however, those who did receive Him; and to such
He gave power to become sons of God through faith in His name. They
became such, not in a physical sense, not of blood, nor of the will of
man, but of God. They received of his fullness.

Accordingly the Gospel treats of the nature of Christ, and of the
witness born to Christ by John, by the disciples, and by miracles. It
goes on to describe the conflict between the eternal Light and the
darkness as embodied historically in the persistent opposition of the
Jews to Jesus. He came to them and they received Him not. Then the other
aspect is presented - the blessing of those who did receive Him, the
impartation of sonship and the consequent privilege of communion with
the divine nature. From the thirteenth to the end of the seventeenth
chapter is described Christ's revelation of Himself to His disciples in
ministries of love and in confidential discourse. The darkness did not
overcome the light. The apparent defeat through death was converted into
victory through resurrection. This victory of the light is unfolded from
the eighteenth to the end of the twentieth chapter, in the story of the
betrayal, the passion, and the resurrection. The twenty-first chapter
forms an Epilogue in which the divine light again shines forth in
miracle, ministry, and counsel, before the final departure to the
Father.

Relation to the Synoptic Gospels

The fourth Gospel exhibits marked differences from the others both in
chronological arrangement and in the selection of material. As regards
the latter, it contains much that is peculiar to itself, and falls in
with the Synoptists only in a few sections.

But, while independent, it is not contradictory of the Synoptic Gospels.
All the four Gospels are consciously based upon the same great facts;
and the author of the fourth owns and confirms the first three. The
incidents common to the fourth Gospel and all the Synoptists are, the
baptism of John; the feeding of the five thousand; the triumphal entry
into Jerusalem; the last supper and the passion and resurrection. John,
with Matthew and Mark, relates the walking on the sea and the anointing
at Bethany.

John's Gospel also implies acquaintance with incidents which he does not
relate. Such are the circumstances of Christ's baptism; the position and
character of Simon Peter; Christ's early home at Nazareth and later
residence at Capernaum; the number of the disciples; the date of the
Baptist's imprisonment; the Ascension, etc. The same imagery appears, in
the figures of the bride and the bridegroom, the harvest, the servant,
the vine. The same sayings occur, and verbal and other coincidences are
frequent.

The inner coincidences are still more striking. John's portrait of
Jesus, for instance, is, in many particulars, unique. It is fuller, more
subtle, and indicates a closer intimacy. John deals with His person,
where Matthew and Luke deal with His offices. In Matthew He is the
fulfiller of the law; in John He foreshadows the grander and richer
economy of the Spirit. Nevertheless, John's Christ is the same figure
which appears in the lines of the Synoptists. In both He is the teacher,
the meek and lowly one, the worker of miracles of power and mercy. In
both He is plain of speech toward those who would become his disciples,
the hater of hypocrisy, the reader of men's hearts.

Similar coincidences appear in the portraits of prominent disciples,
notably of Peter. Though appearing in some scenes not noted by the
Synoptists, the Peter of their Gospels is easily recognized in the
portrait by his fellow disciple. He is the same combination of impulsive
boldness and cowardice; of affectionateness and brusqueness; as quickly
responsive to love as to anger; as prompt to leap into the lake at the
sight of his Lord, as to smite Malchus.

The inner coincidences are also to be discerned in John's assumption of
facts recorded by the other evangelists, so that the coincidence
sometimes appears in what he does not record. Giving no details of the
birth of Christ, like Matthew and Luke, he tells us that the Word became
flesh. The childhood, with its subjection to parental authority appears
in the story of the wedding at Cana. While the Synoptists dwell upon the
event of the incarnation, he dwells upon the doctrine. The sacraments of
Baptism and of the Eucharist, the institution of which he does not
relate, are assumed as familiar in the conversation with Nicodemus and
in the discourse at Capernaum. The ascension is not described, but is
predicted in Christ's words to Mary. Similarly, the work of Jesus in
Galilee, which John does not narrate, is presupposed in the sixth and
seventh chapters. The anointing at Bethany is assumed to be known, as is
the hearing of Jesus before Caiaphas.

With these coincidences marked differences appear. Setting aside the
omission by Mark of the Gospel of the infancy, the Synoptic narrative
falls into three parts: 1, The ministry of the Baptist, the baptism and
temptation of Jesus. 2, The return of Jesus to Galilee, followed by a
series of connected narratives concerning His teaching and miracles in
this and surrounding districts, without any intimation that, during this
time, He also visited Judaea and Jerusalem. 3, Hereupon all the three
pass at once from the last journey of Jesus to Jerusalem to the
Passover, at which He was crucified. Hence, as Dean Alford remarks, "had
we only their accounts, we could never, with any certainty, have
asserted that He went to Jerusalem during His public life, until His
time was come to be delivered up. They do not, it is true, exclude such
a supposition, but rather, perhaps, imply it. It would not, however,
have been gathered from their narrative with any historical precision."

Turning now to John's Gospel, we find Christ's ministry in Galilee
between the Baptism and the Passion interrupted by journeys to
Jerusalem. He goes up to the Passover, on which occasion occur the
cleansing of the temple and the visit of Nicodemus ([Joh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#013); 3:1-21). A second visit is made
to an unnamed feast of the Jews ([Joh
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#001)), during which He heals the
impotent man at Bethesda, excites thereby the hostility of the Jews, and
delivers the discourse in 5:17-47. He goes up again at the Feast of
Tabernacles ([Joh 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010)), and, ten
months later, appears at the Feast of Dedication ([Joh
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022)). An interval is spent on the
other side of the Jordan ([Joh 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040)),
at Ephraim in the wilderness of Judaea ([Joh
11:53-54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#053)), and at Bethany (11, [Joh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)), after which He makes His
triumphal entry into Jerusalem ([Joh
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012) sqq.). According to John,
therefore, between Christ's last journey from Galilee to Jerusalem and
His triumphal entry, there is an interval of several months, spent
partly in Jerusalem and partly in the neighboring districts; while
according to the Synoptists it seems that He went from Galilee to
Jerusalem to the last Passover only a short time before it began; and
that He had previously remained continuously in Galilee or in the
neighborhood, having taken up His abode there at the beginning of His
public ministry.

In the Synoptists the scene of Christ's work is almost exclusively
Galilee, while John mentions only five events connected with the
Galilaean ministry. On the other hand, the fourth Gospel assumes a
knowledge of Jesus' activity in Galilee and Peraea ([Joh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#001); [Joh
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001), [Joh
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#011), [Joh
7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052); [Joh
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#040)).

The difference between John and the Synoptists also appears in the form
of the narrative. The latter represent Jesus' teaching as dealing mainly
with the humble peasantry. It is proverbial, popular, abounding in
parable, and the discourses are brief. John represents Christ as
speaking in long and profoundly thoughtful discourses. While John has
nothing answering to the Sermon on the Mount and the groups of parables,
the other evangelists have nothing answering to the interviews with
Nicodemus, the Samaritan woman, and the disciples before the Passover.
In John the discourses are more dramatic and dialectic; in the
Synoptists, proverbial, parabolic, and prophetic. Yet John's account of
Jesus' teaching is not wanting in short paradoxical sayings, such as
abound in the Synoptists (see [Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019); [Joh
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#032), [Joh
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034), [Joh
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035); [Joh
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033); [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017); [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027), [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062)); nor, though no parable is
worked out by John, are parabolic sayings wanting, such as the Good
Shepherd, the Vine, the Living Water, and the Bread of Heaven.

In another and deeper aspect his Gospel stands related to the others as
completing. He alone has seized and preserved certain sides of the life
and teaching of the Lord, such as His utterances as to His eternal
relation to the Father and His eternal unity with Him ([Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013) sqq.; [Joh
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017) sqq.; [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033), [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051); [Joh
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016), [Joh
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028) sqq.; [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058), and elsewhere). It is to John,
in short, that we owe the view of the speculative side of Christ's work;
while as regards the relation of believers to their Lord, John gives us
those deep and comforting words concerning the mystical unity and
community of life between Himself and His disciples, into which they
will enter through the Holy Spirit.

Yet these deeper and more mystical views were not altogether the outcome
of John's characteristic personality. They were also toned and shaped by
the peculiar conditions of the Church and of the religious thought of
his time. The conflict of Christianity was no longer with Judaistic
error; no longer between the Gospel and the Law; between circumcision
and uncircumcision; but with an essentially heathen Gnosticism which
appealed to the Church with the claim of a profound insight into
Christianity, and sought to wrest the Gospel to its own service. It has
already been remarked that the aim of the fourth Gospel was not
distinctively polemic. John was impelled to write by the pressure upon
his own soul of the truth "God manifest in the flesh," rather than by
the aggressions of heresy; but none the less the utterances of a
Cerinthus lent sharpness to the lines of the Apostle's portrait of the
Son of Man, and no more impressive answer to such teaching could have
been given than John furnished in the words of the Lord himself
concerning His own pre-existence and eternal Godhead, and in His
testimony that the Father has created all things through the Word. (See
[Joh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), [Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033), [Joh
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034), [Joh
1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049); [Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013), [Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014); [Joh
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023), [Joh
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#026); [Joh
6:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#051), [Joh
6:62](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#062); [Joh
8:58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058); [Joh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#023) sqq.; [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001), [Joh
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#002), [Joh
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016), [Joh
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#019); [Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006), [Joh
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011), [Joh
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)).

Style and Diction of John

John's style in the Gospel and Epistles is marked by simplicity and
ease. It is plain without elegance, and the diction is comparatively
pure so far as words and grammar are concerned, but animated with a
Hebrew genius. Godet describes the style as characterized by "a
childlike simplicity and transparent depth, a holy melancholy, and a
vivacity not less holy; above all, the sweetness of a pure and gentle
love."

The vocabulary is meager. The same expressions continually recur. Thus
we find φῶς (light), 23 times; δόξα, δοξάζεσθαι (glory, to be
glorified), 42; ζωή, ζῆν (life, to live), 52; μαρτυρεῖν, μαρτυρία (to
witness, testimony), 47; γανώσκειν (to know), 55; κόσμος (world), 78;
πιστεύειν (to believe), 98; ἔργον (work), 23; ὄνομα (name), and ἀληθεία
(truth), each 25; σημεῖον (sign), 17.

The meagerness of the vocabulary, however, is compensated by its
richness. The few constantly recurring words are symbols of fundamental
and eternal ideas. "They are not purely abstract notions, but powerful
spiritual realities, which may be studied under a multitude of aspects.
If the author has only a few terms in his vocabulary, these terms may be
compared to pieces of gold with which great lords make payment" (Godet).

A similar sameness is apparent in the constructions. These are usually
simple, plain, and direct. The sentences are short and are coordinated,
following each other by a kind of parallelism as in Hebrew poetry. Thus
where other writers would employ particles of logical connection, he
uses the simple connective καὶ (and). For example in [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010), John means to say that though
Jesus was in the world, yet the world knew Him not; but he states the
fact in two distinct and independent propositions: "He was in the world,
and the world knew Him not." So in [Joh
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#020). Jesus spake in the treasury,
teaching in the temple, and yet, though He appeared and taught thus
publicly, no one laid hands on Him. John writes: "These words spake
Jesus as He taught in the temple, and no man laid hands on Him." He uses
and, where the antithetic but might be expected ([Joh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005); [Joh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#011); [Joh
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024)). There is also a frequent
absence of connecting particles. There is not, for instance, a single
one in the first seventeen verses of chapter 15. Out of the wealth of
Greek particles, John uses only five. He abounds in contrasts or
antithetic parallelisms without connecting links. Thus, "the law was
given by Moses: grace and truth came by Jesus Christ" ([Joh
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017)): "No one ever saw God: the
only-begotten Son revealed Him" ([Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)). Compare [Joh
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023); [Joh
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005), etc. This simple coordination of
clauses is assisted by the repetition of a marked word or phrase, so
that a connection between two statements is established and the idea
carried forward in a new direction (see [Joh
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011); [Joh
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013) sqq.; [Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001), [Joh
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005); [Joh
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014) sqq.; [Joh
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039), [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040), [Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)).

The narrative is direct. Even the words of others are given directly and
not obliquely. Instead of saying "This is the witness of John when the
Jews sent to ask him who he was, and he confessed that he was not the
Christ" - John says, "This is the witness of John when the Jews sent to
ask him Who art thou? and he confessed I am not the Christ" ([Joh
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019)). Compare [Joh
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#040) sqq.; [Joh
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#003) sqq.; [Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024) sqq.; [Joh
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#010) sqq.; [Joh
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#014); [Joh
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#022); [Joh
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#002) sqq. Illustrative details are not
wrought into the texture of the narrative, but are interjected as
parentheses or distinct statements (see [Joh
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#010); [Joh
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006); [Joh
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022); [Joh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030); [Joh
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#040)). John's style is
circumstantial. An action which, by other writers, is stated as complex,
is analyzed by him and its components stated separately. Thus, instead
of the usual Greek idiom, "Jesus answering said," John writes, "Jesus
answered and said," thus making both factors of the act equally
prominent (see [Joh 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#044); [Joh
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#028); [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015), [Joh
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025)). This peculiarity is further
illustrated by the combination of the positive and negative expression
of the same truth (see [Joh 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003), [Joh
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020); [Joh
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#024); [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016); [Joh
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#005); [Joh
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020); [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001), [Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006); [Jo1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#004), [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027)). The detachment, however, is
only superficial. The inner connection is closely held in the writer's
mind, and is impressed upon the reader by that constant iteration which,
upon a hasty view, savors of monotony, but which serves to represent the
central thought in its manysidedness, and to place it in its commanding
relation to subordinate thoughts. His frequent use of the particle οὐν
(therefore) directs attention to the sequence of events or ideas ([Joh
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#022), [Joh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#025), [Joh
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029); [Joh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001), [Joh
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006), [Joh
4:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#046); [Joh
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#005); [Joh
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025); [Joh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012), [Joh
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021), [Joh
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#031), [Joh
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#038); [Joh
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#007); [Joh
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001), [Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003), [Joh
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#009), [Joh
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#017), [Joh
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#021)). The phrase in order that
(ἵνα), marking an object or purpose, is of frequent occurrence, and
exhibits the characteristic of John's mind to regard things in their
moral and providential relations. Thus [Joh
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#034) : "My meat is in order that I may
do the will of Him that sent me;" the emphasis lying not on the process,
but on the end. Compare [Joh 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#036);
[Joh 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#029); [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056); [Joh
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023); [Joh
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034); [Joh
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003).

The subject or the significant word of a sentence is often repeated,
especially in dialogues (which are characteristic of John's Gospel),
where, by the constant repetition of the names of the parties they are
kept clearly before the reader's mind (see [Joh
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#018); [Joh
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007) sqq.; [Joh
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048) sqq.; [Joh
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#023) sqq. Also [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001), [Joh
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007), [Joh
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010); [Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022); [Joh
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031); [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027); [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033)).

The demonstrative pronoun is habitually introduced to recall the
subject, when a clause has intervened between the subject and the verb
(see [Joh 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005); [Joh
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#018); [Joh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001); [Joh
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048); [Joh
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026); [Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026)). The personal pronoun is
frequently employed, especially that of the first person. "In this
respect," says Westcott, "much of the teaching of the Lord's discourses
depends upon the careful recognition of the emphatic reference to His
undivided personality" (see [Joh 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#014),
[Joh 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#016); [Joh
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#031)).

The quotations are commonly from the Septuagint, and never immediately
from the Hebrew.

List of Greek Words and Phrases Used by John Only

Ἅλφα Alpha [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011) τὸ Α καὶ το Ω Alpha and Omega
[Rev 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006); [Rev
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013) Ἀβαδδών Abaddon [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011) ἀγγελία message [Jo1
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#011) ἀγγέλλω to announce [Joh
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#018) αἰχμαλωσία captivity [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010) ἀκμάζω to be fully ripe [Rev
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018) ἁλιεύω to go fishing [Joh
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#003) ἀλλαχόθεν some other way [Joh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#001) ἀλληλούΐ́α hallelujah [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001), [Rev
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003), [Rev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#004), [Rev
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006) ἀλόη aloe [Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039) ἁμαρτίαν ἔχειν to have sin [Joh
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#041); [Joh
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022), [Joh
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#024); [Joh
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011). [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008) ἀμεθυστος amethyst [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) ὁ Ἀμὴν the Amen [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014) ἀμὴν, ἀμὴν verily, verily [Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051); [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003), [Joh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005); [Joh
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#019), etc. ἄν (contracted from ἐὰν) if
[Joh 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#020); [Joh
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023); [Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023) ἀνὰ εἷς ἕκαστος every several
one, [Rev 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021) ἀναμάρτητος without
sin [Joh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#007) (passage rejected)
ἀνάστασις ζωῆς ressurection of life [Joh
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029) ἀνάστασις κρίσεως ressurection of
judgment [Joh 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029) ἀνθρακιά heap of
burning coals John 18;18; [Joh 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#009)
ἀνθρωποκτόνος manslayer, murderer [Joh
8:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#044). [Jo1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#015) ἀντιχρίστος antichrist [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018), [Jo1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022); [Jo1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003). [Jo2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#007) ἀντλέω to draw (water or wine)
[Joh 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#008), [Joh
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009); [Joh
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#007), [Joh
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#015) ἄντλημα a thing to draw with [Joh
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#011) ἀπεκρίθη καὶ εἶπε he answered and
said [Joh 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019); [Joh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003); [Joh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#010), etc. ἀπέρχομαι εἰς τὰ ὀπίσω to
go or follow after [Joh 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019) Ἀπολλύων
Apollyon [Rev 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011) ἀποσυνάγωγος out of
the synagogue [Joh 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022); [Joh
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042); [Joh
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002) ἄραφος without seam [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023) ἄρκος a bear [Rev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002) Ἀρμαγεδών Armagedon [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016) ἀρξιτρίκλινος ruler of the feast
[Joh 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#008), [Joh
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#009) ὁ ἄρχων τοῦ κόσμου (τούτου) prince
of this world [Joh 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031); [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030); [Joh
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011) ἄψινθος wormwood [Rev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#011) βάλλειν σκάνδαλον ἐνώπιον to cast
a stumbling block before [Rev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014)
βαΐ́ον branch [Joh 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013) βασανισμός
torment [Rev 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#005); [Rev
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011); [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007), [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010), [Rev
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015) βάτραχος frog [Rev
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013) βήρυλλος beryl [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) βιβλαρίδιον little book [Rev
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#002), [Rev
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#008), [Rev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009), [Rev
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#010) βιβρώσκω eat [Joh
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#013) βότρυς cluster (of grapes) [Rev
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#018) βροντή thunder [Joh
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029). [Rev
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005); [Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001), etc. In [Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017), as a translation βύσσινος fine
linen [Rev 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016); [Rev
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008), [Rev
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#014) Γαββαθᾶ Gabbatha [Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013) γεγετή birth [Joh
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001) γεννηθῆναι ἄνωθεν to be born
again, or from above [Joh 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)
γεννηθῆναι ἐκ (τοῦ) Θεοῦ to be born of God [Joh
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013). [Jo1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009); [Jo1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007); [Jo1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#001), [Jo1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004), [Jo1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#018) γεννηθῆναι ἐκ (τοῦ) πνεύματος to
be born of the Spirit [Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005), [Joh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006), [Joh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008) γέρων old man [Joh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004) γλωσσόκομον bag [Joh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006); [Joh
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#029) δακρύω to weep [Joh
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035) δειλιάω to be afraid [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027) δέκατος tenth [Joh
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039). [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) τὸ δέκατον the tenth part [Rev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013) διάδημα crown [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003); [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001); [Rev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012) διαζωννύω to gird [Joh
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004), [Joh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005); [Joh
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007) διαυγής transparent [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021) Δίδυμος Didymus (twin) [Joh
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016); [Joh
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024); [Joh
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002) διπλόω to double [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006) δράκων dragon [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003), [Rev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004), [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007); [Rev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002) δωδέκατος twelfth [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) ἐγκαίνια feast of the dedication
[Joh 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022) ἐγχρίω anoint [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018) εἶναι ἐκ τοῦ κόσμου to be of the
world [Joh 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023); [Joh
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#019); [Joh
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014), [Joh
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#016); [Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036). [Jo1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016); [Jo1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005) εἶναι ἐκ τῶν ἄνω to be from above
[Joh 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023) εἶναι ἐκ τῶν κάτω to be from
beneath, [Joh 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#023) ἐκκεντέω to pierce
[Joh 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#037). [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007) ἐκνεύω to withdraw [Joh
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#013) ἐκ τοῦ αἰῶνος since the world
began [Joh 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#032) ἐλεφάντινος of ivory
[Rev 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) Ἑλληνικός Greek [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011) ἐμέω to spue [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016) ἐμπόριον merchandise [Joh
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#016) ἐμφυσάω to breathe upon [Joh
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022) ἐνδώμησις building [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018) ἐξακόσιον six hundred [Rev
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#018), [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020) ἐξέρχεσθαι ἀπὸ παρὰ τοῦ Θεοῦ to
come forth from God [Joh 8:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#042); [Joh
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#003); [Joh
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#027), [Joh
16:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#030) ἐξυπνίζω to awake one out of
sleep [Joh 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011) ἐπάρατος accursed
[Joh 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049) ἐπενδύτης upper garment [Joh
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#007) ἐπιδέχομαι to receive [Jo3
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009), [Jo3
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010) ἐπιχρίω to anoint [Joh
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006), [Joh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011) τὰ ἐρχόμενα things that are
coming [Joh 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013) (ἡ) ἐσχάτη ἡμέρα the
last day [Joh 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039), [Joh
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040), [Joh
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044), [Joh
6:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#054); [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037); [Joh
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#024); [Joh
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#048) ζηλεύω to be zealous [Rev
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#019) ζεστός hot [Rev
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#015), [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016) ἡμίωρον half an hour [Joh
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025) ὁ ἦν which was (epithet of God)
[Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004), [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008); [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008) ἤπερ than at all [Joh
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#043) ὁ θάνατος ὁ δεύτερος the second
death [Rev 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011); [Rev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014); [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008) θαῦμα (μέγα) θαυμάζειν to wonder
with with great wonder [Rev 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006)
θειώδης brimstone [Rev 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017) θεοσεβής
worshipper of God [Joh 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031) θεωρεῖν
θάνατον to see death [Joh 8:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#051) θήκη
sheath [Joh 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011) θρέμμα cattle [Joh
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#012) θύΐ́νος thyine (wood) [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) ἴασπις jasper [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003); [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011), [Rev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019) ἱλασμός propitiation [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002); [Jo1
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010) τὸ ἱππικόν cavalry [Rev
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#016) ἶρις rainbow [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003); [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001) καθαίρω to purge [Joh
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002) κατάθεμα curse [Rev
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#003) κατασφραγίζω to seal [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001) κατήγωρ accuser [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010) καῦμα heat [Rev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016); [Rev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009) κέδρος cedar [Joh
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001) κειρία swathing for a corpse [Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044) κεραννυμι to mix, mingle [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010); [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006) κέρμα small coin [Joh
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015) κερματιστής money-changer [Joh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#014) κηπουρός gardener [Joh
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#015) κιθαρῳδός harper [Rev
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#002); [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022) κιννάμωμον cinnamon [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013) κλέμμα theft [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021) κλῆμα branch [Joh
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002), [Joh
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004), [Joh
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#005), [Joh
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006) κοίμησις taking rest [Joh
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#013) κολλούριον eye-salve [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018) κολυμβήθρα pool [Joh
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002), [Joh
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#004), [Joh
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#007); [Joh
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#007), [Joh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#011) κομψότερον ἔχειν to ammend [Joh
4:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#052) κριθή barley [Rev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006) κρίθινος made or consisting of
barley [Joh 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009), [Joh
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#013) κρυσταλλίζω to be as crystal [Rev
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011) κρύσταλλος crystal [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); [Rev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001) κεκλεύω to encircle [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009) κυκλόθεν round about [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003), [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004), [Rev
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008); [Rev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011) ἡ κυριακὴ ἡμέρα The Lord's day
[Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010) λέντιον towel [Joh
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#004), [Joh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005) λιβανωτός censer [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003), [Rev
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#005) λιθόστρωτος pavement [Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013) λιπαρός dainty [Rev
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014) λίτρα pound [Joh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#003); [Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039) λόγχη spear [Joh
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034) μάρμαρος marble [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) μασσάομαι to gnaw [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010) μεσουράνημα mid-heaven [Rev
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013); [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006); [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017) μεσόω to be midway [Joh
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014) Μεσσίας Messiah [Joh
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041); [Joh
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#025) μετρητής firkin [Joh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006) μέτωπον forehead [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003); [Rev
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#004); [Rev
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#016), etc. μηρός thigh [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016) μίγμα mixture [Joh
19:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#039) μονή mansion, abode [Joh
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002), [Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023) μουσικός musician [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022) μυκάομαι to roar [Rev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#003) μύλινος made of milestones [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021) νίκη victory [Jo1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004) Νικολαΐ́της Nicolaitan [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006), [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015) νιπτήρ basin [Joh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005) νύσσω to pierce [Joh
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034) ὄζω to stink [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039) ὀθόνιον linen bandage [Joh
19:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#040); [Joh
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#005), [Joh
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#006), [Joh
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#007) ὄλυνθος untimely fig [Rev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013) ὀνάριον young ass [Joh
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#014) ὅπου ἐκεῖ where there [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006), [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014) ὀπώρα fruits [Rev
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014) ὅρασις vision, sight [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003); [Rev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017) ὅρμημα violence [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021) ὄρνεον bird [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002); [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017), [Rev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021) ἡ οὐαί the woe [Rev
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#012); [Rev
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014) οὐαὶ (with accus. of person) woe
[Rev 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#013); [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012) οὐκοῦν not then (interrogative)
[Joh 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037) οὐρά tail [Rev
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#010), [Rev
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#019); [Rev
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#004) ὀψάριον fish [Joh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009), [Joh
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#011); [Joh
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#009), [Joh
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#010), [Joh
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#013) ὄψις appearance [Joh
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024); [Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044). [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016) παιδάριον lad [Joh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009) παράκλητος Comforter, Advocate
[Joh 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016), [Joh
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026); [Joh
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#026); [Joh
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007). [Jo1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001) πάρδαλις leopard [Rev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002) πελεκίζω kill with an axe, behead
[Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004) πέμπτος fifth [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009); [Rev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001); [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010); [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) πενθερός father-in-law [Joh
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013) περιδέω to bind about [Joh
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#044) περιπατεῖν ἐν ἀληθείᾳ to walk in
the truth [Jo2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004). [Jo3
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#003), [Jo3
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#004) περιπατεῖν ἐν τῇ σκοτίᾳ or σκότει
to walk in darkness [Joh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#012); [Joh
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035). [Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006); [Jo1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#011) περιπατεῖν ἐν τῷ φωτί to walk in
the light [Jo1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007) πέτομαι to fly [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014) πλήσσω to smite [Rev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#012) πνεῦμα τῆς πλάνης spirit of error
[Jo1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#006) ποδήρης reaching to the feet
[Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013) ποιεῖν τὴν ἀλήθειαν to do
the truth [Joh 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021). [Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006) πορφυροῦς purple [Joh
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#002), [Joh
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#005). [Rev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016) ποταμοφόρητος carried away of
the flood [Rev 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015) πότερος whether
[Joh 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017) προβατική pertaining to
sheep [Joh 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002) προβάτιον little sheep
[Joh 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017) προσαιτέω to beg [Joh
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#008) προσκυνητής worshipper [Joh
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#023) προσφάγιον food [Joh
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#005) πρωΐ́νός pertaining to morning,
early [Rev 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028) ὁ πρῶτος καὶ ὁ
ἔσχατος, the first and last [Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011),
[Rev 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017); [Rev
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#013) πτέρνα heel [Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018) πτύσμα spittle [Joh
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006) πύρινος of fire [Rev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017) πυῤῥός red [Rev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004); [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003) ῥέδη (ῥέδα) chariot [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013) ὁέω to flow [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038) ῥυπαίνω to defile [Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011) ῥυπόω to be filthy [Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011) Ῥωμαΐ́στί in Latin [Joh
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020) σαλπιστής trumpeter [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022) σάπφειρος sapphire [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019) σάρδιον sardius (stone) [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) σαρδόνυξ sardonyx [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) σεμίδαλις fine flour [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013) σηρικός (σιρικός) silk [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) σίδηρος iron [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012) σκέλας leg [Joh
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#031), [Joh
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032), [Joh
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#033) σκηνοπηγία feast of tabernacles
[Joh 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002) σκηνόω to dwell [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). [Rev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015); [Rev
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#012); [Rev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006); [Rev
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#003) σμαράγδινος of emerald [Rev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#003) σμάραγδος emerald [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019) στρηνιάω to live deliciously
[Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007), [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009) στρῆνος revelry, voluptuousness
[Rev 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003) συμμαθητής fellow-discipline
[Joh 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#016) συνεισέρχομαι to accompany
into [Joh 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#022); [Joh
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015) σώματα slaves (lit. bodies) [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013) ταλαντιαῖος of a talent's weight
[Rev 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021) τεκνίον little child [Joh
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#033). [Jo1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#012), [Jo1
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#028); [Jo1
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#018); [Jo1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004); [Jo1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#021) τεταρταῖος of the fourth day [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039) τετράγωνος four-square [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016) τετράμηνος of four months [Joh
4:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#035) τιθέναι ψυχήν to lay down the
life [Joh 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#011), [Joh
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015), [Joh
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#017), [Joh
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018); [Joh
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#037), [Joh
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#038); [Joh
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013). [Jo1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016) τιμιότης costliness [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019) τίτλος title [Joh
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#019), [Joh
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#020) τόξον bow [Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002) τοπάζιον topaz [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) τρίχινος of hair [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012) ὑακίνθινος of jacinth [Rev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#017) ὑάκινθος jacinth [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) ὐάλινος of glass [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); [Rev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002) ὕαλος glass Rev. 21;18, 21 ὑδρία
water-pot [Joh 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006), [Joh
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#007); [Joh
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#028) ὑφαντός woven [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023) φανός lantern [Joh
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#003) φάρμακον drug, enchantment [Rev
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#021) φαρμακός sorcerer [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008); [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015) φιάλη bowl or saucer [Rev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008); [Rev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007); [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001), [Rev
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#002), etc. φιλοπρωτεύω to love
pre-eminence [Jo3 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009) φλυαρέω to prate
[Jo3 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#010) φοῖνιξ palm-tree [Joh
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#013), [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009) φραγέλλιον scourge [Joh
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015) χάλαζα hail [Rev
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#007); [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019); [Rev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021) χάλκεος of brass [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020) χαλκηδών chalcedony [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019) χαλκολίβανον fine brass [Rev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#015); [Rev
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018) χαμαί on the ground [Joh
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006); [Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006) χάρτης paper [Jo2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#012) χείμαῤῥος brook [Joh
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001) χλιαρός lukewarm [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016) χοῖνιξ measure, a choenix [Rev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#006) χολάω to be angry [Joh
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023) χρίσμα anointing, unction [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020), [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027) χρυσόλιθος chrysolite [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) χρυσόπρασος chrysoprasus [Rev
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#020) χρυσόω to make golden [Rev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004); [Rev
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#016) ψωμίον sop [Joh
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#026), [Joh
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#027), [Joh
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#030)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 1](joh001)

</div>
