<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk001)  [Next](luk003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)

[Luke 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 2:1</span></span>

Decree (δόγμα)

Wyc., mandment. From δοκέω, to think. Hence, strictly, a personal
opinion; and, as the opinion of one who can impose his opinion
authoritatively on others, a decree.

The world (τὴν οἰκουμένην)

Lit., the inhabited (land). The phrase was originally used by the Greeks
to denote the land inhabited by themselves, in contrast with barbarian
countries; afterward, when the Greeks became subject to the Romans, the
entire Roman world; still later, for the whole inhabited world. In the
New Testament this latter is the more common usage, though, in some
cases, this is conceived in the mould of the Roman empire, as in this
passage, [Act 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028); [Act
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#027). Christ uses it in the
announcement that the Gospel shall be preached in all the world ([Mat
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)); and Paul in the prediction of
a general judgment ([Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031)). Once
it is used of the world to come ([Heb
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005)).

Be taxed (ἀπογράφεσθαι)

The word means properly to register or enter in a list. Commentators are
divided as to whether it refers to an enrolment for taxation, or for
ascertaining the population. Rev., enrolled, which may be taken in
either sense.

[Luke 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 2:2</span></span>

And this taxing was first made (αὕτη ἡ ἀπογραφὴ πρώτη ἐγένετο)

Rather, this occurred as the first enrolment ; or, as Rev., this was the
first enrolment made; with reference to a second enrolment which took
place about eleven years later, and is referred to in [Act
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#037).

[Luke 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 2:3</span></span>

Went (ἐπορεύοντο)

The A. V. and Rev. alike miss the graphic force of the imperfect tense,
were going. The preparation and bustle and travel were in progress.

To his own city

The town to which the village or place of their birth belonged, and
where the house and lineage of each were registered.

[Luke 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 2:4</span></span>

House and lineage

According to the Jewish mode of registration the people would be
enrolled by tribe, families or clans, and households. Compare [Jos
7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016). Rev., house and family.

[Luke 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 2:5</span></span>

To be taxed with Mary

We may read either, went up with Mary, denoting merely the fact of her
accompanying him; or, to enrol himself with Mary, implying that both
their names must be registered.

Espoused

Not merely betrothed. See [Mat 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020),
[Mat 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#024), [Mat
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#025); also see on [Mat
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#018).

Great with child (ἐγκύῳ)

See on [Luk 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#024). Only here in New
Testament.

[Luke 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 2:7</span></span>

Her first-born son

The Greek reads literally, her son, the first-born.

Wrapped in swaddling-clothes (ἐσπαργάνωσεν)

Only here and [Luk 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012). Naturally
found often in medical writings. Swaddle is swathed, from the verb to
swathe.

In a manger (ἐν φάτνῃ)

Used by Luke only, here and [Luk
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#015). Wyc. has a cracche, spelt also
cratch. Compare French crche, a manger. Quite possibly a rock-cave. Dr.
Thomson says: "I have seen many such, consisting of one or more rooms,
in front of and including a cavern where the cattle were kept" ("Land
and Book").

In the inn (ἐν τῷ καταλύματι)

Only here, [Luk 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#011); [Mar
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#014), on which see note. In both
these passages it is rendered guest-chamber, which can hardly be the
meaning here, as some have maintained. (See Geikie, "Life and Words of
Christ," i., 121.) In that case the expression would be, they found no
κατάλυμα, guest-chamber. The word refers to the ordinary khan, or
caravanserai. Tynd., hostrey. "A Syrian khan is a fort and a mart; a
refuge from thieves; a shelter from the heat and dust; a place where a
man and his beast may lodge; where a trader may sell his wares, and a
pilgrim may slake his thirst....Where built by a great sheikh, it would
have a high wall, an inner court, a range of arches or lewans, an open
gallery round the four sides, and, in many cases, a tower from which the
watcher might descry the approach of marauding bands. On one side of the
square, but outside the wall, there is often a huddle of sheds, set
apart from the main edifice, as stables for the asses and camels, the
buffaloes and goats. In the centre of the khan springs a fountain of
water, the first necessity of an Arab's life; and around the jets and
troughs in which the limpid element streams, lies the gay and
picturesque litter of the East. Camels wait to be unloaded; dogs quarrel
for a bone; Bedaween from the desert, their red zannars choked with
pistols, are at prayer. In the archways squat the merchants with their
bales of goods....Half-naked men are cleansing their hands ere sitting
down to eat. Here a barber is at work upon a shaven crown; there a
fellah lies asleep in the shade....Each man has to carry his dinner and
his bed; to litter his horse or camel; to dress his food; to draw his
water; to light his fire, and to boil his mess of herbs" (Hepworth
Dixon, "The Holy Land").

[Luke 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 2:8</span></span>

Shepherds

Luke's Gospel is the gospel of the poor and lowly. This revelation to
the shepherds acquires additional meaning as we remember that shepherds,
as a class, were under the Rabbinic ban, because of their necessary
isolation from religious ordinances, and their manner of life, which
rendered strict legal observance well-nigh impossible.

Keeping watch (φυλάσσοντες φυλακὰς)

Φυλακή is sometimes used of a watch as a measure of time, as in [Mat
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025); [Mar
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#048); [Luk
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#038). So possibly here. See Rev. in
margin, night-watches. There is a play upon the words: watching watches.
There was near Bethlehem, on the road to Jerusalem, a tower known as
Migdal Eder, or the watch-tower of the flock. Here was the station where
shepherds watched the flocks destined for sacrifice in the temple.
Animals straying from Jerusalem on any side, as far as from Jerusalem to
Migdal Eder, were offered in sacrifice. It was a settled conviction
among the Jews that the Messiah was to be born in Bethlehem, and equally
that he was to be revealed from Migdal Eder. The beautiful significance
of the revelation of the infant Christ to shepherds watching the flocks
destined for sacrifice needs no comment.

Their flock (τὴν ποίμνην)

May not the singular number fall in with what has just been said? - the
flock, the temple-flock, specially devoted to sacrifice. The pronoun
their would furnish no objection, since it is common to speak of the
flock as belonging to the shepherd. Compare [Joh
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#003), [Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004).

[Luke 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 2:9</span></span>

Behold

Omitted by the best texts.

The angel

More correctly an angel, as Rev. The Greek has no article.

Came upon (ἐπέστη)

The word is used in this sense in classical Greek, as well as in that of
to stand by, which Rev. prefers here, as in [Act
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#007). In [Luk
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038) of this chapter, Rev. renders
coming up. The rendering to come upon has a hostile flavor, as properly
in [Act 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005), where the verb is
rendered assaulted; so that the Rev. rendering here is preferable.

They were sore afraid

Lit., feared with great fear.

[Luke 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 2:10</span></span>

I bring you good tidings of great joy (εὐαγγελίζομαι ὑμῖν χαρὰν μεγάλην)

Wyc. is strictly literal: I evangelize to you a great joy.

Which (ἥτις)

Of a class or character which, etc.

People (τῷ λαῷ)

Rev., rightly, "the people;" the article pointing specially to the
people of Israel.

[Luke 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 2:11</span></span>

Is born (ἐτέχθη)

It adds to the vividness of the narrative to keep to the strict
rendering of the aorist, was born.

A Saviour

See on [Mat 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021).

Christ

See on [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

Lord

See on [Mat 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#003).

[Luke 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 2:12</span></span>

Sign (σημεῖον).

See on [Mat 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020).

The babe (βρέφος)

See on [Pe1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002). Rev., properly, "a
babe." No article

[Luke 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 2:13</span></span>

A multitude of the heavenly host

Host (στρατιας) is literally army. "Here the army announces peace"
(Bengel). Wyc., heavenly knighthood. Tynd., heavenly soldiers.

[Luke 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 2:14</span></span>

Peace, good-will toward men (εἰρήνη ἐν ἀνθρώποις εὐδοκία)

Both Tischendorf and Westcott and Hort read εὐδοκίας which the Rev.
follows. According to this the rendering is, unto men of good pleasure,
or as Rev., among men in whom he is well pleased. Wyc., to men of
good-will. For a similar construction, see [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015); [Col
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#013).

[Luke 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 2:15</span></span>

The shepherds

Some texts add οἱ ἄνθρωποι, the men; but the later texts omit.

Let us go (διέλθωμεν)

The preposition διά, through, implies through the intervening space.

Thing (ῥῆμα)

See on [Luk 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#037). The utterance of the
shepherds contains a climax: "Let us go and see this saying, which has
come to pass; which the Lord made known."

[Luke 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 2:16</span></span>

Found (ἀνεῦραν)

Only here and [Act 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004). Ἀνά indicates
the discovery of the facts in succession.

Mary and Joseph and the babe

Each has the article, pointing to the several parties already referred
to.

[Luke 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 2:17</span></span>

They made known

See on [Luk 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008). These shepherds,
having charge of flocks devoted to sacrifice, would presently be in the
temple, and would meet those who came to worship and to sacrifice, and
so proclaim the Messiah in the temple.

[Luke 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 2:19</span></span>

Kept (συνετήρει)

See on the simple verb τηρέω, on [Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004). The word signifies not merely to
guard, but to keep, as the result of guarding. Hence the compound verb
is very expressive: kept, σύν, with or within herself: closely. Note the
imperfect tense: was keeping all the while.

Pondered (συμβάλλουσα)

The present participle, pondering. Lit., bringing together: comparing
and weighing facts. Wyc., bearing together in her heart. Vulg.,
conferens. Compare Sophocles, "Oedipus Coloneus," 1472-4.

"Oedipus. My children, the heaven-ordained end of life has come upon him
who stands here, and there is no avoiding it.

"Antigone. How dost thou know, and with what (fact) having compared
(συμβαλὼν) thine opinion hast thou this ?"

[Luke 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 2:22</span></span>

The days of her purification (αἱ ἡμέραι τοῦ καθαρισμοῦ αὐτῆς)

The A. V. follows the reading αὐτῆς, her: but all the best texts read
αὐτῶν, their; the plural including Joseph with Mary as partaking of the
ceremonial defilement. The mother of a child was levitically unclean for
forty days after the birth of a son, and for eighty days after the birth
of a daughter. Women on this errand commonly rode to the temple on oxen;
that the body of so large a beast between them and the ground might
prevent any chance of defilement from passing over a sepulchre on the
road. For details, see Edersheim, "Life and Times of Jesus," i., 195;
"The Temple," p. 302; Geikie, "Life and Words of Christ," i., 127.

To present him to the Lord

The first-born son of every household must be redeemed of the priest at
the price of five shekels of the sanctuary; about two dollars and fifty
cents. [Num 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015), [Num
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#016); [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002).

[Luke 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 2:23</span></span>

The law of the Lord

The word law occurs in this chapter five times; oftener than in all the
rest of this Gospel put together. Luke emphasizes the fact that Jesus"
was made under the law" ([Gal 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)),
and accordingly elaborates the details of the fulfilment of the law by
the parents of both John and Jesus.

[Luke 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 2:24</span></span>

A pair of turtle-doves, or two young pigeons

The offering of the poor. While the lamb would probably cost about one
dollar and seventy-five cents, the doves would cost about sixteen cents.
She would not bring the creatures themselves, but would drop the price
into one of the thirteen trumpet-shaped chests in the Court of the
Women. Young pigeons: lit., young ones of pigeons (νοσσοὺς περιστερῶν).
Wyc. has culver-birds; culver being an old English term for dove. So
Spenser:

"More light than culver in the falcon's fist."

[Luke 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 2:25</span></span>

Devout (εὐλαβής)

Used by Luke only. The kindred word, εὐλάβεια, godly-fear, occurs twice'
[Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007); [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028). From εὖ, well, and λαμβάνω, to
take hold of. Hence of a circumspect or cautious person who takes hold
of things carefully. As applied to morals and religion, it emphasizes
the element of circumspection, a cautious, careful observance of divine
law; and is thus peculiarly expressive of Old Testament piety, with its
minute attention to precept and ceremony. Compare [Act
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005).

Consolation of Israel

Compare hope of Israel, [Act 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020),
and [Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001). The Messianic blessing
of the nation. Of the Messiah himself, Rest. See [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010). A common form of adjuration
among the Jews was, So may I see the consolation

[Luke 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 2:26</span></span>

It was revealed (ἧν κεχρηματισμένον)

Lit., it was having been revealed; i.e., it stood revealed, while he
waited for the fulfilment of the revelation. The verb means primarily to
have dealings with; thence to consult or debate about business matters;
and so of an oracle, to give a response to one consulting it. The word
here implies that the revelation to Simeon had been given in answer to
prayer. See on [Mat 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#012).

[Luke 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 2:27</span></span>

By the Spirit (ἐν τῷ πνεύματι)

Lit., as Rev., "in the Spirit'" the Holy Spirit prompting him.
Indicating rather his spiritual condition, as one who walked with God,
than a special divine impulse.

After the custom (κατὰ τὸ εἰθισμένον)

Lit., according to that which was wont to be done. Only here in New
Testament; and the kindred words, ἔθος custom, and ἔθω, to be
accustomed, occur more frequently in Luke than elsewhere. Very common in
medical writings.

[Luke 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 2:29</span></span>

Lettest thou thy servant depart (ἀπολύεις τὸν δοῦλόν σου)

Lit., thou dost release. The word is often used of manumitting or
setting free on payment of ransom; and as Simeon uses the word for
bond-servant, it is evident that his death is conceived by him under the
figure of enfranchisement from service. Godet's "release of a sentinel
from duty" is fanciful.

O Lord (δέσποτα)

See on [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001).

In peace

Rev. properly puts this in its emphatic position at the end of the
sentence.

[Luke 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 2:31</span></span>

Of all people (πάντων τῶν λαῶν)

The noun is plural, the peoples, and refers equally to the Gentiles. See
Introduction, on the universality of Luke's Gospel. Wyc., all peoples;
and so Rev.

[Luke 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 2:32</span></span>

A light (φῶς)

The light itself as distinguished from λύχνος, a lamp, which the A. V.
often unfortunately renders light. See on [Mar
14:54](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#054).

To lighten (εἰς ἀποκάλυψιν)

Wrong. Rev., correctly, for revelation. Wyc., to the shewing. It may be
rendered the unveiling of the Gentiles.

Gentiles (ἐθνῶν)

Assigned to the same root as ἔθω, to be accustomed, and hence of a
people bound together by like habits or customs. According to biblical
usage the term is understood of people who are not of Israel, and who
therefore occupy a different position with reference to the plan of
salvation. Hence the extension of the gospel salvation to them is
treated as a remarkable fact. See [Mat
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#018), [Mat
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#021); [Mat
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014); [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019); [Act
10:45](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#045); [Act
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#018); [Act
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#006). Paul is called distinctively an
apostle and teacher of the Gentiles, and a chosen vessel to bear
Christ's name among them. In [Act
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009); [Eph
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011), [Eph
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#018); [Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006), we see this difference
annihilated, and the expression at last is merely historical designation
of the non-Israelitish nations which, as such, were formerly without God
and salvation. See [Act 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023); [Rom
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#004); [Eph
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#001). Sometimes the word is used in a
purely moral sense, to denote the heathen in opposition to Christians.
See [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001); [Co1
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020); [Pe1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#012). Light is promised here to the
Gentiles and glory to Israel. The Gentiles are regarded as in darkness
and ignorance. Some render the words εἰς ἀποκάλυψιν, above, for the
unveiling of the Gentiles, instead of for revelation. Compare [Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007). Israel, however, has already
received light by the revelation of God through the law and the
prophets, and that light will expand into glory through Christ. Through
the Messiah, Israel will attain its true and highest glory.

[Luke 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 2:33</span></span>

And Joseph

The best texts read ὁ πατὴρ αὐτοῦ his father.

Marvelled (ἦν θαυμάζοντες)

The Greek construction is peculiar. His father was and his mother
wondering; the finite verb in the singular agreeing with the father,
while the plural participle agrees with both. As usual, this combination
of finite verb and participle denotes continuance or progression: they
were marvelling while Simeon was speaking. So Rev.

[Luke 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 2:34</span></span>

Them

The parents; the child being separately and specially designated.

Is set (κεῖται)

The verb means primarily to be laid, and so to lie: hence to be set
forth or promulgated, as the law is said to be laid down, and so,
appointed or destined, as here.

The fall and rising again (πτῶσιν καὶ ἀνάστασιν)

For the fall, because he will be a stumbling-block to many ([Isa
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014); [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042), [Mat
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#044); [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011); [Rom
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033); [Co1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)). For the rising, because many
will be raised up through him to life and glory ([Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004), [Rom
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#009); [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006)). The A. V. predicates the falling
and the rising of the same persons: the fall and rising again of many.
The Rev., the falling and rising up of many, is ambiguous. The American
Revisers give it correctly: the falling and the rising.

Which shall be spoken against (ἀντιλεγόμενον)

The participle is the present; and the expression does not voice a
prophecy, but describes an inherent characteristic of the sign: a sign
of which it is the character to experience contradiction from the world.
In the beginning, as a babe, Jesus experienced this at the hands of
Herod; so all through his earthly ministry and on the cross; and so it
will be to the end, until he shall have put all enemies under his feet.
Compare [Heb 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#003). Wyc., a token to
whom it shall be gainsaid.

[Luke 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 2:35</span></span>

A sword (ῥομφαία)

Strictly, a large Thracian broadsword. Used in Septuagint of the sword
of Goliath (1 Samuel 17:51). A figure of Mary's pang when her son should
be nailed to the cross.

[Luke 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 2:36</span></span>

A prophetess (προφῆτις)

Only here and [Rev 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020).

Asher

That tribe was celebrated in tradition for the beauty of its women, and
their fitness to be wedded to high-priests or kings.

Of great age (προβεβηκυῖα ἐν ἡμέραις πολλαῖς)

Lit., advanced in many days.

[Luke 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 2:37</span></span>

Of about fourscore and four years (ὡς ἐτῶν ὀγδοήκοντα τεσσάρων)

The A. V. might be supposed to be stating her age; but the best texts
read ἕως, until, instead of ὡς about; and the statement refers to the
time of her widowhood; a widow even for (or up to) fourscore and four
years. So Rev.

Served (λατρεύουσα)

The present participle, serving. Rev., worshipping. See on [Luk
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074).

[Luke 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 2:38</span></span>

Coming up (ἐπιστᾶσα)

See on [Luk 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#009).

Gave thanks (ἀνθωμολογεῖτο)

The verb originally means to make a mutual agreement; and the idea of
reciprocity is retained in the expression "to return thanks" for
something received. Compare Sept., Psalms 79:13.

Spake

Not a public utterance, for which the words, those that waited, etc.,
would be inappropriate. It was to the pious ones who were with her in
the temple, waiting for the Messiah.

In Jerusalem (ἐν Ἰερουσαλήμ)

All the best texts omit ἐν, in. Render, as Rev., the redemption of
Jerusalem. Nearly equivalent to the consolation of Israel, [Luk
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025). Compare [Luk
1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068), and see [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002).

[Luke 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 2:39</span></span>

Nazareth

See on [Mat 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023).

[Luke 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 2:40</span></span>

The child grew, etc

The Jews marked the stages of a child's development by nine different
terms: the new-born babe ([Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006));
the suckling ([Isa 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008)); the suckling
beginning to ask for food ([Lam 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004));
the weaned child ([Isa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)); the
child clinging to its mother ([Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007)); the child becoming firm and
strong ([Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), of the
virgin-mother); the youth, literally, he that shakes himself free; the
ripened one, or warrior ([Isa 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008)).

[Luke 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 2:41</span></span>

His parents

Though women were not bound to present themselves in person.

[Luke 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 2:42</span></span>

Twelve years old

At which age he was known as a son of the law, and came under obligation
to observe the ordinances personally.

[Luke 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 2:43</span></span>

Had fulfilled the days

Not necessarily the whole seven days of the festival. With the third day
commenced the so-called half-holidays, when it was lawful to return
home.

[Luke 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 2:44</span></span>

The company (συνοδίᾀ)

From σύν, with, and ὁδός, the way. The company that shared the journey.

Went a day's journey

Before they missed him.

They sought (ἀνεζήτουν)

From ἀνὰ, from the bottom up, and ζητέω, to seek. Thus implying a
thorough search: they looked for him up and down.

[Luke 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 2:45</span></span>

Seeking him (ἀναζητοῦντες)

All the way as they went. Force of ἀνὰ, as above.

[Luke 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 2:46</span></span>

After three days

From the time of separation.

In the temple

"We read in the Talmud that the members of the Temple-Sanhedrin, who, on
ordinary days, sat as a court of appeal from the close of the morning to
the time of the evening sacrifice, were wont, upon Sabbaths and
feast-days, to come out upon the terrace of the temple, and there to
teach. In such popular instruction the utmost latitude of questioning
would be given. It is in this audience, which sat upon the ground,
surrounding and mingling with the doctors, and hence during, not after,
the feast, that we must seek the child Jesus" (Edersheim, "Life and
Times," etc., 1:247). From this, Edersheim argues that the parents set
out for home before the close of the feast.

Sitting

Not occupying a teacher's place, but sitting in the circle among the
doctors and their hearers. See above. Compare [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003).

[Luke 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 2:47</span></span>

Understanding (συνέσει)

From συνίημι, to bring together. Hence that quality of mind which
combines: understanding not only of facts, but of facts in their mutual
relations. See on [Mar 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033); where
there is meant "the love of a well-pondered and duly considered
resolution which determines the whole person; the love which clearly
understands itself" (Cremer).

[Luke 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 2:48</span></span>

They were amazed (ἐξεπλάγησαν)

A very strong word; the verb meaning, literally, to strike out or drive
away from; and so to drive out of one's senses. Hence in the general
sense of great amazement. Amaze is to throw into a maze or labyrinth;
and so is closely akin to the Greek word here, and is a faithful
rendering.

Son (τέκνον)

Lit., child. See on [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001).

Thy father

"Up to this time Joseph had been so called by the holy child himself;
but from this time never" (Alford).

Have sought (ἐζητοῦμεν)

Imperfect tense: were seeking; Mary is going over in mind the process of
the search.

[Luke 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 2:49</span></span>

And he said

The first saying of Jesus which is preserved to us.

Must (δεῖ)

Lit., it is necessary, or it behoves. A word often used by Jesus
concerning his own appointed work, and expressing both the inevitable
fulfilment of the divine counsels and the absolute constraint of the
principle of duty upon himself. See [Mat
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#021); [Mat
26:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#054); [Mar
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#031); [Luk
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043); [Luk
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#022); [Luk
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#033); [Luk
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#007), [Luk
24:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#026), [Luk
24:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#046); [Joh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#014); [Joh
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#004); [Joh
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034).

About my Father's business (ἐν τοῖς τοῦ πατρός)

Lit., in the things of my Father. The words will bear this rendering;
but the Rev. is better, in my Father's house. Mary's question was not as
to what her son had been doing, but as to where he had been. Jesus, in
effect, answers, "Where is a child to be found but in his Father's
house?"

[Luke 2:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 2:50</span></span>

The saying (τὸ ῥῆμα)

See on [Luk 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#037).

[Luke 2:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 2:51</span></span>

Was subject (ἦν ὑποτασσόμενος)

The participle and finite verb, denoting habitual, continuous
subjection. "Even before, he had been subject to them; but this is
mentioned now, when it might seem that he could by this time have
exempted himself. Not even to the angels fell such an honor as to the
parents of Jesus" (Bengel). Compare [Heb
1:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004).

Kept (διετήρει)

Only here and [Act 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029). The
preposition διά, through, indicates close, faithful, persistent keeping,
through all the circumstances which might have weakened the impression
of the events. Compare [Gen 37:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#011).

[Luke 2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 2:52</span></span>

Stature (ἡλικία)

Which Rev. rightly retains. The word may be rendered age, which would be
superfluous here.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 3](luk003)

</div>
