<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mar004)  [Next](mar006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#001)

[Mark 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 5:3</span></span>

The details of [Mar 5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003) are peculiar
to Mark. "The picture of the miserable man is fearful; and in drawing
it, each evangelist has some touches which are peculiarly his own; but
St. Mark's is the most eminently graphic of all, adding, as it does,
many strokes which wonderfully heighten the terribleness of the man's
condition, and also magnify the glory of his cure" (Trench, "Miracles").

Dwelling (κατοίκησιν)

The κατὰ, down, gives the sense of a settled habitation. Compare our
phrase settled down. So Tynd., his abiding.

The tombs (τοῖς μνήμασιν)

"In unclean places, unclean because of the dead men's bones which were
there. To those who did not on this account shun them, these tombs of
the Jews would afford ample shelter, being either natural caves or
recesses hewn by art out of the rock, often so large as to be supported
with columns, and with cells upon their sides for the reception of the
dead. Being, too, without the cities, and oftentimes in remote and
solitary places, they would attract those who sought to flee from all
fellowship of their kind" (Trench, "Miracles").

[Mark 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 5:4</span></span>

With fetters and chains (πέδαις καὶ ἁλύσεσιν)

πέδη, fetter, is akin to πέζα, the instep; just as the Latin pedica, a
shackle, is related to pes, a foot. The Anglo-Saxon plural of fot (foot)
is fet; so that fetter is feeter. So Chaucer:

"The pure fetters on his shinnes grete

Were of his bitter salte teres wete."

Αλυσιν (derivation uncertain) is a chain, a generic word, denoting a
bond which might be on any part of the body.

Broken in pieces (συντετρῖφθαι)

The verb συντρίβω means originally to rub together, to grind or crush.
It has been suggested that the fetters might have been of cords which
could be rubbed to pieces. Wyc. renders, Had broken the stocks to small
gobbets.

[Mark 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 5:5</span></span>

Crying (κράζων)

Rev., crying out. The verb denotes an inarticulate cry; a shriek.
Aristophanes uses it of the frogs ("Ranae," 258), and of the bawling of
a boor ("Equites," 285).

[Mark 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 5:6</span></span>

Afar off (ἀπὸ μακρόθεν)

Peculiar to Mark, as is also he ran.

[Mark 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 5:7</span></span>

Crying - he saith

The inarticulate cry ([Mar 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#005)), and
then the articulate speech.

What have I to do with thee? (τί ἐμοὶ καὶ σοὶ)

Lit., what is there to me and thee ? What have we in common?

I adjure thee by God

Stronger than Luke's I pray thee. The verb ὁρκίζω, I adjure, is
condemned by the grammarians as inelegant.

[Mark 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 5:8</span></span>

For he said (ἔλεγεν)

Imperfect tense, he was saying; the force of which is lost both in the
A. V. and Rev. The imperfect gives the reason for this strange entreaty
of the demon. Jesus was commanding, was saying "come out;" and, as in
the case of the epileptic child at the Transfiguration Mount, the
baffled spirit wreaked his malice on the man. The literal rendering of
the imperfect brings out the simultaneousness of Christ's exorcism, the
outbreak of demoniac malice, and the cry Torment me not.

[Mark 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 5:13</span></span>

Ran (ὥρμησεν)

The verb indicates hasty, headlong motion. Hence, as Rev., rushed.

Two Thousand.

As usual, Mark alone gives the detail of number.

A steep place

But the noun has the definite article: τοῦ κρημνοῦ, the steep, as Rev.

[Mark 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 5:15</span></span>

See (θεωροῦσιν)

Rev., rightly, behold. For it was more than simple seeing. The verb
means looking stedfastly, as one who has an interest in the object, and
with a view to search into and understand it: to look inquiringly and
intently.

Clothed

Compare [Luk 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#027). For a long time he
had worn no clothes.

[Mark 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 5:18</span></span>

When he was come (ἐμβαίνοντος αὐτοῦ)

The participle is in the present tense. Not after he had embarked, but
while he was in the act. Hence Rev., rightly, as he was entering. With
this corresponds the graphic imperfect παρεκάλει: While he was stepping
into the boat the restored man was beseeching him.

That (ἵνα)

In order that. Not the subject but the aim of the entreaty.

[Mark 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 5:23</span></span>

My little daughter (τὸ θυγάτριον)

This little endearing touch in the use of the diminutive is peculiar to
Mark.

Lieth at the point of death (ἐσχάτως ἔχει)

One of the uncouth phrases peculiar to Mark's style, and which are cited
by some as evidence of the early composition of his gospel.

I pray thee come (ἵνα ἐλθὼν)

The words I pray thee are not in the Greek. Literally the ruler's words
run thus: My little daughter lieth at the point of death - that thou
come, etc. In his anguish he speaks brokenly and incoherently.

He went (ἐπῆλθεν)

Lit., went away. The aorist tense, denoting action once for all, is in
contrast with the imperfects, ἠκολούθει, kept following, and συνέθλιβον,
kept thronging. The multitude kept following and thronging as he went
along. The preposition σύν, together, in the latter verb, indicates the
united pressure of a crowd. Compare Tynd., [Mar
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#031). Thrusting thee on every side.

[Mark 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 5:26</span></span>

Mark is much fuller and more vivid than Matthew or Luke.

Had suffered (παθοῦσα)

To be taken, as everywhere in the New Testament, in the sense of
suffering pain, not merely subjected to treatment. What she may have
suffered will appear from the prescription for the medical treatment of
such a complaint given in the Talmud. "Take of the gum of Alexandria the
weight of a zuzee (a fractional silver coin); of alum the same; of
crocus the same. Let them be bruised together, and given in wine to the
woman that has an issue of blood. If this does not benefit, take of
Persian onions three logs (pints); boil them in wine, and give her to
drink, and say, 'Arise from thy flux.' If this does not cure her, set
her in a place where two ways meet, and let her hold a cup of wine in
her right hand, and let some one come behind and frighten her, and say,
' Arise from thy flux.' But if that do no good, take a handful of cummin
(a kind of fennel), a handful of crocus, and a handful of fenugreek
(another kind of fennel). Let these be boiled in wine and give them her
to drink, and say, ' Arise from thy flux !'" If these do no good, other
doses, over ten in number, are prescribed, among them this: "Let them
dig seven ditches, in which let them burn some cuttings of vines, not
yet four years old. Let her take in her hand a cup of wine, and let them
lead her away from this ditch, and make her sit down over that. And let
them remove her from that, and make her sit down over another, saying to
her at each remove, 'Arise from thy flux!'" (Quoted from Lightfoot by
Geikie, "Life and Words of Christ").

Of many physicians (ὑπὸ)

Lit., under; i.e., under the hands of.

And was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse

Luke's professional pride as a physician kept him from such a statement.
Compare [Luk 8:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#043).

[Mark 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 5:28</span></span>

For she said (ἔλεγεν)

Imperfect tense. She was or kept saying as she pressed through the
crowd, either to herself or to others.

[Mark 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 5:29</span></span>

She knew - she was healed

Note the graphic change in the tenses. ἔλνω, she knew; ἰάται, she is
healed.

Plague

See on [Mar 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#010).

[Mark 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 5:30</span></span>

Knowing (ἐπιγνοὺς)

Rev., perceiving. Lit., having fully known.

That virtue had gone out of him (τὴν ἐξ αὐτοῦ δύναμιν ἐξελθοῦσαν)

More correctly as Rev., that the power proceeding from him had gone
forth. The object of the Saviour's knowledge was thus complex: 1st, his
power; 2d, that his power had gone forth. This and the following
sentence are peculiar to Mark.

[Mark 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 5:32</span></span>

He looked round about (περιεβλέπετο)

Imperfect tense. He kept looking around for the woman, who had hidden
herself in the crowd.

[Mark 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 5:34</span></span>

In peace (εἰς εἰρήνην)

Lit., into peace. Contemplating the peace in store for her. Mark alone
adds, Be whole of ray plague.

[Mark 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 5:35</span></span>

From the ruler of the synagogue

From his house; for the ruler himself is addressed.

Troublest (σκύλλεις)

See on [Mat 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#036). Compare [Luk
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022), where occurs the cognate word
σκῦλα, spoils, things torn or stripped from an enemy. Wyc., travailest.
Tynd., diseasest.

[Mark 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 5:36</span></span>

Heard

This is from the reading ἀκούσας, ([Luk
8:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#050)). The correct reading is
παρακούσας, which may be rendered either not heeding, as Rev. (compare
[Mat 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#017)), or over-hearing, as Rev.
in margin, which, on the whole, seems the more natural. Disregarding
would be more appropriate if the message had been addressed to Jesus
himself; but it was addressed to the ruler. Jesus overheard it. The
present participle, λαλούμενον, being spoken, seems to fall in with
this.

[Mark 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 5:38</span></span>

Seeth (θεωρεῖ)

Rev., beholdeth. See on [Mar 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#015).

Wailing (ἀλαλάζοντας)

A descriptive word of the hired mourners crying al-a-lai!

[Mark 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 5:40</span></span>

Put them out

"Wonderful authority in the house of a stranger. He was really master of
the house" (Bengel). Only Mark relates the taking of the parents with
the three disciples into the chamber.

[Mark 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 5:41</span></span>

Maid (κοράσιον)

Not a classical word, but used also by Matthew.

[Mark 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 5:42</span></span>

Astonishment (ἐκστάσει)

Better Rev., amazement, which carries the sense of bewilderment.
Ἔκστασις, of which the English ecstasy is a transcript, is from ἐκ, out
of, and ἵστημι, to place or put. Its primitive sense, therefore, is that
of removal; hence of a man removed out of his senses. In Biblical Greek
it is used in a modified sense, as here, [Mar
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#008); [Luk
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#026); [Act
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#010), of amazement, often coupled with
fear. In [Act 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#010); [Act
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#005); [Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017), it is used in the sense of our
word ecstasy, and is rendered trance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 6](mar006)

</div>
