<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Mark Index](mar)  
  [Previous](mat028)  [Next](mar001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

[Mark](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mar 0:0</span></span>

The Gospel According to Mark

Introduction

Mark the Evangelist is, by the best authorities, identified with John
Mark, the son of Mary. The surname Mark was adopted for use among the
Gentiles; Mark (Marcus) being one of the commonest Latin names (compare
Marcus Tullius Cicero, Marcus Aurelius), as John was one of the
commonest Hebrew names. Mark was a cousin of Barnabas, and was, from a
very early period, the intimate friend and associate of Peter ([Act
12:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#011)), who affectionately refers
to him as "my son" at the close of his first epistle. The general
opinion of the fathers, as well as that of modern authorities, is that
Mark drew the great mass of his materials from the oral discourses of
Peter. This opinion was perpetuated in Christian art, in representations
of Peter seated on a throne with Mark kneeling before him and writing
from his dictation; Mark sitting and writing, and Peter standing before
him, with his hand raised, dictating; and Peter in a pulpit, preaching
to the Romans, and Mark taking down his words in a book (see Mrs.
Jameson, "Sacred and Legendary Art," 1:149).

This opinion finds support in the evidences of Peter's influence upon
the style of this Gospel. The restlessness and impetuosity of Mark's
disposition, of which we have hints in his forsaking Paul and Barnabas
at Perga ([Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013); [Act
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)), in his subsequent readiness to
join them on the second missionary journey ([Act
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)), and, if the tradition be
accepted, in his rushing into the street on the night of Christ's
arrest, clad only in a linen sheet ([Mar
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051), [Mar
14:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#052)), would naturally be in sympathy
with the well-known character of Peter. Peter was a man of observation
and action rather than of reflection; impulsive and impetuous. "When we
assume," says Dr. Morison, "that Mark drew directly from the
discoursings of St. Peter, then we understand how it comes to pass that
it is in his pages that we have the most particular account of that
lamentable denial of his Lord of which the apostle was guilty. On no
other person's memory would the minute particulars of the prediction,
and of its unanticipated fulfilment, be so indelibly engraven. It is
also noteworthy that, while the very severe rebuke which our Lord
administered to St. Peter in the neighborhood of Caesarea Philippi is
faithfully and circumstantially recorded in Mark's pages, the splendid
eulogium and distinguishing blessing, which had been previously
pronounced, are, as it were, modestly passed by. Doubtless the great
apostle would not be guilty of making frequent or egotistic references
to such marks of distinction" ("Commentary on Mark").

Unlike the other gospels, Mark's narrative is not subordinated to the
working out of any one idea. Matthew's memoirs turn on the relation of
Christ to the law and the prophets. He throws a bridge from the old
economy to the new. His is the Gospel as related to the past, the Gospel
of Christianity regarded as the fulfilment of Judaism. Luke exhibits
Jesus as a Saviour, and expounds the freeness and universality of the
Gospel, and the sacredness of humanity. John wrote that then might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, and might have life in him. While
Matthew and Luke deal with his offices, John deals with his person. John
carries forward the piers of Matthew's bridge toward that perfected
heavenly economy of which his Apocalypse reveals glimpses. In Matthew
Jesus is the Messiah; in John, the Eternal Word. In Matthew he is the
fulfiller of the law; in John he foreshadows the grander and richer
economy of the Spirit.

Mark, on the other hand, is a chronicler rather than a historian. His
narrative is the record of an observer, dealing with the facts of
Christ's life without reference to any dominant conception of his person
or office. Christ's portrait is drawn "in the clearness of his present
energy;" not as the fulfilment of the past, as by Matthew, nor as the
foundation of the future, as by John. His object is to portray Jesus in
his daily life, "in the awe-inspiring grandeur of his human personality,
as a man who was also the Incarnate, the wonder-working Son of God."
Hence his first words are the appropriate keynote of his Gospel: "The
beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God."

Such a narrative might have been expected from Peter, with his
keen-sightedness, his habit of observation, and his power of graphically
describing what he was so quick to perceive. There is, of course, less
room for the exhibition of these traits in his epistles, though they
emerge even there in certain peculiar and picturesque words, and in
expressions which reflect incidents of his personal association with
Christ. Those brief epistles contain over a hundred words which occur
nowhere else in the New Testament. Certain narratives in the Book of
Acts record incidents in which Peter was the principal or the only
apostolic actor, and the account of which must have come from his own
lips; and these narratives bear the marks of his keen observation, and
are characterized by his picturesque power. Such are the accounts of the
healing of the cripple at the temple-gate (3); of Ananias and Sapphira
(5); of Peter's deliverance from prison (12); of the raising of Dorcas
(9); and of the vision of the great sheet (10). In these, especially if
we compare them with narratives which Luke has evidently received from
other sources, we are impressed with the picturesque vividness of the
story; the accurate notes of time and place and number; the pictorial
expressions, the quick transitions; the frequent use of such words as
straightway, immediately; the substitution of dialogue for narrative,
and the general fulness of detail.

All these characteristics appear in Mark's Gospel, and are justly
regarded as indicating the influence of Peter, though comparatively few
of the same words are employed by both; a fact which may be, in great
part, accounted for by the difference between a hortatory epistle and a
narrative. The traces of Peter's quick perception and dramatic and
picturesque power are everywhere visible in Mark. While Matthew fully
records the discourses of our Lord, Mark pictures his deeds. Hence,
while Matthew gives us fifteen of his parables, Mark reproduces only
four, and that in a condensed form. "Mark does not wear the flowing
robes of Matthew. His dress is 'for speed succinct.' Swift-paced,
incisive, his narrative proceeds straight to the goal, like a Roman
soldier on his march to battle." His Gospel is the Gospel of the
present, not of the past. His references to the Old Testament, with the
exception of [Mar 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002), [Mar
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#003), are quotations occurring in the
discourses of Christ, or cited by others. They belong, as Canon Farrar
observes, "to the narrative, not to the recorder" ([Mar
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028) is an interpolation). The word
νόμος, law, never occurs in Mark nor in Peter.

Mark's is, therefore, pre-eminently the pictorial Gospel: the Gospel of
detail. "There is," says Canon Westcott, "perhaps not one narrative
which he gives in common with Matthew and Luke, to which he does not
contribute some special feature." Thus he adds to John the Baptist's
picture of loosing the shoe-latchet another touch, in the words to stoop
down ([Mar 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#007)). He uses a more
graphic term to describe the opening of the heavens at Christ's baptism.
According to Matthew and Luke the heavens were opened (ἀνεώχθησαν); Mark
depicts them as rent asunder (σχιζομένους; [Mar
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#010)). Matthew and Luke represent
Jesus as led (ἀνήχθη) into the wilderness to be tempted; Mark as driven
(ἐκβα.λλει); adding, He was with the wild beasts; to which some detect a
reference in Peter's comparison of the devil to a roaring lion ([Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)). He gives a realistic touch to
the story of James and John forsaking their employment at the call of
Jesus, by adding that they left their father with the hired servants
([Mar 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#020)). After the discourse from
the boat to the multitude upon the shore, Mark alone tells us that the
disciples sent away the multitude, and throws in the little details,
they took him as he was; and there were with them other little ships
([Mar 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#036)). His account of the storm
which followed is more vivid than Matthew's or Luke's. He pictures the
waves beating into the boat, and the boat beginning to fill; notes the
steersman's cushion at the stern on which the sleeping Lord's head
reposed ([Mar 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#037), [Mar
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#038)); and throws the awaking by the
disciples and the stilling of the tempest into a dramatic form by the
distressful question, Master, carest thou not that we perish? and the
command to the sea as to a raging monster, Peace! Be still! ([Mar
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#038), [Mar
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039)).

In the narrative of the feeding of the five thousand, only Mark relates
the Saviour's question, How many loaves have ye ? Go and see ([Mar
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#038)). An oriental crowd abounds in
color, and to Mark we are indebted for the gay picture of the crowds
arranged on the green grass, in companies, like flower-beds with their
varied hues. He alone specifies the division of the two fishes among
them all ([Mar 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#039), [Mar
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#041)). He tells how Jesus, walking on
the sea, would have passed by the disciples' boat; he expresses their
cry of terror at Christ's appearance by a stronger word than Matthew,
using the compound verb ἀνέκραξαν where Matthew uses the simple verb
ἔχραξαν. He adds, they all saw him ([Mar
6:48-50](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#048)). When Jesus descends from the
mount of transfiguration, it is Mark that fills out the incident of the
disciples' controversy with the bystanders by relating that the scribes
were questioning with them. He notes the amazement which, for whatever
reason, fell upon the people at Jesus' appearance, their running to
salute him, and his inquiry, What question ye with them? ([Mar
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#014), [Mar
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#016)). Mark gives us the bystanders'
encouragement of Bartimeus when summoned by Jesus, and tells how he cast
off his outer garment and leaped up ([Mar
10:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#049), [Mar
10:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050)). He alone relates the breaking
of the alabaster by the woman ([Mar
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003)), and Christ's taking the little
child in his arms after he had set him in the midst ([Mar
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036)).

In the account of the two demoniacs of Gadara, Matthew (8) relates that
they were met coming out of the tombs, and that they were exceeding
fierce, so that no one could pass that way. Mark mentions only one
demoniac, but adds that he had his dwelling in the tombs (κατοίκησιν
εἶχεν, stronger than Luke's abode, ἔμενεν); that the attempt had been
made to fetter him, but that he had broken the fetters; and that he was
day and night in the tombs and in the mountains, crying and cutting
himself with stones ([Mar 5:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003)). In
the interview with the lawyer who desired to know what kind of a
commandment was great in the law, Matthew ([Mat
22:34-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#034)) ends the dialogue with
Jesus' answer to this question. Mark gives the lawyer's reply and his
enlargement upon Jesus' answer, the fact that Jesus observed that he
answered discreetly, and his significant words, Thou art not far from
the kingdom of God.

It is interesting to compare the account of Herod's feast and John the
Baptist's murder as given by Matthew and Mark respectively. Mark alone
mentions the great banquet and the rank of the guests. He adds the
little touches of Salome's entering in and delighting the guests. He
throws Herod's promise and Salome's request into dialogue. Where Matthew
says simply, He promised with an oath, to give her whatsoever she should
ask, Mark gives it, Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it
thee. And he sware unto her, whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will
give it thee, unto the half of ray kingdom. The whole narrative is more
dramatic than Matthew's. Matthew says that Salome was put forward by her
mother. Mark pictures her going out, and details her conversation with
Herodias, and her entering in again with haste, and demanding the
horrible boon forthwith. Mark also enlarges upon Herod's regret: he was
exceeding sorry; and where Matthew notes merely his compliance with the
damsel's request, Mark lets us into his feeling of unwillingness to
refuse her. Mark, too, emphasizes the promptness of the transaction.
Salome demands the Baptist's head forthwith; Herod sends the executioner
straightway. Mark alone mentions the executioner. While the dialogue is
not peculiar to Mark, it is to be noted that it is characteristic of
Peter's style, so far, at least, as can be inferred from the stories in
the book of Acts, of Ananias and Sapphira ([Act
5:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003)), Cornelius [Act
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#001)), and Peter's deliverance from
prison ([Act 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001)).

Mark is peculiarly minute and specific as to details of persons, times,
numbers, and places; a feature in which, also, he resembles Peter
(compare [Act 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015); [Act
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003); [Act
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022); [Act
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#007), [Act
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#023); [Act
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#004)). Thus, of persons, "They entered
into the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John" ([Mar
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029)): "Simon and they that were with
him followed after him" ([Mar 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#036)):
"In the days of Abiathar the high-priest" ([Mar
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#026)): "The Pharisees took counsel
with the Herodians" ([Mar 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#006)): "The
woman was a Greek, a Syro-Phenician by nation" ([Mar
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#026)). Compare, also, [Mar
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011); [Mar
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#003); [Mar
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021). Of places: "A multitude from
Galilee and Judaea," etc. ([Mar 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#007),
[Mar 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#008)): The demoniac proclaimed his
recovery in Decapolis ([Mar 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#020)):
Jesus departed "from the border of Tyre and came through Sidon unto the
Sea of Galilee, through the midst of the borders of Decapolis" ([Mar
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#031)). Compare [Mar
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#010); [Mar
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001); [Mar
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#041); [Mar
14:68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068). Of number: The paralytic was
"borne of four" ([Mar 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#003)): The swine
were about two thousand ([Mar 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#013)):
The twelve were sent out two and two ([Mar
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#007)): The people sat down by hundreds
and fifties ([Mar 6:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#040)): "Before the
cock crow twice thou shalt deny me thrice" ([Mar
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#030)). Of time: Jesus rose up in the
morning, a great while before day ([Mar
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035)): "The same day, when the even
was come" ([Mar 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#035)). Compare [Mar
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011); [Mar
14:68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068); [Mar
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025).

But Mark does not confine himself to mere outward details. He abounds in
strokes which bring out the feeling of his characters. He uses six
different words expressive of fear, wonder, trouble, amazement, extreme
astonishment. The compound ἐκθαμβεῖσθαι, greatly amazed, affrighted
([Mar 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015); [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005), [Mar
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#006)) occurs nowhere else in the New
Testament. Thus the look and emotion of our Lord are portrayed: "He
looked round about on them with anger, being grieved at the hardness of
their heart" ([Mar 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005)): "He looked
round about on them which sat round about him, and said, Behold my
mother," etc. ([Mar 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#034)): "He looked
round about" to see who had touched him in the crowd ([Mar
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#032)): "He marvelled because of their
unbelief" ([Mar 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#006)): He looked on the
young ruler and loved him ([Mar
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021)): He was moved with compassion
toward the leper ([Mar 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#041)): He
sighed deeply in his spirit ([Mar
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012)).

Similarly Mark depicts the tender compassion of the Lord. A beautiful
hint of his delicate and loving appreciation of an ordinary need closes
the story of the healing of the ruler's daughter. In their joy and
wonder at her miraculous restoration, the friends would naturally forget
the immediate practical demand for food, of which the Lord promptly
reminds them by his command that something should be given her to eat
([Mar 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#043)). Luke notes the same
circumstance. In like manner his appreciation of his disciples'
weariness appears in the words, "Come ye yourselves apart into a desert
place and rest awhile" ([Mar 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031)). He
is moved with compassion toward the multitude because they are as sheep
without a shepherd ([Mar 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#034)): he is
touched with the need and fatigue of the many who had come from far
([Mar 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#003)): he shows his interest in
the condition of the epileptic lad by inquiring into the history of his
case ([Mar 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#021)): he is much
displeased at the disciples' rebuke of those who are bringing the young
children to him ([Mar 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#014)).

In like manner Mark describes the mental and emotional states of those
who were brought into contact with Christ. Those who witnessed the
miracle of the loaves understood not, and their heart was hardened ([Mar
6:52](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#052)): the disciples were perplexed,
questioning among themselves what the rising again from the dead should
mean ([Mar 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#010)): they were amazed at
his words about a rich man entering into the kingdom of heaven ([Mar
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#024)): a sudden and mysterious awe
fell upon them in their journey to Jerusalem ([Mar
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032)): Pilate marvelled at Jesus
being already dead, and sent for the centurion in order to ask whether
he had been any while dead ([Mar
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044)). Compare [Mar
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029), [Mar
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#027); [Mar
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#020), [Mar
5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#042); [Mar
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020); [Mar
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#037); [Mar
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#018). He depicts the interest excited
by the words and works of Christ; describing the crowds which flocked to
him, and their spreading abroad the fame of his power ([Mar
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#028), [Mar
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#045); [Mar
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#013); [Mar
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#020), [Mar
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#021); [Mar
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#001); [Mar
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#020), [Mar
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#021), [Mar
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#024); [Mar
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#031); [Mar
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#036)).

We find in Mark certain peculiarly forcible expressions in our Lord's
language, such as, "To them that are without" ([Mar
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#011)); "Ye leave the commandment of
God, and hold fast the tradition of men" ([Mar
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#008)); "This adulterous and sinful
generation" ([Mar 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#038)); "Be set at
nought" ([Mar 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#012)); "Quickly to speak
evil of me" ([Mar 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#039)); "Shall
receive brethren and sisters and mothers," etc., "with persecutions"
([Mar 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#030)).

His narrative runs. His style abounds in quick transitions. The word
εὐθέως, straightway, occurs in his Gospel something like forty times. He
imparts vividness to his narration by the use of the present tense
instead of the historic ([Mar 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#040),
[Mar 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#044); [Mar
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#003), sq.; [Mar
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001), [Mar
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#002), [Mar
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#007); [Mar
14:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043), [Mar
14:66](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#066)). He often defines his meaning
by coupling similar words or phrases. Beelzebub is called by two names
([Mar 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#022)), and by a third ([Mar
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#030)): The sick are brought at even,
when the sun did set ([Mar 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#032)): The
blasphemer hath no more forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin
([Mar 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#029)): He spake with many
parables, and without a parable he spake not ([Mar
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#033), [Mar
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#034)). Compare [Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005), [Mar
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#027); [Mar
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#026); [Mar
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#025); [Mar
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#021). He employs over seventy words
which are found nowhere else in the New Testament. We find him
preserving the identical Aramaic words uttered by the Lord. In his
Gospel alone occur Boanerges ([Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017)); Talitha cumi ([Mar
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041)); Korban ([Mar
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#011)); Ephphatha ([Mar
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#034)): and Abba ([Mar
14:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#036)). Writing for Romans we find him
transferring certain Latin words into Greek, such as legio, legion ([Mar
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#009)); centurio, κεντυρίων, centurion,
which elsewhere is ἑκατόνταρχος - χης ([Mar
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039)); quadrans, farthing ([Mar
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042)); flagellare, to scourge ([Mar
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015)); speculator, executioner ([Mar
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#027)); census, tribute ([Mar
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#014)); sextarius, pot ([Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004)); praetorium ([Mar
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016)). Three of these, centurio,
speculator, and sextarius are found in his Gospel only. He always adds a
note of explanation to Jewish words and usages.

His style is abrupt, concise, and forcible; his diction less pure than
that of Luke and John. Besides irregularities of construction which
cannot be explained to the English reader, he employs many words which
are expressly forbidden by the grammarians, and some of which are even
condemned as slang. Such are ἐσχάτως ἔχει, is at the point of death
([Mar 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023)); κράββατος, bed ([Mar
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004), [Mar
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#009), [Mar
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#011), [Mar
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#012)); μονόφθαλμος, with one eye ([Mar
9:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#047)); κολλυβισταί, money-changers
([Mar 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#015)); κοράσιον, maid ([Mar
5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041)); ὁ ρκίζω, I adjure ([Mar
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007)); ῥάπισμα, a blow of the hand
([Mar 14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065)); ῥαφίδος, needle ([Mar
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#025)).

I have described the characteristics of Mark at some length, because
they lie peculiarly in the line of the special purpose of this book,
which deals with individual words and phrases, and with peculiarities of
diction, rather than with the exegesis of passages. Of this Gospel it is
especially true that its peculiar flavor and quality cannot be caught
without careful verbal study. It is a gallery of word-pictures. Reading
it, even in the familiar versions, we may discover that it is, as Canon
Westcott remarks, "essentially a transcript from life;" but nothing
short of an insight into the original and individual words will reveal
to us that the transcript itself is alive.

List of Greek Words Used by Mark Only

ἀγρεύω catch [Mar 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#013) ἅλς salt [Mar
9:49](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#049) ἄλαλος dumb [Mar
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#037); [Mar
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#017), [Mar
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025) ἀλεκτροφωνία cockcrowing [Mar
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#035) ἄμφοδον a place where two ways
meet [Mar 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#004) ἀμφιβάλλω cast [Mar
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#016) ἄναλος saltless [Mar
9:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#050) ἀναπηδάω leap up [Mar
10:50](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#050) ἀναστενάζω sigh deeply [Mar
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012) ἀπἔχει it is enough [Mar
14:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#041) ἀπόδημος abroad [Mar
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#034) ἀποστεγάζω uncover [Mar
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004) ἀφρίζω foam [Mar
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#018), [Mar
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#020) Βοανεργές sons of thunder [Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017) γαμίσκομαι to be given in
marriage [Mar 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#025) γναφεύς fuller
[Mar 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#003) δισχίλιοι two thousand [Mar
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#013) δύσκολος hard [Mar
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#024) εἰ if (in swearing) [Mar
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#012) ἐκθαμβέω to be amazed [Mar
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#015); [Mar
14:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#033); [Mar
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#005), [Mar
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#006) ἐκθαυμάζω to marvel [Mar
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#017) ἐκπερισσῶς exceeding vehemently
[Mar 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#031) ἐναγκαλίζομαι take in
the-arms [Mar 9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036); [Mar
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#016) ἐνειλέω wrap [Mar
15:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#046) ἔννυχον in the night [Mar
1:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#035) ἐξάπινα suddenly [Mar
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#008) ἐξουδενόω set at naught [Mar
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#012) ἐπιβάλλω (neuter) beat [Mar
4:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#037) ἐπιῤῥάπτω sew upon [Mar
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#021) ἐπισυντρέχω come running together
[Mar 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025) ἐσχάτως at the point of
death [Mar 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#023) ἤφιεν suffered
(permitted) [Mar 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#034); [Mar
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#016) θανάσιμος deadly [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018) θαυμάζειν διὰ to wonder because
of [Mar 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#006) θυγάτριον little daughter
[Mar 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#023); [Mar
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#025) τὸ ἱκανὸν ποιεῖν to content [Mar
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015) κατάβα come down [Mar
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#030) καταβαρύνω weigh down [Mar
14:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#040) καταδιώκω follow after [Mar
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#036) κατακόπτω cut [Mar
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#005) κατευλογέω bless [Mar
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#016) κατοίκησις dwelling [Mar
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003) κεντυρίων centurion [Mar
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039), [Mar
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044), [Mar
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#045) κεφαλαιόω to wound in the head
[Mar 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#004) κυλίομαι wallow [Mar
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#020) κωμόπολις village-town [Mar
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#038) μεθόρια borders [Mar
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#024) μηκύνομαι grow [Mar
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#027) μογιλάλος having an impediment in
speech [Mar 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#032) μυρίζω anoint [Mar
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#008) νουνεχῶς discreetly [Mar
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#034) ξέστης pot [Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004) ὄμμα eye [Mar
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#028) οὐά ah! ha! [Mar
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029) παιδιόθεν from a child [Mar
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#021) παρόμοιος like [Mar
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#008), [Mar
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#013) περιτρέχω run round about [Mar
6:55](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#055) πρασιά a garden-plat [Mar
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#040) προαύλιον porch or forecourt [Mar
14:68](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#068) προμεριμνάω take thought
before-hand [Mar 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#011) προσάββατον day
before the Sabbath [Mar 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042)
προσεγγίζω come nigh unto [Mar 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004)
προσκεφάλαιον cushion [Mar 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#038)
προσορμίζομαι moor to the shore [Mar
6:53](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#053) προσπορεύομαι come unto [Mar
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#035) πυγμῇ with the fist [Mar
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#003) σκώληξ worm [Mar
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#044), [Mar
9:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#046), [Mar
9:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#048) σπεκουλάτωρ executioner [Mar
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#027) σμυρνίζω mingle with myrrh [Mar
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023) στασιαστής insurrectionist [Mar
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#007) στίλβω to be glistering [Mar
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#003) στίβας branch, or layer of leaves
[Mar 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#008) συμπόσιον a table-party [Mar
6:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#039) συνλίβω to throng or crowd [Mar
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#024), [Mar
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#031) συλλυπέομαι to be grieved [Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005) Συραφοινίκισσα a Syro-phoenician
woman [Mar 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#026) σύσσημον countersign,
token [Mar 14:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#044) τηλαυγῶς clearly [Mar
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#025) τρίζω gnash [Mar
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#018) ὑπερηφανία pride [Mar
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#022) ὑπερπερισσῶς beyond measure [Mar
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#037) ὑπολήνιον wine-fat or wine-press
[Mar 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#001) χαλκίον brazen vessel [Mar
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#004)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 1](mar001)

</div>
