<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat010)  [Next](mat012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

[Matthew 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 11:1</span></span>

Commanding (διατάσσων)

The preposition διά has a distributive force: giving to each his
appropriate charge.

Their cities (αὐτῶν)

The towns of those to whom he came - the Galilaeans. Compare [Mat
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#023).

[Matthew 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 11:2</span></span>

Two of his disciples (δύο)

But the correct reading is διά, by. He sent by his disciples. So Rev.

[Matthew 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 11:3</span></span>

Thou

Emphatic. Art thou "the Coming One?" - a current phrase for the Messiah.

[Matthew 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 11:5</span></span>

The lame walk

Tynd., The halt go.

[Matthew 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 11:6</span></span>

Be offended (σκανδαλιοθῇ)

See on [Mat 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029). Rev., shall find
none occasion of stumbling. Compare Wyc., shall not be slandered.

[Matthew 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 11:7</span></span>

As they departed (τούτων δὲ πορευομένων)

Rev., more literal and better, as these went their way; or while they,
John's disciples, were departing' thus giving the simultaneousness of
Jesus' words with the act of departure.

To see (θεάσασθαι)

Rev., to behold. θεᾶσθαι, like θεωρεῖν, expresses the calm, continuous
contemplation of an object which remains before the spectator. Compare
[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). Another verb is used in
Christ's repetition of the question, [Mat
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008), [Mat
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009); ἰδεῖν in the ordinary sense of
seeing. The more earnest expression suits the first question.

[Matthew 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 11:12</span></span>

Suffereth violence (βιάζεται)

Lit., is forced, overpowered, taken by storm. Christ thus graphically
portrays the intense excitement which followed John's ministry; the
eager waiting, striving, and struggling of the multitude for the
promised king.

The violent take it by force (βιασταὶ ἁρπάζουσιν αὐτήν)

This was proved by the multitudes who followed Christ and thronged the
doors where he was, and would have taken him by force (the same word)
and made him a king ([Joh 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#015)). The
word take by force means literally to snatch away, carry off. It is
often used in the classics of plundering. Meyer renders, Those who use
violent efforts, drag it to themselves. So Tynd., They that make
violence pull it unto them. Christ speaks of believers. They seize upon
the kingdom and make it their own. The Rev., men of violence, is too
strong, since it describes a class of habitually and characteristically
violent men; whereas the violence in this case is the result of a
special and exceptional impulse. The passage recalls the old Greek
proverb quoted by Plato against the Sophists, who had corrupted the
Athenian youth by promising the easy attainment of wisdom: Good things
are hard. Dante has seized the idea:

"Regnum coelorum (the kingdom of heaven) suffereth violence

From fervent love, and from that living hope

That overcometh the divine volition;

Not in the guise that man o'ercometh man,

But conquers it because it will be conquered,

And conquered, conquers by benignity."

Parad., xx., 94-99.

[Matthew 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 11:14</span></span>

If ye will (εἰ θέλετε)

More correctly, Rev., If ye are willing or disposed. For there would
naturally be an unwillingness to receive the statement about John's high
place, in view of John's imprisonment.

[Matthew 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 11:16</span></span>

Children (παιδίοις)

Diminutive, little children. The Rev. Donald Fraser gives the picture
simply and vividly: "He pictured a group of little children playing at
make-believe marriages and funerals. First they acted a marriage
procession; some of them piping as on instruments of music, while the
rest were expected to leap and dance. In a perverse mood, however, these
last did not respond, but stood still and looked discontented. So the
little pipers changed their game and proposed a funeral. They began to
imitate the loud wailing of eastern mourners. But again they were
thwarted, for their companions refused to chime in with the mournful cry
and to beat their breasts....So the disappointed children complained:
'We piped unto you and ye did not dance; we wailed, and ye did not
mourn. Nothing pleases you. If you don't want to dance, why don't yon
mourn?...It is plain that yon are in bad humor, and determined not to be
pleased'" ("Metaphors in the Gospels"). The issue is between the Jews
(this generation) and the children of wisdom, [Mat
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#019).

Market-places (ἀγοραῖς)

From ἀγείρω, to assemble. Wyc., renders cheepynge; compare cheepside,
the place for buying selling; for the word cheap had originally no
reference to small price, but meant simply barter or price. The primary
conception in the Greek word has nothing to do with buying and selling.
Ἀγορά is an assembly; then the place of assembly. The idea of a place of
trade comes in afterward, and naturally, since trade plants itself where
people habitually gather. Hence the Roman Forum was devoted, not only to
popular and judicial assemblies, but to commercial purposes, especially
of bankers. The idea of trade gradually becomes the dominant one in the
word. In Eastern cities the markets are held in bazaars and streets,
rather than in squares. In these public places the children would be
found playing. Compare [Zac 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#005).

[Matthew 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 11:17</span></span>

Mourn (ἐκόψασθε)

Lit., beat or strike (the breast), as in oriental funeral lamentations.

[Matthew 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 11:20</span></span>

Mighty works (δυνάμεις)

The supernatural works of Christ and his apostles are denoted by six
different words in the New Testament, exhibiting these works under
different aspects and from different points of view. These will be
considered in detail as they occur. Generally, a miracle may be
regarded: 1. As a portent or prodigy (τέρας); as [Act
7:36](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#036), of the wonders shown by Moses in
Egypt. 2. As a sign (σημεῖον), pointing to something beyond itself, a
mark of the power or grace of the doer or of his connection with the
supernatural world. So [Mat 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#038). 3.
As an exhibition of God's glory (ἔνδοξον), [Luk
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#017); glorious things. 4. As a
strange thing (παράδοξον), [Luk 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#026).
5. As a wonderful thing (θαυμάσιον), [Mat
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015). 6. As a power (δύναμις); so
here: a mighty work.

[Matthew 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 11:22</span></span>

But (πλὴν)

Better Rev., howbeit, or as Wyc., nevertheless. Chorazin and Bethsaida
did not repent; therefore a woe lies against them; nevertheless they
shall be more excusable than you who have seen the mighty works which
were not done among them.

[Matthew 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 11:25</span></span>

Answered

In reply to something which is not stated.

I thank (ἐξομολογοῦμαι)

Compare [Mat 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#006), of confessing sins.
Lit., I confess. I recognize the justice and wisdom of thy doings. But
with the dative, as here (σοι, to thee), it means to praise, with an
undercurrent of acknowledgment; to confess only in later Greek, and with
an accusative of the object. Rev. gives praise in the margin here, and
at [Rom 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011). Tynd., I praise.

Prudent (συνετῶν)

Rev., understanding; Wyc., wary. From the verb συνίημι, to bring
together, and denoting that peculiarity of mind which brings the simple
features of an object into a whole. Hence comprehension, insight.
Compare on [Mar 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033), understanding
(συνέσεως). Wise (σοφῶν) and understanding are often joined, as here.
The general distinction is between productive and reflective wisdom, but
the distinction is not always recognized by the writer.

[Matthew 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 11:27</span></span>

Are delivered (παρεδόθη)

More lit., were delivered, as of a single act at a given time, as in
this case, where the Son was sent forth by the Father, and clothed with
authority. Compare [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018).

Knoweth (ἐπιγινώσκει)

The compound indicating full knowledge. Others behold only in part,
"through a glass, darkly."

[Matthew 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 11:28</span></span>

Labor and are heavy-laden (κοπιῶντες καὶ πεφορτισμένοι)

The first an active, the second a passive participle, exhibiting the
active and passive sides of human misery.

Give rest (ἀναπαύσω)

Originally to make to cease; Tynd., ease; Wyc., refresh. The radical
conception is that of relief.

[Matthew 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 11:29</span></span>

Yoke (ζυγόν)

"These words, as recorded by St. Matthew, the Evangelist of the Jews,
must have sunk the deeper into the hearts of Christ's Jewish hearers,
that they came in their own old, familiar form of speech, yet with such
contrast of spirit. One of the most common figurative expressions of the
time was that of the yoke for submission to an occupation or obligation.
Very instructive for the understanding of the figure is this paraphrase
of Cant. 1:10: 'How beautiful is their neck for bearing the yoke of thy
statutes; and it shall be upon them like the yoke on the neck of the ox
that plougheth in the field and provideth food for himself and his
master.'

"The public worship of the ancient synagogue commenced with a
benediction, followed by the shema (Hear, O Israel) or creed, composed
of three passages of scripture: [Deu
6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004); [Deu
11:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013); [Num
15:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#037). The section [Deu
6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) was said to precede [Deu
11:13-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013), so that we might take upon
ourselves the yoke of the kingdom of heaven, and only after that the
yoke of the commandments. The Saviour's words must have had a special
significance to those who remembered this lesson; and they would now
understand how, by coming to the Saviour, they would first take on them
the yoke of the kingdom of heaven, and then that of the commandments,
finding this yoke easy and the burden light" (Edersheim, "Life and Times
of Jesus," and "Jewish Social Life").

Meek (πραΰ́ς)

See on [Mat 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005).

Lowly (ταπεινός)

The word has a history. In the classics it is used commonly in a bad and
degrading sense, of meanness of condition, lowness of rank, and cringing
abjectness and baseness of character. Still, even in classical Greek,
this is not its universal usage. It is occasionally employed in a way
which foreshadows its higher sense. Plato, for instance, says, "To that
law (of God) he would be happy who holds fast, and follows it in all
humility and order; but he who is lifted up with pride, or money, or
honor, or beauty, who has a soul hot with folly, and youth, and
insolence, and thinks that he has no need of a guide or ruler, but is
able himself to be the guide of others, he, I say, is left deserted of
God" ("Laws," 716). And Aristotle says: "He who is worthy of small
things, and deems himself so, is wise" ("Nich. Ethics," iv., 3). At
best, however, the classical conception is only modesty, absence of
assumption. It is an element of wisdom and in no way opposed to
self-righteousness (see Aristotle above). The word for the Christian
virtue of humility (ταπεινοφροσύνη), was not used before the Christian
era, and is distinctly an outgrowth of the Gospel. This virtue is based
upon a correct estimate of our actual littleness, and is linked with a
sense of sinfulness. True greatness is holiness. We are little because
sinful. Compare [Luk 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014). It is
asked how, in this view of the case, the word can be applied to himself
by the sinless Lord? "The answer is," says Archbishop Trench, "that for
the sinner humility involves the confession of sin, inasmuch as it
involves the confession of his true condition; while yet for the
unfallen creature the grace itself as truly exists, involving for such
the acknowledgment, not of sinfulness, which would be untrue, but of
creatureliness, of absolute dependence, of having nothing, but receiving
all things of God. And thus the grace of humility belongs to the highest
angel before the throne, being as he is a creature, yea, even to the
Lord of Glory himself. In his human nature he must be the pattern of all
humility, of all creaturely dependence; and it is only as a man that
Christ thus claims to be lowly; his human life was a constant living on
the fulness of his Father's love; he evermore, as man, took the place
which beseemed the creature in the presence of its Creator" ("Synonyms,"
p. 145). The Christian virtue regards man not only with reference to
God, but to his fellow-man. In lowliness of mind each counting other
better than himself ([Phi 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#003), Rev.).
But this is contrary to the Greek conception of justice or
righteousness, which was simply "his own to each one." It is noteworthy
that neither the Septuagint, the Apocrypha, nor the New Testament
recognize the ignoble classical sense of the word.

Ye shall find (εὑρήσετε)

Compare I will give you and ye shall find. The rest of Christ is twofold
- given and found. It is given in pardon and reconciliation. It is found
under the yoke and the burden; in the development of Christian
experience, as more and more the "strain passes over" from self to
Christ. "No other teacher, since the world began, has ever associated
learn with rest. 'Learn of me,' says the philosopher, 'and you shall
find restlessness.' 'Learn of me,' says Christ, 'and you shall find
rest'" (Drummond, "Natural Law in the Spiritual World").

[Matthew 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 11:30</span></span>

Easy (χρηστὸς)

Not a satisfactory rendering. Christ's yoke is not easy in the ordinary
sense of that word. The word means originally, good, serviceable. The
kindred noun, χρηστότης, occurring only in Paul's writings, is rendered
kindness in [Co2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#006); [Tit
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004); [Gal
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022); [Eph
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#007) (Rev.), and goodness, [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004) (Rev.). At [Luk
5:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#039), it is used of old wine, where
the true reading, instead of better, is good (χρηστός), mellowed with
age. Plato ("Republic," 424) applies the word to education. "Good
nurture and education (τροφὴ γὰρ καὶ παίδευσις χρηστὴ) implant good
(ἀγαθὰς) constitutions; and these good (χρησταὶ) constitutions improve
more and more;" thus evidently using χρηστός and ἀγαθός as synonymous.
The three meanings combine in the word, though it is impossible to find
an English word which combines them all. Christ's yoke is wholesome,
serviceable, kindly. "Christ's yoke is like feathers to a bird; not
loads, but helps to motion" (Jeremy Taylor).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 12](mat012)

</div>
