<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat006)  [Next](mat008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)

[Matthew 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 7:3</span></span>

Beholdest (βλέπεις)

Staring at from without, as one who does not see clearly.

Considerest (κατανοεῖς)

A stronger word, apprehendest from within, what is already there.

Mote (κάρφος)

A.V. and Rev. The word mote, however, suggests dust; whereas the figure
is that of a minute chip or splinter, of the same material with the
beam. Wyc. renders festu, with the explanation, a little mote. In
explaining the passage it is well to remember that the obstruction to
sight is of the same material in both cases. The man with a great beam
in his eye, who therefore can see nothing accurately, proposes to remove
the little splinter from his brother's eye, a delicate operation,
requiring clear sight. The figure of a splinter to represent something
painful or annoying is a common oriental one. Tholuck ("Sermon on the
Mount") quotes from the Arabic several passages in point, and one which
is literally our Lord's saying: "How seest thou the splinter in thy
brother's eye, and seest not the cross-beam in thine eye?"

Beam (δοκὸν)

A log, joist, rafter; indicating a great fault.

[Matthew 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 7:5</span></span>

See clearly (διαβλέψεις)

The preposition διά, through, giving the sense of thoroughness. Compare
the simple verb βλέπεις, (beholdest), [Mat
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003). With the beam in thine eye thou
starest at thy brother's little failing. Pull out the beam; then thou
shalt see clearly, not only the fault itself, but how to help thy
brother get rid of it.

To cast out (ἐκβαλεῖν)

The Lord's words assume that the object of scrutiny is not only nor
mainly detection, but correction. Hence thou shalt see clearly, not the
mote, but to cast out the mote.

[Matthew 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 7:6</span></span>

That which is holy (τὸ ἅγιον)

The holy thing, as of something commonly recognized as sacred. The
reference is to the meat offered in sacrifice. The picture is that of a
priest throwing a piece of flesh from the altar of burnt-offering to one
of the numerous dogs which infest the streets of Eastern cities.

Pearls before swine (μαργαρίτας ἔμπροσθεν τῶν χοίρων)

Another picture of a rich man wantonly throwing handfuls of small pearls
to swine. Swine in Palestine were at best but half-tamed, the hog being
an unclean animal. The wild boar haunts the Jordan valley to this day.
Small pearls, called by jewellers seed-pearls, would resemble the pease
or maize on which the swine feed. They would rush upon them when
scattered, and, discovering the cheat, would trample upon them and turn
their tusks upon the man who scattered them.

Turn (στραφέντες)

The Rev. properly omits again. The word graphically pictures the quick,
sharp turn of the boar.

Rend (ῥήξωσιν)

Lit., break; and well chosen to express the peculiar character of the
wound made by the boar's tusk, which is not a cut, but a long tear or
rip.

[Matthew 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 7:9</span></span>

Bread, a stone (ἄρτον, λίθον)

Rev. for bread reads loaf, which is better. On the resemblance of
certain stones to cakes of bread, see on [Mat
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003).

[Matthew 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 7:13</span></span>

Strait gate (στενῆς πύλης)

Rev., narrow. A remarkable parallel to this passage occurs in the
"Pinax" or "Tablet" of Cebes, a writer contemporary with Socrates. In
this, human life, with its dangers and temptations, is symbolically
represented as on a tablet. The passage is as follows: "Seest thou not,
then, a little door, and a way before the door, which is not much
crowded, but very few travel it? This is the way which leadeth into true
culture."

Leadeth (ἀπάγουσα)

Lit., leadeth away, from death, or, perhaps, from the broad road. Note
that the gate is not at the end, but at the beginning of the road.

[Matthew 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 7:16</span></span>

Ye shall know (ἐπιγνώσεσθε)

The compound verb indicates full knowledge. Character is satisfactorily
tested by its fruits.

[Matthew 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 7:22</span></span>

Have we not (οὐ)

That form of the negative is used which expects an affirmative answer.
It therefore pictures both the self-conceit and the self-deception of
these persons. "Surely we have prophesied," etc.

[Matthew 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 7:23</span></span>

Profess (ὁμολογήσω)

The word which is used elsewhere of open confession of Christ before men
([Mat 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032); [Rom
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009)); of John's public declaration
that he was not the Christ ([Joh
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020)); of Herod's promise to Salome in
the presence of his guests ([Mat
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007)). Here, therefore, of Christ's
open, public declaration as Judge of the world. "There is great
authority in this saying," remarks Bengel.

[Matthew 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 7:24</span></span>

sqq

I will liken him, etc

The picture is not of two men deliberately selecting foundations, but it
contrasts one who carefully chooses and prepares his foundation with one
who builds at hap-hazard. This is more strongly brought out by Luke
([Luk 6:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#048)): "Who digged and went
deep, and laid a foundation upon the rock" (Rev.). Kitto ("Pictorial
Bible") says: "At this very day the mode of building in Christ's own
town of Nazareth suggests the source of this image. Dr. Robinson was
entertained in the house of a Greek Arab. The house had just been built,
and was not yet finished. In order to lay the foundations he had dug
down to the solid rock, as is usual throughout the country here, to the
depth of thirty feet, and then built up arches." The abrupt style of
[Mat 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025) pictures the sudden coming
of the storm which sweeps away the house on the sand: "Descended the
rain, and came the floods, and blew the winds."

[Matthew 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 7:27</span></span>

Great was the fall of it

The conclusion of the Sermon on the Mount. "Thus," remarks Bengel, "it
is not necessary for every sermon to end with consolation."

[Matthew 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 7:28</span></span>

Were astonished (ἐξεπλήσσοντο)

From ἐκ, out of, and πλήσσω, to strike. Often to drive one out of His
senses by a sudden shock, and therefore here of amazement. They were
astounded. We have a similar expression, though not so strong: "I was
struck with this or that remarkable thing."

[Matthew 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 7:29</span></span>

He taught (ἦν διδάσκων)

He was teaching. This union of the verb and participle emphasizes the
idea of duration or habit more than the simple tense.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 8](mat008)

</div>
