<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat016)  [Next](mat018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

[Matthew 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 17:1</span></span>

Taketh (παραλαμβάνει)

Rev. gives the force of the preposition παρά, taketh with him.

Apart (κατ' ἰδίαν)

Not said of the mountain, as isolated, but of the disciples; so that
they might be alone with him. Compare [Mar
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002), apart by themselves (κατ' ἰδίαν
μόνους: lit., apart alone).

[Matthew 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 17:2</span></span>

He was transfigured (μετεμορφώθη)

μετά, denoting change or transfer, and μορφή, form. This latter word
denotes the form regarded as the distinctive nature and character of the
object, and is distinguished from σχῆμα, the changeable, outward
fashion: in a man, for instance, his gestures, clothes, words, acts. The
μορφή partakes of the essence of a thing; the σχῆμα is an accident which
may change, leaving the form unaffected. Compare [Mar
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012); Christ "appeared in another
form" (μορφή), and [Co1 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031) : "the
fashion (σχῆμα) of the world passeth away." The distinction passes into
the verbs compounded with these two nouns. Thus, [Rom
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002), "Be not conformed to this
world," is μὴ συσχηματίζεσθε; i.e., be not fashioned according to the
fleeting fashion of this world. So Rev., fashioned. See, also, [Co2
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#013), [Co2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014), [Co2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015), where the changes described are
changes in outward semblance. False apostles appeared in the outward
fashion of apostles of Christ; Satan takes on the outward appearance of
an angel. All these changes are in the accidents of the life, and do not
touch its inner, essential quality. On the other hand, a change in the
inner life is described as a change of μορθή, never of σχῆμα. Hence,
[Rom 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#002), "Be ye transformed
(μεταμορφοῦσθε); the change taking place by the renewing of the mind.
Compare [Rom 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029); [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018); [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021); and see, further, on [Phi
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006), [Phi
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007).

Why, then, it may be asked, is a compound of μορφή employed in this
description of the transfigured Saviour, since the change described is a
change in his outward appearance? It may be answered, because a compound
of σχῆμα, expressing merely a change in the aspect of Christ's person
and garments, would not express the deeper truth of the case, which is,
that the visible change gets its real character and meaning from that
which is essential in our Lord - his divine nature. A fore-shadowing or
prophecy of his true form - his distinctive character - comes out in his
transfiguration. He passes over into a form identified, so far as
revealed, with the divine quality of his being, and prophetic of his
revelation "as he is" ([Jo1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002)), in
the glory which he had with the Father before the world was ([Joh
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#005)). In truth, there is a deep and
pregnant hint in the use of this word, which easily escapes observation,
and which defies accurate definition. The profound and overwhelming
impression upon the three disciples was due to something besides the
shining of Christ's face and garments, and the presence of Moses and
Elijah; and was deeper and subtler than the effect of all these
combined. There was a fact and a power in that vision which mere
radiance and the appearance of the dead patriarchs could not wholly
convey: a revelation of Deity breaking out in that glorified face and
form, which appealed to something deeper than sense, and confirmed the
words from heaven: This is my beloved Son.

The same truth is illustrated in the use of μορφή in [Mar
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012), where it is said that Jesus
appeared in a different form (ἐν ἑτέρᾳ μορφῇ) after his resurrection.
The accidents of figure, face, pierced hands and feet, were the same;
but an indefinable change had passed upon him, the characteristic of
which was that it prefigured his passing into the condition peculiar and
appropriate to his essential spiritual and divine being.

[Matthew 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 17:4</span></span>

Let us make (ποιήσωμεν)

But the best texts read, ποιήσω, I will make, which is more
characteristic of Peter. He would erect the booths himself.

Three tabernacles (σκηνάς)

Tents or booths, out o the brushwood lying near. Peter realized that it
was night, and was for preparing shelters into which the heavenly
visitants might retire after their interview.

[Matthew 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 17:9</span></span>

Vision (ὅραμα).

The spectacle.

[Matthew 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 17:11</span></span>

Cometh

Elijah cometh first. An abstract statement expressing the fact that
Elijah's coming precedes in time the coming of the Messiah. It is a
point of Jewish chronology; just as a teacher of history might say to
his pupils, "The Saxons and Danes precede the Normans in England."
Elijah had already come in the person of John the Baptist.

[Matthew 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 17:15</span></span>

Is lunatic (σεληνιάζεται)

Rev., epileptic. The A. V. preserves the etymology of the word (σελήνη,
the moon), but lunatic conveys to us the idea of demented; while the
Rev. epileptic gives the true character of the disease, yet does not
tell us the fact contained in the Greek word, that epilepsy was supposed
to be affected by the changes of the moon. See on [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).

[Matthew 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 17:17</span></span>

Perverse (διεστραμμένη)

Wyc., wayward. Tynd., crooked; διά, throughout ; στερέφω, to twist.
Warped.

[Matthew 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 17:20</span></span>

Unbelief (ἀπιστίαν)

But the better reading is ὀλιγοπιστίαν, littleness of faith. Hence Rev.,
Because of your little faith.

[Matthew 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 17:24</span></span>

They that received tribute-money (οἱ τὰ δίδαχμα λαμβάνοντες)

Rev., They that received the half-shekel. Every male Israelite of age,
including proselytes and manumitted Jews, was expected to pay annually
for the temple-service a half-shekel or didrachm, about thirty-five
cents. This must be paid in the ancient money of Israel, the regular
half-shekel of the treasury; and the money-changers, therefore, were in
demand to change the current into the temple coin, which they did at a
rate of discount fixed by law, between four and five cents on every
half-shekel. The annual revenue to the money-changers from this source
has been estimated at nearly forty-five thousand dollars; a very large
sum in a country where a laborer received less than twenty cents for a
day's work, and where the good Samaritan left about thirty-three cents
at the inn for the keeping of the wounded man. Jesus attacked a very
powerful interest when he overthrew the tables of the money-changers.

[Matthew 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 17:25</span></span>

Yes (ναί)

Indicating that Jesus had paid the tax on former occasions.

Prevented (προέφθασεν)

Rev., rather awkwardly, but following Tynd., Spake first to him.
Prevent, in its older sense, to anticipate, get before, was a correct
translation. Compare Shakspeare:

"So shall my anticipation prevent your discovery."

Hamlet, ii., 1.

Out of this grew the secondary meaning, to hinder. By getting before
another, one hinders him from accomplishing his purpose. This meaning
has supplanted the other. Wyc. renders came before him. The meaning is
that Jesus did not wait for Peter to tell him of the demand of the
collectors. He anticipated him in speaking about it.

Custom or tribute (τέλη ἢ κῆνσον)

Rev. gives toll for custom. Toll is duty upon goods; tribute, tax upon
individuals. Κῆνσος tribute, is merely a transcription of the Latin
census, which means, first, a registration with a view to taxation, and
then the tax itself.

Strangers (ἀλλοτρίων)

Not foreigners, but others than those of their own families; their
subjects. In other words, Does a king tax his own children or his
subjects?

[Matthew 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 17:27</span></span>

Hook (ἄγκιστρον)

The only mention in the New Testament of fishing with a hook. A single
fish is wanted.

A piece of money (στατῆρα)

The A. V. is very inadequate, because Christ names a definite sum, the
stater, which is a literal transcription of the Greek word, and
represents two didrachmas, or a shekel. Hence Rev., a shekel.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 18](mat018)

</div>
