<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat012)  [Next](mat014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#001)

[Matthew 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 13:2</span></span>

Shore (αἰγιαλὸν)

Rev., beach, that over which the sea (ἅλς) rushes (ἀΐ́σσει). The word for
shore, ἀκτή, on which the sea breaks (ἄγνυμι), is never used in the New
Testament. Wyc., brink.

[Matthew 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 13:3</span></span>

Parables (παραβολαῖς)

From παρά, beside, and βάλλω, to throw. A parable is a form of teaching
in which one thing is thrown beside another. Hence its radical idea is
comparison. Sir John Cheke renders biword, and the same idea is conveyed
by the German Beispiel, a pattern or example ; bei, beside, and the old
high German spel, discourse or narration.

The word is used with a wide range in scripture, but always involves the
idea of comparison:

1\. Of brief sayings, having an oracular or proverbial character. Thus
Peter ([Mat 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#015)), referring to the
words "If the blind lead the blind," etc., says, "declare unto us this
parable." Compare [Luk 6:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#039). So of the
patched garment ([Luk 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#036)), and the
guest who assumes the highest place at the feast ([Luk
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#007), [Luk
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#011)). Compare, also, [Mat
24:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#039); [Mar
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#028).

2\. Of a proverb. The word for proverb (παροιμία) has the same idea at
the root as parable. It is παρά, beside, οἶμος, a way or road. Either a
trite, wayside saying (Trench), or a path by the side of the high road
(Godet). See [Luk 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#023); [Sa1
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#013).

3\. Of a song or poem, in which an example is set up by way of
comparison. See [Mic 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#004); [Hab
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#006).

4\. Of a word or discourse which is enigmatical or obscure until the
meaning is developed by application or comparison. It occurs along with
the words αἴνιγμα, enigma, and πρόβλημα, a problem, something put forth
or proposed (πρό, in front, βάλλω, to throw). See [Psa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#004) (Sept. 48:4); [Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002) (Sept. 77:2); [Pro
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006), where we have παραβολὴν, parable;
σκοτεινὸν λόγον, dark saying; and αἰνίγματα, enigmas. Used also of the
sayings of Balaam ([Num 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007), [Num
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#018); [Num
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003), [Num
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#015)).

In this sense Christ uses parables symbolically to expound the mysteries
of the kingdom of God; as utterances which conceal from one class what
they reveal to another ([Mat
13:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)), and in which familiar facts
of the earthly life are used figuratively to expound truths of the
higher life. The un-spiritual do not link these facts of the natural
life with those of the supernatural, which are not discerned by them
([Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)), and therefore they need
an interpreter of the relation between the two. Such symbols assume the
existence of a law common to the natural and spiritual worlds under
which the symbol and the thing symbolized alike work; so that the one
does not merely resemble the other superficially, but stands in actual
coherence and harmony with it. Christ formulates such a law in
connection with the parables of the Talents and the Sower. "To him that
hath shall be given. From him that hath not shall be taken away." That
is a law of morals and religion, as of business and agriculture. One
must have in order to make. Interest requires capital. Fruit requires
not only seed but soil. Spiritual fruitfulness requires an honest and
good heart. Similarly, the law of growth as set forth in the parable of
the Mustard Seed, is a law common to nature and to the kingdom of God.
The great forces in both kingdoms are germinal, enwrapped in small seeds
which unfold from within by an inherent power of growth.

5\. A parable is also an example or type; furnishing a model or a
warning; as the Good Samaritan, the Rich Fool, the Pharisee and the
Publican. The element of comparison enters here as between the
particular incident imagined or recounted, and all cases of a similar
kind.

The term parable, however, as employed in ordinary Christian
phraseology, is limited to those utterances of Christ which are marked
by a complete figurative history or narrative. It is thus defined by
Goebel ("Parables of Jesus"). "A narrative moving within the sphere of
physical or human life, not professing to describe an event which
actually took place, but expressly imagined for the purpose of
representing, in pictorial figure, a truth belonging to the sphere of
religion, and therefore referring to the relation of man or mankind to
God."

In form the New Testament parables resemble the fable. The distinction
between them does not turn on the respective use of rational and
irrational beings speaking and acting. There are fables where the actors
are human. Nor does the fable always deal with the impossible, since
there are fables in which an animal, for instance, does nothing contrary
to its nature. The distinction lies in the religious character of the
New Testament parable as contrasted with the secular character of the
fable. While the parable exhibits the relations of man to God, the fable
teaches lessons of worldly policy or natural morality and utility. "The
parable is predominantly symbolic; the fable, for the most part,
typical, and therefore presents its teaching only in the form of
example, for which reason it chooses animals by preference, not as
symbolic, but as typical figures; never symbolic in the sense in which
the parable mostly is, because the higher invisible world, of which the
parable sees and exhibits the symbol in the visible world of nature and
man, lies far from it. Hence the parable can never work with fantastic
figures like speaking animals, trees," etc. (Goebel, condensed).

The parable differs from the allegory in that there is in the latter "an
interpenetration of the thing signified and the thing signifying; the
qualities and properties of the first being attributed to the last," and
the two being thus blended instead of being kept distinct and parallel.
See, for example, the allegory of the Vine and the Branches (John 15)
where Christ at once identifies himself with the figure' "I am the true
vine." Thus the allegory, unlike the parable, carries its own
interpretation with it.

Parable and proverb are often used interchangeably in the ;New
Testament; the fundamental conception being, as we have seen, the same
in both, the same Hebrew word representing both, and both being
enigmatical. They differ rather in extent than in essence; the parable
being a proverb expanded and carried into detail, and being necessarily
figurative, which the proverb is not; though the range of the proverb is
wider, since the parable expands only one particular case of a proverb.
(See Trench, "Notes on the Parables," Introd.)

A sower (ὁ σπείρων)

Rev., the sower. Generic, as representing a class.

To sow (τοῦ σπείρειν)

"According to Jewish authorities, there was twofold sowing, as the seed
was either cast by the hand or by means of cattle. In the latter case, a
sack with holes was filled with corn and laid on the back of the animal,
so that, as it moved onward, the seed was thickly scattered" (Edersheim,
"Life and Times of Jesus").

[Matthew 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 13:4</span></span>

By the wayside

Dean Stanley, approaching the plain of Gennesareth, says: "A slight
recess in the hillside, close upon the plain, disclosed at once, in
detail and with a conjunction which I remember nowhere else in
Palestine, every feature of the great parable. There was the undulating
cornfield descending to the water's edge. There was the trodden pathway
running through the midst of it, with no fence or hedge to prevent the
seed from falling here and there on either side of it or upon it; itself
hard with the constant tramp of horse and mule and human feet. There was
the 'good' rich soil which distinguishes the whole of that plain and its
neighborhood from the bare hills elsewhere descending into the lake, and
which, where there is no interruption, produces one vast mass of corn.
There was the rocky ground of the hillside protruding here and there
through the cornfields, as elsewhere through the grassy slopes. There
were the large bushes of thorn - the nabk, that kind of which tradition
says that the crown of thorns was woven - springing up, like the
fruit-trees of the more inland parts, in the very midst of the waving
wheat" ("Sinai and Palestine").

[Matthew 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 13:5</span></span>

Stony places

Not ground covered with loose stones, but a hard, rocky surface, covered
with a thin layer of soil.

[Matthew 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 13:7</span></span>

Sprang up

The seed, therefore, fell, not among standing thorns, but among those
beneath the surface, ready to spring up.

Trench ("Parables") cites a striking parallel from Ovid, describing the
obstacles to the growth of the grain:

"Now the too ardent sun, vow furious showers,

With baleful stars and bitter winds combine

The crop to ravage; while the greedy fowl

Snatch the strewn seeds; and grass with stubborn roots,

And thorn and darnel plague the ripening grain."

Metamorphoses, v., 486.

[Matthew 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 13:8</span></span>

A hundred-fold

Mentioned as something extraordinary. Compare [Gen
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#012). Herodotus (i., 93) says of
Babylonia, "In grain it is so fruitful as to yield commonly
two-hundred-fold; and when the production is the greatest, even
three-hundred-fold."

[Matthew 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 13:11</span></span>

Mysteries (μυστήρια)

From μύω, to close or shut. In classical Greek, applied to certain
religious celebrations to which persons were admitted by formal
initiation, and the precise character of which is unknown. Some suppose
them to have been revelations of religious secrets; others of secret
politico-religious doctrines; others, again, scenic representations of
mythical legends. In this latter sense the term was used in the Middle
Ages of miracle-plays - rude dramas representing scenes from scripture
and from the apocryphal gospels. Such plays are still enacted among the
Basque mountaineers. (See Vincent, "In the Shadow of the Pyrenees.")

A mystery does not denote an unknowable thing, but one which is
withdrawn from knowledge or manifestation, and which cannot be known
without special manifestation of it. Hence appropriate to the things of
the kingdom of heaven, which could be known only by revelation. Paul
([Phi 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#012)) says, "I am instructed
(μεμύημαι) both to be full and to be hungry," etc. But Rev. gives more
correctly the force of instructed, by rendering I have learned the
secret: the verb being μυέω (from the same root as μυστήρια) to initiate
into the mysteries.

[Matthew 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 13:14</span></span>

Is fulfilled (ἀναπληροῦται)

Rather of something in progress: is being fulfilled or in process of
fulfilment.

[Matthew 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 13:15</span></span>

Is waxed gross (ἐπαχύνθη)

Lit., was made fat. Wyc., enfatted.

Are dull of hearing (τοῖς ὠσὶν βαρέως ἤ κουσαν)

Lit., They heard heavily with their ears.

They have closed (ἐκάμμυσαν)

, κατά, down, μύω, to close, as in μυστήρια above Our idiom shuts up the
eyes. The Greek shuts them down. The Hebrew, in [Isa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010), is besmear. This insensibility
is described as a punishment. Compare [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010); [Isa
44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018); in both of which the closing of
the eyes is described as a judgment of God. Sealing up the eyes was an
oriental punishment. Cheyne ("Isaiah") cites the case of a son of the
Great Mogul, who had his eyes sealed up three years by his father as a
punishment. Dante pictures the envious, on the second cornice of
Purgatory, with their eyes sewed up:

"For all their lids an iron wire transpierces,

And sews them up, as to a sparhawk wild

Is done, because it will not quiet stay."

Purg., xiii., 70-72.

Be converted (ἐπιστρέψωσιν)

Rev., turn again; ἐπί, to or toward, στρέφω, to turn; with the idea of
their turning from their evil toward God.

[Matthew 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 13:19</span></span>

When any one heareth

The rendering would be made even more graphic by preserving the
continuous force of the present tense, as exhibiting action in progress,
and the simultaneousness of Satan's work with that of the gospel
instructor. "While any one is hearing, the evil one is coming and
snatching away, just as the birds do not wait for the sower to be out of
the way, but are at work while he is sowing.

He which received seed (ὁ σπαρείς)

Lit., and much better, Rev., He that was sown; identifying the seed of
the figure with the man signified.

[Matthew 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 13:21</span></span>

Dureth for a while (πρόσκαιρός ἐστιν)

Rev., endureth. Lit., is temporary: thus bringing out the quality of the
hearer. He is a creature of circumstances, changing as they change.
Wyc., is temporal, with explanation, lasteth but a little time.

For (δὲ)

Rev. better, and, for the following clause does not give a reason for
the temporariness, but adds something to the description of the hearer.

Tribulation (θλίψεως)

θλίβω, to press or squeeze. Tribulation is perhaps as accurate a
rendering as is possible, being derived from tribulum, the
threshing-roller of the Romans. In both the idea of pressure is
dominant, though θλῖψιμ, does not convey the idea of separation (as of
corn from husk) which is implied in tribulatio. Trench cites, in
illustration of θλῖψις, pressure, the provision of the old English law,
by which those who wilfully refused to plead had heavy weights placed on
their breasts, and so were pressed and crushed to death ("Synonyms of
the New Testament").

[Matthew 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 13:23</span></span>

Understandeth (συνιείς)

See on [Mat 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), prudent. The three
evangelists give three characteristics of the good hearer. Matthew, he
understandeth the word; Mark, he receiveth it; Luke, he keepeth it

[Matthew 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 13:24</span></span>

Put he forth (παρέθηκεν)

But this would be rather the translation of προβάλλω, from which
πρόβλημα, a problem, is derived, while the word here used means rather
to set before or offer. Often used of meals, to serve up. Hence, better,
Rev., set he before them. See on [Luk
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#016).

[Matthew 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 13:25</span></span>

Sowed (ἐπέσπειρεν)

The preposition ἐπί, upon, indicates sowing over what was previously
sown. Rev., "sowed also."

[Matthew 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 13:33</span></span>

Leaven (ζύμῃ)

Wyc., sour dough, as German Sauerteig. From ζέω, to boil or seethe, as
in fermentation. The English leaven is from the Latin levare, to raise,
and appears in the French levain.

[Matthew 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 13:35</span></span>

I will utter (ἐρεύξομαι)

The verb, in which the sound corresponds to the sense (ereuxoma,), means
originally to belch, to disgorge. Homer uses it of the sea surging
against the shore ("Iliad," xvii., 265). Pindar of the eruption of Aetna
("Pyth.," i., 40). There seems to lie in the word a sense of full,
impassioned utterance, as of a prophet.

From the foundation (ἀπὸ καταβολῆς)

"It is assumed by the Psalmsist.([Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)) that there was a hidden meaning
in God's ancient dealings with his people. A typical, archetypical, and
prefigurative element ran through the whole. The history of the dealings
is one long Old Testament parable. Things long kept secret, and that
were hidden indeed in the depths of the divine mind from before the
foundation of the world, were involved in these dealings. And hence the
evangelist wisely sees, in the parabolic teaching of our Lord, a real
culmination of the older parabolic teaching of the Psalmsist. The
culmination was divinely intended, and hence the expression that it
might be fulfilled" (Morison on Matthew).

[Matthew 13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 13:43</span></span>

Shine forth (ἐκλάμψουσιν)

The compound verb with ἐκ, forth, is designedly used to express a
dissipating of darkness which has hidden: a bursting into light. The
righteous shall shine forth as the sun from behind a cloud. The mixture
of evil with good in the world obscures the good, and veils the true
glory of righteous character. Compare [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003).

[Matthew 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 13:47</span></span>

Net (σαγήνῃ)

See on [Mat 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018). The only occurrence
of the word in the New Testament. A long draw-net, the ends of which are
carried out and drawn together. Through the transcription of the word
into the Latin sagena comes seine. From the fact of its making a great
sweep, the Greeks formed a verb from it, σαγηνέυω, to surround and take
with a drag-net. Thus Herodotus (iii., 149) says: "The Persians netted
Santos." And again (vi., 31), "Whenever they became masters of an
island, the barbarians, in every single instance, netted the
inhabitants. Now, the mode in which they practise this netting is the
following: Men join hands, so as to form a line across from the north
coast to the south, and then march through the island from end to end,
and hunt out the inhabitants." Compare [Isa
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#008) : "Those who spread nets on the
face of the waters shall languish." Also, [Hab
1:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#015), where the Chaldaean conquests
are described under this figure.

Gathered of every kind

Compare the graphic passage in Homer ("Odyssey," xxii., 384-389) of the
slain suitors in the halls of Ulysses.

"He saw that all had fallen in blood and dust,

Many as fishes on the shelving beach,

Drawn from the hoary deep by those who tend

The nets with myriad meshes. Poured abroad

Upon the sand, while panting to return

To the salt sea, they lie till the hot sun

Takes their life from them."

[Matthew 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 13:48</span></span>

Sat down

Implying deliberation in the assortment.

[Matthew 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">mat 13:52</span></span>

Which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven

Instructed μαθητευθεὶς. Rev., who hath been made a disciple to the
kingdom, etc. The kingdom of heaven is personified. The disciples of
Christ are disciples of that kingdom of which he is the representative.

Which (ὅστις)

The pronoun marks the householder as belonging to a class and exhibiting
the characteristic of the class: a householder - one of those who bring
forth, etc.

Bringeth forth (ἐκβάλλει)

Lit., flingeth forth. See on [Mat
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035). Indicating his zeal in
communicating instruction and the fulness out of which he speaks.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 14](mat014)

</div>
