<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philemon Index](plm.md)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](plm001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vincent's Word Studies*, by Marvin R. Vincent, \[1886\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

[Philemon](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">plm 0:0</span></span>

The Epistle to Philemon

This epistle is the only private letter of Paul which has been
preserved, and the only one in the New Testament except 3 John.

Onesimus, a slave, had run away from his master, Philemon, of Colossae,
and had hidden himself in Rome, where he came under Paul's influence and
was converted to Christianity.

In his loyalty to the civil law, Paul felt that Onesimus, in fulfillment
of his Christian duty, should return to his master. He had probably
robbed Philemon, and should make at least this restitution. He therefore
sent Onesimus back to Colossae under the escort of Tychicus, who carried
this letter to Philemon.

Paul did not attack slavery as an institution. He did not charge
Philemon to emancipate his slave. For the final extinction of slavery he
relied on the spirit of the Gospel, and on its principle that all men
are brethren in Christ and alike servants of the one heavenly Master.

After salutations to Philemon and his household, and acknowledgments of
Philemon's loving service to the Church and to himself, he introduces
the main subject of the letter. He asks as a personal favor that
Philemon will kindly receive Onesimus. He praises the ministries of the
latter to himself, playing upon his name, "once unprofitable but now
profitable," and expressing his desire to keep him with himself. This,
however, he will not do without Philemon's consent. If Philemon shall
see fit to retain him in his own service, he will find him, as a
Christian, far more valuable than he was as a pagan slave. Perhaps his
flight was divinely permitted, in order that he might return to his
master as a Christian brother. He hints delicately at Onesimus' possible
thefts, offering his personal security for the amount stolen, though
intimating that Philemon is already in his debt for his own conversion.
He is sure that Philemon will comply with his request. He thinks he will
soon be released from prison, and asks his friend to prepare him a
lodging in view of his visit.

The epistle has always been celebrated as a model of Christian tact and
courtesy. Paul waives his apostolic right to command, and throws himself
upon the appeal of Christian friendship, backing it with a delicate
allusion to his sufferings for the Gospel's sake. Without palliating
Onesimus' fault, he throws round him the protection of his own
confidence and esteem. He softens the phrases which describe the slave's
flight and theft. He does not say "he ran away," but "he was separated
from thee." He does not say "he stole," but, "if he hath wronged thee or
oweth thee aught." With exquisite tact he assumes that Philemon will
regard Onesimus' ministries to the prisoner as his own, and will rejoice
in them as an expression of his own affection.

Few sections of Scripture contain within the same space more topics for
the preacher. Among these may be noted, Fellowship in Christian service
([Plm 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md), [Plm
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md), [Plm
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#011.md), [Plm
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#012.md), [Plm
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#013.md), [Plm
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#019).md): Friendship founded in faith
([Plm 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#003.md), [Plm
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005.md), [Plm
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#020).md): The practical quality of love
and faith ([Plm 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md), [Plm
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#005.md), [Plm
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#006.md), [Plm
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#007).md): The true method of Christian
persuasion: The power of the Gospel to deal with the worst: The
Christian method of dealing with bad social institutions: The union of
all classes and conditions in Christ.

The letter has often been compared with the younger Pliny's epistle to
Sabinianus, written under similar circumstances. Doddridge remarks that
although antiquity furnishes no example of the epistolary style equal to
Pliny's letter, Paul's letter to Philemon is far superior as a human
composition. Dr. Davidson says: "It puts Paul's character in a light
which none other of his writings exhibit. The qualities which dictated
its composition are eminently attractive. Dignity, generosity, prudence,
friendship, politeness, skillful address, purity, are apparent. Hence it
has been called, with great propriety, 'the polite epistle.' True
delicacy, fine address, consummate courtesy, nice strokes of rhetoric,
make it a unique specimen of the epistolary style. It shows the perfect
Christian gentleman." Ewald: "Nowhere can the sensibility and warmth of
tender friendship blend more beautifully with the higher feeling of a
superior mind, nay, of a teacher and apostle, than this brief and yet so
eminently significant letter." Renan: "A little chef-d'oeuere of the art
of letter-writing." Calvin: "Though he handleth a subject which
otherwise were low and mean, yet after his manner he is borne up aloft
unto God. With such modest entreaty doth he humble himself on behalf of
the lowest of men, that scarce anywhere else is the gentleness of his
spirit portrayed more truly to the life." Maclaren: "Without thought of
effect, and with complete unconsciousness, this man beats all the famous
letter-writers on their own ground. That must have been a great
intellect, and closely conversant with the Fountain of all light and
beauty, which could shape the profound and far-reaching teachings of the
epistle to the Colossians, and pass from them to the graceful simplicity
and sweet kindliness of this exquisite letter; as if Michael Angelo had
gone straight from smiting his magnificent Moses from the marble mass,
to incise some delicate and tiny figure of Love or Friendship on a
cameo."

The authenticity of the epistle is conceded. The assaults of Baur and
Holtzmann require no notice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Chapter 1](plm001.md)

</div>
