[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob02)  [Next](lob04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PART ONE

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

<span id="img_00200"></span> ![](img/00200.jpg)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

### 1. King Suddhodana And Queen Maya

SERENE and magnificent was this city where once had dwelt the great
hermit Kapila. It seemed to be built out of some fragment of the sky:
the walls were like clouds of light, and the houses and gardens radiated
a divine splendor. Precious stones glistened everywhere. Within its
gates darkness was as little known as poverty. At night, when silver
moonbeams fingered each turret, the city was like a pond of lilies; by
day, when the terraces were bathed in golden sunshine, the city was like
a river of lotuses.

King Suddhodana reigned in Kapilavastu; he was its brightest ornament.
He was kindly and generous, modest and just. He pursued his bravest
enemies, and they fell before him in battle like elephants struck down
by Indra; and as darkness is dissipated by the sharp rays of the sun,
even so were the wicked vanquished by his radiant glory. He brought
light into the world, and he pointed out the true path to those who were
close to him. His great wisdom gained for him many friends, many
courageous, discerning friends, and as starlight intensifies

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

the brightness of the moon, so did their brilliance enhance his
splendor.

Suddhodana, king of the Sakya race, had wed many queens. His favorite
among these was Maya.

She was very beautiful. It was as if the Goddess Lakshmi herself had
strayed into the world. When she spoke, it was like the song of birds in
the spring, and her words were sweet and pleasant. Her hair was the
color of the black bee; her forehead was as chaste as a diamond; her
eyes as cool as a young blue-lotus leaf; and no frown ever marred the
exquisite curve of her brows.

She was virtuous. She desired the happiness of her subjects; she was
attentive to the pious precepts of her teachers. She was truthful, and
her conduct was exemplary.

King Suddhodana and Queen Maya lived quietly and happily in Kapilavastu.

One day, the queen bathed and perfumed her body, then attired herself in
a delicate, colorful robe and covered her arms with jewels. Golden
bangles tinkled about her ankles, and her face was radiant with
happiness as she sought the king's presence.

Suddhodana was seated in a great hall. Sweet music was lulling his
tranquil reverie. Maya took the seat on his right, and she said to him:

"Deign to listen, my lord. Deign to grant the

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

favor I have to ask of you, O protector of the earth."

"Speak, my queen," replied Suddhodana. "What is this favor?"

"My lord, there is great suffering in the world, and I look with
compassion on all who suffer. I would be helpful to my fellow-creatures;
I would close my mind to evil thoughts. And since I shall forbear doing
and thinking evil, since I am thus kind to myself, I would be helpful, I
would be kind to others, too. I will put aside pride, O king, and I will
not listen to the voice of evil desire. I will never utter a vain or
dishonorable word. My lord, henceforth I will lead a life of austerity;
I will fast; and I will never bear ill will or commit wickedness, suffer
anxiety or hatred, know anger or covetousness. I will be satisfied with
my lot; I will forswear deceit and envy; I will be pure; I will walk in
the straight path; and I will practise virtue. And because of these
things my eyes are now smiling, because of these things my lips are now
joyous."

She paused a moment. The king gazed at her in tender admiration. She
continued:

"My lord, I ask you to respect my austere life. Do not enter the dim
forest of desire; allow me to observe the holy law of abstinence. I
shall repair to those apartments that are in the lofty reached of the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

palace, and there, where the swans build their nests, have prepared for
me a couch strewn with flowers, a soft, perfumed couch. My maidens shall
attend to my wants, and you may dismiss the eunuchs, the guards and all
vulgar servants. I would be spared the sight of ugliness, the sound of
revelry and the odor of things unpleasant."

She said no more. The king replied:

"So let it be! The favor you ask, I grant." And he commanded:

"Up there, in the lofty reaches of the palace, where the air throbs with
the song of the swans, let the queen, resplendent in gold and precious
stones, rest on a couch of rare flowers; and let there be music. And to
her maidens, gathered about her, she will be like a daughter of the Gods
in some celestial garden!"

The queen rose.

"It is well, my lord," said she. "But hear me further. Free your
prisoners. Give generously to the poor. Let men and women and children
be happy! Be merciful, O king, and, that the world may be joyous, be a
father to all living creatures!"

She then left the hall and went to the top of the royal palace.

It was the advent of spring. Birds darted and wheeled above the
terraces; birds sang in the trees. The gardens were in flower; on the
surface of the

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

ponds, the lotus buds were unfolding. And, as the queen sought her
bower, the piping note of flutes and the deeper harmony of strings
resounded of their own accord, and a refulgent glory appeared over the
palace, a glory so perfect that the sunlight turned to shadow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2. Maya's Dream](lob04)
