[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob04)  [Next](lob06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### 3. The Birth of Siddhartha

MONTHS passed. Then, one day, the queen knew that the time was
approaching for her son to be born. She went to King Suddhodana, and she
said to him:

"My lord, I would wander through the happy gardens. Birds are singing in
the trees, and the air is bright with flower-dust. I would wander
through the happy gardens."

"But it will weary you, O queen," replied Suddhodana. "Are you not
afraid?"

"The innocent being that I carry in my womb must be born amid the
innocence of budding flowers. No, I will go, O master, I will go into
the flower-gardens."

The king yielded to Maya's wish. He said to his servants:

"Go into the gardens and deck them out in silver and in gold. Drape the
trees with precious hangings. Let everything be magnificent, for the
queen will pass."

Then he addressed Maya:

"Array yourself, to-day, in great splendor, O

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Maya. Ride in a
gorgeous palanquin; let your most beautiful maidens carry you. Order
your servants to use rare perfumes; have them wear ropes of pearls and
bracelets of precious stones; have them carry lutes and drums and
flutes, and sing sweet songs that would delight the Gods themselves."

Suddhodana was obeyed, and when the queen reached the palace-gates the
guards greeted her with joyous cries. Bells peeled gaily, peacocks
spread their gorgeous tail-feathers, and the song of swans throbbed in
the air.

They came to a wood where the trees were in bloom, and Maya ordered them
to set down the palanquin. She stepped out and began wandering about,
aimlessly. She was happy. And behold! she found a rare tree, the
branches drooping under their burden of blossoms. She went up to it;
gracefully extending her hand, she drew down a branch. Suddenly, she
stood very still. She smiled, and the maidens who were near her received
a lovely child into their arms.

At that same moment all that was alive in the world trembled with joy.
The earth quivered. Songs and the patter of dancing feet echoed in the
sky. Trees of all seasons burst into flower, and ripe fruit hung from
the branches. A pure, serene light appeared in the sky. The sick were
rid of their suffering. The hungry were satisfied. Those to

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

whom wine had played false became sober. Madmen recovered their reason,
the weak their strength, the poor their wealth. Prisons opened their
gates. The wicked were cleansed of all evil.

One of Maya's maidens hastened to King Suddhodana and joyously
exclaimed:

"My lord, my lord, a son is born to you, a son who will bring great
glory to your house!"

He was speechless. But his face was radiant with joy, and he knew great
happiness.

Presently he summoned all the Sakyas, and he commanded them to accompany
him into the garden where the child had been born. They obeyed, and,
with a host of brahmans in attendance, they formed a noble retinue as
they gravely followed the king.

When he came near the child, the king made a deep obeisance, and he
said:

"Do you bow as I bow before the prince, to whom I give the name
Siddhartha."

They all bowed, and the brahmans, inspired by the Gods, then sang:

"All creatures are happy, and they are no longer rough, those roads
travelled by men, for he is born, he who gives happiness: he will bring
happiness into the world. In the darkness a great light has dawned, the
sun and the moon are like dying embers, for he is born, he who gives
light: he will

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

bring light into the world. The blind see, the deaf hear, the foolish
have recovered their reason, for he is born, he who restores sight, and
restores hearing, and restores the mind: he will bring sight, he will
bring hearing, he will bring reason into the world. Perfumed zephyrs
ease the suffering of mankind, for he is born, he who heals: he will
bring health into the world. Flames are no longer pitiless, the flow of
rivers has been stayed, the earth has trembled gently: he will be the
one to see the truth."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. Asita's Prediction](lob06)
