[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob05)  [Next](lob07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### 4. Asita's Prediction

THE great hermit Asita, whose austerities were pleasing to the Gods,
heard of the birth of him who was to save mankind from the torment of
rebirth. In his thirst for the true law, he came to the palace of King
Suddhodana and gravely approached the women's quarters. His years and
his learning lent him great dignity.

The king showed him the courtesies that custom prescribed and addressed
him in a seemly manner:

"Happy, indeed, am I! Truly, this child of mine will enjoy distinguished
favor, for the venerable Asita has come purposely to see me. Command me.
What must I do? I am your disciple, your servant."

The hermit, his eyes shining with the light of joy, gravely spoke these
words:

"This has happened to you, O noble, generous and hospitable king,
because you love duty and because you are ever kind to those who are
wise and to those who are full of years. This has happened to you
because your ancestors, though rich in land

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

and rich in gold, were above all rich in virtue. Know the reason for my
coming, O king, and rejoice. In the air I heard a divine voice speaking
and it said: 'A son has been born to the king of the Sakyas, a son who
will have the true knowledge.' I heard these words, and I came, and my
eyes shall now behold the glory of the Sakyas."

Overwhelmed with joy, the king went to fetch the child. Taking him from
his nurse's breast, he showed him to the aged Asita.

The hermit noticed that the king's son bore the marks of omnipotence.
His gaze hovered over the child, and presently his lashes were wet with
tears. Then he sighed and turned his eyes to the sky.

The king saw that Asita was weeping, and he began to fear for his son.
He questioned the old man:

"You say, O venerable roan, that my son's body differs little from that
of a God. You say that his birth was a wondrous thing, that in the
future his glory will be supreme, yet you look at him with eyes that are
filled with tears. Is his life, then, to be a fragile thing? Was he born
only to bring me sorrow? Must this new branch wither before it has burst
into flower? Speak, O saintly man, speak quickly; you know the great
love a father bears his son."

"Be not distressed, O king," replied the hermit.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "What I have told
you is true: this child will know great glory. If I weep, it is for
myself. My life draws to a close and he is born, he who will destroy the
evil of rebirth. He will surrender sovereign power, he will master his
passions, he will understand truth, and error will disappear in the
world before the light of his knowledge, even as night flees before the
spears of the sun. From the sea of evil, from the stinging spray of
sickness, from the surge and swell of old age, from the angry waves of
death, from these will he rescue the suffering world, and together they
will sail away in the great ship of knowledge. He will know where it
takes its rise, that swift, wonderful, beneficent river, the river of
duty; he will reveal its course, and those who are tortured by thirst
will come and drink of its waters. To those tormented by sorrow, to
those enslaved by the senses, to those wandering in the forest of
existences like travellers who have lost their way, he will point out
the road to salvation. To those burning with the fire of passion, he
will be the cloud that brings refreshing rain; armed with the true law,
he will go to the prison of desires where all creatures languish, and he
will break down the evil gates. For he who will have perfect
understanding will set the world free. Therefore do not grieve, O king.
He alone is to be pitied who will not hear the voice of your son, and
that is why

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I weep, I who, in
spite of my austerities, in spite of my meditations, will never know his
message and his law. Yes, even he is to be pitied who ascends to the
loftiest gardens of the sky."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. Siddhartha at the Temple](lob07)
