[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob03)  [Next](lob05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

### 2. Maya's Dream

THE same hour that spring was born, a dream came to Maya as she slept.
She saw a young elephant descending from the sky. It had six great
tusks; it was as white as the snow on mountain-tops. Maya saw it enter
her womb, and thousands of Gods suddenly appeared before her. They
praised her with immortal songs, and Maya understood that nevermore
would she know disquietude or hatred or anger.

Then she awoke. She was happy; it was a happiness she had never felt
before. Arising, she arrayed herself in bright colors, and, followed by
her most beautiful maidens, she passed through the palace-gates. She
walked in the gardens until she came to a little wood, where she found a
shaded seat. Then she sent two of her maidens to King Suddhodana with
this message: "That the king should come to the wood; Queen Maya wishes
to see him and will await him there."

The king promptly complied. He left the hall where, with the help of his
counsellors, he had been administering justice to the inhabitants of the
city.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He walked toward
the wood, but, as he was about to enter, a strange feeling came over
him. His limbs faltered, his hands trembled and tears welled from his
eyes. And he thought:

"Never, not even in the heat of battle when fighting my bravest enemies,
have I felt as profoundly disturbed as at this moment. Why is it I can
not enter the wood where the queen awaits me? Can anyone explain my
agitation?"

Whereupon a great voice thundered in the sky:

"Be happy, King Suddhodana, worthiest of the Sakyas! He who seeks
supreme knowledge is about to come into the world. He has chosen your
family to be his family because of its fame, good fortune and virtue,
and for mother he has chosen the noblest of all women, your wife, Queen
Maya. Be happy, King Suddhodana! He who seeks supreme knowledge would
fain be your son!"

The king knew that the Gods were speaking, and he rejoiced. Regaining
his serenity, he entered the wood where Maya awaited him.

He .saw her; quietly, without .arrogance, he asked:

"Why did you send for me? What do you wish?" The queen told him of the
dream she had had; then added:

"My lord, there are brahmans who are clever at interpreting dreams. Send
for them. They will

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

know if the palace has been visited by good or evil, and if we should
rejoice or mourn."

The king agreed, and brahmans familiar with the mystery of dreams were
summoned to the palace. When they had heard Maya's story they spoke in
this manner:

"A great joy is to be yours, O king, O queen. A son will be born to you,
distinguished by the favor of the Gods. If, one day, he should renounce
royalty, leave the palace, cast love aside; if, seized with compassion
for the worlds, he should live the wandering life of a monk, he will
deserve marvellous praise, he will richly deserve magnificent gifts. He
will be adored by the worlds, for he will give them that which they
hunger after. O master, O mistress, your son will be a Buddha!"

The brahmans withdrew. The king and queen looked at each other, and
their faces were radiant with happiness and peace. Suddhodana then
ordered that alms be distributed to the poor in Kapilavastu; and food
was given to the hungry, drink to the thirsty, and the women received
flowers and perfume. Maya became the object of their veneration; the
sick crowded her path, and when she extended her right hand they were
cured. The blind saw, the deaf heard, the dumb spoke, and when the dying
touched a blade of grass she had gathered they recovered at once their
health and their

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

strength. And above the city a ceaseless melody was borne on the wind,
exquisite flowers rained from the sky, and songs of gratitude rose on
the air around the palace walls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. The Birth of Siddhartha](lob05)
