[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lob55)  [Next](lob57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00292BROK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life of Buddha*, by A. Ferdinand Herold, tr. by Paul C Blum
\[1922\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### 14. The Buddha Teaches the Doctrine

THE Master was growing old. When he was in Rajagriha, he called the
monks together, and he spoke to them at great length:

"Monks, do not forget the precepts I have given you. Observe them
carefully. You will assemble twice a month, and you will confess your
transgressions to one another. If you feel that you have done evil, and
you keep it to yourself, you will be guilty of a lie. Admit your
transgressions: the confession will bring you rest and peace. The four
gravest sins a monk can commit are, as you know: to have intercourse
with a woman; to steal anything whatsoever; to kill a human being or
instigate a murder; and to pretend to possess a superhuman power that he
knows he does not possess. A monk who has committed one of these four
sins must be expelled from the community. Monks, do not bandy words with
women, and do not corrupt them. Do not bear false witness against your
brothers. Do not try to sow discord in the community. Do not strive to
evade a reprimand. Never

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

lie, and insult no one. Observe carefully, O monks, all the precepts I
have given you."

He said further:

"Seriousness is the province of immortality; frivolity, the province of
death. They that are serious do not die; they that are frivolous are
always dead. Therefore would the wise be serious. The wise attain the
supreme blessing, nirvana. He sees his glory increase who is energetic
and can remember, who thinks honestly and acts deliberately, who is
continent, who lives within the law, and who is serious. It is frivolity
the fools and the weak-minded pursue; the wise treasure seriousness as a
miser his gold. The monk who would be serious, who sees the danger of
frivolity, shakes the evil law like the wind does the leaves; he tears
asunder the bonds that bind him to the world; he is close to nirvana.
Standing on the terrace of wisdom, released from all suffering, the
serious man who has conquered frivolity looks out over the unhappy
multitude, as, from the summit of a mountain, one might gaze upon the
crowd in the plains below."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 15. The Buddha and the Shepherd](lob57)
