[TOPY](https://www.topy.net/topy/) \[External Site\] 
[Sacred-Texts](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index)  [Index](black) 
[Previous](black7) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

SEVEN

  
With thee increased strength ov thee Temple, both in experience and
numbers, a considerable amount ov directed energy is being released
within a common framework. We know from our own experiences that this
combined energy is highly potent, and that it brings individual
Sigilisers into close psychick contact in thee knowledge that we are all
active, working within thee Temple with a unity ov purpose. Thee
recognition ov this - that we are each a part ov a united network ov
exchange - serves to further promote individual work and development. It
is vital for thee continued growth ov thee Temple to act upon this
realisation, to share experiences, ideas and methods.  
  
Thee exchange ov information through active participation in thee
network ov Access Points helps each ov us, and provides thee opportunity
for positive inter-action. We are all Individuals, butter it is in a
modern tribal framework that we progress. We separate ourselves from
thee flatness ov everyday life by our choice + acknowledge our
Individuality, and by our coumitment to it, and we firm thee truth that
nothing is beyond our capabilities when we work together. Thee tribe
exists everywhere, butter it is invisible to those who don't know how to
see. We can use this to our advantage, and promote our ideas and aims
through thee subtlest ov means, or by outrage and shock. We can melt
away and reappear as we will. We can evade attack by seeing clearly. We
can strengthen ourselves with discipline.  
  
Sigils generate thee confidence for coumitment to Individuality by
showing each ov us who we are; and that, once known, is something that
can never be taken away. They bring thee strength and determination
necessary to becoum wholly alive, and thus to accept full responsibility
for our own actions. This is thee freedom we strive for: thee freedom to
reject thee dictates ov dogma and fashion in any and every sphere ov
life. Thee freedom to be true to our deepest desires. Sigils enable us
to overcoum thee debilitating comfort ov habit, to accept new challenge
as a friend, to live a life rich in experience and unencumbered by thee
negative attitude ov others to change. Life becoums fluid, a continual
transformation ov colour, energised with magickal purpose.

  
Inevitably there are as many views about Sigils as there are Individuals
working with them, and it is our intention that just as thee Sigil
process should remain fluid, reflecting thee Individual, so will this
book remain fluid, reflecting thee Temple as it develops and grows. Thee
process ov transformation is never coumplete, and whilst this edition
can be no more than a snapshot ov thee moment, there is nothing that
says we cannot add to thee album. In this way we will draw closer to
each other, inter-acting so that we avoid thee dilution ov our efforts
which could result from an active/passive split.  
  
Thee Temple is a place for thee active. It is about sharing, working
together and for each other. We all have valuable gifts to offer, and
personal experiences to relate. We are asking, therefore, that you write
and tell us ov your ideas and feelings about your Sigil work: how they
affect you personally; thee technical process ov working Individually
developed; parallels and differences with other methods, both occult and
psychological; insights gained from Sigils, both personal and relating
to thee wider society and its obsessions. We want your thoughts, essays,
criticism, encouragement - in fact anything that you would like to see
in a future expanded edition ov Thee Sigils Book.  
  
Thee Temple's main weapon in overcouming thee insidious hand ov control
is our internal exchange ov information, and thee external expansion ov
propaganda in thee Information War. It is selfish to keep things to
ourselves. By exchanging ideas within thee Temple network we can each
develop faster, making thee necessary connections to help remove all
unwanted obstacles. Together we will Rise. In Strength. In L-ov-e. In
Unity.

IMPORTANT NOTE

  
For those who are new to thee Temple we should explain that thee Sigil
materialand documentation you send is filed only under your Temple name,
which allSigilising members receive, and that this name should be used
in all futurecorrespondence. All so-called "real names" have been
removed fromthese files for mutual protection. We request thee date in
order to documentthee chronology and development ov thee material you
send in. Your Sigilswill remain private at all times.  
  
