[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050278)  [Next](2050280) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xiv"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Letter XIII</span>.—*To the Church at
Nicomedia* <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2207](#fn_2205) .

<span id="xiii.xiv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p3.1"></span>May</span> the Father of mercies and the God
of all comfort, Who disposeth all things in wisdom for the best, visit
you by His own grace, and comfort you by Himself, working in you that
which is well-pleasing to Him, and may the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ come upon you, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, that ye may
have healing of all tribulation and affliction, and advance towards all
good, for the perfecting of the Church, for the edification of your
souls, and to the praise of the glory of His name. But in making here a
defence of ourselves before your charity, we would say that we were not
neglectful to render an account of the charge entrusted to us, either in
time past, or since the departure hence of Patricius of blessed memory;
but we insist that there were many troubles in our Church, and the decay
of our bodily powers was great, increasing, as was natural, with
advancing years; and great also was the remissness of your Excellency
towards us, inasmuch as no word ever came by letter to induce us to
undertake the task, nor was any connection kept up between your Church
and ourselves, although Euphrasius, your Bishop of blessed memory, had
in all holiness bound together our Humility to himself and to you with
love, as with chains. But even though the debt of love has not been
satisfied before, either by our taking charge of you, or your Piety’s
encouragement of us, now at any rate we pray to God, taking your prayer
to God as an ally to our own desire, that we may with all speed possible
visit you, and be comforted along with you, and along with you show
diligence, as the Lord may direct us; so as to discover a means of
rectifying the disorders which have already found place, and of securing
safety for the future, so that you may no longer be distracted by this
discord, one withdrawing himself from the Church in one direction,
another in another, and be thereby exposed as a laughing-stock to the
Devil, whose desire and business it is (in direct contrariety to the
Divine will) that no one should be saved, or come to the knowledge of
the truth. For how do you think, brethren, that we were afflicted upon
hearing from those who reported to us your state, that there was no
return to better things <span id="fr_2206"></span>[2208](#fn_2206) ; but
that the resolution <span id="page_536">p. 536</span> <span
id="xiii.xiv-Page_536"></span>of those who had once swerved aside is
ever carried along in the same course; and—as water from a conduit often
overflows the neighbouring bank, and streaming off sideways, flows away,
and unless the leak is stopped, it is almost impossible to recall it to
its channel, when the submerged ground has been hollowed out in
accordance with the course of the stream,—even so the course of those
who have left the Church, when it has once through personal motives
deflected from the straight and right faith, has sunk deep in the rut of
habit, and does not easily return to the grace it once had. For which
cause your affairs demand a wise and strong administrator, who is
skilled to guide such wayward tempers aright, so as to be able to recall
to its pristine beauty the disorderly circuit of this stream, that the
corn-fields of your piety may once again flourish abundantly, watered by
the irrigating stream of peace. For this reason great diligence and
fervent desire on the part of you all is needed for this matter, that
such an one may be appointed your President by the Holy Spirit, who will
have a single eye to the things of God alone, not turning his glance
this way or that to any of those things that men strive after. For for
this cause I think that the ancient law gave the Levite no share in the
general inheritance of the land; that he might have God alone for the
portion of his possession, and might always be engaged about the
possession in himself, with no eye to any material object.

<span id="xiii.xiv-p5"></span>\[What follows is unintelligible, and
something has probably been lost.\]

<span id="xiii.xiv-p6"></span>For it is not lawful that the simple
should meddle with that with which they have no concern, but which
properly belongs to others. For you should each mind your own business,
that so that which is most expedient may come about \[and that your
Church may again prosper\], when those who have been dispersed have
returned again to the unit of the one body, and spiritual peace is
established by those who devoutly glorify God. To this end it is well, I
think, to look out for high qualifications in your election, that he who
is appointed to the Presidency may be suitable for the post. Now the
Apostolic injunctions do not direct us to look to high birth, wealth,
and distinction in the eyes of the world among the virtues of a Bishop;
but if all this should, unsought, accompany your spiritual chiefs, we do
not reject it, but consider it merely as a shadow accidentally <span
id="fr_2207"></span>[2209](#fn_2207) following the body; and none the
less shall we welcome the more precious endowments, even though they
happen to be apart from those boons of fortune. The prophet Amos was a
goat-herd; Peter was a fisherman, and his brother Andrew followed the
same employment; so too was the sublime John; Paul was a tent-maker,
Matthew a publican, and the rest of the Apostles in the same way—not
consuls, generals, prefects, or distinguished in rhetoric and
philosophy, but poor, and of none of the learned professions, but
starting from the more humble occupations of life: and yet for all that
their voice went out into all the earth, and their words unto the ends
of the world. “Consider your calling, brethren, that not many wise after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God hath
chosen the foolish things of the world <span
id="fr_2208"></span>[2210](#fn_2208) .” Perhaps even now it is thought
something foolish, as things appear to men, when one is not able to do
much from poverty, or is slighted because of meanness of
extraction <span id="fr_2209"></span>[2211](#fn_2209) , not of
character. But who knows whether the horn of anointing is not poured out
by grace upon such an one, even though he be less than the lofty and
more illustrious? Which was more to the interest of the Church at Rome,
that it should at its commencement be presided over by some high-born
and pompous senator, or by the fisherman Peter, who had none of this
world’s advantages to attract men to him <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2212](#fn_2210) ? What house had he, what slaves,
what property ministering luxury, by wealth constantly flowing in? But
that stranger, without a table, without a roof over his head, was richer
than those who have all things, because through having nothing he had
God wholly. So too the people of Mesopotamia, though they had among them
wealthy satraps, preferred Thomas above them all to the presidency of
their Church; the Cretans preferred Titus, the dwellers at Jerusalem
James, and we Cappadocians the centurion, who at the Cross acknowledged
the Godhead of the Lord, though there were many at that time of splendid
lineage, whose fortunes enabled them to maintain a stud, and who prided
themselves upon having the first place in the Senate. And in all the
Church one may see those who are great according to God’s standard
preferred above worldly magnificence. You too, I think, ought to have an
eye to these spiritual qualifications at this time present, if you
really mean to revive the ancient glory of your Church. For nothing is
better known to you than your own history, that anciently, before the
city near you <span id="fr_2211"></span>[2213](#fn_2211) flourished,
<span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="xiii.xiv-Page_537"></span>the seat of government was with you, and
among Bithynian cities there was nothing preeminent above yours. And
now, it is true, the public buildings that once graced it have
disappeared, but the city that consists in men—whether we look to
numbers or to quality—is rapidly rising to a level with its former
splendour. Accordingly it would well become you to entertain thoughts
that shall not fall below the height of the blessings that now are
yours, but to raise your enthusiasm in the work before you to the height
of the magnificence of your city, that you may find such a one to
preside over the laity as will prove himself not unworthy of you <span
id="fr_2212"></span>[2214](#fn_2212) . For it is disgraceful, brethren,
and utterly monstrous, that while no one ever becomes a pilot unless he
is skilled in navigation, he who sits at the helm of the Church should
not know how to bring the souls of those who sail with him safe into the
haven of God. How many wrecks of Churches, men and all, have ere now
taken place by the inexperience of their heads! Who can reckon what
disasters might not have been avoided, had there been aught of the
pilot’s skill in those who had command? Nay, we entrust iron, to make
vessels with, not to those who know nothing about the matter, but to
those who are acquainted with the art of the smith; ought we not
therefore to trust souls to him who is well-skilled to soften them by
the fervent heat of the Holy Spirit, and who by the impress of rational
implements may fashion each one of you to be a chosen and useful vessel?
It is thus that the inspired Apostle bids us to take thought, in his
Epistle to Timothy <span id="fr_2213"></span>[2215](#fn_2213) , laying
injunction upon all who hear, when he says that a Bishop must be without
reproach. Is this all that the Apostle cares for, that he who is
advanced to the priesthood should be irreproachable? and what is so
great an advantage as that all possible qualifications should be
included in one? But he knows full well that the subject is moulded by
the character of his superior, and that the upright walk of the guide
becomes that of his followers too. For what the Master is, such does he
make the disciple to be. For it is impossible that he who has been
apprenticed to the art of the smith should practise that of the weaver,
or that one who has only been taught to work at the loom should turn out
an orator or a mathematician: but on the contrary that which the
disciple sees in his master he adopts and transfers to himself. For this
reason it is that the Scripture says, “Every disciple that is perfect
shall be as his master <span id="fr_2214"></span>[2216](#fn_2214) .”
What then, brethren? Is it possible to be lowly and subdued in
character, moderate, superior to the love of lucre, wise in things
divine, and trained to virtue and considerateness in works and ways,
without seeing those qualities in one’s master? Nay, I do not know how a
man can become spiritual, if he has been a disciple in a worldly school.
For how can they who are striving to resemble their master fail to be
like him? What advantage is the magnificence of the aqueduct to the
thirsty, if there is no water in it, even though the symmetrical
disposition of columns <span id="fr_2215"></span>[2217](#fn_2215)
variously shaped rear aloft the pediment <span
id="fr_2216"></span>[2218](#fn_2216) ? Which would the thirsty man
rather choose for the supply of his own need, to see marbles beautifully
disposed or to find good spring water, even if it flowed through a
wooden pipe, as long as the stream which it poured forth was clear and
drinkable? Even so, brethren, those who look to godliness should neglect
the trappings of outward show, and whether a man exults in powerful
friends, or plumes himself on the long list of his dignities, or boasts
that he receives large annual revenues, or is puffed up with the thought
of his noble ancestry, or has his mind on all sides clouded <span
id="fr_2217"></span>[2219](#fn_2217) with the fumes of self-esteem,
should have nothing to do with such an one, any more than with a dry
aqueduct, if he display not in his life the primary and essential
qualities for high office. But, employing the lamp of the Spirit for the
search <span id="fr_2218"></span>[2220](#fn_2218) , you should, as far
as is possible, seek for “a garden enclosed, a fountain sealed <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2221](#fn_2219) ,” that, by your election the
garden of delight having been opened and the water of the fountain
having been unstopped, there may be a common acquisition to the Catholic
Church. May God grant that there may soon be found among you such an
one, who shall be a chosen vessel, a pillar of the Church. But we trust
in the Lord that so it will be, if you are minded by the grace of
concord with one mind to see that which is good, preferring to your own
wills the will of the Lord, and that which is approved of Him, and
perfect, and well-pleasing in His eyes; that there may be such a happy
issue among you, that therein <span id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span
id="xiii.xiv-Page_538"></span>we may rejoice, and you triumph, and the
God of all be glorified, Whom glory becometh for ever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[535:2207](2050279.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p2"></span> Euphrasius, mentioned in this Letter, had
subscribed to the *first* Council of Constantinople, as Bishop of
Nicomedia. On his death, clergy and laity proceeded to a joint election
of a successor. The date of this is uncertain; Zacagni and Page think
that the dispute here mentioned is to be identified with that which
Sozomen records, and which is placed by Baronius and Basnage in 400,
401. But we have no evidence that Gregory’s life was prolonged so far.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[535:2208](2050279.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p4.1"></span>οὐδεμία γέγονε τῶν ἐφεστώτων ἐπιστροφὴ</span>,
literally, “no return from existing (or besetting) evils.” The words
might possibly mean something very different; “no concern shown on the
part of those set over you” (H. C. O.).

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[536:2209](2050279.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p7"></span> The shadow may be considered as an
accidental appendage to the body, inasmuch as it does not always appear,
but only when there is some light, *e.g.* of the sun, to cast it (H. C.
O.).

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[536:2210](2050279.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p8"></span> <span id="xiii.xiv-p8.1"></span>[1 Cor.
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span id="xiii.xiv-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[536:2211](2050279.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p9.1"></span>σώματος δυσγένειαν</span>, might possibly mean
“bodily deformity;” but less probably (H. C. O.).

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[536:2212](2050279.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.2"></span>φολκόν</span>: if <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.3"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.4"></span>φόλκιον</span>, “a boat taken in tow,”
perhaps still regarding S. Peter as the master of a ship: or “an
appendage;” Gregory so uses it in his *De Animâ.* Some suggest <span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xiv-p10.5"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xiii.xiv-p10.6"></span>φόδιον</span>, meaning
“resource,” but <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.7"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.8"></span>φολκόν</span> is simpler.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[536:2213](2050279.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p10.9"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p11"></span> *i.e.*Nicæa. “The whirligig of time has
brought about its revenge,” and Nicomedia (Ismid) is now more important
than Nicæa (Isnik). Nicomedia had, in fact, been the residence of the
Kings of Bithynia; and Diocletian had intended to make it the rival of
Rome (cf. Lactantius, *De Mort. Persec.* c. 7). But it had been
destroyed by an earthquake in the year 368: Socrates, ii. 39.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[537:2214](2050279.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p12"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.2"></span>μῶν</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.4"></span>μῖν</span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[537:2215](2050279.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p12.5"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p13"></span> [1 Tim. iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#002)<span id="xiii.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[537:2216](2050279.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p14"></span> S. [Luke vi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#040)<span id="xiii.xiv-p14.1"></span>.
Cf. Gregory’s Treatises *On Perfection, What is the Christian name and
profession, Sketch of the aim of True Asceticism.*

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[537:2217](2050279.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p15.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p15.2"></span>τῶν κιόνων ἐπάλληλος θέσις</span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[537:2218](2050279.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p16.1"></span>πέτασον</span>.

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[537:2219](2050279.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p17"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p17.1"></span>περιαυτίζεται</span>

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[537:2220](2050279.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p18"></span> For humility and spirituality required
in prelates, cf. Origen, *c. Cels.* viii. 75. “We summon to the
magistracies of these churches men of ability and good life: but instead
of selecting the ambitious amongst these we put compulsion upon those
whose deep humility makes them backward in accepting this general charge
of the Church. Our best rulers then, are like consuls compelled to rule
by a mighty Emperor: no other, we are persuaded, than the Son of God,
Who is the Word of God. If, then, these magistrates in the assembly of
God’s nation rule well, or at all events strictly in accordance with the
Divine enactment, they are not because of that to meddle with the
secular law-making. It is not that the Christians wish to escape all
public responsibility, that they keep themselves away from such things;
but they wish to reserve themselves for the higher and more urgent
responsibilities (<span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p18.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xiv-p18.2"></span>ναγκαιοτέρᾳ λειτουργί& 139·</span>) of God’s
Church.”

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[537:2221](2050279.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="xiii.xiv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xiv-p19"></span> [Song
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012)<span id="xiii.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishop of Melitene.](2050280)
