[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050189)  [Next](2050191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p1"></span> VIII. *Why man’s form is upright; and
that hands were given him because of reason; wherein also is a
speculation on the difference of souls* <span
id="fr_1607"></span>[1609](#fn_1607) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p3"></span>1. But man’s form is upright, and
extends aloft towards heaven, and looks upwards: and these are marks of
sovereignty which show his royal dignity. For the fact that man alone
among existing things is such as this, while all others bow their bodies
downwards, clearly points to the difference of dignity between those
which stoop beneath his sway and that power which rises above them: for
all the rest have the foremost limbs of their bodies in the form of
feet, because that which stoops needs something to support it: but in
the formation of man these limbs were made hands, for the upright body
found one base, supporting its position securely on two feet, sufficient
for its needs.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p4"></span>2. Especially do these ministering hands
adapt themselves to the requirements of the reason: indeed if one were
to say that the ministration of hands is a special property of the
rational nature, he would not be entirely wrong; and that not only
because his thought turns to the common and obvious fact that we signify
our reasoning by means of the natural employment of our hands in written
characters. It is true that this fact, that we speak by writing, and, in
a certain way, converse by the aid of our hands, preserving sounds by
the forms of the alphabet, is not unconnected with the endowment of
reason; but I am referring to something else when I say that the hands
co-operate with the bidding of reason.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p5"></span>3. Let us, however, before discussing
this point, consider the matter we passed over (for the subject of the
order of created things almost escaped our notice), why the growth of
things that spring from the earth takes precedence, and the irrational
animals come next, and then, after the making of these, comes man: for
it may be that we learn from these facts not only the obvious thought,
that grass appeared to the Creator useful for the sake of the animals,
while the animals were made because of man, and that for this reason,
before the animals there was made their food, and before man that which
was to minister to human life.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p6"></span>4. But it seems to me that by these
facts Moses reveals a hidden doctrine, and secretly delivers that wisdom
concerning the soul, of which the learning that is without had indeed
some imagination, but no clear comprehension. His discourse then hereby
teaches us that the power of life and soul may be considered in three
divisions. For one is only a power of growth and nutrition supplying
what is suitable for the support of the bodies that are nourished, which
is called the vegetative <span id="fr_1608"></span>[1610](#fn_1608)
soul, and is to be seen in plants; for we may perceive in growing plants
a certain vital power destitute of sense; and there is another form of
life besides this, which, while it includes the form above mentioned, is
also possessed in addition of the power of management according to
sense; and this is to be found in the nature of the irrational animals:
for they are not only the subjects of nourishment and growth, but also
have the activity of sense and perception. But perfect bodily life is
seen in the rational (I mean the human) nature, which both is nourished
and endowed with sense, and also partakes of reason and is ordered by
mind.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p8"></span>5. We might make a division of our
subject in some such way as this. Of things existing, part are
intellectual, part corporeal. Let us leave alone for the present the
division of the intellectual according to its properties, for our
argument is not concerned with these. Of the corporeal, part is entirely
devoid of life, and part shares in vital energy. Of a living body,
again, part has sense conjoined with life, and part is without sense:
lastly, that which has <span id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-Page_394"></span>sense is again divided into rational and
irrational. For this reason the lawgiver says that after inanimate
matter (as a sort of foundation for the form of animate things), this
vegetative life was made, and had earlier <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1611](#fn_1609) existence in the growth of plants:
then he proceeds to introduce the genesis of those creatures which are
regulated by sense: and since, following the same order, of those things
which have obtained life in the flesh, those which have sense can exist
by themselves even apart from the intellectual nature, while the
rational principle could not be embodied save as blended with the
sensitive,—for this reason man was made last after the animals, as
nature advanced in an orderly course to perfection. For this rational
animal, man, is blended of every form of soul; he is nourished by the
vegetative kind of soul, and to the faculty of growth was added that of
sense, which stands midway, if we regard its peculiar nature, between
the intellectual and the more material essence being as much coarser
than the one as it is more refined than the other: then takes place a
certain alliance and commixture of the intellectual essence with the
subtle and enlightened element of the sensitive nature: so that man
consists of these three: as we are taught the like thing by the apostle
in what he says to the Ephesians <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[1612](#fn_1610) , praying for them that the
complete grace of their “body and soul and spirit” may be preserved at
the coming of the Lord; using, the word “body” for the nutritive part,
and denoting the sensitive by the word “soul,” and the intellectual by
“spirit.” Likewise too the Lord instructs the scribe in the Gospel that
he should set before every commandment that love to God which is
exercised with all the heart and soul and mind <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[1613](#fn_1611) : for here also it seems to me that
the phrase indicates the same difference, naming the more corporeal
existence “heart,” the intermediate “soul,” and the higher nature, the
intellectual and mental faculty, “mind.”

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p12"></span>6. Hence also the apostle recognizes
three divisions of dispositions, calling one “carnal,” which is busied
with the belly and the pleasures connected with it, another
“natural <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1614](#fn_1612) ,” which holds a
middle position with regard to virtue and vice, rising above the one,
but without pure participation in the other; and another “spiritual,”
which perceives the perfection of godly life: wherefore he says to the
Corinthians, reproaching their indulgence in pleasure and passion, “Ye
are carnal <span id="fr_1613"></span>[1615](#fn_1613) ,” and incapable
of receiving the more perfect doctrine; while elsewhere, making a
comparison of the middle kind with the perfect, he says, “but the
natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit: for they are
foolishness unto him: but he that is spiritual judgeth all things, yet
he himself is judged of no man <span
id="fr_1614"></span>[1616](#fn_1614) .” As, then, the natural man is
higher than the carnal, by the same measure also the spiritual man rises
above the natural.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p16"></span>7. If, therefore, Scripture tells us
that man was made last, after every animate thing, the lawgiver is doing
nothing else than declaring to us the doctrine of the soul, considering
that what is perfect comes last, according to a certain necessary
sequence in the order of things: for in the rational are included the
others also, while in the sensitive there also surely exists the
vegetative form, and that again is conceived only in connection with
what is material: thus we may suppose that nature makes an ascent as it
were by steps—I mean the various properties of life—from the lower to
the perfect form.

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p17"></span>8 <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1617](#fn_1615) . Now since man is a rational
animal, the instrument of his body must be made suitable for the use of
reason <span id="fr_1616"></span>[1618](#fn_1616) ; as you may see
musicians producing their music according to the form of their
instruments, and not piping with harps nor harping upon flutes, so it
must needs be that the organization of these instruments of ours should
be adapted for reason, that when struck by the vocal organs it might be
able to sound properly for the use of words. For this reason the hands
were attached to the body; for though we can count up very many uses in
daily life for which these skilfully contrived and helpful instruments,
our hands, that easily follow every art and every operation, alike in
war and peace <span id="fr_1617"></span>[1619](#fn_1617) , are
serviceable, yet nature added them to our body pre-eminently for the
sake of reason. For if man were destitute of hands, the various parts of
his face would certainly have been arranged like those of the
quadrupeds, to suit the purpose of his feeding: so that its form would
have been lengthened out and pointed towards the nostrils, and his lips
would have projected from his mouth, lumpy, and stiff, and thick, fitted
for taking up the grass, and his tongue would either have lain between
his teeth, of a kind to match his lips, fleshy, and hard, and rough,
assisting his teeth to deal with what came under his grinder, or it
would have been moist and hanging out at the side like that of dogs and
other carnivorous beasts, projecting through the gaps in <span
id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span id="x.ii.ii.ix-Page_395"></span>his
jagged row of teeth. If, then, our body had no hands, how could
articulate sound have been implanted in it, seeing that the form of the
parts of the mouth would not have had the configuration proper for the
use of speech, so that man must of necessity have either bleated, or
“baaed,” or barked, or neighed, or bellowed like oxen or asses, or
uttered some bestial sound? but now, as the hand is made part of the
body, the mouth is at leisure for the service of the reason. Thus the
hands are shown to be the property of the rational nature, the Creator
having thus devised by their means a special advantage for reason.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[393:1609](2050190.htm#fr_1607) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p2"></span> The Latin version divides the chapters
somewhat differently at this point. The Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p2.1"></span>ms.</span> gives this section the title, “Of
the dignity of the human form, and why man was created after the other
creatures.”

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[393:1610](2050190.htm#fr_1608) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7"></span> “Vegetative”:—reading (with several
<span class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> of both
classes of those cited by Forbes) <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.2"></span>φυτικὴ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.3"></span>φυσικὴ</span> (the reading which Forbes
follows in his text). A similar reading has been adopted in some later
passages, where the <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.4"></span>mss.</span> show similar variations. It
seems not unlikely that the less common <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.5"></span>φυτικὸς</span> should have been altered by
copyists to <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.6"></span>φυσικός</span>. But Gregory seems in this
treatise to use the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p7.7"></span>φύσις</span> for the *corporeal* nature: and
he may have employed the adjectival form in a corresponding sense.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[394:1611](2050190.htm#fr_1609) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p9"></span> *Earlier,* i.e. earlier than the animal
life, or “sensitive” soul.

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[394:1612](2050190.htm#fr_1610) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10"></span> The reference is really to <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10.1"></span>[1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10.2"></span>.
Apparently all Forbes’ <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10.3"></span>mss.</span> read <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10.4"></span>πρὸς τοὺς ᾽Εφεσίους</span>: but the Latin
version of Dionysius Exiguus corrects the error, giving the quotation at
greater length.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[394:1613](2050190.htm#fr_1611) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p10.5"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p11"></span> Cf. S. [Mark xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#030)<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[394:1614](2050190.htm#fr_1612) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p13.1"></span>ψυχικὴν</span>: “psychic” or “animal:”—the
Authorised Version translates the word by “natural.”

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[394:1615](2050190.htm#fr_1613) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p14"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[394:1616](2050190.htm#fr_1614) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p15"></span> Cf. [1 Cor.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[394:1617](2050190.htm#fr_1615) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p18"></span> The Latin versions make ch. ix. begin
at this point. The Bodleian <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>ms.</span> gives as its title:—“That the
form of the human body agrees with the rationality of the mind.”

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[394:1618](2050190.htm#fr_1616) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19"></span> It is not absolutely clear whether
<span class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19.1"></span>λόγος</span> in
the following passage means *speech* or *reason*—and whether <span
class="Greek"><span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19.2"></span>λογικὸς</span> means
“capable of speech,” or “rational.” But as <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19.3"></span>λογικὸς</span> in §7 clearly has the force
of “rational,” it would seem too abrupt a transition to make it mean
“capable of speech” in the first line of §8, and this may determine the
meaning of <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19.4"></span>λόγος</span>.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[394:1619](2050190.htm#fr_1617) <span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p19.5"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p20"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p20.1"></span>τῶν</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="x.ii.ii.ix-p20.2"></span>τὸν</span>, with some of Forbes’ <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.ix-p20.3"></span>mss.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the form of man was framed to serve as an instrument for the
use of reason.](2050191)
