[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050246)  [Next](2050248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxix"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxix-p2.1"></span>It</span> is, then, completely in keeping
with this, that He Who was thus pouring Himself into our nature should
accept this commixture in all its accidents. For as they who wash
clothes do not pass over some of the dirt and cleanse the rest, but
clear the whole cloth from all its stains, from one end to the other,
that the cloak by being uniformly brightened from washing may be
throughout equal to its own standard of cleanness, in like manner, since
the life of man was defiled by sin, in its beginning, end, and all its
intermediate states, there needed an abstergent force to penetrate the
whole, and not to mend some one part by cleansing, while it left another
unattended to. For this reason it is that, seeing that our life has been
included between boundaries on either side, one, I mean, at its
beginning, and the other at its ending, at each boundary the force that
is capable of correcting our nature is to be found, attaching itself to
the beginning, and extending to the end, and touching all between those
two points <span id="fr_2006"></span>[2008](#fn_2006) . Since, then,
there is for all men only one way of entrance into this life of ours,
from whence was He Who was making His entrance amongst us to transport
Himself into our life? From heaven, perhaps some one will say, who
rejects with contempt, as base and degraded, this species of birth,
*i.e.* the human. But there was no humanity in heaven: and in that
supramundane existence no disease of evil had been naturalized; but He
Who poured Himself into man adopted this commixture with a view to the
*benefit* of it. Where, then, evil was not and the human life was not
lived, how is it that any one seeks *there* the scene of this wrapping
up of God in man, or, rather, not man, but some phantom resemblance of
man? In what could the recovery of our nature have consisted if, while
this earthly creature was diseased and needed this recovery, something
else, amongst the heavenly beings, had experienced the Divine
sojourning? It is impossible for the sick man to be healed, unless his
suffering member receives the healing. If, therefore, while this sick
part was on earth, omnipotence had touched it not, but had regarded only
its own dignity, this its pre-occupation with matters with which we had
nothing in common would have been of no benefit to man. And with regard
to the undignified in the case of Deity we can make no distinction; that
is, if it is allowable to conceive at all of anything beneath the
dignity of Deity beside evil. On the contrary, for one who forms such a
narrow-minded view of the greatness of the Deity as to make it consist
in inability to admit of fellowship with the peculiarities of our
nature, the degradation is in no point lessened by the Deity <span
id="page_497">p. 497</span> <span id="xi.ii.xxix-Page_497"></span>being
conformed to the fashion of a heavenly rather than of an earthly body.
For every *created* being is distant, by an equal degree of inferiority,
from that which is the Highest, Who is unapproachable by reason of the
sublimity of His Being: the whole universe is in value the same distance
beneath Him. For that which is absolutely inaccessible does not allow
access to some one thing while it is unapproachable by another, but it
transcends all existences by an equal sublimity. Neither, therefore, is
the earth further removed from this dignity, nor the heavens closer to
it, nor do the things which have their existence within each of these
elemental worlds differ at all from each other in this respect, that
some are allowed to be in contact with the inaccessible Being, while
others are forbidden the approach. Otherwise we must suppose that the
power which governs the Universe does not equally pervade the whole, but
in some parts is in excess, in others is deficient. Consequently, by
this difference of less or more in quantity or quality, the Deity will
appear in the light of something composite and out of agreement with
itself; if, that is, we could suppose it, as viewed in its essence, to
be far away from us, whilst it is a close neighbour to some other
creature, and from that proximity easily apprehended. But on this
subject of that exalted dignity true reason looks neither downward nor
upward in the way of comparison; for all things sink to a level beneath
the power which presides over the Universe: so that if it shall be
thought by them that any earthly nature is unworthy of this intimate
connection with the Deity, neither can any other be found which has such
worthiness. But if all things equally fall short of this dignity, one
thing there is that is not beneath the dignity of God, and that is, to
do good to him that needed it. If we confess, then, that where the
disease was, there the healing power attended, what is there in this
belief which is foreign to the proper conception of the Deity?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[496:2008](2050247.htm#fr_2006) <span
id="xi.ii.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxix-p3"></span> “In order that the sacrifice might be
representative, He took upon Him the whole of our human nature and
became flesh, conditioned though that fleshly nature was throughout by
sin. It was not only in His death that we contemplate Him as the
sin-bearer: but throughout His life He was as it were conditioned by the
sinfulness of those with whom His human nature brought Him into close
and manifold relations.”—*Lux Mundi,* p. 217 (Augustine, *de Musicâ,*
vi. 4, quoted in note, “Hominem sine peccato, non sine peccatoris
conditione, suscepit”).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVIII](2050248)
