[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050133)  [Next](2050135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p1"></span> §2. *Then referring to the blasphemy
of Eunomius, which had been refuted by the great Basil, where he
banished the Only-begotten God to the realm of darkness, and the apology
or explanation which Eunomius puts forth for his blasphemy, he shows
that his present blasphemy is rendered by his apology worse than his
previous one; and herein he very ably discourses of the “true” and the
“unapproachable” Light.*

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p2"></span>Let us also investigate this point as
well,—what defence he has to offer on those matters on which he was
convicted of error by the great Basil, when he banishes the
Only-begotten God to the realm of darkness, saying, “As great as is the
difference between the generate and the ungenerate, so great is the
divergence between Light and Light.” For as he has already shown that
the difference between the generate and the ungenerate is not merely one
of greater or less intensity, but that they are diametrically opposed as
regards their meaning; and since he has inferred by logical consequence
from his premises that, as the difference between the light of the
Father and that of the Son corresponds to ungeneracy and generation, we
must necessarily suppose in the Son not a diminution of light, but a
complete alienation from light. For as we cannot say that generation is
a modified ungeneracy, but the signification of the terms <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p2.1"></span>γέννησις</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p2.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p2.3"></span>γεννησία</span> are
absolutely contradictory and mutually exclusive, so, if the same
distinction is to be preserved between the Light of the Father and that
conceived as existing in the Son, it will be logically concluded that
the Son is not henceforth to be conceived as Light, as he is excluded
alike from ungeneracy itself, and from the light which accompanies that
condition,—and He Who is something different from light will evidently,
by consequence, have affinity with its contrary,—since this absurdity, I
say, results from his principles, Eunomius endeavours to explain it away
by dialectic artifices, delivering himself as follows: “For we know, we
know the true Light, we know Him who created the light after the heavens
and the earth, we have heard the Life and Truth Himself, even Christ,
saying to His disciples, ‘Ye are the light of the world <span
id="fr_1042"></span>[1044](#fn_1042) ,’ we have learned from the blessed
Paul, when he gives the title of ‘Light unapproachable <span
id="fr_1043"></span>[1045](#fn_1043) ’ to <span id="page_CCXLIII">p.
CCXLIII</span> <span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-Page_CCXLIII"></span>the God over
all, and by the addition defines and teaches us the transcendent
superiority of His Light; and now that we have learnt that there is so
great a difference between the one Light and the other, we shall not
patiently endure so much as the mere mention of the notion that the
conception of light in either case is one and the same.” Can he be
serious when he advances such arguments in his attempts against the
truth, or is he experimenting upon the dulness of those who follow his
error to see whether they can detect so childish and transparent a
fallacy, or have no sense to discern such a barefaced imposition? For I
suppose that no one is so senseless as not to perceive the juggling with
equivocal terms by which Eunomius deludes both himself and his admirers.
The disciples, he says, were termed light, and that which was produced
in the course of creation is also called light. But who does not know
that in these only the name is common, and the thing meant in each case
is quite different? For the light of the sun gives discernment to the
sight, but the word of the disciples implants in men’s souls the
illumination of the truth. If, then, he is aware of this difference even
in the case of that light, so that he thinks the light of the body is
one thing, and the light of the soul another, we need no longer discuss
the point with him, since his defence itself condemns him if we hold our
peace. But if in that light he cannot discover such a difference as
regards the mode of operation, (for it is not, he may say, the light of
the eyes that illumines the flesh, and the spiritual light which
illumines the soul, but the operation and the potency of the one light
and of the other is the same, operating in the same sphere and on the
same objects,) then how is it that from the difference between the light
of the beams of the sun and that of the words of the Apostles, he infers
a like difference between the Only-begotten Light and the Light of the
Father? “But the Son,” he says, “is called the ‘true’ Light, the Father
‘Light unapproachable.’” Well, these additional distinctions import a
difference in degree only, and not in kind, between the light of the Son
and the light of the Father. He thinks that the “true” is one thing, and
the “unapproachable” another. I suppose there is no one so idiotic as
not to see the real identity of meaning in the two terms. For the “true”
and the “unapproachable” are each of them removed in an equally absolute
degree from their contraries. For as the “true” does not admit any
intermixture of the false, even so the “unapproachable” does not admit
the access of its contrary. For the “unapproachable” is surely
unapproachable by evil. But the light of the Son is not evil; for how
can any one see in evil that which is true? Since, then, the truth is
not evil, no one can say that the light which is in the Father is
unapproachable by the truth. For if it were to reject the truth it would
of course be associated with falsehood. For the nature of
contradictories is such that the absence of the better involves the
presence of its opposite. If, then, any one were to say that the Light
of the Father was contemplated as remote from the presentation of its
opposite, he would interpret the term “unapproachable” in a manner
agreeable to the intention of the Apostle. But if he were to say that
“unapproachable” signified alienation from good, he would suppose
nothing else than that God was alien from, and at enmity with, Himself,
being at the same time good and opposed to good. But this is impossible:
for the good is akin to good. Accordingly the one Light is not divergent
from the other. For the Son is the true Light, and the Father is Light
unapproachable. In fact I would make bold to say that the man who should
interchange the two attributes would not be wrong. For the true is
unapproachable by the false, and on the other side, the unapproachable
is found to be in unsullied truth. Accordingly the unapproachable is
identical with the true, because that which is signified by each
expression is equally inaccessible to evil. What is the difference then,
that is imagined to exist in these by him who imposes on himself and his
followers by the equivocal use of the term “Light”? But let us not pass
over this point either without notice, that it is only after garbling
the Apostle’s words to suit his own fancy that he cites the phrase as if
it came from him. For Paul says, “*dwelling in* light
unapproachable <span id="fr_1044"></span>[1046](#fn_1044) .” But there
is a great difference between *being* oneself something and *being* in
something. For he who said, “dwelling in light unapproachable,” did not,
by the word “dwelling,” indicate God Himself, but that which surrounds
Him, which in our view is equivalent to the Gospel phrase which tells us
that the Father is in the Son. For the Son is true Light, and the truth
is unapproachable by falsehood; so then the Son is Light unapproachable
in which the Father dwells, or in Whom the Father is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[CCXLII:1044](2050134.htm#fr_1042) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p2.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p3"></span> S. [Matt. v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[CCXLII:1045](2050134.htm#fr_1043) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p4"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p4.1"></span>. The quotation, as S. Gregory points
out, is inexact.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[CCXLIII:1046](2050134.htm#fr_1044) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p5"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.ii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He further proceeds notably to interpret the language of the
Gospel, “In the beginning was the Word,” and “Life” and “Light,” and
“The Word was made flesh,” which had been misinterpreted by Eunomius;
and overthrows his blasphemy, and shows that the dispensation of the
Lord took place by loving-kindness, not by lack of power, and with the
co-operation of the Father.](2050135)
