[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050084)  [Next](2050086) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p1"></span> §2. *He convicts Eunomius of having
used of the Only-begotten terms applicable to the existence of the
earth, and thus shows that his intention is to prove the Son to be a
being mutable and created.*

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p2"></span>And this he shows very plainly by his
contention against our arguments, where he says that “the essence of the
Son came into being from the Father, not put forth by way of extension,
not separated from its conjunction with Him that generated Him by flux
or division, not perfected by way of growth, not transformed by way of
change, but obtaining existence by the mere will of the Generator.” Why,
what man whose mental senses are not closed up is left in ignorance by
this utterance that by these statements the Son is being represented by
Eunomius as a part of the creation? What hinders us from saying all this
word for word as it stands, about every single one of the things we
contemplate in creation? Let us apply, if you will, the definition to
any of the things that appear in creation, and if it does not admit the
same sequence, we will condemn ourselves for having examined the
definition slightingly, and not with the care that befits the truth. Let
us exchange, then, the name of the Son, and so read the definition word
by word. We say that the essence of the *earth* came into being from the
Father, not separated by way of extension or division from its
conjunction with Him Who generated it, nor perfected by way of growth,
nor put forth by way of change, but obtaining existence by the mere will
of Him Who generated it. Is there anything in what we have said that
does not apply to the existence of the earth? I think no one would say
so: for God did not put forth the earth by being extended, nor bring its
essence into existence by flowing or by dissevering Himself from
conjunction with Himself, nor did He bring it by means of gradual growth
from being small to completeness of magnitude, nor was He fashioned into
the form of earth by undergoing mutation or alteration, but His will
sufficed Him for the existence of all things that were made: “He spake
and they were generated <span id="fr_614"></span>[616](#fn_614) ,” so
that even the name of “generation” does not fail to accord with the
existence of the earth. Now if these things may be truly said of the
parts of the universe, what doubt is still left as to our adversaries’
doctrine, that while, so far as words go, they call Him “Son,” they
represent Him as being one of the things that came into existence by
creation, set before the rest only in precedence of order? just as you
might say about the trade of a smith, that from <span id="page_CLVI">p.
CLVI</span> <span id="viii.i.vi.ii-Page_CLVI"></span>it come all things
that are wrought out of iron; but that the instrument of the tongs and
hammer, by which the iron is fashioned for use, existed before the
making of the rest; yet, while this has precedence of the rest, there is
not on that account any difference in respect of matter between the
instrument that fashions and the iron that is shaped by the instrument,
(for both one and the other are iron,) but the one form is earlier than
the other. Such is the theology of heresy touching the Son,—to imagine
that there is no difference between the Lord Himself and the things that
were made by Him, save the difference in respect of order.

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p4"></span>Who that is in any sense classed among
Christians admits that the definition <span
id="fr_615"></span>[617](#fn_615) of the essence of the parts of the
world, and of Him Who made the world, is the same? For my own part I
shudder at the blasphemy, knowing that where the definition of things is
the same neither is their nature different. For as the definition of the
essence of Peter and John and other men is common and their nature is
one, in the same way, if the Lord were in respect of nature even as the
parts of the world, they must acknowledge that He is also subject to
those things, whatever they may be, which they perceive in them. Now the
world does not last for ever: thus, according to them, the Lord also
will pass away with the heaven and the earth, if, as they say, He is of
the same kind with the world. If on the other hand He is confessed to be
eternal, we must needs suppose that the world too is not without some
part in the Divine nature, if, as they say, it corresponds with the
Only-begotten in the matter of creation. You see where this fine process
of inference makes the argument tend, like a stone broken off from a
mountain ridge and rushing down-hill by its own weight. For either the
elements of the world must be Divine, according to the foolish belief of
the Greeks, or the Son must not be worshipped. Let us consider it thus.
We say that the creation, both what is perceived by the mind, and that
which is of a nature to be perceived by sense, came into being from
nothing: this they declare also of the Lord. We say that all things that
have been made consist by the will of God: this they tell us also of the
Only-begotten. We believe that neither the angelic creation nor the
mundane is of the essence of Him that made it: and they make Him also
alien from the essence of the Father. We confess that all things serve
Him that made them: this view they also hold of the Only-begotten.
Therefore, of necessity, whatever else it may be that they conceive of
the creation, all these attributes they will also attach to the
Only-begotten: and whatever they believe of Him, this they will also
conceive of the creation: so that, if they confess the Lord as God, they
will also deify the rest of the creation. On the other hand, if they
define these things to be without share in the Divine nature, they will
not reject the same conception touching the Only-begotten also. Moreover
no sane man asserts Godhead of the creation. Then neither—I do not utter
the rest, lest I lend my tongue to the blasphemy of the enemy. Let those
say what consequence follows, whose mouth is well trained in blasphemy.
But their doctrine is evident even if they hold their peace. For one of
two things must necessarily happen:—either they will depose the
Only-begotten God, so that with them He will no more either be, or be
called so: or, if they assert Godhead of Him, they will equally assert
it of all creation:—or, (for this is still left to them,) they will shun
the impiety that appears on either side, and take refuge in the orthodox
doctrine, and will assuredly agree with us that He is not created, that
they may confess Him to be truly God.

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p6"></span>What need is there to take time to
recount all the other blasphemies that underlie his doctrine, starting
from this beginning? For by what we have quoted, one who considers the
inference to be drawn will understand that the father of falsehood, the
maker of death, the inventor of wickedness, being created in a nature
intellectual and incorporeal, was not by that nature hindered from
becoming what he is by way of change. For the mutability of essence,
moved either way at will, involves a capacity of nature that follows the
impulse of determination, so as to become that to which its
determination leads it. Accordingly they will define the Lord as being
capable even of contrary dispositions, drawing Him down as it were to a
rank equal with the angels, by the conception of creation <span
id="fr_616"></span>[618](#fn_616) . But let them listen to the great
voice of Paul. Why is it that he says that He alone has been called Son?
Because He is *not* of the nature of angels, but of that which is more
excellent. “For unto which of the angels said He at any time, ‘Thou art
My Son, This day have I begotten Thee’? and when again He bringeth the
first-begotten into the world He saith, ‘And let all the angels of God
worship Him.’ And of the angels He saith, ‘Who maketh His angels
spirits, and His <span id="page_CLVII">p. CLVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-Page_CLVII"></span>ministers a flame of fire’: but of
the Son He saith, ‘Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever; a sceptre of
righteousness is the sceptre of Thy kingdom <span
id="fr_617"></span>[619](#fn_617) ,’” and all else that the prophecy
recites together with these words in declaring His Godhead. And he adds
also from another Psalm the appropriate words, “Thou, Lord, in the
beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the
works of Thine hands,” and the rest, as far as “But Thou art the same,
and Thy years shall not fail <span id="fr_618"></span>[620](#fn_618) ,”
whereby he describes the immutability and eternity of His nature. If,
then, the Godhead of the Only-begotten is as far above the angelic
nature as a master is superior to his slaves, how do they make common
either with the sensible creation Him Who is Lord of the creation, or
with the nature of the angels Him Who is worshipped by them <span
id="fr_619"></span>[621](#fn_619) , by detailing, concerning the manner
of His existence, statements which will properly apply to the individual
things we contemplate in creation, even as we already showed the account
given by heresy, touching the Lord, to be closely and appropriately
applicable to the making of the earth?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_614"></span>[CLV:616](2050085.htm#fr_614) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3"></span> Cf. [Ps.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009), [Ps.
148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps. xxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3.2"></span>,
and [Ps. cxlviii. 5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3.3"></span>, in LXX. (reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p3.5"></span>γεννήθησαν</span>).

<span id="fn_615"></span>[CLVI:617](2050085.htm#fr_615) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p5"></span> The force of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>λόγος</span> here
appears to be nearly equivalent to “idea,” in the sense of an exact
expression of the nature of a thing. Gulonius renders it by “ratio.”

<span id="fn_616"></span>[CLVI:618](2050085.htm#fr_616) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p7"></span> The argument appears to be this:—The
Anomœans assert, on the ground that He is created, that the Son’s
essence is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p7.1"></span>τρεπτὸν</span>, liable to change; where
there is the possibility of change, the nature must have a capacity of
inclining one way or the other, according to the balance of will
determining to which side the nature shall incline: and that this is the
condition of the angels may be seen from the instance of the fallen
angels, whose nature was inclined to evil by their <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p7.2"></span>προαίρεσις</span>. It
follows that to say the Son is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p7.3"></span>τρεπτὸς</span> implies that He is on a
level with the angelic nature, and might fall even as the angels fell.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[CLVII:619](2050085.htm#fr_617) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8.1"></span>,
and foll. It is to be noted that Gregory connects <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8.2"></span>πάλιν</span> in [Heb.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8.3"></span>, with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8.4"></span>εἰσαγάγῃ</span>, not treating it, as the
A.V. does, as simply introducing another quotation. This appears from
his later reference to the text.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[CLVII:620](2050085.htm#fr_618) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p9"></span> Cf. [Ps.
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#026)<span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[CLVII:621](2050085.htm#fr_619) <span
id="viii.i.vi.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.ii-p10"></span> Oehler’s punctuation here seems to
be unsatisfactory.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then again admirably discusses the term πρωτότοκος as it is
four times employed by the Apostle.](2050086)
