[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050076)  [Next](2050078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.v.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p1"></span> §2. *He then once more excellently,
appropriately, and clearly examines and expounds the passage, “The Lord
Created Me.”*

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p2"></span>Perhaps that passage in the Proverbs
might be brought forward against us which the champions of heresy are
wont to cite as a testimony that the Lord was created—the passage, “The
Lord created me in the beginning of His ways, for His works <span
id="fr_532"></span>[534](#fn_532) .” For because these words are spoken
by Wisdom, and the Lord is called Wisdom by the great Paul <span
id="fr_533"></span>[535](#fn_533) , they allege this passage as though
the Only-begotten God Himself, under the name of Wisdom, acknowledges
that He was created by the Maker of all things. I imagine, however, that
the godly sense of this utterance is clear to moderately attentive and
painstaking persons, so that, in the case of those who are instructed in
the dark sayings of the Proverbs, no injury is done to the doctrine of
the faith. Yet I think it well briefly to discuss what is to be said on
this subject, that when the intention of this passage is more clearly
explained, the heretical doctrine may have no room for boldness of
speech on the ground that it has evidence in the writing of the inspired
author. It is universally admitted that the name of “proverb,” in its
scriptural use, is not applied with regard to the evident sense, but is
used with a view to some hidden meaning, as the Gospel thus gives the
name of “proverbs <span id="fr_534"></span>[536](#fn_534) ” to dark and
obscure sayings; so that the “proverb,” if one were to set forth the
interpretation of the name by a <span id="page_CXXXVIII">p.
CXXXVIII</span> <span id="viii.i.v.ii-Page_CXXXVIII"></span>definition,
is a form of speech which, by means of one set of ideas immediately
presented, points to something else which is hidden, or a form of speech
which does not point out the aim of the thought directly, but gives its
instruction by an indirect signification. Now to this book such a name
is especially attached as a title, and the force of the appellation is
at once interpreted in the preface by the wise Solomon. For he does not
call the sayings in this book “maxims,” or “counsels,” or “clear
instruction,” but “proverbs,” and proceeds to add an explanation. What
is the force of the signification of this word? “To know,” he tells us,
“wisdom and instruction <span id="fr_535"></span>[537](#fn_535) ”; not
setting before us the course of instruction in wisdom according to the
method common in other kinds of learning; he bids a man, on the other
hand <span id="fr_536"></span>[538](#fn_536) , first to become wise by
previous training, and then so to receive the instruction conveyed by
proverb. For he tells us that there are “words of wisdom” which reveal
their aim “by a turn <span id="fr_537"></span>[539](#fn_537) .” For that
which is not directly understood needs some turn for the apprehension of
the thing concealed; and as Paul, when about to exchange the literal
sense of the history for figurative contemplation, says that he will
“change his voice <span id="fr_538"></span>[540](#fn_538) ,” so here the
manifestation of the hidden meaning is called by Solomon a “turn of the
saying,” as if the beauty of the thoughts could not be perceived, unless
one were to obtain a view of the revealed brightness of the thought by
turning the apparent meaning of the saying round about, as happens with
the plumage with which the peacock is decked behind. For in him, one who
sees the back of his plumage quite despises it for its want of beauty
and tint, as a mean sight; but if one were to turn it round and show him
the other view of it, he then sees the varied painting of nature, the
half-circle shining in the midst with its dye of purple, and the golden
mist round the circle ringed round and glistening at its edge with its
many rainbow hues. Since then there is no beauty in what is obvious in
the saying (for “all the glory of the king’s daughter is within <span
id="fr_539"></span>[541](#fn_539) ,” shining with its hidden ornament in
golden thoughts), Solomon of necessity suggests to the readers of this
book “the turn of the saying,” that thereby they may “understand a
parable and a dark saying, words of the wise and riddles <span
id="fr_540"></span>[542](#fn_540) .” Now as this proverbial teaching
embraces these elements, a reasonable man will not receive any passage
cited from this book, be it never so clear and intelligible at first
sight, without examination and inspection; for assuredly there is some
mystical contemplation underlying even those passages which seem
manifest. And if the obvious passages of the work necessarily demand a
somewhat minute scrutiny, how much more do those passages require it
where even immediate apprehension presents to us much that is obscure
and difficult?

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p12"></span>Let us then begin our examination from
the context of the passage in question, and see whether the reading of
the neighbouring clauses gives any clear sense. The discourse describes
Wisdom as uttering certain sayings in her own person. Every student
knows what is said in the passage <span
id="fr_541"></span>[543](#fn_541) where Wisdom makes counsel her
dwelling-place, and calls to her knowledge and understanding, and says
that she has as a possession strength and prudence (while she is herself
called intelligence), and that she walks in the ways of righteousness
and has her conversation in the ways of just judgment, and declares that
by her kings reign, and princes write the decree of equity, and monarchs
win possession of their own land. Now every one will see that the
considerate reader will receive none of the phrases quoted without
scrutiny according to the obvious sense. For if by her kings are
advanced to their rule, and if from her monarchy derives its strength,
it follows of necessity that Wisdom is displayed to us as a king-maker,
and transfers to herself the blame of those who bear evil rule in their
kingdoms. But we know of kings who in truth advance under the guidance
of Wisdom to the rule that has no end—the poor in spirit, whose
possession is the kingdom of heaven <span
id="fr_542"></span>[544](#fn_542) , as the Lord promises, Who is the
Wisdom of the Gospel: and such also we recognize as the princes who bear
rule over their passions, who are not enslaved by the dominion of sin,
who inscribe the decree of equity upon their own life, as it were upon a
tablet. Thus, too, that laudable despotism which changes, by the
alliance of Wisdom, the democracy of the passions into the monarchy of
reason, brings into bondage what were running unrestrained into
mischievous liberty, I mean all carnal and earthly thoughts: for “the
flesh lusteth against the Spirit <span id="fr_543"></span>[545](#fn_543)
,” and rebels against the government of the soul. Of this land, then,
such a monarch wins possession, whereof he was, according to the first
creation, appointed as ruler by the Word.

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p16"></span>Seeing then that all reasonable men
admit that these expressions are to be read in such a sense as this,
rather than in that which appears in the words at first sight, it is
consequently probable that the phrase we are discussing, being written
in close connection with them, is not received by prudent men absolutely
and <span id="page_CXXXIX">p. CXXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-Page_CXXXIX"></span>without examination. “If I declare
to you,” she says, “the things that happen day by day, I will remember
to recount the things from everlasting: the Lord created me <span
id="fr_544"></span>[546](#fn_544) .” What, pray, has the slave of the
literal text, who sits listening closely to the sound of the syllables,
like the Jews, to say to this phrase? Does not the conjunction, “If I
declare to you the things that happen day by day, the Lord created me,”
ring strangely in the ears of those who listen attentively? as though,
if she did not declare the things that happen day by day, she will by
consequence deny absolutely that she was created. For he who says, “If I
declare, I was created,” leaves you by his silence to understand, “I was
not created, if I do not declare.” “The Lord created me,” she says, “in
the beginning of His ways, for His works. He set me up from everlasting,
in the beginning, before He made the earth, before He made the depths,
before the springs of the waters came forth, before the mountains were
settled, before all hills, He begetteth me <span
id="fr_545"></span>[547](#fn_545) .” What new order of the formation of
a creature is this? First it is created, and after that it is set up,
and then it is begotten. “The Lord made,” she says, “lands, even
uninhabited, and the inhabited extremes of the earth under heaven <span
id="fr_546"></span>[548](#fn_546) .” Of what Lord does she speak as the
maker of land both uninhabited and inhabited? Of Him surely, who made
wisdom. For both the one saying and the other are uttered by the same
person; both that which says, “the Lord created me,” and that which
adds, “the Lord made land, even uninhabited.” Thus the Lord will be the
maker equally of both, of Wisdom herself, and of the inhabited and
uninhabited land. What then are we to make of the saying, “All things
were made by Him, and without Him was not anything made <span
id="fr_547"></span>[549](#fn_547) ”? For if one and the same Lord
creates both Wisdom (which they advise us to understand of the Son), and
also the particular things which are included in the Creation, how does
the sublime John speak truly, when he says that all things were made by
Him? For this Scripture gives a contrary sound to that of the Gospel, in
ascribing to the Creator of Wisdom the making of land uninhabited and
inhabited. So, too, with all that follows <span
id="fr_548"></span>[550](#fn_548) :—she speaks of a Throne of God set
apart upon the winds, and says that the clouds above are made strong,
and the fountains under the heaven sure; and the context contains many
similar expressions, demanding in a marked degree that interpretation by
a minute and clear-sighted intelligence, which is to be observed in the
passages already quoted. What is the throne that is set apart upon the
winds? What is the security of the fountains under the heaven? How are
the clouds above made strong? If any one should interpret the passage
with reference to visible objects <span
id="fr_549"></span>[551](#fn_549) , he will find that the facts are at
considerable variance with the words. For who knows not that the extreme
parts of the earth under heaven, by excess in one direction or in the
other, either by being too close to the sun’s heat, or by being too far
removed from it, are uninhabitable; some being excessively dry and
parched, other parts superabounding in moisture, and chilled by frost,
and that only so much is inhabited as is equally removed from the
extreme of each of the two opposite conditions? But if it is the midst
of the earth that is occupied by man, how does the proverb say that the
extremes of the earth under heaven are inhabited? Again, what strength
could one perceive in the clouds, that that passage may have a true
sense, according to its apparent intention, which says that the clouds
above have been made strong? For the nature of cloud is a sort of rather
slight vapour diffused through the air, which, being light, by reason of
its great subtilty, is borne on the breath of the air, and, when forced
together by compression, falls down through the air that held it up, in
the form of a heavy drop of rain. What then is the strength in these,
which offer no resistance to the touch? For in the cloud you may discern
the slight and easily dissolved character of air. Again, how is the
Divine throne set apart on the winds that are by nature unstable? And as
for her saying at first that she is “created,” finally, that she is
“begotten,” and between these two utterances that she is “set up,” what
account of this could any one profess to give that would agree with the
common and obvious sense? The point also on which a doubt was previously
raised in our argument, the declaring, that is, of the things that
happen day by day, and the remembering to recount the things from
everlasting, is, as it were, a condition of Wisdom’s assertion that she
was created by God.

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p23"></span>Thus, since it has been clearly shown
by what has been said, that no part of this passage is such that its
language should be received without examination and reflection, it may
be well, perhaps, as with the rest, so not to interpret the text, “The
Lord created me,” according to that sense which immediately presents
itself to us from the phrase, but to seek with all attention and care
what is to be piously understood from the utterance. Now, to apprehend
perfectly the sense of the passage before us, would seem to belong only
to those who search out the depths by the aid of the Holy Spirit, and
know how to speak in the Spirit the divine <span id="page_CXL">p.
CXL</span> <span id="viii.i.v.ii-Page_CXL"></span>mysteries: our
account, however, will only busy itself with the passage in question so
far as not to leave its drift entirely unconsidered. What, then, is our
account? It is not, I think, possible that that wisdom which arises in
any man from divine illumination should come alone, apart from the other
gifts of the Spirit, but there must needs enter in therewith also the
grace of prophecy. For if the apprehension of the truth of the things
that are is the peculiar power of wisdom, and prophecy includes the
clear knowledge of the things that are about to be, one would not be
possessed of the gift of wisdom in perfection, if he did not further
include in his knowledge, by the aid of prophecy, the future likewise.
Now, since it is not mere human wisdom that is claimed for himself by
Solomon, who says, “God hath taught me wisdom <span
id="fr_550"></span>[552](#fn_550) ,” and who, where he says “all my
words are spoken from God <span id="fr_551"></span>[553](#fn_551) ,”
refers to God all that is spoken by himself, it might be well in this
part of the Proverbs to trace out the prophecy that is mingled with his
wisdom. But we say that in the earlier part of the book, where he says
that “Wisdom has builded herself a house <span
id="fr_552"></span>[554](#fn_552) ,” he refers darkly in these words to
the preparation of the flesh of the Lord: for the trite Wisdom did not
dwell in another’s building, but built for Itself that dwelling-place
from the body of the Virgin. Here, however, he adds to his
discourse <span id="fr_553"></span>[555](#fn_553) that which of both is
made one—of the house, I mean, and of the Wisdom which built the house,
that is to say, of the Humanity and of the Divinity that was commingled
with man <span id="fr_554"></span>[556](#fn_554) ; and to each of these
he applies suitable and fitting terms, as you may see to be the case
also in the Gospels, where the discourse, proceeding as befits its
subject, employs the more lofty and divine phraseology to indicate the
Godhead, and that which is humble and lowly to indicate the Manhood. So
we may see in this passage also Solomon prophetically moved, and
delivering to us in its fulness the mystery of the Incarnation <span
id="fr_555"></span>[557](#fn_555) . For we speak first of the eternal
power and energy of Wisdom; and here the evangelist, to a certain
extent, agrees with him in his very words. For as the latter in his
comprehensive <span id="fr_556"></span>[558](#fn_556) phrase proclaimed
Him to be the cause and Maker of all things, so Solomon says that by Him
were made those individual things which are included in the whole. For
he tells us that God by Wisdom established the earth, and in
understanding prepared the heavens, and all that follows these in order,
keeping to the same sense: and that he might not seem to pass over
without mention the gift of excellence in men, he again goes on to say,
speaking in the person of Wisdom, the words we mentioned a little
earlier; I mean, “I made counsel my dwelling-place, and knowledge, and
understanding <span id="fr_557"></span>[559](#fn_557) ,” and all that
relates to instruction in intellect and knowledge.

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p32"></span>After recounting these and the like
matters, he proceeds to introduce also his teaching concerning the
dispensation with regard to man, why the Word was made flesh. For seeing
that it is clear to all that God Who is over all has in Himself nothing
as a thing created or imported, not power nor wisdom, nor light, nor
word, nor life, nor truth, nor any at all of those things which are
contemplated in the fulness of the Divine bosom (all which things the
Only-begotten God is, Who is in the bosom of the Father <span
id="fr_558"></span>[560](#fn_558) , the name of “creation” could not
properly be applied to any of those things which are contemplated in
God, so that the Son Who is in the Father, or the Word Who is in the
Beginning, or the Light Who is in the Light, or the Life Who is in the
Life, or the Wisdom Who is in the Wisdom, should say, “the Lord created
me.” For if the Wisdom of God is created (and Christ is the Power of God
and the Wisdom of God <span id="fr_559"></span>[561](#fn_559) ), God, it
would follow, has His Wisdom as a thing imported, receiving afterwards,
as the result of making, something which He had not at first. But surely
He Who is in the bosom of the Father does not permit us to conceive the
bosom of the Father as ever void of Himself. He Who is in the beginning
is surely not of the things which come to be in that bosom from without,
but being the fulness of all good, He is conceived as being always in
the Father, not waiting to arise in Him as the result of creation, so
that the Father should not be conceived as at any time void of good, but
He Who is conceived as being in the eternity of the Father’s Godhead is
always in Him, being Power, and Life, and Truth, and Wisdom, and the
like. Accordingly the words “created me” do not proceed from the Divine
and immortal nature, but from that which was commingled with it in the
Incarnation from our created nature. How comes it then that the same,
called wisdom, and understanding, and intelligence, establishes the
earth, and prepares the heavens, and breaks up the deeps, and yet is
here “created for the be<span id="page_CXLI">p. CXLI</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-Page_CXLI"></span>ginning of His works <span
id="fr_560"></span>[562](#fn_560) ”? Such a dispensation, he tells us,
is not set forward without great cause. But since men, after receiving
the commandment of the things we should observe, cast away by
disobedience the grace of memory, and became forgetful, for this cause,
“that I may declare to you the things that happen day by day for your
salvation, and may put you in mind by recounting the things from
everlasting, which you have forgotten (for it is no new gospel that I
now proclaim, but I labour at your restoration to your first
estate),—for this cause I was created, Who ever am, and need no creation
in order to be; so that I am the beginning of ways for the works of God,
that is for men. For the first way being destroyed, there must needs
again be consecrated for the wanderers a new and living way <span
id="fr_561"></span>[563](#fn_561) , even I myself, Who am the way.” And
this view, that the sense of “created me” has reference to the Humanity,
the divine apostle more clearly sets before us by his own words when he
charges us, “Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ <span
id="fr_562"></span>[564](#fn_562) ,” and also where (using the same
word) he says, “Put on the new man which after God is created. <span
id="fr_563"></span>[565](#fn_563) ” For if the garment of salvation is
one, and that is Christ, one cannot say that “the new man, which after
God is created,” is any other than Christ, but it is clear that he who
has “put on Christ” has “put on the new man which after God is created.”
For actually He alone is properly named “the new man,” Who did not
appear in the life of man by the known and ordinary ways of nature, but
in His case alone creation, in a strange and special form, was
instituted anew. For this reason he names the same Person, when
regarding the wonderful manner of His birth <span
id="fr_564"></span>[566](#fn_564) , “the new man, which after God is
created,” and, when looking to the Divine nature, which was
blended <span id="fr_565"></span>[567](#fn_565) in the creation of this
“new man,” he calls Him “Christ”: so that the two names (I mean the name
of “Christ” and the name of “the new man which after God is created”)
are applied to one and the same Person.

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p41"></span>Since, then, Christ is Wisdom, let the
intelligent reader consider our opponent’s account of the matter, and
our own, and judge which is the more pious, which better preserves in
the text those conceptions which are befitting the Divine nature;
whether that which declares the Creator and Lord of all to have been
made, and places Him on a level with the creation that is in bondage, or
that rather which looks to the Incarnation, and preserves the due
proportion with regard to our conception alike of the Divinity and of
the Humanity, bearing in mind that the great Paul testifies in favour of
our view, who sees in the “new man” creation, and in the true Wisdom the
power of creation. And, further, the order of the passage agrees with
this view of the doctrine it conveys. For if the “beginning of the ways”
had not been created among us, the foundation of those ages for which we
look would not have been laid; nor would the Lord have become for us
“the Father of the age to come <span id="fr_566"></span>[568](#fn_566)
,” had not a Child been born to us, according to Isaiah, and His name
been called, both all the other titles which the prophet gives Him, and
withal “The Father of the age to come.” Thus first there came to pass
the mystery wrought in virginity, and the dispensation of the Passion,
and then the wise master-builders of the Faith laid the foundation of
the Faith: and this is Christ, the Father of the age to come, on Whom is
built the life of the ages that have no end. And when this has come to
pass, to the end that in each individual believer may be wrought the
divine decrees of the Gospel law, and the varied gifts of the Holy
Spirits—(all which the divine Scripture figuratively names, with a
suitable significance, “mountains” and “hills,” calling righteousness
the “mountains” of God, and speaking of His judgments as “deeps <span
id="fr_567"></span>[569](#fn_567) ,” and giving the name of “earth” to
that which is sown by the Word and brings forth abundant fruit; or in
that sense in which we are taught by David to understand peace by the
“mountains,” and righteousness by the “hills <span
id="fr_568"></span>[570](#fn_568) ”),—Wisdom is begotten in the
faithful, and the saying is found true. For He Who is in those who have
received Him, is not yet begotten in the unbelieving. Thus, that these
things may be wrought in us, their Maker must be begotten in us. For if
Wisdom is begotten in us, then in each of us is prepared by God both
land, and land uninhabited,—the land, that which receives the sowing and
the ploughing of the Word, the uninhabited land, the heart cleared of
evil inhabitants,—and thus our dwelling will be upon the extreme parts
of the earth. For since in the earth some is depth, and some is surface,
when a man is not buried in the earth, or, as it were, dwelling in a
cave by reason of thinking of things beneath (as is the life of those
who live in sin, who “stick fast in the deep mire where no ground
is <span id="fr_569"></span>[571](#fn_569) ,” whose life is truly a pit,
as the Psalm says, “let not the pit shut her mouth upon me <span
id="fr_570"></span>[572](#fn_570) ”)—if, I say, a man, when Wisdom is
begotten in him, thinks of the things that are above, and touches the
earth only so much as he needs must, such a man inhabits “the extreme
parts of the earth under heavens,” not plunging deep in earthly thought;
with <span id="page_CXLII">p. CXLII</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-Page_CXLII"></span>him Wisdom is present, as he prepares
in himself heaven instead of earth: and when, by carrying out the
precepts into act, he makes strong for himself the instruction of the
clouds above, and, enclosing the great and widespread sea of wickedness,
as it were with a beach, by his exact conversation, hinders the troubled
water from proceeding forth from his mouth; and if by the grace of
instruction he be made to dwell among the fountains, pouring forth the
stream of his discourse with sure caution, that he may not give to any
man for drink the turbid fluid of destruction in place of pure water,
and if he be lifted up above all earthly paths and become aerial in his
life, advancing towards that spiritual life which he speaks of as “the
winds,” so that he is set apart to be a throne of Him Who is seated in
him (as was Paul separated for the Gospel to be a chosen vessel to bear
the name of God, who, as it is elsewhere expressed, was made a throne,
bearing Him that sat upon him)—when, I say, he is established in these
and like ways, so that he who has already fully made up in himself the
land inhabited by God, now rejoices in gladness that he is made the
father, not of wild and senseless beasts, but of men (and these would be
godlike thoughts, which are fashioned according to the Divine image, by
faith in Him Who has been created and begotten, and set up in us;—and
faith, according to the words of Paul, is conceived as the foundation
whereby wisdom is begotten in the faithful, and all the things that I
have spoken of are wrought)—then, I say, the life of the man who has
been thus established is truly blessed, for Wisdom is at all times in
agreement with him, and rejoices with him who daily finds gladness in
her alone. For the Lord rejoices in His saints, and there is joy in
heaven over those who are being saved, and Christ, as the father, makes
a feast for his rescued son. Though we have spoken hurriedly of these
matters, let the careful man read the original text of the Holy
Scripture, and fit its dark sayings to our reflections, testing whether
it is not far better to consider that the meaning of these dark sayings
has this reference, and not that which is attributed to it at first
sight. For it is not possible that the theology of John should be
esteemed true, which recites that all created things are the work of the
Word, if in this passage He Who created Wisdom be believed to have made
together with her all other things also. For in that case all things
will not be by her, but she will herself be counted with the things that
were made.

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p47"></span>And that this is the reference of the
enigmatical sayings is clearly revealed by the passage that follows,
which says, “Now therefore hearken unto me, my son: and blessed is he
that keepeth my ways <span id="fr_571"></span>[573](#fn_571) ,” meaning
of course by “ways” the approaches to virtue, the beginning of which is
the possession of Wisdom. Who, then, who looks to the divine Scripture,
will not agree that the enemies of the truth are at once impious and
slanderous?—impious, because, so far as in them lies, they degrade the
unspeakable glory of the Only-begotten God, and unite it with the
creation, striving to show that the Lord Whose power over all things is
only-begotten, is one of the things that were made by Him: slanderous,
because, though Scripture itself gives them no ground for such opinions,
they arm themselves against piety as though they drew their evidence
from that source. Now since they can by no means show any passage of the
Holy Scriptures which leads us to look upon the pre-temporal glory of
the Only-begotten God in conjunction with the subject creation, it is
well, these points being proved, that the tokens of victory over
falsehood should be adduced as testimony to the doctrine of godliness,
and that sweeping aside these verbal systems of theirs by which they
make the creature answer to the creator, and the thing made to the
maker, we should confess, as the Gospel from heaven teaches us, the
well-beloved Son—not a bastard, not a counterfeit; but that, accepting
with the name of Son all that naturally belongs to that name, we should
say that He Who is of Very God is Very God, and that we should believe
of Him all that we behold in the Father, because They are One, and in
the one is conceived the other, not overpassing Him, not inferior to
Him, not altered or subject to change in any Divine or excellent
property.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_532"></span>[CXXXVII:534](2050077.htm#fr_532) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p3"></span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p3.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p3.2"></span>
(LXX.). On this passage see also Book II. §10.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[CXXXVII:535](2050077.htm#fr_533) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p4"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[CXXXVII:536](2050077.htm#fr_534) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p5"></span> *E. g.*S. [John xvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#025)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[CXXXVIII:537](2050077.htm#fr_535) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p6"></span> [Prov. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#002)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[CXXXVIII:538](2050077.htm#fr_536) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p7"></span> The hiatus in the Paris editions ends
here.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[CXXXVIII:539](2050077.htm#fr_537) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p8"></span> Cf. [Prov. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p8.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_538"></span>[CXXXVIII:540](2050077.htm#fr_538) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p9"></span> [Gal. iv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#020)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[CXXXVIII:541](2050077.htm#fr_539) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p10"></span> [Ps. xlv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p10.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_540"></span>[CXXXVIII:542](2050077.htm#fr_540) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p11"></span> [Prov. i.
6](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p11.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_541"></span>[CXXXVIII:543](2050077.htm#fr_541) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p13"></span> Compare with what follows <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p13.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p13.2"></span>, *sqq.* (LXX.).

<span id="fn_542"></span>[CXXXVIII:544](2050077.htm#fr_542) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p14"></span> S. [Matt. v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_543"></span>[CXXXVIII:545](2050077.htm#fr_543) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p15"></span> [Gal. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[CXXXIX:546](2050077.htm#fr_544) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p17"></span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p17.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
21-22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p17.2"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_545"></span>[CXXXIX:547](2050077.htm#fr_545) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p18"></span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p18.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p18.2"></span>
*sqq.* (LXX.).

<span id="fn_546"></span>[CXXXIX:548](2050077.htm#fr_546) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p19"></span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p19.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p19.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_547"></span>[CXXXIX:549](2050077.htm#fr_547) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p20"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_548"></span>[CXXXIX:550](2050077.htm#fr_548) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p21"></span> Cf. [Prov. viii.
27-8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p21.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_549"></span>[CXXXIX:551](2050077.htm#fr_549) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p22"></span> Or “according to the apparent sense.”

<span id="fn_550"></span>[CXL:552](2050077.htm#fr_550) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p24"></span> [Prov. xxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p24.1"></span>
(LXX. ch. xxiv.).

<span id="fn_551"></span>[CXL:553](2050077.htm#fr_551) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p25"></span> [Prov. xxxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.1"></span>
(LXX. ch. xxiv.). The ordinary reading in the LXX. seems to be <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.3"></span>πὸ θεοῦ</span>, while
Oehler retains in his text of Greg. Nyss. the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.5"></span>πὸ θεοῦ</span> of the Paris editions.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[CXL:554](2050077.htm#fr_552) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p25.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p26"></span> [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p26.1"></span>,
which seems to be spoken of as “earlier” in contrast, not with the main
passage under examination, but with those just cited.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[CXL:555](2050077.htm#fr_553) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p27"></span> If <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.1"></span>προστίθησι</span> be the right reading, it
would almost seem that Gregory had forgotten the order of the passages,
and supposed <span id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.2"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.3"></span>
to have been written *after* [Prov. ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.4"></span>.
To read <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.5"></span>προτίθησι</span>, (“presents to us”) would
get rid of this difficulty, but it may be that Gregory only intends to
point out that the idea of the union of the two natures, from which the
“communicatio idiomatum” results, is distinct from that of the
preparation for the Nativity, not to insist upon the order in which, as
he conceives, they are set forth in the book of Proverbs.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[CXL:556](2050077.htm#fr_554) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p27.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p28.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p28.2"></span>νακραθείσης τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ</span>

<span id="fn_555"></span>[CXL:557](2050077.htm#fr_555) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p28.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p29"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p29.1"></span>τῆς οἰκονομίας</span>

<span id="fn_556"></span>[CXL:558](2050077.htm#fr_556) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p30.1"></span>περιληπτῇ</span> appears to be used as
equivalent to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p30.2"></span>περιληπτικῇ</span>

<span id="fn_557"></span>[CXL:559](2050077.htm#fr_557) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p31"></span> Cf. [Prov. viii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p31.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_558"></span>[CXL:560](2050077.htm#fr_558) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p33"></span> S. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="fn_559"></span>[CXL:561](2050077.htm#fr_559) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p34"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[CXLI:562](2050077.htm#fr_560) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p35"></span> The quotation is an inexact
reproduction of <span id="viii.i.v.ii-p35.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p35.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_561"></span>[CXLI:563](2050077.htm#fr_561) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p35.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p36"></span> Cf. [Heb. x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#020)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="fn_562"></span>[CXLI:564](2050077.htm#fr_562) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p37"></span> [Rom. xiii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[CXLI:565](2050077.htm#fr_563) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p38"></span> [Eph. iv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[CXLI:566](2050077.htm#fr_564) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p39"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p39.1"></span>γεννησέως</span>

<span id="fn_565"></span>[CXLI:567](2050077.htm#fr_565) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p40"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p40.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p40.2"></span>γκραθεῖσαν</span>

<span id="fn_566"></span>[CXLI:568](2050077.htm#fr_566) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p42"></span> [Is. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p42.1"></span>
(LXX.). “The Everlasting Father” of the English Version.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[CXLI:569](2050077.htm#fr_567) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p43"></span> Cf. [Ps. xxxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="fn_568"></span>[CXLI:570](2050077.htm#fr_568) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p44"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[CXLI:571](2050077.htm#fr_569) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p45"></span> [Ps. lxix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[CXLI:572](2050077.htm#fr_570) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p46"></span> [Ps. lxix.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[CXLII:573](2050077.htm#fr_571) <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p48"></span> <span
id="viii.i.v.ii-p48.1"></span>[Prov. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#032)<span id="viii.i.v.ii-p48.2"></span>
(not verbally agreeing with the LXX.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then shows, from the instance of Adam and Abel, and other
examples, the absence of alienation of essence in the case of the
“generate” and “ungenerate.”](2050078)
