[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050013)  [Next](2050015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_XXXIII">p. XXXIII</span>
<span id="viii.i.i-Page_XXXIII"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.i-p1.1"></span>Gregory of Nyssa Against Eunomius.</span>

<span id="viii.i.i-p2"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.i-p2.1"></span>Letter I.</span>

<span id="viii.i.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.i-p3.1"></span>Gregory</span> to his brother Peter, Bishop of
Sebasteia.

<span id="viii.i.i-p4"></span>Having with difficulty obtained a little
leisure, I have been able to recover from bodily fatigue on my return
from Armenia, and to collect the sheets of my reply to Eunomius which
was suggested by your wise advice; so that my work is now arranged in a
complete treatise, which can be read between covers. However, I have not
written against both his pamphlets <span id="fr_54"></span>[56](#fn_54)
; even the leisure for that was not granted; for the person who lent me
the heretical volume most uncourteously sent for it again, and allowed
me no time either to write it out or to study it. In the short space of
seventeen days it was impossible to be prepared to answer both his
attacks.

<span id="viii.i.i-p6"></span>Owing to its somehow having become
notorious that we had laboured to answer this blasphemous manifesto,
many persons possessing some zeal for the Truth have importuned me about
it: but I have thought it right to prefer you in your wisdom before them
all, to advise me whether to consign this work to the public, or to take
some other course. The reason why I hesitate is this. When our saintly
Basil fell asleep, and I received the legacy of Eunomius’ controversy,
when my heart was hot within me with bereavement, and, besides this deep
sorrow for the common loss of the church, Eunomius had not confined
himself to the various topics which might pass as a defence of his
views, but had spent the chief part of his energy in laboriously-written
abuse of our father in God. I was exasperated with this, and there were
passages where the flame of my heart-felt indignation burst out against
this writer. The public have pardoned us for much else, because we have
been apt in showing patience in meeting lawless attacks, and as far as
possible have practised that restraint in feeling which the saint has
taught us; but I had fears lest from what we have now written against
this opponent the reader should get the idea that we were very raw
controversialists, who lost our temper directly at insolent abuse.
Perhaps, however, this suspicion about us will be disarmed by
remembering that this display of anger is not on our own behalf, but
because of insults levelled against our father in God; and that it is a
case in which mildness would be more unpardonable than anger.

<span id="viii.i.i-p7"></span>If, then, the first part of my treatise
should seem somewhat outside the controversy, the following explanation
of it will, I think, be accepted by a reader who can judge fairly. It
was not right to leave undefended the reputation of our noble saint,
mangled as it was by the opponent’s blasphemies, any more than it was
convenient to let this battle in his behalf be spread diffusely along
the whole thread of the discussion; besides, if any one reflects, these
pages do really form part of the controversy. Our adversary’s treatise
has two separate arms, viz. to abuse us and to controvert sound
doctrine; and therefore ours too must show a double front. But for the
sake of clearness, and in order that the thread of the discussion upon
matters of the Faith should not be cut by parentheses, consisting of
answers to their personal abuse, we have separated our work into two
parts, and devoted ourselves in the first to refute these charges: and
then we have grappled as best we might with that which they have
advanced against the Faith. Our treatise also contains, in addition to a
refutation of their heretical views, a dogmatic exposition of our own
teaching; for it would be a most shameful want of spirit, when our foes
make no concealment of their blasphemy, not to be bold in our statement
of the Truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_54"></span>[XXXIII:56](2050014.htm#fr_54) <span
id="viii.i.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.i-p5"></span> *both his pamphlets.* The ‘sheets’ which
Gregory says that he has collected are the 12 Books that follow. They
are written in reply to Eunomius’ pamphlet, ‘Apologia Apologiæ,’ itself
a reply to Basil’s Refutation. The other pamphlet of Eunomius seems to
have come out during the composition of Gregory’s 12 Books: and was
afterwards answered by the latter in a second 12th Book, but not now,
because of the shortness of the time in which he had a copy of the
‘heretical volume’ in his hands. The two last books of the five which go
under the title of Basil’s Refutation are considered on good grounds to
have been Gregory’s, and to have formed that short reply to Eunomius
which he read, at the Council of Constantinople, to Gregory of Nazianzen
and Jerome (*d. vir. illust.* c. 128). Then he worked upon this longer
reply. Thus there were in all three works of Gregory corresponding to
the three attacks of Eunomius upon the Trinity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To his most pious brother Gregory. Peter greeting in the
Lord.](2050015)
