[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050241)  [Next](2050243) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>What</span>, then, under these circumstances
is justice? It is the not exercising any arbitrary sway over him who has
us in his power <span id="fr_1994"></span>[1996](#fn_1994) , nor, by
tearing us away by a violent exercise of force from his hold, thus
leaving some colour for a just complaint to him who enslaved man through
sensual pleasure. For as they who have bartered away their freedom for
money are the slaves of those who have purchased them (for they have
constituted themselves their own sellers, and it is not allowable either
for themselves or any one else in their behalf to call freedom to their
aid, not even though those who have thus reduced themselves to this sad
state are of noble birth; and, if any one out of regard for the person
who has so sold himself should use violence against him who has bought
him, he will clearly be acting un<span id="page_493">p. 493</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xxiv-Page_493"></span>justly in thus arbitrarily rescuing one
who has been legally purchased as a slave, whereas, if he wishes to pay
a price to get such a one away, there is no law to prevent that), on the
same principle, now that we had voluntarily bartered away our freedom,
it was requisite that no arbitrary method of recovery, but the one
consonant with justice <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1997](#fn_1995) should
be devised by Him Who in His goodness had undertaken our rescue. Now
this method is in a measure this; to make over to the master of the
slave whatever ransom he may agree to accept for the person in his
possession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[492:1996](2050242.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="xi.ii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiv-p3"></span> Compare a passage in Dionysius Areop.
(*De eccles. hierarch.* c. iii. p. 297). “The boundless love of the
Supreme Goodness did not refuse a personal providing for us, but
perfectly participating in all that belongs to us, and united to our
lowliness, along with an undiluted and unimpaired possession of its own
qualities, has gifted us for ever with a communion of kinship with
itself, and exhibited us as partners in Its glories: undoing the adverse
power of the Rebel throng, as the secret Tradition says, *“not by might,
as if it was domineering, but, according to the oracle secretly
delivered to us, by right and justice”* (quoted by Krabinger). To the
words “not by might,” S. Maximus has added the note, “This is what
Gregory of Nyssa says in the Catechetic.” See next note.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[493:1997](2050242.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="xi.ii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxiv-p4"></span> *one consonant with justice.* This view
of Redemption, as a coming to terms with Satan and making him a party or
defender in the case, is rather remarkable. The Prologue to the Book of
Job furnishes a basis for it, where Satan enters into terms with God. It
appears to be the Miltonic view: as also that Envy was the first sin of
Satan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](2050243)
