[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050038)  [Next](2050040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> §23. *These doctrines of our
Faith witnessed to and confirmed by Scripture passages*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p2"></span>It is therefore clear that these
are metaphors, which contain a deeper meaning than the obvious one: so
that there is no reason from them that any suspicion that our Lord was
created should be entertained by reverent inquirers, who have been
trained according to the grand words of the evangelist, that “all things
that have been made were made by Him” and “consist in Him.” “Without Him
was not anything made that was made.” The evangelist would not have so
defined it if he had believed that our Lord was one among the things
made. How could all things be made by Him and in Him consist, unless
their Maker possessed a nature different from theirs, and so produced,
not Himself, but them? If the creation was by Him, but He was not by
Himself, plainly He is something outside the creation. And after the
evangelist has by these words so plainly declared that the things that
were made were made by the Son, and did not pass into existence by any
other channel, Paul  <span id="fr_127"></span>[129](#fn_127) follows
and, to leave no ground at all for this profane talk which numbers even
the Spirit amongst the things that were made, he mentions one after
another all the existencies which the evangelist’s words imply: just as
David in fact, after having said that “all things” were put in
subjection to man, adds each species which that “all” comprehends, that
is, the creatures on land, in water, and in air, so does Paul the
Apostle, expounder of the divine doctrines, after saying that all things
were made by Him, define by numbering them the meaning of “all.” He
speaks of “the things that are seen <span
id="fr_128"></span>[130](#fn_128) ” and “the things that are not seen:”
by the first he gives a general name to all things cognizable by the
senses, as we have seen: by the latter he shadows forth the intelligible
world.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p5"></span>Now about the first there is no
necessity of going into minute detail. No one is so <span
id="page_LXIV">p. LXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-Page_LXIV"></span>carnal, so brutelike, as to
imagine that the Spirit resides in the sensible world. But after Paul
has mentioned “the things that are not seen” he proceeds (in order that
none may surmise that the Spirit, because He is of the intelligible and
immaterial world, on account of this connexion subsists therein) to
another most distinct division into the things that have been made in
the way of creation, and the existence that is above creation. He
mentions the several classes of these created intelligibles: “ <span
id="fr_129"></span>[131](#fn_129) thrones,” “dominions,”
“principalities,” “powers,” conveying his doctrine about these unseen
influences in broadly comprehensive terms: but by his very silence he
separates from his list of things created that which is above them. It
is just as if any one was required to name the sectional and inferior
officers in some army, and after he had gone through them all, the
commanders of tens, the commanders of hundreds, the captains and the
colonels <span id="fr_130"></span>[132](#fn_130) , and all the other
names given to the authorities over divisions, omitted after all to
speak of the supreme command which extended over all the others: not
from deliberate neglect, or from forgetfulness, but because when
required or intending to name only the several ranks which served under
it, it would have been an insult to include this supreme command in the
list of the inferior. So do we find it with Paul, who once in Paradise
was admitted to mysteries, when he had been caught up there, and had
become a spectator of the wonders that are above the heavens, and saw
and heard “things which it is not lawful for a man to utter <span
id="fr_131"></span>[133](#fn_131) .” This Apostle proposes to tell us of
all that has been created by our Lord, and he gives them under certain
comprehensive terms: but, having traversed all the angelic and
transcendental world, he stops his reckoning there, and refuses to drag
down to the level of creation that which is above it. Hence there is a
clear testimony in Scripture that the Holy Spirit is higher than the
creation. Should any one attempt to refute this, by urging that neither
are the Cherubim mentioned by Paul, that they equally with the Spirit
are left out, and that therefore this omission must prove either that
they also are above the creation, or that the Holy Spirit is not any
more than they to be believed above it, let him measure the full intent
of each name in the list: and he will find amongst them that which from
not being actually mentioned seems, but only seems, omitted. Under
“thrones” he includes the Cherubim, giving them this Greek name, as more
intelligible than the Hebrew name for them. He knew that “God sits upon
the Cherubim:” and so he calls these Powers the thrones of Him who sits
thereon. In the same way there are included in the list Isaiah’s
Seraphim <span id="fr_132"></span>[134](#fn_132) , by whom the mystery
of the Trinity was luminously proclaimed, when they uttered that
marvellous cry “Holy,” being awestruck with the beauty in each Person of
the Trinity. They are named under the title of “powers” both by the
mighty Paul, and by the prophet David. The latter says, “Bless ye the
Lord all ye His powers, ye ministers of His that do His pleasure <span
id="fr_133"></span>[135](#fn_133) :” and Isaiah instead of saying “Bless
ye” has written the very words of their blessing, “Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord God of hosts: the whole earth is full of His glory” and he has
revealed by what one of the Seraphim did (to him) that these powers are
ministers that do God’s pleasure, effecting the ‘purging of sin’
according to the will of Him Who sent them: for this is the ministry of
these spiritual beings, viz., to be sent forth for the salvation of
those who are being saved.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p11"></span>That divine Apostle perceived
this. He understood that the same matter is indicated under different
names by the two prophets, and he took the best known of the two words,
and called those Seraphim “powers:” so that no ground is left to our
critics for saying that any single one of these beings is omitted
equally with the Holy Ghost from the catalogue of creation. We learn
from the existences detailed by Paul that while some existences have
been mentioned, others have been passed over: and while he has taken
count of the creation in masses as it were, he has (elsewhere) mentioned
as units those things which are conceived of singly. For it is a
peculiarity of the Holy Trinity that it is to be proclaimed as
consisting of individuals: one Father, one Son, one Holy Ghost: whereas
those existences aforesaid are counted in masses, “dominions,”
“principalities,” “lordships,” “powers,” so as to exclude any suspicion
that the Holy Ghost was one of them. Paul is wisely silent upon our
mysteries; he understands how, after having heard those unspeakable
words in paradise, to refrain from proclaiming those secrets when he is
making mention of lower beings.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p12"></span>But these foes of the truth rush
in upon the ineffable; they degrade the majesty of the Spirit to the
level of the creation; they act as if they had never heard that the Word
of God, when confiding to His disciples the secret of knowing God,
Himself said that the life of <span id="page_LXV">p. LXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-Page_LXV"></span> <span
id="fr_134"></span>[136](#fn_134) the regenerate was to be completed in
them and imparted in the name of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and,
thereby ranking the Spirit with the Father and Himself, precluded Him
from being confused with the creation. From both, therefore, we may get
a reverential and proper conception with regard to Him: from Paul’s
omitting the Spirit’s existence in the mention of the creation, and from
our Lord’s joining the Spirit with His Father and Himself in mentioning
the life-giving power. Thus does our reason, under the guidance of the
Scripture, place not only the Only-begotten but the Holy Spirit as well
above the creation, and prompt us in accordance with our Saviour’s
command to contemplate Him by faith in the blessed world of life giving
and uncreated existence: and so this unit, which we believe in, above
creation, and sharing in the supreme and absolutely perfect nature,
cannot be regarded as in any way a ‘less,’ although this teacher of
heresy attempt to curtail its infinitude by introducing the idea of
degrees, and thus contracting the divine perfection by defining a
greater and a less as residing in the Persons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[LXIII:129](2050039.htm#fr_127) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> in the Canon. (Oehler’s stopping
is here at fault, i.e. he begins a new paragraph with <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p3.2"></span>Εκδέχεται τὸν
λόγον τοῦτον ὁ Παῦλος</span>). We need not speculate whether Gregory was
aware that the Epistle to the Colossians (quoted below) is an earlier
‘Gospel’ than S. John’s.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[LXIII:130](2050039.htm#fr_128) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p4"></span> [Coloss. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[LXIV:131](2050039.htm#fr_129) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p6"></span> [Coloss. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[LXIV:132](2050039.htm#fr_130) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p7.1"></span>ταξιάρχας καὶ λοχαγοὺς, ἑκατοντάρχους
τε καὶ χιλιάρχους</span>. The difference between the two pairs seems to
be the difference between ‘non-commissioned’ and ‘commissioned’
officers.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[LXIV:133](2050039.htm#fr_131) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p8"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p8.1"></span>[2 Corinth. xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[LXIV:134](2050039.htm#fr_132) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p9.1"></span>[Isa.
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[LXIV:135](2050039.htm#fr_133) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p9.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p10"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p10.1"></span>[Psalm ciii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[LXV:136](2050039.htm#fr_134) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxiii-p13.1"></span>τοῖς ἀναγεννωμένοις</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His elaborate account of degrees and differences in 'works' and
'energies' within the Trinity is absurd.](2050040)
