[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050037)  [Next](2050039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p1"></span> §22. *He has no right to assert a
greater and less in the Divine being. A systematic statement of the
teaching of the Church.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p2"></span>Then they discover in His being a
certain shortness in the way of deficiency, though they do not tell us
by what method they measure that which is devoid of quantity and size:
they are able to find out exactly by how much the size of the
Only-begotten falls short of perfection, and therefore has to be classed
with the inferior and imperfect: much else they lay down, partly by open
assertion, partly by underhand inference: all the time making their
confession of the Son and the Spirit a mere exercise-ground for their
unbelieving spirit. How, then, can we fail to pity them more even than
the condemned Jews, when views never ventured upon by the latter are
inferred by the former? He who makes the being of the Son and of the
Spirit comparatively less, seems, so far as words go perhaps, to commit
but a slight profanity: but if one were to test his view stringently it
will be found the height of blasphemy. Let us look into this, then, and
let indulgence be shown me, if, for the sake of doctrine, and to place
in a clear light the lie which they have demonstrated, I advance into an
exposition of our own conception of the truth.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p3"></span>Now the ultimate division of all
being is into the Intelligible and the Sensible. The Sensible world is
called by the Apostle broadly “that which is seen.” For as all body has
colour, and the sight apprehends this, he calls this world by the rough
and ready name of “that which is seen,” leaving out all the other
qualities, which are essentially inherent in its framework. The common
term, again, for all the intellectual world, is with the Apostle “that
which is not seen <span id="fr_115"></span>[117](#fn_115) :” by
withdrawing all idea of comprehension by the senses he leads the mind on
to the immaterial and intellectual. Reason again divides this “which is
not seen” into the uncreate and the created, inferentially comprehending
it: the uncreate being that which effects the Creation, the created that
which owes its origin and its force to the uncreate. In the Sensible
world, then, is found everything that we comprehend by our organs of
bodily sense, and in which the differences of qualities involve the idea
of more and less, such differences consisting in quantity, quality, and
the other properties.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p5"></span>But in the Intelligible world,—that
part of it, I mean, which is created,—the idea of such differences as
are perceived in the Sensible cannot find a place: another method, then,
is devised for discovering the degrees of greater and less. The
fountain, the origin, the supply of every good is regarded as being in
the world that is uncreate, and the whole creation inclines to that, and
touches and shares the Highest Existence only by virtue of its part in
the First Good: therefore it follows from this participation in the
highest blessings varying in degree according to the amount of freedom
in the will that each possesses, that the greater and less in this
creation is disclosed according to the proportion of this tendency in
each <span id="fr_116"></span>[118](#fn_116) . Created intelligible
nature stands on the borderline between good and the reverse, so as to
be capable of either, and to incline at pleasure to the things of its
choice, as we learn from Scripture; so that we can say of it that it is
more or less in the heights of excellence only in proportion to its
removal from the evil and its approach to the good. Whereas <span
id="fr_117"></span>[119](#fn_117) uncreate intelligible nature is far
removed from such distinctions: it does not <span id="page_LXI">p.
LXI</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-Page_LXI"></span>possess the good
by acquisition, or participate only in the goodness of some good which
lies above it: in its own essence it is good, and is conceived as such:
it is a source of good, it is simple, uniform, incomposite, even by the
confession of our adversaries. But it has distinction within itself in
keeping with the majesty of its own nature, but not conceived of with
regard to quantity, as Eunomius supposes: (indeed the man who introduces
the notion of less of good into any of the things believed to be in the
Holy Trinity must admit thereby some admixture of the opposite quality
in that which fails of the good: and it is blasphemous to imagine this
in the case either of the Only-begotten, or of the Holy Spirit): we
regard it as consummately perfect and incomprehensibly excellent yet as
containing clear distinctions within itself which reside in the
peculiarities of each of the Persons: as possessing invariableness by
virtue of its common attribute of uncreatedness, but differentiated by
the unique character of each Person. This peculiarity contemplated in
each sharply and clearly divides one from the other: the Father, for
instance, is uncreate and ungenerate as well: He was never generated any
more than He was created. While this uncreatedness is common to Him and
the Son, and the Spirit, He is ungenerate as well as the Father. This is
peculiar and uncommunicable, being not seen in the other Persons. The
Son in His uncreatedness touches the Father and the Spirit, but as the
Son and the Only-begotten He has a character which is not that of the
Almighty or of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit by the uncreatedness of
His nature has contact with the Son and Father, but is distinguished
from them by His own tokens. His most peculiar characteristic is that He
is neither of those things which we contemplate in the Father and the
Son respectively. He *is* simply, neither as ungenerate <span
id="fr_118"></span>[120](#fn_118) , nor as only-begotten: this it is
that constitutes His chief peculiarity. Joined to the Father by His
uncreatedness, He is disjoined from Him again by not being ‘Father.’
United to the Son by the bond of uncreatedness, and of deriving His
existence from the Supreme, He is parted again from Him by the
characteristic of not being the Only-begotten of the Father, and of
having been manifested by means of the Son Himself. Again, as the
creation was effected by the Only-begotten, in order to secure that the
Spirit should not be considered to have something in common with this
creation because of His having been manifested by means of the Son, He
is distinguished from it by His unchangeableness, and independence of
all external goodness. The creation does not possess in its nature this
unchangeableness, as the Scripture says in the description of the fall
of the morning star, the mysteries on which subject are revealed by our
Lord to His disciples: “I saw Satan falling like lightning from
heaven <span id="fr_119"></span>[121](#fn_119) .” But the very
attributes which part Him from the creation constitute His relationship
to the Father and the Son. All that is incapable of degenerating has one
and the same definition of “unchangeable.”

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p10"></span>Having stated thus much as a
preface we are in a position to discuss the rest of our adversaries’
teaching. “It necessarily follows,” he says in his system of the Son and
the Spirit, “that the Beings are relatively greater and less.” Let us
then inquire what is the meaning of this necessity of difference. Does
it arise from a comparison formed from measuring them one with another
in some material way, or from viewing them on the spiritual ground of
more or less of moral excellence, or on that of pure being? But in the
case of this last it has been shown by competent thinkers that it is
impossible to conceive of any difference whatever, if one abstracts
being from attributes and properties, and looks at it according to its
bare definition. Again, to conceive of this difference as consisting in
the case of the Only-begotten and the Spirit in the intensity or
abatement of moral excellence, and in consequence to hint that their
nature admits of change in either direction, so as to be equally capable
of opposites, and to be placed in a borderland between moral beauty and
its opposite—that is gross profanity. A man who thinks this will be
proving that their nature is one thing in itself, and becomes something
else by virtue of its participation in this beauty or its opposite: as
happens with iron for example: if it is approached some time to the
fire, it assumes the quality of heat while remaining iron: if it is put
in snow or ice, it changes its quality to the mastering influence, and
lets the snow’s coldness pass into its pores.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p11"></span>Now just as we cannot name the
material of the iron from the quality now to be observed upon it (for we
do not give the name of fire or ice to that which is tempered with
either of these), so the moment we grant the view of these heretics,
that in the case <span id="fr_120"></span>[122](#fn_120) of the
Life-giving Power good does not reside in It essentially, but is
imparted to it only, it will become impossible to call it properly good:
<span id="page_LXII">p. LXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-Page_LXII"></span>such a conception of it will
compel us to regard it as something different, as not eternally
exhibiting the good, as not in itself to be classed amongst genuine
goods, but as such that the good is at times not in it, and is at times
not likely to be in it. If these existences become good only by sharing
in a something superior to themselves, it is plain that before this
participation they were not good, and if, being other than good, they
were then coloured by the influence of good they must certainly, if
again isolated from this, be considered other than good: so that, if
this heresy prevails, the Divine Nature cannot be apprehended as
transmissive of good, but rather as itself needing goodness: for how can
one impart to another that which he does not himself possess? If it is
in a state of perfection, no abatement of that can be conceived, and it
is absurd to talk of less of perfection. If on the other hand its
participation of good is an imperfect one, and this is what they mean by
‘less,’ mark the consequence that anything in that state can never help
an inferior, but will be busied in satisfying its own want: so that,
according to them, Providence is a fiction, and so is the judgment and
the Dispensation of the Only-begotten, and all the other works believed
to be done, and still doing by Him: for He will necessarily be employed
in taking care of His own good, and must abandon the supervision of the
Universe <span id="fr_121"></span>[123](#fn_121) .

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p14"></span>If, then, this surmise is to have
its way, namely, that our Lord is not perfected in every kind of good,
it is very easy to see the conclusion of the blasphemy. This being so,
our faith is vain, and our preaching vain; our hopes, which take their
substance from our faith, are unsubstantial. Why are they baptized into
Christ <span id="fr_122"></span>[124](#fn_122) , if He has no power of
goodness of His own? God forgive me for saying it! Why do they believe
in the Holy Ghost, if the same account is given of Him? How are they
regenerate <span id="fr_123"></span>[125](#fn_123) by baptism from their
mortal birth, if the regenerating Power does not possess in its own
nature infallibility and independence? How can their ‘vile body’ be
changed, while they think that He who is to change it Himself needs
change, i.e. another to change Him? For as long as a nature is in defect
as regards the good, the superior existence exerts upon this inferior
one a ceaseless attraction towards itself: and this craving for more
will never stop: it will be stretching out to something not yet grasped:
the subject of this deficiency will be always demanding a supply, always
altering into the grander nature, and yet will never touch perfection,
because it cannot find a goal to grasp, and cease its impulse upward.
The First Good is in its nature infinite, and so it follows of necessity
that the participation in the enjoyment of it will be infinite also, for
more will be always being grasped, and yet something beyond that which
has been grasped will always be discovered, and this search will never
overtake its Object, because its fund is as inexhaustible as the growth
of that which participates in it is ceaseless <span
id="fr_124"></span>[126](#fn_124) .

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p18"></span>Such, then, are the blasphemies
which emerge from their making differences between the Persons as to the
good. If on the other hand the degrees of more or less are to be
understood in this case in some material sense, the absurdity of this
surmise will be obvious at once, without examination in detail. Ideas of
quality and distance, weight and figure, and all that goes to complete
the notion of a body, will perforce be introduced along with such a
surmise into the view of the Divine Nature: and where a compound is
assumed, there the dissolution also of that compound must be admitted. A
teaching so monstrous, which dares to discover a smaller and a larger in
what is sizeless and not concrete lands us in these and suchlike
conclusions, a few samples only of which are here indicated: nor indeed
would it be easy to unveil all the mischief that lurks beneath it. Still
the shocking absurdity that results from their blasphemous premiss will
be clear from this brief notice. We now proceed to their next position,
after a short defining and confirmation of our own doctrine. For an
inspired testimony is a sure test of the truth of any doctrine: and so
it seems to me that ours may be well guaranteed by a quotation from the
divine words.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p19"></span>In the division of all existing
things, then, we find these distinctions. There is, as appealing to our
perceptions, the Sensible world: <span id="page_LXIII">p. LXIII</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-Page_LXIII"></span>and there is, beyond this,
the world which the mind, led on by objects of sense, can view: I mean
the Intelligible: and in this we detect again a further distinction into
the Created and the Uncreate: to the latter of which we have defined the
Holy Trinity to belong, to the former all that can exist or can be
thought of after that. But in order that this statement may not be left
without a proof, but may be confirmed by Scripture, we will add that our
Lord was not created, but came forth from the Father, as the Word with
His own lips attests in the Gospel, in a manner of birth or of
proceeding ineffable and mysterious: and what truer witness could be
found than this constant declaration of our Lord all through the Gospel,
that the Very Father was a father, not a creator, of Himself, and that
He was not a work of God, but Son of God? Just as when He wished to name
His connexion with humanity according to the flesh, He called that phase
of his being Son of Man, indicating thereby His kinship according to the
nature of the flesh with her from whom He was born, so also by the title
of Son he expresses His true and real relationship to the Almighty, by
that name of Son showing this natural connexion: no matter if there are
some who, for the contradiction of the truth, do take literally and
without any explanation, words used with a hidden meaning in the dark
form of parable, and adduce the expression ‘created,’ put into the mouth
of Wisdom by the author of the Proverbs <span
id="fr_125"></span>[127](#fn_125) , to support their perverted views.
They say, in fact, that “the Lord created me” is a proof that our Lord
is a creature, as if the Only-begotten Himself in that word confessed
it. But we need not heed such an argument. They do not give reasons why
we must refer that text to our Lord at all: neither will they be able to
show that the idea of the word in the Hebrew leads to this and no other
meaning, seeing that the other translators have rendered it by
“possessed” or “constituted:” nor, finally, even if this was the idea in
the original text, would its real meaning be so plain and on the
surface: for these proverbial discourses do not show their aim at once,
but rather conceal it, revealing it only by an indirect import, and we
may judge of the obscurity of this particular passage from its context
where he says, “When He set His throne upon the winds <span
id="fr_126"></span>[128](#fn_126) ,” and all the similar expressions.
What is God’s throne? Is it material or ideal? What are the winds? Are
they these winds so familiar to us, which the natural philosophers tell
us are formed from vapours and exhalations: or are they to be understood
in another way not familiar to man, when they are called the bases of
His throne? What is this throne of the immaterial, incomprehensible, and
formless Deity? Who could possibly understand all this in a literal
sense?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_115"></span>[LX:117](2050038.htm#fr_115) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p4"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p4.1"></span>[Colossians i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[LX:118](2050038.htm#fr_116) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p6"></span> i.e. according as each inclines
more or less to the First Good.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[LX:119](2050038.htm#fr_117) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p7"></span> *uncreate intelligible nature is
far removed from such distinctions.* This was the impregnable position
that Athanasius had taken up. To admit that the Son is less than the
Father, and the Spirit less than the Son, is to admit *the law of
emanation* such as hitherto conceived, that is, the gradual and
successive degradation of God’s substance; which had conducted oriental
heretics as well as the Neoplatonists to a sort of pantheistic
polytheism. Arius had indeed tried to resist this tendency so far as to
bring back divinity to the Supreme Being; but it was at the expense of
the divinity of the Son, Who was with him just as much a created
Intermediate between God and man, as one of the Æons: and Aetius and
Eunomius treated the Holy Ghost also as their master had treated the
Son. But Arianism tended at once to Judaism and, in making creatures
adorable, to Greek polytheism. There was only one way of cutting short
the phantasmagoria of divine emanations, without having recourse to the
contradictory hypothesis of Arius: and that was to reject the *law of
emanation,* as hitherto accepted, altogether. Far from admitting that
the Supreme Being is always weakening and degrading Himself in that
which emanates from Him, Athanasius lays down the principle that He
produces within Himself nothing but what is perfect, and first, and
divine: and all that is not perfect is a work of the Divine Will, which
draws it out of nothing (i.e. creates it), and not out of the Divine
Substance. This was the crowning result of the teaching of Alexandria
and Origen. See Denys (De la Philosophie d’Origene, p. 432, Paris,
1884).

<span id="fn_118"></span>[LXI:120](2050038.htm#fr_118) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p8"></span> But He is not *begotten.*
Athanasian Creed.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[LXI:121](2050038.htm#fr_119) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p9"></span> [Luke x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[LXI:122](2050038.htm#fr_120) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p12.1"></span>τῆς ζωοποιοῦ δυνάμεως</span>.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[LXII:123](2050038.htm#fr_121) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.1"></span>τοῦ παντὸς</span>. It is worth while
to mention, once for all, the distinction in the names used by the
Stoics for the world, which had long since passed from them into the
common parlance. Including the Empty, the world is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.2"></span>τὸ πᾶν</span>,
without it, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.3"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.4"></span>λον</span> (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.5"></span>τὸ ὅλον, τὰ ὅλα</span> frequently
occurs with the Stoics). The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p13.6"></span>πᾶν</span>, it was said, is neither
material nor immaterial, since it consists of both.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[LXII:124](2050038.htm#fr_122) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15.1"></span>Τί γὰρ βαπτίζονται εἰς Χριστὸν</span>.
This throws some light on the much discussed passage, ‘Why are these
baptized for the dead?’ Gregory at all events *seems* here to take it to
mean, ‘Why are they baptized in the name of a dead Christ?’ as he is
adopting partially S. Paul’s words, [1 Cor. xv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#029)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15.2"></span>; as well as <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15.3"></span>[Heb. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15.4"></span> above.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[LXII:125](2050038.htm#fr_123) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p16"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p16.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p16.2"></span>ναγεννῶνται</span>

<span id="fn_124"></span>[LXII:126](2050038.htm#fr_124) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p17"></span> Cf. Gregory’s theory of *human*
perfection; *De anima et Resurrectione,* p. 229, 230. ‘The All-creating
Wisdom fashioned these souls, these receptacles with free wills, as
vessels as it were, for this very purpose, that there should be some
capacities able to receive His blessings, and become continually larger
with the inpouring of the stream. Such are the wonders that the
participation in the Divine blessings works; it makes him into whom they
come larger and more capacious.…The fountain of blessings wells up
unceasingly, and the partaker’s nature, finding nothing superfluous and
without a use in that which it receives, makes the whole influx an
enlargement of its own proportions.…It is likely, therefore, that this
bulk will mount to a magnitude wherein no limit checks the growth.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[LXIII:127](2050038.htm#fr_125) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p20"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p20.1"></span>[Proverbs viii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p20.2"></span> (LXX). For another discussion of this
passage, see Book II. ch. 10 (beginning) with note.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[LXIII:128](2050038.htm#fr_126) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p20.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p21"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p21.1"></span>[Proverbs viii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxii-p21.2"></span> (LXX).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: These doctrines of our Faith witnessed to and confirmed by
Scripture passages.](2050039)
