[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050022)  [Next](2050024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p1"></span> §7. *Eunomius himself proves that
the confession of faith which He made was not impeached.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p2"></span>Let us see for a moment now what
kind of truth is dealt with by this man, who in his Introduction
complains that it is because of his telling the truth that he is hated
by the unbelievers; we may well make the way he handles truth outside
doctrine teach us a test to apply to his doctrine itself. “He that is
faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much, and he that is
unjust in the least is unjust also in much.” Now, when he is beginning
to write this “apology for the apology” (that is the new and startling
title, as well as subject, of his book) he says that we must look for
the cause of this very startling announcement nowhere else but in him
who answered that first treatise of his. That book was entitled an
Apology; but being given to understand by our master-theologian that an
apology can only come from those who have been accused of something, and
that if a man writes merely from his own inclination his production is
something else than an apology, he does not deny—it would be too
manifestly absurd— <span id="fr_76"></span>[78](#fn_76) that an apology
requires a preceding accusation; but he declares that his ‘apology’ has
cleared him from very serious accusations in the trial which has been
instituted against him. How false this is, is manifest from his own
words. He complained that “many heavy sufferings were inflicted on him
by those who had condemned him”; we may read that in his book.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p4"></span>But how could he have suffered so,
if his ‘apology’ cleared him of these charges? If he successfully
adopted an apology to escape from these, that pathetic complaint of his
is a hypocritical pretence; if on the other hand he really suffered as
he says, then, plainly, he suffered because he did *not* clear himself
by an apology; for every apology, to be such, has to secure this end,
namely, to prevent the voting power from being misled by any false
statements. Surely he will not now attempt to say that at the time of
the trial he produced his apology, but not being able to win over the
jury lost the case to the prosecution. For he said nothing at the time
of the trial ‘about producing his apology;’ nor was it likely that he
would, considering that he distinctly states in his book that he refused
to have anything to do with those ill-affected and hostile dicasts. “We
own,” he says, “that we were condemned by default: there was a
packed <span id="fr_77"></span>[79](#fn_77) panel of evil-disposed
persons where a jury ought to have sat.” He is very labored here, and
has his attention diverted by his argument, I think, or he would have
noticed that he has tacked on a fine solecism to his sentence. He
affects to be imposingly Attic with his phrase ‘packed panel;’ but the
correct in language use these words, as those familiar with the forensic
<span id="page_XLII">p. XLII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-Page_XLII"></span>vocabulary know, quite differently
to our new Atticist.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p6"></span>A little further on he adds this;
“If he thinks that, because I would have nothing to do with a jury who
were really my prosecutors he can argue away my apology, he must be
blind to his own simplicity.” When, then, and before whom did our
caustic friend make his apology? He had demurred to the jury because
they were ‘foes,’ and he did not utter one word about any trial, as he
himself insists. See how this strenuous champion of the true, little by
little, passes over to the side of the false, and, while honouring truth
in phrase, combats it in deed. But it is amusing to see how weak he is
even in seconding his own lie. How can one and the same man have
‘cleared himself by an apology in the trial which was instituted against
him,’ and then have ‘prudently kept silence because the court was in the
hands of the foe?’ Nay, the very language he uses in the preface to his
Apology clearly shows that no court at all was opened against him. For
he does not address his preface to any definite jury, but to certain
unspecified persons who were living then, or who were afterwards to come
into the world; and I grant that to such an audience there was need of a
very vigorous apology, not indeed in the manner of the one he has
actually written, which requires another still to bolster it up, but a
broadly intelligible one <span id="fr_78"></span>[80](#fn_78) , able to
prove this special point, viz., that he was not in the possession of his
usual reason when he wrote this, wherein he rings <span
id="fr_79"></span>[81](#fn_79) the assembly-bell for men who never came,
perhaps never existed, and speaks an apology before an imaginary court,
and begs an imperceptible jury not to let numbers decide between truth
and falsehood, nor to assign the victory to mere quantity. Verily it is
becoming that he should make an apology of that sort to jurymen who are
yet in the loins of their fathers, and to explain to them how he came to
think it right to adopt opinions which contradict universal belief, and
to put more faith in his own mistaken fancies than in those who
throughout the world glorify Christ’s name.

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p9"></span>Let him write, please, another
apology in addition to this second; for this one is not a correction of
mistakes made about him, but rather a proof of the truth of those
charges. Every one knows that a proper apology aims at disproving a
charge; thus a man who is accused of theft or murder or any other crime
either denies the fact altogether, or transfers the blame to another
party, or else, if neither of these is possible, he appeals to the
charity or to the compassion of those who are to vote upon his sentence.
But in his book he neither denies the charge, nor shifts it on some one
else, nor has recourse to an appeal for mercy, nor promises amendment
for the future; but he establishes the charge against him by an
unusually labored demonstration. This charge, as he himself confesses,
really amounted to an indictment for profanity, nor did it leave the
nature of this undefined, but proclaimed the particular kind; whereas
his apology proves this species of profanity to be a positive duty, and
instead of removing the charge strengthens it. Now, if the tenets of our
Faith had been left in any obscurity, it might have been less hazardous
to attempt novelties; but the teaching of our master-theologian is now
firmly fixed in the souls of the faithful; and so it is a question
whether the man who shouts out contradictions of that about which all
equally have made up their minds is defending himself against the
charges made, or is not rather drawing down upon him the anger of his
hearers, and making his accusers still more bitter. I incline to think
the latter. So that if there are, as our writer tells us, both hearers
of his apology and accusers of his attempts upon the Faith, let him tell
us, how those accusers can possibly compromise <span
id="fr_80"></span>[82](#fn_80) the matter now, or what sort of verdict
that jury must return, now that his offence has been already proved by
his own ‘apology.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[XLI:78](2050023.htm#fr_76) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p3"></span> The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p3.1"></span>μὴ</span> is redundant and owing to
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p3.2"></span>οὐκ</span>.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[XLI:79](2050023.htm#fr_77) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>Εἰςφρησάντων</span>. A word used in
Aristophanes of ‘letting into court,’ probably a technical word: it is a
manifest derivation from <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p5.2"></span>εἰσφορεῖν</span>. What the solecism is,
is not clear; Gretser thinks that Eunomius meant it for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p5.3"></span>εἰσπηδᾶν</span>

<span id="fn_78"></span>[XLII:80](2050023.htm#fr_78) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>γενικῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[XLII:81](2050023.htm#fr_79) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p8.1"></span>συνεκρότει</span>. The word has this
meaning in Origen. In Philo (*de Vitâ Mosis,* p. 476, l. 48, quoted by
Viger.), it has another meaning, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p8.2"></span>συνεκρότουν ἄλλος ἄλλον, μὴ
ἀποκάμνειν</span>, i.e. ‘cheered.’

<span id="fn_80"></span>[XLII:82](2050023.htm#fr_80) <span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.vii-p10"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>καθυφήσουσιν</span>. This is the
reading of the Venetian <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>ms.</span> The word bears the same
forensic sense as the Latin prævaricari. The common reading is <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.vii-p10.3"></span>καθυβρίσουσιν</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Facts show that the terms of abuse which he has employed against
Basil are more suitable for himself.](2050024)
