[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050086)  [Next](2050088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He proceeds again to discuss the
impassibility of the Lord’s generation; and the folly of Eunomius, who
says that the generated essence involves the appellation of Son, and
again, forgetting this, denies the relation of the Son to the Father:
and herein he speaks of Circe and of the mandrake poison.*

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p2"></span>We must, however, return to those who
connect passion with the Divine generation, and on this account deny
that the Lord is truly begotten, in order to avoid the conception of
passion. To say that passion is absolutely linked with generation, and
that on this account, in order that the Divine nature may continue in
purity beyond the reach of passion, we ought to consider that the Son is
alien to the idea of generation, may perhaps appear reasonable in the
eyes of those who are easily deceived, but those who are instructed in
the Divine mysteries <span id="fr_638"></span>[640](#fn_638) have an
answer ready to hand, based upon admitted facts. For who knows not that
it is generation that leads us back to the true and blessed life, not
being the same with that which takes place “of blood and of the will of
the flesh <span id="fr_639"></span>[641](#fn_639) ,” in which are flux
and change, and gradual growth to perfection, and all else that we
observe in our earthly generation: but the other kind is believed to be
from God, and heavenly, and, as the Gospel says, “from above <span
id="fr_640"></span>[642](#fn_640) ,” which excludes the passions of
flesh and blood? I presume that they both admit the existence of this
generation, and find no passion in it. Therefore not all generation is
naturally connected with passion, but the material generation is subject
to passion, the immaterial pure from passion. What constrains him then
to attribute to the incorruptible generation of the Son what properly
belongs to the flesh, and, by ridiculing the lower form of generation
with his unseemly physiology, to exclude the Son from affinity with the
Father? For if, even in our own case, it is generation that is the
beginning of either life,—that generation which is through the flesh of
a life of passion, that which is spiritual of a life of purity, (and no
one who is in any sense numbered among Christians would contradict this
statement,)—how is it allowable to entertain the idea of passion in
thinking of generation as it concerns the incorruptible Nature? Let us
moreover examine this point in addition to those we have mentioned. If
they disbelieve the passionless character of the Divine generation on
the ground of the passion that affects the flesh, let them also, from
the same tokens, (those, I mean, to be found in ourselves,) refuse to
believe that God acts as a Maker without passion. For if they judge of
the Godhead by comparison of our own conditions, they must not confess
that God either begets or creates; for neither of these operations is
exercised by ourselves without passion. Let them therefore either
separate from the Divine nature both creation and generation, that they
may guard the impassibility of God on either side, and let them, that
the Father may be kept safely beyond the range of passion, neither
growing weary by creation, nor being defiled by generation, entirely
reject from their doctrine the belief in the Only-begotten, or, if they
agree <span id="fr_641"></span>[643](#fn_641) that the one activity is
exercised by the Divine power without passion, let them not quarrel
about the other: for if He creates without labour or matter, He surely
also begets without labour or flux.

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p7"></span>And here once more I have in this
argument the support of Eunomius. I will state his nonsense concisely
and briefly, epitomizing his whole meaning. That men do not make
materials for us, but only by their art add form to matter,—this is the
drift of what he says in the course of a great quantity of nonsensical
language. If, then, understanding conception and formation to be
included in the lower generation, he forbids on this ground the pure
notion of generation, by consequence, on the same reasoning, since
earthly creation is busied with the form, but cannot furnish matter
together with the form, let him forbid us also, on this ground, to
suppose that the Father is a Creator. If, on the other hand, he refuses
to conceive creation in the case of God according to man’s measure of
power, let him also cease to slander Divine generation by human
imperfections. But, that his accuracy and circumspection in argument may
be more clearly established, I will again return to a small point in his
statements. He asserts that “things which are respectively active and
passive share one another’s nature,” and mentions, after bodily
generation, <span id="page_CLX">p. CLX</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-Page_CLX"></span>“the work of the craftsman as
displayed in materials.” Now let the acute hearer mark how he here fails
in his proper aim, and wanders about among whatever statements he
happens to invent. He sees in things that come into being by way of the
flesh the “active and passive conceived, with the same essence, the one
imparting the essence, the other receiving it.” Thus he knows how to
discern the truth with accuracy as regards the nature of existing
things, so as to separate the imparter and the receiver from the
essence, and to say that each of these is distinct in himself apart from
the essence. For he that receives or imparts is surely another besides
that which is given or received, so that we must first conceive some one
by himself, viewed in his own separate existence, and then speak of him
as giving that which he has, or receiving that which he has not <span
id="fr_642"></span>[644](#fn_642) . And when he has sputtered out this
argument in such a ridiculous fashion, our sage friend does not perceive
that by the next step he overthrows himself once more. For he who by his
art forms at his will the material before him, surely in this operation
*acts;* and the material, in receiving its form at the hand of him who
exercises the art, is passively affected: for it is not by remaining
unaffected and unimpressionable that the material receives its form. If
then, even in the case of things wrought by art, nothing can come into
being without passivity and action concurring to produce it, how can our
author think that he here abides by his own words? seeing that, in
declaring community of essence to be involved in the relation of action
and passion, he seems not only to attest in some sense community of
essence in Him that is begotten with Him that begat Him, but also to
make the whole creation of one essence <span
id="fr_643"></span>[645](#fn_643) with its Maker, if, as he says, the
active and the passive are to be defined as mutually akin in respect of
nature. Thus, by the very arguments by which he establishes what he
wishes, he overthrows the main object of his effort, and makes the glory
of the coessential Son more secure by his own contention. For if the
fact of origination from anything shows the essence of the generator to
be in the generated, and if artificial fabrication (being accomplished
by means of action and passion) reduces both that which makes and that
which is produced to community of essence, according to his account, our
author in many places of his own writings maintains that the Lord has
been begotten. Thus by the very arguments whereby he seeks to prove the
Lord alien from the essence of the Father, he asserts for Him intimate
connexion. For if, according to his account, separation in essence is
not observed either in generation or in fabrication, then, whatever he
allows the Lord to be, whether “created” or a “product of generation,”
he asserts, by both names alike, the affinity of essence, seeing that he
makes community of nature in active and passive, in generator and
generated, a part of his system.

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p10"></span>Let us turn however to the next point
of the argument. I beg my readers not to be impatient at the minuteness
of examination which extends our argument to a length beyond what we
would desire. For it is not any ordinary matters on which we stand in
danger, so that our loss would be slight if we should hurry past any
point that required more careful attention, but it is the very sum of
our hope that we have at stake. For the alternative before us is,
whether we should be Christians, not led astray by the destructive wiles
of heresy, or whether we should be completely swept away into the
conceptions of Jews or heathen. To the end, then, that we may not suffer
either of these things forbidden, that we may neither agree with the
doctrine of the Jews by a denial of the verily begotten Son, nor be
involved in the downfall of the idolaters by the adoration of the
creature, let us perforce spend some time in the discussion of these
matters, and set forth the very words of Eunomius, which run thus:—

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p11"></span>“Now as these things are thus
divided, one might reasonably say that the most proper and primary
essence, and that which alone exists by the operation of the Father,
admits for itself the appellations of ‘product of generation,’ ‘product
of making,’ and ‘product of creation’:” and a little further on he says,
“But the Son alone, existing by the operation of the Father, possesses
His nature and His relation to Him that begat Him, without
community <span id="fr_644"></span>[646](#fn_644) .” Such are his words.
But let us, like men who look on at their enemies engaged in a factious
struggle among themselves, consider first our adversaries’ contention
against themselves, and so proceed to set forth on the other side the
true doctrine of godliness. “The Son alone,” he says, “existing by the
operation of the Father, possesses His nature and His relation to Him
that begat Him, without community.” But in his previous statements, he
says that he “does not refuse to call Him, that is begotten a ‘product
of generation,’ as the generated essence itself, and the appellation of
Son, make such a relation of words appropriate.”

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p13"></span><span id="page_CLXI">p. CLXI</span>
<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-Page_CLXI"></span>The contradiction existing in
these passages being thus evident, I am inclined to admire for their
acuteness those who praise this doctrine. For it would be hard to say to
which of his statements they could turn without finding themselves at
variance with the remainder. His earlier statement represented that the
generated essence, and the appellation of “Son,” made such a relation of
words appropriate. His present system says the contrary:—that “the Son
possesses His relation to Him that begat Him without community.” If they
believe the first statement, they will surely not accept the second: if
they incline to the latter, they will find themselves opposed to the
earlier conception. Who will stay the combat? Who will mediate in this
civil war? Who will bring this discord into agreement, when the very
soul is divided against itself by the opposing statements, and drawn in
different ways to contrary doctrines? Perhaps we may see here that dark
saying of prophecy which David speaks of the Jews—“They were divided but
were not pricked at heart <span id="fr_645"></span>[647](#fn_645) .” For
lo, not even when they are divided among contrariety of doctrines have
they a sense of their discordancy, but they are carried about by their
ears like wine-jars, borne around at the will of him who shifts them. It
pleased him to say that the generated essence was closely connected with
the appellation of “Son”: straightway, like men asleep, they nodded
assent to his remarks. He changed his statement again to the contrary
one, and denies the relation of the Son to Him that begat Him: again his
well-beloved friends join in assent to this also, shifting in whatever
direction he chooses, as the shadows of bodies change their form by
spontaneous mimicry with the motion of the advancing figure, and even if
he contradicts himself, accepting that also. This is another form of the
drought that Homer tells us of, not changing the bodies of those who
drink its poison into the forms of brutes, but acting on their souls to
produce in them a change to a state void of reason. For of those men,
the tale tells that their mind was sound, while their form was changed
to that of beasts, but here, while their bodies remain in their natural
state, their souls are transformed to the condition of brutes. And as
there the poet’s tale of wonder says that those who drank the drug were
changed into the forms of various beasts, at the pleasure of her who
beguiled their nature, the same thing happens now also from this Circe’s
cup. For they who drink the deceit of sorcery from the same writing are
changed to different forms of doctrine, transformed now to one, now to
another. And meanwhile these very ridiculous people, according to the
revised edition of the fable, are still well pleased with him who leads
them to such absurdity, and stoop to gather the words he scatters about,
as if they were cornel fruit or acorns, running greedily like swine to
the doctrines that are shed on the ground, not being naturally capable
of fixing their gaze on those which are lofty and heavenly. For this
reason it is that they do not see the tendency of his argument to
contrary positions, but snatch without examination what comes in their
way: and as they say that the bodies of men stupefied with mandrake are
held in a sort of slumber and inability to move, so are the senses of
these men’s souls affected, being made torpid as regards the
apprehension of deceit. It is certainly a terrible thing to be held in
unconsciousness by hidden guile, as the result of some fallacious
argument: yet where it is involuntary the misfortune is excusable: but
to be brought to make trial of evil as the result of a kind of
forethought and zealous desire, not in ignorance of what will befall,
surpasses every extreme of misery. Surely we may well complain, when we
hear that even greedy fish avoid the steel when it comes near them
unbaited, and take down the hook only when hope of food decoys them to a
bait: but where the evil is apparent, to go over of their own accord to
this destruction is a more wretched thing than the folly of the fish:
for these are led by their greediness to a destruction that is concealed
from them, but the others swallow with open mouth the hook of impiety in
its bareness, satisfied with destruction under the influence of some
unreasoning passion. For what could be clearer than this
contradiction—than to say that the same Person was begotten and is a
thing created, and that something is closely connected with the name of
“Son,” and, again, is alien from the sense of “Son”? But enough of these
matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_638"></span>[CLIX:640](2050087.htm#fr_638) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p3"></span> That is, in the sacramental doctrine
with regard to Holy Baptism.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[CLIX:641](2050087.htm#fr_639) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p4"></span> S. [John i.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013)<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_640"></span>[CLIX:642](2050087.htm#fr_640) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p5"></span> S. [John iii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p5.1"></span>,
where <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p5.2"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p5.3"></span>νωθεν</span> may be interpreted either
“from above” or as in A.V.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[CLIX:643](2050087.htm#fr_641) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p6"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p6.1"></span>εἰ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p6.2"></span>εἰς</span>, according to Oehler’s
suggestion.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[CLX:644](2050087.htm#fr_642) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p8"></span> It is not quite clear whether any of
this passage, or, if so, how much of it, is a direct quotation from
Eunomius. Probably only the phrase about the imparting and receiving of
the essence is taken from him, the rest of the passage being Gregory’s
expansion of the phrase into a distinction between the essence and the
thing of which it is the essence, so that the thing can be viewed apart
from its own essence.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[CLX:645](2050087.htm#fr_643) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p9.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>

<span id="fn_644"></span>[CLX:646](2050087.htm#fr_644) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p12"></span> This seems to be the force of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p12.2"></span>κοινώνητον</span>: it
is clear from what follows that it is to be understood as denying
community of essence between the Father and the Son, not as asserting
only the unique character alike of the Son and of His relation to the
Father.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[CLXI:647](2050087.htm#fr_645) <span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.iv-p14"></span> This is the LXX. version of the last
part of [Ps. xxxv. 15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.vi.iv-p14.1"></span>, a rendering with which the Vulgate
version practically agrees.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He again shows Eunomius, constrained by truth, in the character
of an advocate of the orthodox doctrine, confessing as most proper and
primary, not only the essence of the Father, but the essence also of the
Only-begotten.](2050088)
