[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050081)  [Next](2050083) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.v.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p1"></span> §7. *Then he ends the book with an
exposition of the Divine and Human names of the Only-Begotten, and a
discussion of the terms “generate” and “ungenerate.”*

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p2"></span>But as, I know not how or why, they
hate and abhor the truth, they give Him indeed the name of “Son,” but in
order to avoid the testimony which this word would give to the community
of essence, they separate the word from the sense included in the name,
and concede to the Only-begotten the name of “Son” as an empty thing,
vouchsafing to Him only the mere sound of the word. That what I say is
true, and that I am not taking a false aim at the adversaries’ mark, may
be clearly learnt from the actual attacks they make upon the truth. Such
are those arguments which are brought forward by them to establish their
blasphemy, that we are taught by the divine Scriptures many names of the
Only-begotten—a stone, an axe, a rock, a foundation, bread, a vine, a
door, a way, a shepherd, a fountain, a tree, resurrection, a teacher,
light, and many such names. But we may not piously use any of these
names of the Lord, understanding it according to its immediate sense.
For surely it would be a most absurd thing to think that what is
incorporeal and immaterial, simple, and without figure, should be
fashioned according to the apparent senses of these names, whatever they
may be, so that when we hear of an axe we should think of a particular
figure of iron, or when we hear of light, of the light in the sky, or of
a vine, of that which grows by the planting of shoots, or of any one of
the other names, as its ordinary use suggests to us to think; but we
transfer the sense of these names to what better becomes the Divine
nature, and form some other conception, and if we do designate Him thus,
it is not as being any of these things, according to the definition of
His nature, but as being called these things while He is conceived by
means of the names employed as something else than the things
themselves. But if such names are indeed truly predicated of the
Only-begotten God, without including the declaration of His nature, they
say that, as a consequence, neither should we admit the signification of
“Son,” as it is understood according to the prevailing use, as
expressive of nature, but should find some sense of this word also,
different from that which is ordinary and obvious. These, and others
like these, are their philosophical arguments to establish that the Son
is not what He is and is called. Our argument was hastening to a
different goal, namely to show that Eunomius’ new discourse is false and
inconsistent, and argues neither with the truth nor with itself. Since,
however, <span id="page_CL">p. CL</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.vii-Page_CL"></span>the arguments which we employ to attack
their doctrine are brought into the discussion as a sort of support for
their blasphemy <span id="fr_600"></span>[602](#fn_600) , it may be well
first briefly to discuss his point, and then to proceed to the orderly
examination of his writings.

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p4"></span>What can we say, then, to such things
without relevance? That while, as they say, the names which Scripture
applies to the Only-begotten are many, we assert that none of the other
names is closely connected with the reference to Him that begat Him. For
we do not employ the name “Stone,” or “Resurrection,” or “Shepherd,” or
“Light,” or any of the rest, as we do the name “Son of the Father,” with
a reference to the God of all. It is possible to make a twofold division
of the signification of the Divine names, as it were by a scientific
rule: for to one class belongs the indication of His lofty and
unspeakable glory; the other class indicates the variety of the
providential dispensation: so that, as we suppose, if that which
received His benefits did not exist, neither would those words be
applied with respect to them <span id="fr_601"></span>[603](#fn_601)
which indicate His bounty. All those on the other hand, that express the
attributes of God, are applied suitably and properly to the
Only-begotten God, apart from the objects of the dispensation. But that
we may set forth this doctrine clearly, we will examine the names
themselves. The Lord would not have been called a vine, save for the
planting of those who are rooted in Him, nor a shepherd, had not the
sheep of the house of Israel been lost, nor a physician, save for the
sake of them that were sick, nor would He have received for Himself the
rest of these names, had He not made the titles appropriate, in a manner
advantageous with regard to those who were benefited by Him, by some
action of His providence. What need is there to mention individual
instances, and to lengthen our argument upon points that are
acknowledged? On the other hand, He is certainly called “Son,” and
“Right Hand,” and “Only-begotten,” and “Word,” and “Wisdom,” and
“Power,” and all other such relative names, as being named together with
the Father in a certain relative conjunction. For He is called the
“Power *of God,*” and the “Right Hand *of God,*” and the “Wisdom *of
God,*” and the “Son and Only-begotten *of the Father,*” and the “Word
*with God,*” and so of the rest. Thus, it follows from what we have
stated, that in each of the names we are to contemplate some suitable
sense appropriate to the subject, so that we may not miss the right
understanding of them, and go astray from the doctrine of godliness. As,
then, we transfer each of the other terms to that sense in which they
may be applied to God, and reject in their case the immediate sense, so
as not to understand material light, or a trodden way, or the bread
which is produced by husbandry, or the word that is expressed by speech,
but, instead of these, all those thoughts which present to us the
magnitude of the power of the Word of God,—so, if one were to reject the
ordinary and natural sense of the word “Son,” by which we learn that He
is of the same essence as Him that begat Him, he will of course transfer
the name to some more divine interpretation. For since the change to the
more glorious meaning which has been made in each of the other terms has
adapted them to set forth the Divine power, it surely follows that the
significance of this name also should be transferred to what is loftier.
But what more Divine sense could we find in the appellation of “Son,” if
we were to reject, according to our adversaries’ view, the natural
relation to Him that begat Him? I presume no one is so daring in impiety
as to think that, in speech concerning the Divine nature, what is humble
and mean is more appropriate than what is lofty and great. If they can
discover, therefore, any sense of more exalted character than this, so
that to be of the nature of the Father seems a thing unworthy to
conceive of the Only-begotten, let them tell us whether they know, in
their secret wisdom, anything more exalted than the nature of the
Father, that, in raising the Only-begotten God to this level, they
should lift Him also above His relation to the Father. But if the
majesty of the Divine nature transcends all height, and excels every
power that calls forth our wonder, what idea remains that can carry the
meaning of the name “Son” to something greater still? Since it is
acknowledged, therefore, that every significant phrase employed of the
Only-begotten, even if the name be derived from the ordinary use of our
lower life, is properly applied to Him with a difference of sense in the
direction of greater majesty, and if it is shown that we can find no
more noble conception of the title “Son” than that which presents to us
the reality of His relationship to Him that begat Him, I think that we
need spend no more time on this topic, as our argument has sufficiently
shown that it is not proper to interpret the title of “Son” in like
manner with the other names.

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p6"></span>But we must bring back our enquiry
once more to the book. It does not become the same persons “not to
refuse” (for I will use <span id="page_CLI">p. CLI</span> <span
id="viii.i.v.vii-Page_CLI"></span>their own words) “to call Him that is
generated a ‘product of generation,’ since both the generated essence
itself and the appellation of Son make such a relation of words
appropriate,” and again to change the names which naturally belong to
Him into metaphorical interpretations: so that one of two things has
befallen them,—either their first attack has failed, and it is in vain
that they fly to “natural order” to establish the necessity of calling
Him that is generated a “product of generation”; or, if this argument
holds good, they will find their second argument brought to nought by
what they have already established. For the person who is called a
“product of generation” because He is generated, cannot, for the very
same reason, be possibly called a “product of making,” or a “product of
creation.” For the sense of the several terms differs very widely, and
one who uses his phrases advisedly ought to employ words with due regard
to the subject, that we may not, by improperly interchanging the sense
of our phrases, fall into any confusion of ideas. Hence we call that
which is wrought out by a craft the work of the craftsman, and call him
who is begotten by a man that man’s son; and no sane person would call
the work a son, or the son a work; for that is the language of one who
confuses and obscures the true sense by an erroneous use of names. It
follows that we must truly affirm of the Only-begotten one of these two
things,—if He is a Son, that He is not to be called a “product of
creation,” and if He is created, that He is alien from the appellation
of “Son <span id="fr_602"></span>[604](#fn_602) ,” just as heaven and
sea and earth, and all individual things, being things created, do not
assume the name of “Son.” But since Eunomius bears witness that the
Only-begotten God is begotten (and the evidence of enemies is of
additional value for establishing the truth), he surely testifies also,
by saying that He is begotten, to the fact that He is not created.
Enough, however, on these points: for though many arguments crowd upon
us, we will be content, lest their number lead to disproportion, with
those we have already adduced on the subject before us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_600"></span>[CL:602](2050082.htm#fr_600) <span
id="viii.i.v.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p3"></span> The meaning of this seems to be that
the Anomœan party make the same charge of “inconsistency” against the
orthodox, which Gregory makes against Eunomius, basing that charge on
the fact that the title “Son” is not interpreted in the same figurative
way as the other titles recited. Gregory accordingly proceeds to show
why the name of “Son” stands on a different level from those titles, and
is to be treated in a different way.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[CL:603](2050082.htm#fr_601) <span
id="viii.i.v.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.vii-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.v.vii-p5.2"></span>π᾽ ἀυτῶν</span>: perhaps “with reference
to man,” the plural being employed here to denote the race of men,
spoken of in the preceding clause collectively as <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.v.vii-p5.3"></span>τὸ
εὐεργετόυμενον</span>

<span id="fn_602"></span>[CLI:604](2050082.htm#fr_602) <span
id="viii.i.v.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.vii-p7"></span> Oehler’s punctuation here seems
faulty, and is accordingly not followed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](2050083)
