[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050089)  [Next](2050091) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p1"></span> §7. *He then clearly and skilfully
criticises the doctrine of the impossibility of comparison with the
things made after the Son, and exposes the idolatry contrived by
Eunomius, and concealed by the terminology of “Son” and “Only-begotten,”
to deceive his readers.*

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p2"></span>In the remainder of the passage,
however, he becomes conciliatory, and says that the essence “is not
compared with any of the things that were made by it and after it <span
id="fr_656"></span>[658](#fn_656) .” Such are the gifts which the
enemies of the truth offer to the Lord <span
id="fr_657"></span>[659](#fn_657) , by which their blasphemy is made
more manifest. Tell me what else is there of all things in creation that
admits of comparison with a different thing, seeing that the
characteristic nature that appears in each absolutely rejects community
with things of a different kind <span id="fr_658"></span>[660](#fn_658)
? The heaven admits no comparison with the earth, nor this with the
stars, nor the stars with the seas, nor water with stone, nor animals
with trees, nor land animals with winged creatures, nor four-footed
beasts with those that swim, nor irrational with rational creatures.
Indeed, why should one take up time with individual instances, in
showing that we may say of every single thing that we behold in the
creation, precisely what was thrown to the Only-begotten, as if it were
something special—that He admits of comparison with none of the things
that have been produced after Him and by Him? For it is clear that
everything which you conceive by itself is incapable of comparison with
the universe, and with the individual things which compose it; and it is
this, which may be truly said of any creature you please, which is
allotted by the enemies of the truth, as adequate and sufficient for His
honour and glory, to the Only-begotten God! And once more, putting
together phrases of the same sort in the remainder of the passage, he
dignifies Him with his empty honours, calling Him “Lord” and
“Only-begotten”: but that no orthodox meaning may be conveyed to his
readers by these names, he <span id="page_CLXVII">p. CLXVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-Page_CLXVII"></span>promptly mixes up blasphemy with
the more notable of them. His phrase runs thus:—“Inasmuch,” he says, “as
the generated essence leaves no room for community to anything else (for
it is only-begotten <span id="fr_659"></span>[661](#fn_659) ), nor is
the operation of the Maker contemplated as common.” O marvellous
insolence! as though he were addressing his harangue to brutes, or
senseless beings “which have no understanding <span
id="fr_660"></span>[662](#fn_660) ,” he twists his argument about in
contrary ways, as he pleases; or rather he suffers as men do who are
deprived of sight; for they too behave often in unseemly ways before the
eyes of those who see, supposing, because they themselves cannot see,
that they are also unseen. For what sort of man is it who does not see
the contradiction in his words? Because it is “generated,” he says, the
essence leaves other things no room for community, for it is
only-begotten; and then when he has uttered these words, really as
though he did not see or did not suppose himself to be seen, he tacks
on, as if corresponding to what he has said, things that have nothing in
common with them, coupling “the operation of the maker” with the essence
of the Only-begotten. That which is generated is correlative to the
generator, and the Only-begotten, surely, by consequence, to the Father;
and he who looks to the truth beholds, in co-ordination with the Son,
not “the operation of the maker,” but the nature of Him that begat Him.
But he, as if he were talking about plants or seeds, or some other thing
in the order of creation, sets “the operation of the maker” by the side
of the existence <span id="fr_661"></span>[663](#fn_661) of the
Only-begotten. Why, if a stone or a stick, or something of that sort,
were the subject of consideration, it would be logical to pre-suppose
“the operation of the maker”; but if the Only-begotten God is confessed,
even by His adversaries, to be a Son, and to exist by way of generation,
how do the same words befit Him that befit the lowest portions of the
creation? how do they think it pious to say concerning the Lord the very
thing which may be truly said of an ant or a gnat? For if any one
understood the nature of an ant, and its peculiar ties in reference to
other living things, he would not be beyond the truth in saying that
“the operation of its maker is not contemplated as common” with
reference to the other things. What, therefore, is affirmed of such
things as these, this they predicate also of the Only-begotten, and as
hunters are said to intercept the passage of their game with holes, and
to conceal their design by covering over the mouths of the holes with
some unsound and unsubstantial material, in order that the pit may seem
level with the ground about it, so heresy contrives against men
something of the same sort, covering over the hole of their impiety with
these fine-sounding and pious names, as it were with a level thatch, so
that those who are rather unintelligent, thinking that these men’s
preaching is the same with the true faith, because of the agreement of
their words, hasten towards the mere name of the Son and the
Only-begotten, and step into emptiness in the hole, since the
significance of these titles will not sustain the weight of their tread,
but lets them down into the pitfall of the denial of Christ. This is why
he speaks of the generated essence that leaves nothing room for
community, and calls it “Only-begotten.” These are the coverings of the
hole. But when any one stops before he is caught in the gulf, and puts
forth the test of argument, like a hand, upon his discourse, he sees the
dangerous downfall of idolatry lying beneath the doctrine. For when he
draws near, as though to God and the Son of God, he finds a creature of
God set forth for his worship. This is why they proclaim high and low
the name of the Only-begotten, that the destruction may be readily
accepted by the victims of their deceit, as though one were to mix up
poison in bread, and give a deadly greeting to those who asked for food,
who would not have been willing to take the poison by itself, had they
not been enticed to what they saw. Thus he has a sharp eye to the object
of his efforts, at least so far as his own opinion goes. For if he had
entirely rejected from his teaching the name of the Son, his falsehood
would not have been acceptable to men, when his denial was openly stated
in a definite proclamation; but now leaving only the name, and changing
the signification of it to express creation, he at once sets up his
idolatry, and fraudulently hides its reproach. But since we are bidden
not to honour God with our lips <span id="fr_662"></span>[664](#fn_662)
, and piety is not tested by the sound of a word, but the Son must first
be the object of belief in the heart unto righteousness, and then be
confessed with the mouth unto salvation <span
id="fr_663"></span>[665](#fn_663) , and those who say in their hearts
that He is not God, even though with their mouths they confess Him as
Lord, are corrupt and became abominable <span
id="fr_664"></span>[666](#fn_664) , as the prophet says,—for this cause,
I say, we must look to the mind of those who put forward, forsooth, the
words of the faith, and not be enticed to follow their sound. If, then,
one who speaks of the Son does not by that word refer to a creature, he
is on our side and not on the enemy’s; but if any one applies the name
of Son to the creation, he is to be ranked among idolaters. For they too
gave the name of God to Dagon and Bel and the Dragon, but they did not
on that account worship God. For the wood and the brass and the monster
were not God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_656"></span>[CLXVI:658](2050090.htm#fr_656) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3"></span> Oehler’s proposal to read “*vel
invitis libris quod sententia flagitat* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3.1"></span>τῶν δἰ ἀυτοῦ καὶ μετ᾽ αῦτὸν</span>” does
not seem necessary. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3.2"></span>αὐτῆς</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3.3"></span>αὐτὴν</span> refer to
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3.4"></span>οὐσία</span>,
the quotation being made (not verbally) from *Eunomius,* not from
Theognostus, and following apparently the phrase about “preserving the
relation,” etc. If the clause were a continuation of the quotation from
Theognostus, we should have to follow Oehler’s proposal.

<span id="fn_657"></span>[CLXVI:659](2050090.htm#fr_657) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p4"></span> Reading, according to Cotelerius’
suggestion, (mentioned with approval by Oehler, though not followed by
him,) <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>δωροφοροῦσιν</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p4.2"></span>δορυφοροῦσιν</span>

<span id="fn_658"></span>[CLXVI:660](2050090.htm#fr_658) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p5"></span> That is to say, because there is no
“common measure” of the distinct natures.

<span id="fn_659"></span>[CLXVII:661](2050090.htm#fr_659) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p6"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation; it is
the fact that the essence is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p6.1"></span>μονογενὴς</span> which excludes all other
things from community with it.

<span id="fn_660"></span>[CLXVII:662](2050090.htm#fr_660) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p7"></span> [Ps. xxxii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_661"></span>[CLXVII:663](2050090.htm#fr_661) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p8.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p8.2"></span>ποστάσε</span>.

<span id="fn_662"></span>[CLXVII:664](2050090.htm#fr_662) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p9"></span> Cf. [Is. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_663"></span>[CLXVII:665](2050090.htm#fr_663) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p10"></span> Cf. [Rom. x.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_664"></span>[CLXVII:666](2050090.htm#fr_664) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vii-p11"></span> Cf. [Ps. xiii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vii-p11.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He proceeds to show that there is no “variance” in the essence of
the Father and the Son: wherein he expounds many forms of variation and
harmony, and explains the “form,” the “seal,” and the “express
image.”](2050091)
