[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050057)  [Next](2050059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p1"></span> §42. *Explanation of ‘Ungenerate,’
and a ‘study’ of Eternity.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p2"></span>The eternity of God’s life, to
sketch it in mere outline, is on this wise. He is always to be
apprehended as in existence; He admits not a time when He was not, and
when He will not be. Those who draw a circular figure in plane geometry
from a centre to the distance of the line of circumference tell us there
is no definite beginning to their figure; and that the line is
interrupted by no ascertained end any more than by any visible
commencement: they say that, as it forms a single whole in itself with
equal radii on all sides, it avoids giving any indication of beginning
or ending. When, then, we compare the Infinite being to such a figure,
circumscribed though it be, let none find fault with this account; for
it is not on the circumference, but on the similarity which the figure
bears to the Life which in every direction eludes the grasp, that we fix
our attention when we affirm that such is our intuition of the Eternal.
From the present instant, as from a centre and a “point,” we extend
thought in all directions, to the immensity of that Life. We find that
we are drawn round uninterruptedly and evenly, and that we are always
following a circumference where there is nothing to grasp; we find the
divine life returning upon itself in an unbroken continuity, where no
end and no parts can be recognized. Of God’s eternity <span
id="page_XCVIII">p. XCVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-Page_XCVIII"></span>we say that which we have heard
from prophecy <span id="fr_225"></span>[227](#fn_225) ; viz.. that God
is a king “of old,” and rules for ages, and for ever, and beyond.
Therefore we define Him to be earlier than any beginning, and exceeding
any end. Entertaining, then, this idea of the Almighty, as one that is
adequate, we express it by two titles; i.e., ‘Ungenerate’ and ‘Endless’
represent this infinitude and continuity and ever-lastingness of the
Deity. If we adopted only one of them for our idea, and if the remaining
one was dropped, our meaning would be marred by this omission; for it is
impossible with either one of them singly <span
id="fr_226"></span>[228](#fn_226) to express the notion residing in each
of the two; but when one speaks of the ‘endless,’ only the absence as
regards an end has been indicated, and it does not follow that any hint
has been given about a beginning; while, when one speaks of the
‘Unoriginate <span id="fr_227"></span>[229](#fn_227) ,’ the fact of
being beyond a beginning has been expressed, but the case as regards an
end has been left quite doubtful.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p6"></span>Seeing, then, that these two titles
equally help to express the eternity of the divine life, it is high time
to inquire why our friends cut in two the complete meaning of this
eternity, and declare that the one meaning, which is the negation of
beginning, constitutes God’s being (instead of merely forming part of
the definition of eternity <span id="fr_228"></span>[230](#fn_228) ),
while they consider the other, which is the negation of end, as amongst
the externals of that being. It is difficult to see the reason for thus
assigning the negation of beginning to the realm of being, while they
banish the negation of end outside that realm. The two are our
conceptions of the same thing; and, therefore, either both should be
admitted to the definition of being, or, if the one is to be judged
inadmissible, the other should be rejected also. If, however, they are
determined thus to divide the thought of eternity, and to make the one
fall within the realm of that being, and to reckon the other with the
non-realities of Deity (for the thoughts which they adopt on this
subject are grovelling, and, like birds who have shed their feathers,
they are unable to soar into the sublimities of theology), I would
advise them to reverse their teaching, and to count the unending as
being, overlooking the unoriginate rather, and assigning the palm to
that which is future and excites hope, rather than to that which is past
and stale. Seeing, I say (and I speak thus owing to their narrowness of
spirit, and lower the discussion to the level of a child’s conception),
the past period of his life is nothing to him who has lived it, and all
his interest is centred on the future and on that which can be looked
forward to, that which has no end will have more value than that which
has no beginning. So let our thoughts upon the divine nature be worthy
and exalted ones; or else, if they are going to judge of it according to
human tests, let the future be more valued by them than the past, and
let them confine the being of the Deity to that, since time’s lapse
sweeps away with it all existence in the past, whereas expected
existence gains substance from our hope <span
id="fr_229"></span>[231](#fn_229) .

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p9"></span>Now I broach these ridiculously
childish suggestions as to children sitting in the market-place and
playing <span id="fr_230"></span>[232](#fn_230) ; for when one looks
into the grovelling earthliness of their heretical teaching it is
impossible to help falling into a sort of sportive childishness. It
would be right, however, to add this to what we have said, viz., that,
as the idea of eternity is completed only by means of both (as we have
already argued), by the negation of a beginning and also by that of an
end, if they confine God’s being to the one, their definition of this
being will be manifestly imperfect and curtailed by half; it is thought
of only by the absence of beginning, and does not contain the absence of
end within itself as an essential element. But if they do combine both
negations, and so complete their definition of the being of God,
observe, again, the absurdity that is at once apparent in this view; it
will be found, after all their efforts, to be at variance not only with
the Only-begotten, but with itself. The case is clear and does not
require much dwelling upon. The idea of a beginning and the idea of an
end are opposed each to each; the meanings of each differ as widely as
the other diametric oppositions <span id="fr_231"></span>[233](#fn_231)
, where there is no half-way proposition below <span
id="fr_232"></span>[234](#fn_232) . If any one is asked to define
‘beginning,’ he will not give a definition the same as that of end; but
will carry his definition of it to the opposite extremity. Therefore
also the two <span id="page_XCIX">p. XCIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-Page_XCIX"></span>*contraries* <span
id="fr_233"></span>[235](#fn_233) of these will be separated from each
other by the same distance of opposition; and that which is without
beginning, being contrary to that which is to be seen by a beginning,
will be a very different thing from that which is endless, or the
negation of end. If, then, they import both these attributes into the
being of God, I mean the negations of end and of beginning, they will
exhibit this Deity of theirs as a combination of two contradictory and
discordant things, because the *contrary* ideas to beginning and end
reproduce on their side also the *contradiction* existing between
beginning and end. Contraries of contradictories are themselves
contradictory of each other. In fact, it is always a true axiom, that
two things which are naturally opposed to two things mutually opposite
are themselves opposed to each other; as we may see by example. Water is
opposed to fire; therefore also the forces destructive of these are
opposed to each other; if moistness is apt to extinguish fire, and
dryness is apt to destroy water, the opposition of fire to water is
continued in those qualities themselves which are contrary to them; so
that dryness is plainly opposed to moistness. Thus, when beginning and
end have to be placed (diametrically) opposite each other <span
id="fr_234"></span>[236](#fn_234) , the terms contrary to these also
contradict each other in their meaning, I mean, the negations of end and
of beginning. Well, then, if they determine that one only of these
negations is indicative of the being (to repeat my former assertion),
they will bear evidence to half only of God’s existence, confining it to
the absence of beginning, and refusing to extend it to the absence of
end; whereas, if they import both into their definition of it, they will
actually exhibit it so as a combination of contradictions in the way
that has been said; for these two negations of beginning and of end, by
virtue of the contradiction existing between beginning and end, will
part it asunder. So their Deity will be found to be a sort of patchwork
compound, a conglomerate of contradictions.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p19"></span>But there is not, neither shall
there be, in the Church of God a teaching such as that, which can make
One who is single and incomposite not only multiform and patchwork, but
also the combination of opposites. The simplicity of the True Faith
assumes God to be that which He is, viz., incapable of being grasped by
any term, or any idea, or any other device of our apprehension,
remaining beyond the reach not only of the human but of the angelic and
of all supramundane intelligence, unthinkable, unutterable, above all
expression in words, having but one name that can represent His proper
nature, the single name of being ‘Above every name <span
id="fr_235"></span>[237](#fn_235) ’; which is granted to the
Only-begotten also, because “all that the Father hath is the Son’s.” The
orthodox theory allows these words, I mean “Ungenerate,” “Endless,” to
be indicative of God’s eternity, but not of His being; so that
“Ungenerate” means that no source or cause lies beyond Him, and
“Endless” means that His kingdom will be brought to a standstill in no
end. “Thou art the same,” the prophet says, “and Thy years shall not
fail <span id="fr_236"></span>[238](#fn_236) ,” showing by “art” that He
subsists out of no cause, and by the words following, that the
blessedness of His life is ceaseless and unending.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p22"></span>But, perhaps, some one amongst
even very religious people will pause over these investigations of ours
upon God’s eternity, and say that it will be difficult from what we have
said for the Faith in the Only-begotten to escape unhurt. Of two
unacceptable doctrines, he will say, our account <span
id="fr_237"></span>[239](#fn_237) must inevitably be brought into
contact with one. Either we shall make out that the Son is Ungenerate,
which is absurd; or else we shall deny Him Eternity altogether, a denial
which that *fraternity* of blasphemers make their specialty. For if
Eternity is characterized by having no beginning and end, it is
inevitable either that we must be impious and deny the Son Eternity, or
that we must be led in our secret thoughts about Him into the idea of
Ungeneracy. What, then, shall we answer? That if, in conceiving of the
Father before the Son on the single score of causation, we inserted any
mark of time before the subsistence of the Only-begotten, the belief
which we have in the Son’s eternity might with reason be said to be
endangered. But, as it is, the Eternal nature, equally in the case of
the Father’s and the Son’s life, and, as well, in what we believe about
the Holy Ghost, admits not of the thought that it will ever cease to be;
for where time is not, the “when” is annihilated with it. And if the
Son, always ap<span id="page_C">p. C</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-Page_C"></span>pearing with the thought of the
Father, is always found in the category of existence, what danger is
there in owning the Eternity of the Only-begotten, Who “hath neither
beginning of days, nor end of life <span
id="fr_238"></span>[240](#fn_238) .” For as He is Light from Light, Life
from Life, Good from Good, and Wise, Just, Strong, and all else in the
same way, so most certainly is He Eternal from Eternal.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p26"></span>But a lover of controversial
wrangling catches up the argument, on the ground that such a sequence
would make Him Ungenerate from Ungenerate. Let him, however, cool his
combative heart, and insist upon the proper expressions, for in
confessing His ‘coming from the Father’ he has banished all ideas of
Ungeneracy as regards the Only-begotten; and there will be then no
danger in pronouncing Him Eternal and yet not Ungenerate. On the one
hand, because the existence of the Son is not marked by any intervals of
time, and the infinitude of His life flows back before the ages and
onward beyond them in an all-pervading tide, He is properly addressed
with the title of Eternal; again, on the other hand, because the thought
of Him as Son in fact and title gives us the thought of the Father as
inalienably joined to it, He thereby stands clear of an ungenerate
existence being imputed to Him, while He is always with a Father Who
always is, as those inspired words of our Master expressed it, “bound by
way of generation to His Father’s Ungeneracy.” Our account of the Holy
Ghost will be the same also; the difference is only in the place
assigned in order. For as the Son is bound to the Father, and, while
deriving existence from Him, is not substantially after Him, so again
the Holy Spirit is in touch with the Only-begotten, Who is conceived of
as before the Spirit’s subsistence only in the theoretical light of a
cause <span id="fr_239"></span>[241](#fn_239) . Extensions in time find
no admittance in the Eternal Life; so that, when we have removed the
thought of cause, the Holy Trinity in no single way exhibits discord
with itself; and to It is glory due.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_225"></span>[XCVIII:227](2050058.htm#fr_225) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3"></span> *from prophecy.* <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.1"></span>[Psalm x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.2"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.3"></span>Βασιλεύσει Κύριος εἰς τὸν αἰ& 242·να,
καὶ εἰς τὸν αἰ& 242·να τοῦ αἰ& 242·νος·</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.4"></span>[Psalm xxix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.5"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.6"></span>καθιεῖται Κύριος βασιλεὺς εἰς τὸν αἰ&
242·να·</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.7"></span>[Psalm lxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.8"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.9"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.10"></span>Ο δὲ θεὸς βασιλεὺς ἡμῶν πρὸ αἰ&
242·νος</span>.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[XCVIII:228](2050058.htm#fr_226) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p3.11"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p4.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p4.2"></span>νός τινος τούτων</span>.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[XCVIII:229](2050058.htm#fr_227) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p5.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p5.2"></span>ναρχον</span>.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[XCVIII:230](2050058.htm#fr_228) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p7.1"></span>οὐ περὶ τὸ αΐδιον θεωρεῖσθαι</span>

<span id="fn_229"></span>[XCVIII:231](2050058.htm#fr_229) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p8"></span> Cf. [Heb. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p8.1"></span>, of faith, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p8.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p8.3"></span>λπιζομένων ὑπόστασις πραγμάτων</span>

<span id="fn_230"></span>[XCVIII:232](2050058.htm#fr_230) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p10"></span> [Luke vii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#032)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[XCVIII:233](2050058.htm#fr_231) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p11.1"></span>κατὰ διάμετρον ἀλλήλοις
ἀντικειμένων</span>, i.e. Contradictories in Logic.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[XCVIII:234](2050058.htm#fr_232) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p12"></span> As in A or E, both of which have
the Particular below them (I or O) as *a half-way* to the contrary
Universal. Thus—

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p13"></span>A I E All men are mortal. Some men
are mortal. No men are mortal. E O A

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p14"></span>No men are mortal. Some men are
not mortal. All men are mortal.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p15"></span>But between A and O, E and I,
there is no half-way.

<span id="fn_233"></span>[XCIX:235](2050058.htm#fr_233) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p16"></span> Beginning (Contraries)
Beginningless.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p17"></span>Endless (Contraries) Ending.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[XCIX:236](2050058.htm#fr_234) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p18.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p18.2"></span>πεναντίως διακειμένων</span>. The same
term has been used to express the opposition between Ungenerate and
Generated: so that it means both Oppositions, i.e. Contraries and
Contradictories.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[XCIX:237](2050058.htm#fr_235) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p20"></span> [Philip. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p20.1"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p20.2"></span>ὄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p20.3"></span>νομα τὸ ὑπὲρ πᾶν ὄνομα</span>.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[XCIX:238](2050058.htm#fr_236) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p20.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p21"></span> [Psalm cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[XCIX:239](2050058.htm#fr_237) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23"></span> Adopting <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23.2"></span>λόγος</span> from
the Venice Cod. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23.3"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23.4"></span>νὶ πάντως ὁ λόγος
συνενεχθήσεται</span>). The verb cannot be impersonal: and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p23.5"></span>τις</span> above,
the only available nominative, does not suit the sense very well.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p24"></span>Gregory constructs this scheme of
Opposition *after the analogy* of Logical Opposition. Beginning is not
so opposed to Beginning-less, as it is to Ending, because with the
latter there is no half-way, i.e. no word of definition in common.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[C:240](2050058.htm#fr_238) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p25"></span> [Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[C:241](2050058.htm#fr_239) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p27"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xlii-p27.1"></span>τὸν τῆς αἰτίας λόγον</span>. This is
much more probably the meaning, because of *before* above, than “on the
score of the different kind of causation” (Non omne quod procedat
nascitur, quamvis omne procedat quod nascitur. S. August.). It is a
direct testimony to the ‘Filioque’ belief. “The Spirit comes forth with
the Word, not begotten with Him, but being with and accompanying and
proceeding from Him.” Theodoret. Serm. II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II](2050059)
