[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050221)  [Next](2050223) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>As</span>, then, by the higher mystical
ascent <span id="fr_1946"></span>[1948](#fn_1946) from matters that
concern ourselves to that <span id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="xi.ii.iv-Page_477"></span>transcendent nature we gain a knowledge of
the Word, by the same method we shall be led on to a conception of the
Spirit, by observing in our own nature certain shadows and resemblances
of His ineffable power. Now in us the spirit (or breath) is the drawing
of the air, a matter other than ourselves, inhaled and breathed out for
the necessary sustainment of the body. This, on the occasion of uttering
the word, becomes an utterance which expresses in itself the meaning of
the word. And in the case of the Divine nature it has been deemed a
point of our religion that there is a Spirit of God, just as it has been
allowed that there is a Word of God, because of the inconsistency of the
Word of God being deficient as compared with our word, if, while this
word of ours is contemplated in connection with spirit, that other Word
were to be believed to be quite unconnected with spirit. Not indeed that
it is a thought proper to entertain of Deity, that after the manner of
our breath something foreign from without flows into God, and in Him
becomes the Spirit; but when we think of God’s Word we do not deem the
Word to be something unsubstantial, nor the result of instruction, nor
an utterance of the voice, nor what after being uttered passes away, nor
what is subject to any other condition such as those which are observed
in our word, but to be essentially self-subsisting, with a faculty of
will ever-working, all-powerful. The like doctrine have we received as
to God’s Spirit; we regard it as that which goes with the Word and
manifests its energy, and not as a mere effluence of the breath; for by
such a conception the grandeur of the Divine power would be reduced and
humiliated, that is, if the Spirit that is in it were supposed to
resemble ours. But we conceive of it as an essential power, regarded as
self-centred in its own proper person, yet equally incapable of being
separated from God in Whom it is, or from the Word of God whom it
accompanies, as from melting into nothingness; but as being, after the
likeness of God’s Word, existing as a person <span
id="fr_1947"></span>[1949](#fn_1947) , able to will, self-moved,
efficient, ever choosing the good, and for its every purpose having its
power concurrent with its will.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[476:1948](2050222.htm#fr_1946) <span
id="xi.ii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iv-p3"></span> *by the higher mystical ascent,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.2"></span>ναγωγικῶς</span>. The
common reading was <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p3.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p3.4"></span>ναλογικῶς</span>, which Hervetus and Morell
have translated. But Krabinger, from all his Codd. but one, has rightly
restored <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p3.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p3.6"></span>ναγωγικῶς</span>. It is not “analogy,” but
rather “induction,” that is here meant; *i.e.* the arguing from the
known to the unknown, from the facts of human nature (<span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.7"></span>τὰ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span>) to
those of the Godhead, or from history to spiritual events. <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.8"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.9"></span>Αναγωγή</span> is the
chief instrument in Origen’s interpretation of the Bible; it is more
important than allegory. It alone gives the “heavenly” meaning, as
opposed to the moral and practical though *still mystical* (cf.
Guericke, *Hist. Schol. Catech.* ii. p. 60) meaning. Speaking of the
Tower of Babel, he says that there is a “riddle” in the account. “A
competent exposition will have a more convenient season for dealing with
this, when there is a direct necessity to explain the passage in its
higher mystical meaning” (*c. Cels*. iv. p. 173). Gregory imitates his
master in constantly thus dealing with the Old Testament, *i.e.* making
inductions about the highest spiritual truths from the “history.” So
Basil would treat the prophecies (in *Isai.* v. p. 948). Chrysostom, on
the Songs of “Degrees” in the Psalms, says that they are so called
because they speak of the going up from Babylon, according to history;
but, according to their high mysticism, because they lift us into the
way of excellence. Here Gregory uses the facts of human nature neither
in the way of mere analogy nor of allegory: he argues straight from
them, as one reality, to another reality almost of the same *class,* as
it were, as the first, man being “in the image of God”; and so <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.10"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p3.11"></span>ναγωγή</span> here comes
nearer induction than anything else.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[477:1949](2050222.htm#fr_1947) <span
id="xi.ii.iv-p3.12"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.iv-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>καθ᾽ ὑπόστασιν</span>. Ueberweg (*Hist. of
Philosophy*, vol. i. 329) remarks: “That the same argumentation, which
in the last analysis reposes only on the double sense of <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>πόστασις</span> (viz. :
*(a)* real subsistence; *(b)* individually independent, not attributive
subsistence), could be used with reference to each of the Divine
attributes, and so for the complete restoration of polytheism, Gregory
leaves unnoticed.” Yet Gregory doubtless was well aware of this, for he
says, just below, that even a severe study of the mystery can only
result in a moderate amount of apprehension of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](2050223)
