[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050090)  [Next](2050092) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span id="page_CLXVIII">p.
CLXVIII</span> <span id="viii.i.vi.viii-Page_CLXVIII"></span>§8. *He
proceeds to show that there is no “variance” in the essence of the
Father and the Son: wherein he expounds many forms of variation and
harmony, and explains the “form,” the “seal,” and the “express image.”*

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p2"></span>But what need is there in our
discourse to reveal his hidden deceit by mere guesses at his intention,
and possibly to give our hearers occasions for objection, on the ground
that we make these charges against our enemies untruly? For lo, he sets
forth to us his blasphemy in its nakedness, not hiding his guile by any
veil, but speaking boldly in his absurdities with unrestrained voice.
What he has written runs thus:—“We, for our part,” he says, “as we find
nothing else besides the essence of the Son which admits of the
generation, are of opinion that we must assign the appellations to the
essence itself, or else we speak of ‘Son’ and ‘begotten’ to no purpose,
and as a mere verbal matter, if we are really to separate them from the
essence; starting from these names, we also confidently maintain that
the essences are variant from each other <span
id="fr_665"></span>[667](#fn_665) .”

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p4"></span>There is no need, I imagine, that
the absurdity here laid down should be refuted by arguments from us. The
mere reading of what he has written is enough to pillory his blasphemy.
But let us thus examine it. He says that the essences of the Father and
the Son are “variant.” What is meant by “variant”? Let us first of all
examine the force of the term as it is applied by itself <span
id="fr_666"></span>[668](#fn_666) , that by the interpretation of the
word its blasphemous character may be more clearly revealed. The term
“variance” is used, in the inexact sense sanctioned by custom, of
bodies, when, by palsy or any other disease, any limb is perverted from
its natural co-ordination. For we speak, comparing the state of
suffering with that of health, of the condition of one who has been
subjected to a change for the worse, as being a “variation” from his
usual health; and in the case of those who differ in respect of virtue
and vice, comparing the licentious life with that of purity and
temperance, or the unjust life with that of justice, or the life which
is passionate, warlike, and prodigal of anger, with that which is mild
and peaceful—and generally all that is reproached with vice, as compared
with what is more excellent, is said to exhibit “variance” from it,
because the marks observed in both—in the good, I mean, and the
inferior—do not mutually agree. Again, we say that those qualities
observed in the elements are “at variance” which are mutually opposed as
contraries, having a power reciprocally destructive, as heat and cold,
or dryness and moisture, or, generally, anything that is opposed to
another as a contrary; and the absence of union in these we express by
the term “variation”; and generally everything which is out of harmony
with another in their observed characteristics, is said to be “at
variance” with it, as health with disease, life with death, war with
peace, virtue with vice, and all similar cases.

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p6"></span>Now that we have thus analyzed these
expressions, let us also consider in regard to our author in what sense
he says that the essences of the Father and the Son are “variant from
each other.” What does he mean by it? Is it in the sense that the Father
is according to nature, while the Son “varies” from that nature? Or does
he express by this word the perversion of virtue, separating the evil
from the more excellent by the name of “variation,” so as to regard the
one essence in a good, the other in a contrary aspect? Or does he assert
that one Divine essence also is variant from another, in the manner of
the opposition of the elements? or as war stands to peace, and life to
death, does he also perceive in the essences the conflict which so
exists among all such things, so that they cannot unite one with
another, because the mixture of contraries exerts upon the things
mingled a consuming force, as the wisdom of the Proverbs saith of such a
doctrine, that water and fire never say “It is enough <span
id="fr_667"></span>[669](#fn_667) ,” expressing enigmatically the nature
of contraries of equal force and equal balance, and their mutual
destruction? Or is it in none of these ways that he sees “variance” in
the essences? Let him tell us, then, what he conceives besides these. He
could not say, I take it, even if he were to repeat his wonted
phrase <span id="fr_668"></span>[670](#fn_668) , “The Son is variant
from Him Who begat Him”; for thereby the absurdity of his statements is
yet more clearly shown. For what mutual relation is so closely and
concordantly engrafted and fitted together as that meaning of relation
to <span id="page_CLXIX">p. CLXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-Page_CLXIX"></span>the Father expressed by the word
“Son”? And a proof of this is that even if both of these names be not
spoken, that which is omitted is connoted by the one that is uttered, so
closely is the one implied in the other, and concordant with it: and
both of them are so discerned in the one that one cannot be conceived
without the other. Now that which is “at variance” is surely so
conceived and so called, in opposition to that which is “in harmony,” as
the plumb-line is in harmony with the straight line, while that which is
crooked, when set beside that which is straight, does not harmonize with
it. Musicians also are wont to call the agreement of notes “harmony,”
and that which is out of tune and discordant “inharmonious.” To speak of
things as at “variance,” then, is the same as to speak of them as “out
of harmony.” If, therefore, the nature of the Only-begotten God is at
“variance,” to use the heretical phrase, with the essence of the Father,
it is surely not in harmony with it: and inharmoniousness cannot exist
where there is no possibility of harmony <span
id="fr_669"></span>[671](#fn_669) . For the case is as when, the figure
in the wax and in the graying of the signet being one, the wax that has
been stamped by the signet, when it is fitted again to the latter, makes
the impression on itself accord with that which surrounds it, filling up
the hollows and accommodating the projections of the engraving with its
own patterns: but if some strange and different pattern is fitted to the
engraving of the signet, it makes its own form rough and confused, by
rubbing off its figure on an engraved surface that does not correspond
with it. But He Who is “in the form of God <span
id="fr_670"></span>[672](#fn_670) ” has been formed by no impression
different from the Father, seeing that He is “the express image” of the
Father’s Person <span id="fr_671"></span>[673](#fn_671) , while the
“form of God” is surely the same thing as His essence. For as, “being
made in the form of a servant <span id="fr_672"></span>[674](#fn_672) ,”
He was formed in the essence of a servant, not taking upon Him the form
merely, apart from the essence, but the essence is involved in the sense
of “form,” so, surely, he who says that He is “in the form of God”
signified essence by “form.” If, therefore, He is “in the form of God,”
and being in the Father is sealed with the Father’s glory, (as the word
of the Gospel declares, which saith, “Him hath God the Father
sealed <span id="fr_673"></span>[675](#fn_673) ,”—whence also “He that
hath seen Me hath seen the Father <span
id="fr_674"></span>[676](#fn_674) ,”) then “the image of goodness” and
“the brightness of glory,” and all other similar titles, testify that
the essence of the Son is not out of harmony with the Father. Thus by
the text cited is shown the insubstantial character of the adversaries’
blasphemy. For if things at “variance” are not in harmony, and He Who is
sealed by the Father, and displays the Father in Himself, both being in
the Father, and having the Father in Himself <span
id="fr_675"></span>[677](#fn_675) , shows in all points His close
relation and harmony, then the absurdity of the opposing views is hereby
overwhelmingly shown. For as that which is at “variance” was shown to be
out of harmony, so conversely that which is harmonious is surely
confessed beyond dispute not to be at “variance.” For as that which is
at “variance” is not harmonious, so the harmonious is not at “variance.”
Moreover, he who says that the nature of the Only-begotten is at
“variance” with the good essence of the Father, clearly has in view
variation in the good itself. But as for what that is which is at
variance with the good—“O ye simple,” as the Proverb saith, “understand
his craftiness <span id="fr_676"></span>[678](#fn_676) !”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_665"></span>[CLXVIII:667](2050091.htm#fr_665) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3"></span> The whole passage is rather
obscure, and Oehler’s punctuation renders it perhaps more obscure than
that which is here adopted. The argument seems to be something like
this:—“The generated essence is not compared with any of the things made
by it, or after it, because being *only-begotten* it leaves no room for
a common basis of comparison with anything else, and the operation of
its maker is also peculiar to itself (since it is immediate, the
operation in the case of other things being *mediate*). The essence of
the Son, then, being so far isolated, it is to it that the appellations
of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>γέννημα</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.2"></span>,</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.3"></span>ποίημα</span>, and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.4"></span>κτίσμα</span> are to
be assigned; otherwise the terms ‘Son’ and ‘Only-begotten’ are
meaningless. Therefore the Son, being in essence a <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.5"></span>ποίημα</span> or
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.6"></span>κτίσμα</span>,
is alien from the Father Who made or created Him.” The word <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p3.7"></span>παρηλλάχθαι</span>,
used to express the difference of essence between the Father and the
Son, is one for which it is hard to find an equivalent which shall suit
all the cases of the use of the word afterwards instanced: the idea of
“variation,” however, seems to attach to all these cases, and the verb
has been translated accordingly.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[CLXVIII:668](2050091.htm#fr_666) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p5"></span> Following Oehler’s suggestion and
reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p5.2"></span>φ᾽ ἑαυτῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_667"></span>[CLXVIII:669](2050091.htm#fr_667) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p7"></span> Cf. [Prov. xxx.
15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p7.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_668"></span>[CLXVIII:670](2050091.htm#fr_668) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8"></span> The sense given would perhaps be
clearer if we were to read (as Gulonius seems to have done) <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8.2"></span>συνήθη</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8.3"></span>συνήθη</span>.
This might be interpreted, “He could not say, I take it, even if he uses
the words in an unwonted sense, that the Son is at variance with Him Who
begat Him.” The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8.4"></span>συνήθη</span> would thus be the senses
already considered and set aside: and the point would be that such a
statement could not be made without manifest absurdity, even if some
out-of-the-way sense were attached to the words. As the passage stands,
it must mean that even if Eunomius repeats his wonted phrase, that can
suggest no other sense of “variance” than those enumerated.

<span id="fn_669"></span>[CLXIX:671](2050091.htm#fr_669) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p8.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p9"></span> The reading of Oehler is here
followed: but the sense of the clause is not clear either in his text or
in that of the Paris editions.

<span id="fn_670"></span>[CLXIX:672](2050091.htm#fr_670) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_671"></span>[CLXIX:673](2050091.htm#fr_671) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p11"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[CLXIX:674](2050091.htm#fr_672) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p12"></span> [Phil. ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_673"></span>[CLXIX:675](2050091.htm#fr_673) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p13"></span> S. [John vi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_674"></span>[CLXIX:676](2050091.htm#fr_674) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p14"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_675"></span>[CLXIX:677](2050091.htm#fr_675) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p15"></span> Cf. S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="fn_676"></span>[CLXIX:678](2050091.htm#fr_676) <span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.viii-p16"></span> [Prov. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.vi.viii-p16.1"></span> (LXX.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then, distinguishing between essence and generation, he declares
the empty and frivolous language of Eunomius to be like a rattle. He
proceeds to show that the language used by the great Basil on the
subject of the generation of the Only-begotten has been grievously
slandered by Eunomius, and so ends the book.](2050092)
