[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050110)  [Next](2050112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.x.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CC">p. CC</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.i-Page_CC"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.x.i-p1.1"></span>Book VIII.</span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p2"></span>§1. *The eighth book very notably
overthrows the blasphemy of the heretics who say that the Only-begotten
came from nothing, and that there was a time when He was not, and shows
the Son to be no new being, but from everlasting, from His having said
to Moses, “I am He that is,” and to Manoah, “Why askest thou My name? It
also is wonderful”;—moreover David also says to God, “Thou art the same,
and Thy years shall not fail;” and furthermore Isaiah says, “I am God,
the first, and hereafter am I:” and the Evangelist, “He was in the
beginning, and was with God, and was God:”—and that He has neither
beginning nor end: —and he proves that those who say that He is new and
comes from nothing are idolaters. And herein he very finely interprets
“the brightness of the glory, and the express image of the Person.”*

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.x.i-p3.1"></span>These,</span> then, are the strong points of
Eunomius’ case; and I think that when those which promised to be
powerful are proved by argument to be so rotten and unsubstantial, I may
well keep silence concerning the rest, since the others are practically
refuted, concurrently with the refutation of the stronger ones; just as
it happens in warlike operations that when a force more powerful than
the rest has been beaten, the remainder of the army are no longer of any
account in the eyes of those by whom the strong portion of it has been
overcome. But the fact that the chief part of his blasphemy lies in the
later part of his discourse forbids me to be silent. For the transition
of the Only-begotten from nothing into being, that horrid and godless
doctrine of Eunomius, which is more to be shunned than all impiety, is
next maintained in the order of his argument. And since every one who
has been bewitched by this deceit has the phrase, “If He was, He has not
been begotten, and if He has been begotten, He was not,” ready upon his
tongue for the maintenance of the doctrine that He Who made of nothing
us and all the creation is Himself from nothing, and since the deceit
obtains much support thereby, as men of feebler mind are pressed by this
superficial bit of plausibility, and led to acquiesce in the blasphemy,
we must needs not pass by this doctrinal “root of bitterness,” lest, as
the Apostle says, it “spring up and trouble us <span
id="fr_848"></span>[850](#fn_848) .” Now I say that we must first of all
consider the actual argument itself, apart from our contest with our
opponents, and thus afterwards proceed to the examination and refutation
of what they have set forth.

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p5"></span>One mark of the true Godhead is
indicated by the words of Holy Scripture, which Moses learnt by the
voice from heaven, when He heard Him Who said, “I am He that is <span
id="fr_849"></span>[851](#fn_849) .” We think it right, then, to believe
that to be alone truly Divine which is represented as eternal and
infinite in respect of being; and all that is contemplated therein is
always the same, neither growing nor being consumed; so that if one
should say of God, that formerly He was, but now is not, or that He now
is, but formerly was not, we should consider each of the sayings alike
to be godless: for by both alike the idea of eternity is mutilated,
being cut short on one side or the other by non-existence, whether one
contemplates “nothing” as preceding “being <span
id="fr_850"></span>[852](#fn_850) ,” or declares that “being” ends in
“nothing”; and the frequent repetition of “first of all” or “last of
all” concerning God’s non-existence does not make amends for the impious
conception touching the Divinity. For this reason we declare the
maintenance of their doctrine as to the non-existence at some time of
Him Who truly is, to be a denial and rejection of His true Godhead; and
this on the ground that, on the one hand, He Who showed Himself to Moses
by the light speaks of Himself as *being,* when He says, “I am He that
is <span id="fr_851"></span>[853](#fn_851) ,” while on the other, Isaiah
(being made, so to say, the instrument of Him Who spoke in him) says in
the person of Him that is, “I am the first, and hereafter am I <span
id="fr_852"></span>[854](#fn_852) ,” so that hereby, whichever way we
consider it, we conceive eternity in God. And so, too, the word that was
spoken to Manoah shows the fact that the Divinity is not comprehensible
by the significance of His name, because, when Manoah asks to know His
name, that, when the promise has come actually to pass, he may by name
glorify his benefactor, <span id="page_CCI">p. CCI</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.i-Page_CCI"></span>He says to him, “Why askest thou this?
It also is wonderful <span id="fr_853"></span>[855](#fn_853) ”; so that
by this we learn that there is one name significant of the Divine
Nature—the wonder, namely, that arises unspeakably in our hearts
concerning It. So, too, great David, in his discourses with himself,
proclaims the same truth, in the sense that all the creation was brought
into being by God, while He alone exists always in the same manner, and
abides for ever, where he says, “But Thou art the same, and Thy years
shall not fail <span id="fr_854"></span>[856](#fn_854) .” When we hear
these sayings, and others like them, from men inspired by God, let us
leave all that is not from eternity to the worship of idolaters, as a
new thing alien from the true Godhead. For that which now is, and
formerly was not, is clearly new and not eternal, and to have regard to
any new object of worship is called by Moses the service of demons, when
he says, “They sacrificed to devils and not to God, to gods whom their
fathers knew not; new gods were they that came newly up <span
id="fr_855"></span>[857](#fn_855) .” If then everything that is new in
worship is a service of demons, and is alien from the true Godhead, and
if what is now, but was not always, is new and not eternal, we who have
regard to that which *is,* necessarily reckon those who contemplate
non-existence as attaching to Him Who is, and who say that “He once was
not,” among the worshippers of idols. For we may also see that the great
John, when declaring in his own preaching the Only-begotten God, guards
his own statement in every way, so that the conception of non-existence
shall find no access to Him Who is. For he says <span
id="fr_856"></span>[858](#fn_856) that He “was in the beginning,” and
“was with God,” and “was God,” and was light, and life, and truth, and
all good things at all times, and never at any time failed to be
anything that is excellent, Who is the fulness of all good, and is in
the bosom of the Father. If then Moses lays down as a law for us some
such mark of true Godhead as this, that we know nothing else of God but
this one thing, that He *is* (for to this point the words, “I am He that
is <span id="fr_857"></span>[859](#fn_857) ”); while Isaiah in his
preaching declares aloud the absolute infinity of Him Who is, defining
the existence of God as having no regard to beginning or to end (for He
Who says “I am the first, and hereafter am I,” places no limit to His
eternity in either direction, so that neither, if we look to the
beginning, do we find any point marked *since* which He is, and beyond
which He was not, nor, if we turn our thought to the future, can we cut
short by any boundary the eternal progress of Him Who is),—and if the
prophet David forbids us to worship any new and strange God <span
id="fr_858"></span>[860](#fn_858) (both of which are involved in the
heretical doctrine; “newness” is clearly indicated in that which is not
eternal, and “strangeness” is alienation from the Nature of the very
God),—if, I say, these things are so, we declare all the sophistical
fabrication about the non-existence at some time of Him Who truly is, to
be nothing else than a departure from Christianity, and a turning to
idolatry. For when the Evangelist, in his discourse concerning the
Nature of God, separates at all points non-existence from Him Who is,
and, by his constant repetition of the word “was,” carefully destroys
the suspicion of non-existence, and calls Him the Only-begotten God, the
Word of God, the Son of God, equal with God, and all such names, we have
this judgment fixed and settled in us, that if the Only-begotten Son is
God, we must believe that He Who is believed to be God is eternal. And
indeed He is verily God, and assuredly is eternal, and is never at any
time found to be non-existent. For God, as we have often said, if He now
is, also assuredly always was, and if He once was not, neither does He
now exist at all. But since even the enemies of the truth confess that
the Son is and continually abides the Only-begotten God, we say this,
that, being in the Father, He is not in Him in one respect only, but He
is in Him altogether, in respect of all that the Father is conceived to
be. As, then, being in the incorruptibility of the Father, He is
incorruptible, good in His goodness, powerful in His might, and, as
being in each of these attributes of special excellence which are
conceived of the Father, He is that particular thing, so, also, being in
His eternity, He is assuredly eternal. Now the eternity of the Father is
marked by His never having taken His being from nonexistence, and never
terminating His being in non-existence. He, therefore, Who hath all
things that are the Father’s <span id="fr_859"></span>[861](#fn_859) ,
and is contemplated in all the glory of the Father, even as, being in
the endlessness of the Father, He has no end, so, being in the
unoriginateness of the Father, has, as the Apostle says, “no beginning
of days <span id="fr_860"></span>[862](#fn_860) ,” but at once is “of
the Father,” and is regarded in the eternity of the Father: and in this
respect, more especially, is seen the complete absence of divergence in
the Likeness, as compared with Him Whose Likeness He is. And herein is
His saying found true which tells us, “He that hath seen Me hath seen
the Father <span id="fr_861"></span>[863](#fn_861) .” Moreover, it is in
this way that those words of the Apostle, that the Son is “the
brightness of His glory, and the express image of His Person <span
id="fr_862"></span>[864](#fn_862) ,” are best understood to have an
excellent and close application. For <span id="page_CCII">p. CCII</span>
<span id="viii.i.x.i-Page_CCII"></span>the Apostle conveys to those
hearers who are unable, by the contemplation of purely intellectual
objects, to elevate their thought to the height of the knowledge of God,
a sort of notion of the truth, by means of things apparent to sense. For
as the body of the sun is expressly imaged by the whole disc that
surrounds it, and he who looks on the sun argues, by means of what he
sees, the existence of the whole solid substratum, so, he says, the
majesty of the Father is expressly imaged in the greatness of the power
of the Son, that the one may be believed to be as great as the other is
known to be: and again, as the radiance of light sheds its brilliancy
from the whole of the sun’s disc (for in the disc one part is not
radiant, and the rest dim), so all that glory which the Father is, sheds
its brilliancy from its whole extent by means of the brightness that
comes from it, that is, by the true Light; and as the ray is of the sun
(for there would be no ray if the sun were not), yet the sun is never
conceived as existing by itself without the ray of brightness that is
shed from it, so the Apostle delivering to us the continuity and
eternity of that existence which the Only-begotten has of the Father,
calls the Son “the brightness of His glory.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_848"></span>[CC:850](2050111.htm#fr_848) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p4"></span> Cf. [Heb. xii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_849"></span>[CC:851](2050111.htm#fr_849) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p6"></span> [Exod. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_850"></span>[CC:852](2050111.htm#fr_850) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p7"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.i-p7.1"></span>προθεωροίη</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.i-p7.2"></span>προσθεωροίη</span>

<span id="fn_851"></span>[CC:853](2050111.htm#fr_851) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p8"></span> [Exod. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[CC:854](2050111.htm#fr_852) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p9"></span> See note 4 on Book V. §1, where these
words are also treated of.

<span id="fn_853"></span>[CCI:855](2050111.htm#fr_853) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p10"></span> Cf. [Judges xiii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p10.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_854"></span>[CCI:856](2050111.htm#fr_854) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p11"></span> [Ps. cii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#027)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_855"></span>[CCI:857](2050111.htm#fr_855) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p12"></span> Cf. [Deut. xxxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p12.1"></span>
(LXX.). The quotation is not exact.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[CCI:858](2050111.htm#fr_856) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p13"></span> Cf. S. [John
i](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#000)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_857"></span>[CCI:859](2050111.htm#fr_857) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p14"></span> [Exod. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#004)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[CCI:860](2050111.htm#fr_858) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p15"></span> Cf. [Ps. lxxxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[CCI:861](2050111.htm#fr_859) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p16"></span> S. [John xvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#015)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="fn_860"></span>[CCI:862](2050111.htm#fr_860) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p17"></span> [Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_861"></span>[CCI:863](2050111.htm#fr_861) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p18"></span> S. [John xiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_862"></span>[CCI:864](2050111.htm#fr_862) <span
id="viii.i.x.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.i-p19"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.i-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then discusses the “willing” of the Father concerning the
generation of the Son, and shows that the object of that good will is
from eternity, which is the Son, existing in the Father, and being
closely related to the process of willing, as the ray to the flame, or
the act of seeing to the eye.](2050112)
