[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050062)  [Next](2050064) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He next skilfully confutes the
partial, empty and blasphemous statement of Eunomius on the subject of
the absolutely existent.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p2"></span>Now the wording of their doctrine is
as follows: “We believe in the one and only true God, according to the
teaching of the Lord Himself, not honouring Him with a lying title (for
He cannot lie), but really existent, one God in nature and in glory, who
is without beginning, eternally, without end, alone.” Let not him who
professes to believe in accordance with the teaching of the Lord pervert
the exposition of the faith that was made concerning the Lord of all to
suit his own fancy, but himself follow the utterance of the truth. Since
then, the expression of the Faith comprehends the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, what agreement has this construction
of theirs to show with the utterances of the Lord, so as to refer such a
doctrine to the teaching of those utterances? They cannot manage to show
where in the Gospels the Lord said that we should believe on “the one
and only true God:” unless they have some new Gospel. For the Gospels
which are read in the churches continuously from ancient times to the
present day, do not contain this saying which tells us that we should
believe in or baptize into “the one and only true God,” as these people
say, but “in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost.” But as we were taught by the voice of the Lord, this we say,
that the word “one” does not indicate the Father alone, but comprehends
in its significance the Son with the Father, inasmuch as the Lord said,
“I and My Father are one <span id="fr_263"></span>[265](#fn_263) .” In
like manner also the name “God” belongs equally to the Beginning in
which the Word was, and to the Word Who was in the Beginning. For the
Evangelist tells us that “the Word was with God, and the Word was
God <span id="fr_264"></span>[266](#fn_264) .” So that when Deity is
expressed the Son is included no less than the Father. Moreover, the
true cannot be conceived as something alien from and unconnected with
the truth. But that the Lord is the Truth no one at all will dispute,
unless he be one estranged from the truth. If, then, the Word is in the
One, and is God and Truth, as is proclaimed in the Gospels, on what
teaching of the Lord does he base his doctrine who makes use of these
distinctive terms? For the antithesis is between “only” and “not only,”
between “God” and “no God,” between “true” and “untrue.” If it is with
respect to idols that they make their distinction of phrases, we too
agree. For the name of “deity” is given, in an equivocal sense, to the
idols of the heathen, seeing that “all the gods of the heathen are
demons,” and in another sense marks the contrast of the one with the
many, of the true with the false, of those who are not Gods with Him who
is God <span id="fr_265"></span>[267](#fn_265) . But if the contrast is
one with the Only-begotten God <span id="fr_266"></span>[268](#fn_266) ,
let our sages learn that truth has its opposite only in falsehood, and
God in one who is not God. But inasmuch as the Lord Who is the Truth is
God, and is in the Father and is one relatively to the Father <span
id="fr_267"></span>[269](#fn_267) , there is no room in the true
doctrine for these distinctions of phrases. For he who truly believes in
the One sees in the One Him Who is completely united with Him in truth,
and deity, and essence, and life, and wisdom, and in all attributes
whatsoever: or, if he does not see in the One Him Who is all these it is
<span id="page_CV">p. CV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-Page_CV"></span>in nothing that he believes. For
without the Son the Father has neither existence nor name, any more than
the Powerful without Power, or the Wise without Wisdom. For Christ is
“the Power of God and the Wisdom of God <span
id="fr_268"></span>[270](#fn_268) ;” so that he who imagines he sees the
One God apart from power, truth, wisdom, life, or the true light, either
sees nothing at all or else assuredly that which is evil. For the
withdrawal of the good attributes becomes a positing and origination of
evil.

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p9"></span>“Not honouring Him,” he says, “with a
lying title, for He cannot lie.” By that phrase I pray that Eunomius may
abide, and so bear witness to the truth that it cannot lie. For if he
would be of this mind, that everything that is uttered by the Lord is
far removed from falsehood, he will of course be persuaded that He
speaks the truth Who says, “I am in the Father, and the Father in
Me <span id="fr_269"></span>[271](#fn_269) ,”—plainly, the One in His
entirety, in the Other in His entirety, the Father not superabounding in
the Son, the Son not being deficient in the Father,—and Who says also
that the Son should be honoured as the Father is honoured <span
id="fr_270"></span>[272](#fn_270) , and “He that hath seen Me hath seen
the Father <span id="fr_271"></span>[273](#fn_271) ,” and “no man
knoweth the Father save the Son <span id="fr_272"></span>[274](#fn_272)
,” in all which passages there is no hint given to those who receive
these declarations as genuine, of any variation <span
id="fr_273"></span>[275](#fn_273) of glory, or of essence, or anything
else, between the Father and the Son.

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p15"></span>“Really existent,” he says, “one God
in nature and in glory.” Real existence is opposed to unreal existence.
Now each of existing things is really existent in so far as it is; but
that which, so far as appearance and suggestion go, seems to be, but is
not, this is not really existent, as for example an appearance in a
dream or a man in a picture. For these and such like things, though they
exist so far as appearance is concerned, have not real existence. If
then they maintain, in accordance with the Jewish opinion, that the
Only-begotten God does not exist at all, they are right in predicating
real existence of the Father alone. But if they do not deny the
existence of the Maker of all things, let them be content not to deprive
of real existence Him Who is, Who in the Divine appearance to Moses gave
Himself the name of Existent, when He said, “I am that I am <span
id="fr_274"></span>[276](#fn_274) :” even as Eunomius in his later
argument agrees with this, saying that it was He Who appeared to Moses.
Then he says that God is “one in nature and in glory.” Whether God
exists without being by nature God, he who uses these words may perhaps
know: but if it be true that he who is not by nature God is not God at
all, let them learn from the great Paul that they who serve those who
are not Gods do not serve God <span id="fr_275"></span>[277](#fn_275) .”
But we “serve the living and true God,” as the Apostle says <span
id="fr_276"></span>[278](#fn_276) : and He Whom we serve is Jesus the
Christ <span id="fr_277"></span>[279](#fn_277) . For Him the Apostle
Paul even exults in serving, saying, “Paul, a servant of Jesus
Christ <span id="fr_278"></span>[280](#fn_278) .” We then, who no longer
serve them which by nature are no Gods <span
id="fr_279"></span>[281](#fn_279) , have come to the knowledge of Him
Who by nature is God, to Whom every knee boweth “of things in heaven and
things in earth and things under the earth <span
id="fr_280"></span>[282](#fn_280) .” But we should not have been His
servants had we not believed that this is the living and true God, to
Whom “every tongue maketh confession that Jesus is Lord to the glory of
God the Father <span id="fr_281"></span>[283](#fn_281) .”

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p24"></span>“God,” he says, “Who is without
beginning, eternally, without end, alone.” Once more “understand, ye
simple ones,” as Solomon says, “his subtlety <span
id="fr_282"></span>[284](#fn_282) ,” lest haply ye be deceived and fall
headlong into the denial of the Godhead of the Only-begotten Son. That
is without end which admits not of death and decay: that, likewise, is
called everlasting which is not only for a time. That, therefore, which
is neither everlasting nor without end is surely seen in the nature
which is perishable and mortal. Accordingly he who predicates
“unendingness” of the one and only God, and does not include the Son in
the assertion of “unendingness” and “eternity,” maintains by such a
proposition, that He Whom he thus contrasts with the eternal and
unending is perishable and temporary. But we, even when we are told that
God “only hath immortality <span id="fr_283"></span>[285](#fn_283) ,”
understand by “immortality” the Son. For life is immortality, and the
Lord is that life, Who said, “I am the Life <span
id="fr_284"></span>[286](#fn_284) .” And if He be said to dwell “in the
light that no man can approach unto <span
id="fr_285"></span>[287](#fn_285) ,” again we make no difficulty in
understanding that the true Light, unapproachable by falsehood, is the
Only-begotten, in Whom we learn from the Truth itself that the Father
is <span id="fr_286"></span>[288](#fn_286) . Of these opinions let the
reader choose the more devout, whether we are to think of the
Only-begotten in a manner worthy of the Godhead, or to call Him, as
heresy prescribes, perishable and temporary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_263"></span>[CIV:265](2050063.htm#fr_263) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p3"></span> S. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_264"></span>[CIV:266](2050063.htm#fr_264) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p4"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="fn_265"></span>[CIV:267](2050063.htm#fr_265) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5"></span> Or, possibly, “and the contrast he
makes between the one and the many, &c. is irrelevant” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5.1"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5.2"></span>λλως
ἀντιδιαιρεῖ</span>): the quotation is from [Ps.
96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5.3"></span>[Ps. xcvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5.4"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_266"></span>[CIV:268](2050063.htm#fr_266) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p5.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p6"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p6.1"></span>, reading (as S. Gregory seems to have
done) <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p6.2"></span>θεός</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p6.3"></span>υἱ& 231·ς</span>.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[CIV:269](2050063.htm#fr_267) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p6.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.1"></span>καὶ ἓν πρὸς τὸν πατέρα ὄντος</span>. It
may be questioned whether the text is sound: the phrase seems unusual;
perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.2"></span>ἓ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.3"></span>ν</span> has been inserted in error from
the preceding clause <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.4"></span>καὶ ἐν τῷ πατρὶ ὄντος</span>, and we
should read “is in the Father and is with the Father” (cf. the [1 John
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002), [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.5"></span>).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[CV:270](2050063.htm#fr_268) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p7.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p8"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[CV:271](2050063.htm#fr_269) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p10"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_270"></span>[CV:272](2050063.htm#fr_270) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_271"></span>[CV:273](2050063.htm#fr_271) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p12"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_272"></span>[CV:274](2050063.htm#fr_272) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p13"></span> S. [Matt. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_273"></span>[CV:275](2050063.htm#fr_273) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p14"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p14.1"></span>παραλλαγή</span> (Cf. S. [James i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p14.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_274"></span>[CV:276](2050063.htm#fr_274) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p16"></span> Or “I am He that is,” [Ex. iii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[CV:277](2050063.htm#fr_275) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p17"></span> The reference seems to be to [Gal.
iv. 8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[CV:278](2050063.htm#fr_276) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p18"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p18.1"></span>[1 Thess. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[CV:279](2050063.htm#fr_277) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p18.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p19"></span> There is perhaps a reference here to
[Col. iii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[CV:280](2050063.htm#fr_278) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p20"></span> [Rom. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[CV:281](2050063.htm#fr_279) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p21"></span> Cf. [Gal. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_280"></span>[CV:282](2050063.htm#fr_280) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p22"></span> Cf. [Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[CV:283](2050063.htm#fr_281) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p23"></span> Cf. [Phil.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[CV:284](2050063.htm#fr_282) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p25"></span> [Prov. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p25.1"></span>
(Septuagint).

<span id="fn_283"></span>[CV:285](2050063.htm#fr_283) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p26"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[CV:286](2050063.htm#fr_284) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p27"></span> S. [John xiv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="fn_285"></span>[CV:287](2050063.htm#fr_285) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p28"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[CV:288](2050063.htm#fr_286) <span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.iv-p29"></span> S. [John xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.iv-p29.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He next marvellously overthrows the unintelligible statements of
Eunomius which assert that the essence of the Father is not separated or
divided, and does not become anything else.](2050064)
