[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050020)  [Next](2050022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p1"></span> §5. *His peculiar caricature of the
bishops, Eustathius of Armenia and Basil of Galatia, is not well drawn.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p2"></span>But, not to linger longer on these
absurdities in the very act of declining to mention them, and not to
soil this book by forcing my subject through all his written
reminiscences, like one who urges his horse through a slough and so gets
covered with its filth, I think it is best to leap over the mass of his
rubbish with as high and as speedy a jump as my thoughts are capable of,
seeing that a quick retreat from what is disgusting is a considerable
advantage; and let us hasten on <span id="fr_66"></span>[68](#fn_66) to
the finale of his story, lest the bitterness of his own words should
trickle into my book. Let Eunomius have the monopoly of the bad taste in
such words as these, spoken of God’s priests <span
id="fr_67"></span>[69](#fn_67) , “curmudgeon squires, and beadles, and
satellites, rummaging about, and not suffering the fugitive to carry on
his concealment,” and all the other things which he is not ashamed to
write of grey-haired priests. Just as in the schools for secular
learning <span id="fr_68"></span>[70](#fn_68) , in order to exercise the
boys to be ready in word and wit, they propose themes for declamation,
in which the person who is the subject of them is nameless, so does
Eunomius make an onset at once upon the facts suggested, and lets loose
the tongue of invective, and without saying one word as to any actual
villainies, he merely works up against them all the hackneyed phrases of
contempt, and every imaginable term of abuse: in which, besides,
incongruous ideas are brought together, such as a ‘dilettante soldier,’
‘an accursed saint,’ ‘pale with fast, and murderous with hate,’ and many
such like scurrilities; and just like a reveller in the secular
processions shouts his ribaldry, when he would carry his insolence to
the highest pitch, without his mask on, so does Eunomius, without an
attempt to veil his malignity, shout with brazen throat the language of
the waggon. Then he reveals the cause why he is so enraged; ‘these
priests took every precaution that many should not’ be perverted to the
error of these heretics; accordingly he is angry that they could not
stay at their convenience in the places they liked, but that a residence
was assigned them by order of the then governor of Phrygia, so that most
might be secured from such wicked neighbours; his indignation at this
bursts out in these words; ‘the excessive severity of our trials,’ ‘our
grievous sufferings,’ ‘our noble endurance of them,’ ‘the exile from our
native country into Phrygia.’ Quite so: this Oltiserian <span
id="fr_69"></span>[71](#fn_69) might well be proud of what occurred,
putting an end as it did to all his family pride, and casting such a
slur upon his race that that far-renowned Priscus, his grandfather, from
whom he gets those brilliant and most remarkable heirlooms, “the mill,
and the <span id="page_XXXIX">p. XXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-Page_XXXIX"></span>leather, and the slaves’ stores,”
and the rest of his inheritance in Chanaan <span
id="fr_70"></span>[72](#fn_70) , would never have chosen this lot, which
now makes him so angry. It was to be expected that he would revile those
who were the agents of this exile. I quite understand his feeling. Truly
the authors of these misfortunes, if such there be or ever have been,
deserve the censures of these men, in that the renown of their former
lives is thereby obscured, and they are deprived of the opportunity of
mentioning and making much of their more impressive antecedents; the
great distinctions with which each started in life; the professions they
inherited from their fathers; the greater or the smaller marks of
gentility of which each was conscious, even before they became so widely
known and valued that even emperors numbered them amongst their
acquaintance, as he now boasts in his book, and that all the higher
governments were roused about them and the world was filled with their
doings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[XXXVIII:68](2050021.htm#fr_66) <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p3"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p3.1"></span>πρός τε τὸ πέρας</span>.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[XXXVIII:69](2050021.htm#fr_67) <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p4"></span> This must be the ‘caricature’ of the
(Greek) Summary above. Eustathius of Sebasteia, the capital of Armenia,
and the Galatian Basil, of Ancyra (Angora), are certainly mentioned, c.
6 (end). Twice did these two, once Semi-Arians, oppose Aetius and
Eunomius, before Constantius, at Byzantium. On the second occasion,
however (Sozomen, *H. E*. iv. 23, Ursacius and Valens arrived with the
proscription of the Homoousion from Ariminum: it was then that “the
world groaned to find itself Arian” (Jerome). The ‘accursed saint’ ‘pale
with fast,’ i.e. Eustathius, in his Armenian monastery, gave Basil the
Great a model for his own.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[XXXVIII:70](2050021.htm#fr_68) <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p5.1"></span>τῶν ἔξωθεν λόγων</span>.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[XXXVIII:71](2050021.htm#fr_69) <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p6"></span> Oltiseris was probably the district,
as Corniaspa was the village, in which Eunomius was born. It is a Celtic
word: and probably suggests his half-Galatian extraction.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[XXXIX:72](2050021.htm#fr_70) <span
id="viii.i.iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.v-p7"></span> This can be no other than the
district Chammanene, on the east bank of the Halys, where Galatia and
Cappadocia join.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A notice of Aetius, Eunomius' master in heresy, and of Eunomius
himself, describing the origin and avocations of each.](2050022)
