[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050195)  [Next](2050197) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p1"></span> XIV. *That the mind is not in a part of
the body; wherein also is a distinction of the movements of the body and
of the soul* <span id="fr_1640"></span>[1642](#fn_1640) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p3"></span>1. But we have wandered far from our
subject, for the purpose of our argument was to show that the mind is
not restricted to any part of the body, but is equally in touch with the
whole, producing its motion according to the nature of the part which is
under its influence. <span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="x.ii.ii.xv-Page_403"></span>There are cases, however, in which the
mind even follows the bodily impulses, and becomes, as it were, their
servant; for often the bodily nature takes the lead by introducing
either the sense of that which gives pain or the desire for that which
gives pleasure, so that it may be said to furnish the first beginnings,
by producing in us the desire for food, or, generally, the impulse
towards some pleasant thing; while the mind, receiving such an impulse,
furnishes the body by its own intelligence with the proper means towards
the desired object. Such a condition, indeed, does not occur in all,
save in those of a somewhat slavish disposition, who bring the reason
into bondage to the impulses of their nature and pay servile homage to
the pleasures of sense by allowing them the alliance of their mind; but
in the case of more perfect men this does not happen; for the mind takes
the lead, and chooses the expedient course by reason and not by passion,
while their nature follows in the tracks of its leader.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p4"></span>2. But since our argument discovered in
our vital faculty three different varieties—one which receives
nourishment without perception, another which at once receives
nourishment and is capable of perception, but is without the reasoning
activity, and a third rational, perfect, and co-extensive with the whole
faculty—so that among these varieties the advantage belongs to the
intellectual,—let no one suppose on this account that in the compound
nature of man there are three souls welded together, contemplated each
in its own limits, so that one should think man’s nature to be a sort of
conglomeration of several souls. The true and perfect soul is naturally
one, the intellectual and immaterial, which mingles with our material
nature by the agency of the senses; but all that is of material nature,
being subject to mutation and alteration, will, if it should partake of
the animating power, move by way of growth: if, on the contrary, it
should fall away from the vital energy, it will reduce its motion to
destruction.

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p5"></span>3. Thus, neither is there perception
without material substance, nor does the act of perception take place
without the intellectual faculty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[402:1642](2050196.htm#fr_1640) <span
id="x.ii.ii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p2"></span> This is chapter xv. in the Latin
version and some Greek <span class="c22"><span
id="x.ii.ii.xv-p2.1"></span>mss.</span> The Bodleian <span
class="c22"><span id="x.ii.ii.xv-p2.2"></span>ms.</span> of the Latin
gives the title:—“That the mind is sometimes in servitude to the body,
and of its three differences, vital, spiritual, and rational.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the soul proper, in fact and name, is the rational soul,
while the others are called so equivocally; wherein also is this
statement, that the power of the mind extends throughout the whole body
in fitting contact with every part.](2050197)
