[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050259)  [Next](2050261) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xlii"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XL.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p2.1"></span>But</span>, as far as what has been already
said, the instruction of this Catechism does not seem to me to be yet
complete. For we ought, in my opinion, to take into consideration the
sequel of this matter; which many of those who come to the grace of
baptism <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2052](#fn_2050) overlook, being led
astray, and self-deceived, and indeed only seemingly, and not really,
regenerate. For that change in our life which takes place through
regeneration will not be change, if we continue in the state in which we
were. I do not see <span id="page_508">p. 508</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-Page_508"></span>how it is possible to deem one who is
still in the same condition, and in whom there has been no change in the
distinguishing features of his nature, to be any other than he was, it
being palpable to every one that it is for a renovation and change of
our nature that the saving birth is received. And yet human nature does
not of itself admit of any change in baptism; neither the reason, nor
the understanding, nor the scientific faculty, nor any other peculiar
characteristic of man is a subject for change. Indeed the change would
be for the worse if any one of these properties of our nature were
exchanged away <span id="fr_2051"></span>[2053](#fn_2051) for something
else. If, then, the birth from above is a definite refashioning of the
man, and yet these properties do not admit of change, it is a subject
for inquiry what that is in him, by the changing of which the grace of
regeneration is perfected. It is evident that when those evil features
which mark our nature have been obliterated a change to a better state
takes place. If, then, by being “washed,” as says the Prophet <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2054](#fn_2052) , in that mystic bath we become
“clean” in our wills and “put away the evil” of our souls, we thus
become better men, and are changed to a better state. But if, when the
bath has been applied to the body, the soul has not cleansed itself from
the stains of its passions and affections, but the life after initiation
keeps on a level with the uninitiate life, then, though it may be a bold
thing to say, yet I will say it and will not shrink; in these cases the
water is but water, for the gift of the Holy Ghost in no ways appears in
him who is thus baptismally born; whenever, that is, not only the
deformity of anger <span id="fr_2053"></span>[2055](#fn_2053) , or the
passion of greed, or the unbridled and unseemly thought, with pride,
envy, and arrogance, disfigures the Divine image, but the gains, too, of
injustice abide with him, and the woman he has procured by adultery
still even after that ministers to his pleasures. If these and the like
vices, after, as before, surround the life of the baptized, I cannot see
in what respects he has been changed; for I observe him the same man as
he was before. The man whom he has unjustly treated, the man whom he has
falsely accused, the man whom he has forcibly deprived of his property,
these, as far as they are concerned, see no change in him though he has
been washed in the laver of baptism. They do not hear the cry of
Zacchæus from him as well: “If I have taken any thing from any man by
false accusation, I restore fourfold <span
id="fr_2054"></span>[2056](#fn_2054) .” What they said of him before his
baptism, the same they now more fully declare; they call him by the same
names, a covetous person, one who is greedy of what belongs to others,
one who lives in luxury at the cost of men’s calamities. Let such an
one, therefore, who remains in the same moral condition as before, and
then babbles to himself of the beneficial change he has received from
baptism, listen to what Paul says: “If a man think himself to be
something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth himself <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2057](#fn_2055) .” For what you have not become,
that you are not. “As many as received Him,” thus speaks the Gospel of
those who have been born again, “to them gave He power to become the
sons of God <span id="fr_2056"></span>[2058](#fn_2056) .” Now the child
born of any one is entirely of a kindred nature with his parent. If,
then, you have received God, if you have become a child of God, make
manifest in your disposition the God that is in you, manifest in
yourself Him that begot you. By the same marks whereby we recognize God,
must this relationship to God of the son so born be exhibited. “He
openeth His hand and filleth every living thing with His good pleasure.”
“He passeth over transgressions.” “He repenteth Him of the evil.” “The
Lord is good to all, and bringeth not on us His anger every day.” “God
is a righteous Lord, and there is no injustice in Him <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2059](#fn_2057) ;” and all other sayings of the
like kind which are scattered for our instruction throughout the
Scripture;—if you live amidst such things as these, you are a child of
God indeed; but if you continue with the characteristic marks of vice in
you, it is in vain that you babble to yourself of your birth from above.
Prophecy will speak against you and say, “You are a ‘son of man,’ not a
son of the Most High. You ‘love vanity, and seek after leasing.’ Know
you not in what way man is ‘made admirable <span
id="fr_2058"></span>[2060](#fn_2058) ’? In no other way than by becoming
holy.”

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p12"></span>It will be necessary to add to what has
been said this remaining statement also; viz. that those good things
which are held out in the Gospels to those who have led a godly life,
are not such as can be precisely described. For how is that possible
with things which “eye hath not seen, neither ear heard, neither have
entered into the heart of man <span id="fr_2059"></span>[2061](#fn_2059)
”? Indeed, the sinner’s life of torment presents no equivalent to
anything that pains the sense here. Even if some one of the punishments
in that other world be named in terms that are well known here, the
distinction is still <span id="page_509">p. 509</span> <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-Page_509"></span>not small. When you hear the word fire,
you have been taught to think of a fire other than the fire we see,
owing to something being added to that fire which in this there is not;
for that fire is never quenched, whereas experience has discovered many
ways of quenching this; and there is a great difference between a fire
which can be extinguished, and one that does not admit of extinction.
That fire, therefore, is something other than this. If, again, a person
hears the word “worm,” let not his thoughts, from the similarity of the
term, be carried to the creature here that crawls upon the ground; for
the addition that it “dieth not” suggests the thought of another reptile
than that known here. Since, then, these things are set before us as to
be expected in the life that follows this, being the natural outgrowth
according to the righteous judgment of God, in the life of each, of his
particular disposition, it must be the part of the wise not to regard
the present, but that which follows after, and to lay down the
foundations for that unspeakable blessedness during this short and
fleeting life, and by a good choice to wean themselves from all
experience of evil, now in their lifetime here, hereafter in their
eternal recompense <span id="fr_2060"></span>[2062](#fn_2060) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[507:2052](2050260.htm#fr_2050) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p3"></span> We need not consider this passage about
Regeneration as an interpolation, with Aubertin, *De Sacram. Eucharist.*
lib. ii. p. 487, because Gregory has already dealt with Baptism in ch.
xxxv.–xxxvi.; and then with the Eucharist: his view of the relation
between the two Sacraments, that the Eucharist unites the body, as
Baptism the soul to God, quite explains this return to the preliminaries
of this double union.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[508:2053](2050260.htm#fr_2051) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p4.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p4.2"></span>παμειφθείη</span>. A word almost peculiar to
this Gregory.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[508:2054](2050260.htm#fr_2052) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p5"></span> [Is. i.
16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[508:2055](2050260.htm#fr_2053) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p6.1"></span>τὸ κατὰ τὸν θυμὸν αἶσχος</span>. Quite
wrongly the Latin translators, “animi turpitudo,” *i.e.* baseness of
*mind,* which is mentioned just below.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[508:2056](2050260.htm#fr_2054) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p7"></span> S. [Luke xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[508:2057](2050260.htm#fr_2055) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p8"></span> [Gal. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[508:2058](2050260.htm#fr_2056) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p9"></span> S. [John i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[508:2059](2050260.htm#fr_2057) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p10"></span> These quotations are from the LXX. of
[Ps. 145:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#016), [Ps.
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012), [Isa.
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025), [Joel
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013), [Ps.
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011), [Ps.
92:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)<span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[508:2060](2050260.htm#fr_2058) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p11"></span> [Ps.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p11.1"></span>.
In the last verse the LXX. has <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p11.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p11.3"></span>θαυμάστωσε</span>; which the Vulgate
follows, *i.e.* “He hath made his Saint wonderful” (the Hebrew implies,
“hath wonderfully separated”). That <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p11.4"></span>θαυμαστοῦται</span> (three of Krabinger’s
Codd., and Morell’s) is the reading here (omitted in Editt.), is clear
from the whole quotation from the LXX. of this Psalm.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[508:2061](2050260.htm#fr_2059) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p13"></span> <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p13.1"></span>[Is. lxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p13.2"></span>;
[1 Cor. ii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p13.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[509:2062](2050260.htm#fr_2060) <span
id="xi.ii.xlii-p13.4"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xlii-p14"></span> The section beginning here, which one
Cod. (Vulcobius’), used by Hervetus, exhibits, is “evidently the
addition of some blundering copyist.” P. Morell considers it the portion
of a preface to a treatise against Severus, head of the heretics called
Acephali. But Severus was condemned under Justinian, <span
class="c22"><span id="xi.ii.xlii-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 536: and the
Acephali themselves were no recognized party till after the Council of
Ephesus (those who would follow neither S. Cyril, nor John of Damascus,
in one meaning of the term, *i.e.* “headless”), or after the Council of
Chalcedon (those who rejected the Henoticon of the Emperor Zeno,
addressed to the orthodox and the Monophysites, in the other meaning).
It is quoted by Krabinger, none of whose Codd. recognize it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Oratorical Works.](2050261)
