[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050112)  [Next](2050114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.x.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p1"></span> §3. *Then, thus passing over what
relates to the essence of the Son as having been already discussed, he
treats of the sense involved in “generation,” saying that there are
diverse generations, those effected by matter and art, and of
buildings,—and that by succession of animals,—and those by efflux, as by
the sun and its beam. The lamp and its radiance, scents and ointments
and the quality diffused by them,—and the word produced by the mind; and
cleverly discusses generation* <span id="fr_864"></span>[866](#fn_864)
*from rotten wood; and from the condensation of fire, and countless
other causes.*

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p3"></span>Now that we have thus thoroughly
scrutinized our doctrine, it may perhaps be time to set forth and to
consider the opposing statement, examining it side by side in comparison
with our own opinion. He states it thus:—“For while there are,” he says,
“two statements which we have made, the one, that the essence of the
Only-begotten was not before its own generation, the other that, being
generated, it was before all things, he <span
id="fr_865"></span>[867](#fn_865) does not prove either of these
statements to be untrue; for he did not venture to say that He was
before that supreme <span id="fr_866"></span>[868](#fn_866) generation
and formation, seeing that he is opposed at once by the Nature of the
Father, and the judgment of sober-minded men. For what sober man could
admit the Son to be and to be begotten before that supreme generation?
and He Who is without generation needs not generation in order to His
being what He is.” Well, whether he speaks truly, when he says that our
master <span id="fr_867"></span>[869](#fn_867) opposed his antitheses to
no purpose, all may surely be aware who have been conversant with that
writer’s works. But for my own part (for I think that the refutation of
his calumny on this matter is a small step towards the exposure of his
malice), I will leave the task of showing that this point was not passed
over by our master without discussion, and turn my argument to the
discussion, as far as in me lies, of the points now advanced. He says
that he has in his own discourse spoken of two matters,—one, that the
essence of the Only-begotten was not before Its own generation, the
other, that, being generated, It was before all things. Now I think that
by what we have already said, the fact has been sufficiently shown that
no new essence was begotten by the Father besides that which is
contemplated in the Father Himself, and that there is no need for us to
be entangled in a contest with blasphemy of this kind, as if the
argument were now propounded to us for the first time; and further, that
the real force of our argument must be directed to one point, I mean to
his horrible and blasphemous utterance, which clearly states concerning
God the Word that “He was not.” Moreover, as our argument in the
foregoing discourse has already to some extent dealt with the question
of his blasphemy, it would perhaps be superfluous again to establish by
like considerations what we have proved already. For it was to this end
that we made those former statements, that by the earlier impression
upon our hearers of an orthodox mode of thought, the blasphemy <span
id="page_CCIV">p. CCIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-Page_CCIV"></span>of our adversaries, who assert that
non-existence preceded existence in the case of the Only-begotten God,
might be more manifest.

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p7"></span>It seems at this point well to
investigate in our argument, by a more careful examination, the actual
significance of “generation.” That this name presents to us the fact of
being as the result of some cause is clear to every one, and about this
point there is, I suppose, no need to dispute. But since the account to
be given of things which exist as the result of cause is various, I
think it proper that this matter should be cleared up in our discourse
by some sort of scientific division. Of things, then, which are the
result of something, we understand the varieties to be as follows. Some
are the result of matter and art, as the structure of buildings and of
other works, coming into being by means of their respective matter, and
these are directed by some art that accomplishes the thing proposed,
with a view to the proper aim of the results produced. Others are the
results of matter and nature; for the generations of animals are the
building <span id="fr_868"></span>[870](#fn_868) of nature, who carries
on her own operation by means of their material bodily subsistence.
Others are the result of material efflux, in which cases the antecedent
remains in its natural condition, while that which flows from it is
conceived separately, as in the case of the sun and its beam, or the
lamp and its brightness, or of scents and ointments and the quality they
emit; for these, while they remain in themselves without diminution,
have at the same time, each concurrently with itself, that natural
property which they emit: as the sun its beam, the lamp its brightness,
the scents the perfume produced by them in the air. There is also
another species of “generation” besides these, in which the cause is
immaterial and incorporeal, but the generation is an object of sense and
takes place by corporeal means;—I speak of the word which is begotten by
the mind: for the mind, being itself incorporeal, brings forth the word
by means of the organs of sense. All these varieties of generation we
mentally include, as it were, in one general view. For all the wonders
that are wrought by nature, which changes the bodies of some animals to
something of a different kind, or produces some animals from a change in
liquids, or a corruption of seed, or the rotting of wood, or out of the
condensed mass of fire transforms the cold vapour that issues from the
firebrands, shut off in the heart of the fire, to produce an animal
which they call the salamander,—these, even if they seem to be outside
the limits we have laid down, are none the less included among the cases
we have mentioned. For it is by means of bodies that nature fashions
these varied forms of animals; for it is such and such a change of body,
disposed by nature in this or that particular way, which produces this
or that particular animal; and this is not a distinct species of
generation besides that which is accomplished as the result of nature
and matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_864"></span>[CCIII:866](2050113.htm#fr_864) <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p2"></span> To make the grammar of the sentence
exact <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.iii-p2.1"></span>τὴν</span>
should here be substituted for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p2.2"></span>τὸν</span>, the object of the verb being
apparently <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p2.3"></span>γέννησιν</span> not <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.iii-p2.4"></span>λόγον</span>. The
whole section of the analysis is rather confused, and does not clearly
reproduce S. Gregory’s division of the subject. A large part of this
section, and of that which follows it, is repeated with very slight
alteration from Bk. II. §9 (see pp. 113–115 above). The resemblances are
much closer in the Greek text than they appear in the present
translation, in which different hands have been at work in the two
books.

<span id="fn_865"></span>[CCIII:867](2050113.htm#fr_865) <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p4"></span> *i.e.*S. Basil.

<span id="fn_866"></span>[CCIII:868](2050113.htm#fr_866) <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p5.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p5.2"></span>νωτάτω</span> may be “supreme,” in the
sense of “ultimate” or “most remote,” or in the more ordinary sense of
“most exalted.”

<span id="fn_867"></span>[CCIII:869](2050113.htm#fr_867) <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p6"></span> *i.e.*S. Basil.

<span id="fn_868"></span>[CCIV:870](2050113.htm#fr_868) <span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iii-p8"></span> Or (reading as proposed above, p.
114, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.x.iii-p8.1"></span>οἰκονομεῖ</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.x.iii-p8.2"></span>οἰκοδομεῖ</span>),
“the ordering of nature.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He further shows the operations of God to be expressed by human
illustrations; for what hands and feet and the other parts of the body
with which men work are, that, in the case of God, the will alone is, in
place of these. And so also arises the divergence of generation;
wherefore He is called Only-begotten, because He has no community with
other generation such as is observed in creation, but in that He is
called the “brightness of glory,” and the “savour of ointment,” He shows
the close conjunction and co-eternity of His Nature with the
Father.](2050114)
