[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050065)  [Next](2050067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p1"></span> §7. *Gregory further shows that the
Only-Begotten being begotten not only of the Father, but also impassibly
of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, does not divide the substance; seeing
that neither is the nature of men divided or severed from the parents by
being begotten, as is ingeniously demonstrated from the instances of
Adam and Abraham.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p2"></span>And now let us see what he adds to
his previous statements. “Not dividing,” he says, “His own essence by
begetting, and being at once begetter and begotten, at the same time
Father and Son; for He is incorruptible.” Of such a kind as this,
perhaps, is that of which the prophet says, touching the ungodly, “They
weave a spider’s web <span id="fr_308"></span>[310](#fn_308) .” For as
in the cobweb there is the appearance of something woven, but no
substantiality in the appearance,—for he who touches it touches nothing
substantial, as the spider’s threads break with the touch of a
finger,—just such is the unsubstantial texture of idle phrases. “Not
dividing His own essence by begetting and being at once begetter and
begotten.” Ought we to give his words the name of argument, or to call
them rather a swelling of humours secreted by some dropsical inflation?
For what is the sense of “dividing His own essence by begetting, and
being at once begetter and begotten?” Who is so distracted, who is so
demented, as to make the statement against which Eunomius thinks he is
doing battle? For the Church believes that the true Father is truly
Father of His own Son, as the Apostle says, not of a Son alien from Him.
For thus he declares in one of his Epistles, “Who spared not His own
Son <span id="fr_309"></span>[311](#fn_309) ,” distinguishing Him, by
the addition of “own,” from those who are counted worthy of the adoption
of sons by grace and not by nature. But what says He who disparages this
belief of ours? “Not dividing His own essence by begetting, or being at
once begetter and begotten, at the same time Father and Son; for He is
incorruptible.” Does one who hears in the Gospel that the Word was in
the beginning, and was God, and that the Word came forth from the
Father, so befoul the undefiled doctrine with these base and fetid
ideas, saying “He does not divide His essence by begetting?” Shame on
the abomination of these base and filthy notions! How is it that he who
speaks thus fails to understand that God when manifested in flesh did
not admit for the formation of His own body the conditions of human
nature, but was born for us a Child by the Holy Ghost and the power of
the Highest; nor was the Virgin subject to those conditions, nor was the
Spirit diminished, nor the power of the Highest divided? For the Spirit
is entire, the power of the Highest remained undiminished: the Child was
born in the fulness of our nature <span
id="fr_310"></span>[312](#fn_310) , and did not sully the incorruption
of His mother. Then was flesh born of flesh without carnal passion: yet
Eunomius will not admit that the brightness of the glory is from the
glory itself, since the glory is neither diminished nor divided by
begetting the light. Again, the word of man is generated from his mind
without division, but God the Word cannot be generated from the Father
without the essence of the Father being divided! Is any one so witless
as not to perceive the irrational character of his position? “Not
dividing,” quoth he, “His own essence by begetting.” Why, whose own
essence is divided by begetting? For in the case of men essence means
human nature: in the case of brutes, it means, generically, brute
nature, but in the case of cattle, sheep, and all brute animals,
specifically, it is regarded according to the distinctions of their
kinds. Which, then, of these divides its own essence by the process of
generation? Does not the nature always remain undiminished in the case
of every animal by the succession of its posterity? Further a man in
begetting a man from himself does not divide his nature, but it remains
in its fulness alike in him who begets and in him who is begotten, not
split off and transferred from the one to the other, nor mutilated in
the one when it is fully formed in the other, but at once existing in
its entirety in the former and discoverable in its entirety in the
latter. For both before begetting his child the man was a rational
animal, mortal, capable of intelligence and knowledge, and also after
begetting a man endowed with such qualities: so that in him are shown
all the special properties of his nature; as he does not lose his
existence as a man by begetting the man derived from him, but remains
after that event what he was before without causing any diminution of
the nature derived from him by the fact that the man derived from him
comes into being.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p6"></span>Well, man is begotten of man, and the
nature of the begetter is not divided. Yet Eunomius does not admit that
the Only-begotten God, Who is in the bosom of the Father, is truly of
the Father, for fear forsooth, lest he should muti<span id="page_CX">p.
CX</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.vii-Page_CX"></span>late the inviolable
nature of the Father by the subsistence of the Only-begotten: but after
saying “Not dividing His essence by begetting,” he adds, “Or being
Himself begetter and begotten, or Himself becoming Father and Son <span
id="fr_311"></span>[313](#fn_311) ,” and thinks by such loose disjointed
phrases to undermine the true confession of godliness or to furnish some
support to his own ungodliness, not being aware that by the very means
he uses to construct a *reductio ad absurdum* he is discovered to be an
advocate of the truth. For we too say that He who has all that belongs
to His own Father is all that He is, save being Father, and that He who
has all that belongs to the Son exhibits in Himself the Son in His
completeness, save being Son: so that the *reductio ad absurdum*, which
Eunomius here invents, turns out to be a support of the truth, when the
notion is expanded by us so as to display it more clearly, under the
guidance of the Gospel. For if “he that hath seen the Son seeth the
Father <span id="fr_312"></span>[314](#fn_312) ” then the Father begat
another self, not passing out of Himself, and at the same time appearing
in His fulness in Him: so that from these considerations that which
seemed to have been uttered against godliness is demonstrated to be a
support of sound doctrine.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p9"></span>But he says, “Not dividing His own
essence by begetting, and being at once begetter and begotten, at the
same time Father and Son; for He is incorruptible.” Most cogent
conclusion! What do you mean, most sapient sir? Because He is
incorruptible, therefore He does not divide His own essence by begetting
the Son: nor does He beget Himself or be begotten of Himself, nor become
at the same time His own Father and His own Son because He is
incorruptible. It follows then, that if any one is of corruptible nature
he divides his essence by begetting, and is begotten by himself, and
begets himself, and is his own father and his own son, because he is not
incorruptible. If this is so, then Abraham, because he was corruptible,
did not beget Ishmael and Isaac, but begat himself by the bondwoman and
by his lawful wife or, to take the other mountebank tricks of the
argument, he divided his essence among the sons who were begotten of
him, and first, when Hagar bore him a son, he was divided into two
sections, and in one of the halves became Ishmael, while in the other he
remained half Abraham; and subsequently the residue of the essence of
Abraham being again divided took subsistence in Isaac. Accordingly the
fourth part of the essence of Abraham was divided into the twin sons of
Isaac, so that there was an eighth in each of his grandchildren! How
could one subdivide the eighth part, cutting it small in fractions among
the twelve Patriarchs, or among the threescore and fifteen souls with
whom Jacob went down into Egypt? And why do I talk thus when I really
ought to confute the folly of such notions by beginning with the first
man? For if it is a property of the incorruptible only not to divide its
essence in begetting, and if Adam was corruptible, to whom the word was
spoken, “Dust thou art and unto dust shalt thou return <span
id="fr_313"></span>[315](#fn_313) ,” then, according to Eunomius’
reasoning, he certainly divided his essence, being cut up among those
who were begotten of him, and by reason of the vast number of his
posterity (the slice of his essence which is to be found in each being
necessarily subdivided according to the number of his progeny), the
essence of Adam is used up before Abraham began to subsist, being
dispersed in these minute and infinitesimal particles among the
countless myriads of his descendants, and the minute fragment of Adam
that has reached Abraham and his descendants by a process of division,
is no longer discoverable in them as a remnant of his essence, inasmuch
as his nature has been already used up among the countless myriads of
those who were before them by its division into infinitesimal fractions.
Mark the folly of him who “understands neither what he says nor whereof
he affirms <span id="fr_314"></span>[316](#fn_314) .” For by saying
“Since He is incorruptible” He neither divides His essence nor begets
Himself nor becomes His own father, he implicitly lays it down that we
must suppose all those things from which he affirms that the
incorruptible alone are free to be incidental to generation in the case
of every one who is subject to corruption. Though there are many other
considerations capable of proving the inanity of his argument, I think
that what has been said above is sufficient to demonstrate its
absurdity. But this has surely been already acknowledged by all who have
an eye for logical consistency, that, when he asserted incorruptibility
of the Father alone, he places all things which are considered after the
Father in the category of corruptible, by virtue of opposition to the
incorruptible, so as to make out even the Son not to be free from
corruption. If then he places the Son in opposition to the
incorruptible, he not only defines Him to be corruptible, but also
asserts of Him all those incidents from which he affirms only the
incorruptible to be exempt. For it necessarily follows that, if the
Father alone neither begets Himself nor is begotten of Himself,
everything which is not incorruptible both begets itself <span
id="page_CXI">p. CXI</span> <span id="viii.i.iv.vii-Page_CXI"></span>and
is begotten of itself, and becomes its own father and son, shifting from
its own proper essence to each of these relations. For if to be
incorruptible belongs to the Father alone, and if not to be the things
specified is a special property of the incorruptible, then, of course,
according to this heretical argument, the Son is not incorruptible, and
all these circumstances of course, find place about Him,—to have His
essence divided, to beget Himself and to be begotten by Himself, to
become Himself His own father and His own son.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p12"></span>Perhaps, however, it is waste of
time to linger long over such follies. Let us pass to the next point of
his statement. He adds to what he had already said, “Not standing in
need, in the act of creation, of matter or parts or natural instruments:
for He stands in need of nothing.” This proposition, though Eunomius
states it with a certain looseness of phrase, we yet do not reject as
inconsistent with godly doctrine. For learning as we do that “He spake
the word and they were made: He commanded and they were created <span
id="fr_315"></span>[317](#fn_315) ,” we know that the Word is the
Creator of matter, by that very act also producing with the matter the
qualities of matter, so that for Him the impulse of His almighty will
was everything and instead of everything, matter, instrument, place,
time, essence, quality, everything that is conceived in creation. For at
one and the same time did He will that that which ought to be should be,
and His power, that produced all things that are, kept pace with His
will, turning His will into act. For thus the mighty Moses in the record
of creation instructs us about the Divine power, ascribing the
production of each of the objects that were manifested in the creation
to the words that bade them be. For “God said,” he tells us, “Let there
be light, and there was light <span id="fr_316"></span>[318](#fn_316) :”
and so about the rest, without any mention either of matter or of any
instrumental agency. Accordingly the language of Eunomius on this point
is not to be rejected. For God, when creating all things that have their
origin by creation, neither stood in need of any matter on which to
operate, nor of instruments to aid Him in His construction: for the
power and wisdom of God has no need of any external assistance. But
Christ is “the Power of God and the Wisdom of God <span
id="fr_317"></span>[319](#fn_317) ,” by Whom all things were made and
without Whom is no existent thing, as John testifies <span
id="fr_318"></span>[320](#fn_318) . If, then, all things were made by
Him, both visible and invisible, and if His will alone suffices to
effect the subsistence of existing things (for His will is power),
Eunomius utters our doctrine though with a loose mode of
expression <span id="fr_319"></span>[321](#fn_319) . For what instrument
and what matter could He Who upholds all things by the word of His
power <span id="fr_320"></span>[322](#fn_320) need in upholding the
constitution of existing things by His almighty word? But if he
maintains that what we have believed to be true of the Only-begotten in
the case of the creation, is true also in the case of the Son—in the
sense that the Father created Him in like manner as the creation was
made by the Son,—then we retract our former statement, because such a
supposition is a denial of the Godhead of the Only-begotten. For we have
learnt from the mighty utterance of Paul that it is the distinguishing
feature of idolatry to worship and serve the creature more than the
Creator <span id="fr_321"></span>[323](#fn_321) , as well as from David,
when He says “There shall no new God be in thee: neither shalt thou
worship any alien God <span id="fr_322"></span>[324](#fn_322) .” We use
this line and rule to arrive at the discernment of the object of
worship, so as to be convinced that that alone is God which is neither
“new” nor “alien.” Since then we have been taught to believe that the
Only-begotten God is God, we acknowledge, by our belief that He is God,
that He is neither “new” or “alien.” If, then, He is God, He is not
“new,” and if He is not new, He is assuredly eternal. Accordingly,
neither is the Eternal “new,” nor is He Who is of the Father and in the
bosom of the Father and Who has the Father in Himself “alien” from true
Deity. Thus he who severs the Son from the nature of the Father either
absolutely disallows the worship of the Son, that he may not worship an
alien God, or bows down before an idol, making a creature and not God
the object of his worship, and giving to his idol the name of Christ.

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p21"></span>Now that this is the meaning to
which he tends in his conception concerning the Only-begotten will
become more plain by considering the language he employs touching the
Only-begotten Himself, which is as follows. “We believe also in the Son
of God, the Only-begotten God, the first-born of all creation, very Son,
not ungenerate, verily begotten before the worlds, named Son not without
being begotten before He existed, coming into being before all creation,
not uncreate.” I think that the mere reading of his exposition of his
faith is quite sufficient to render its impiety plain without any
investigation on our part. For though he calls Him “first-born,” yet
that he may not raise any <span id="page_CXII">p. CXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-Page_CXII"></span>doubt in his readers’ minds as to
His not being created, he immediately adds the words, “not uncreate,”
lest if the natural significance of the term “Son” were apprehended by
his readers, any pious conception concerning Him might find place in
their minds. It is for this reason that after at first confessing Him to
be <span class="c22"><span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p21.1"></span>Son</span> of
God and Only-begotten God, he proceeds at once, by what he adds, to
pervert the minds of his readers from their devout belief to his
heretical notions. For he who hears the titles “Son of God” and
“Only-begotten God” is of necessity lifted up to the loftier kind of
assertions respecting the Son, led onward by the significance of these
terms, inasmuch as no difference of nature is introduced by the use of
the title “God” and by the significance of the term “Son.” For how could
He Who is truly the Son of God and Himself God be conceived as something
else differing from the nature of the Father? But that godly conceptions
may not by these names be impressed beforehand on the hearts of his
readers, he forthwith calls Him “the first-born of all creation, named
Son, not without being begotten before He existed, coming into being
before all creation, not uncreate.” Let us linger a little while, then,
over his argument, that the miscreant may be shown to be holding out his
first statements to people merely as a bait to induce them to receive
the poison that he sugars over with phrases of a pious tendency, as it
were with honey. Who does not know how great is the difference in
signification between the term “only-begotten” and “first-born?” For
“first-born” implies brethren, and “only-begotten” implies that there
are no other brethren. Thus the “first-born” is not “only-begotten,” for
certainly “first-born” is the first-born among brethren, while he who is
“only-begotten” has no brother: for if he were numbered among brethren
he would not be only-begotten. And moreover, whatever the essence of the
brothers of the first-born is, the same is the essence of the first-born
himself. Nor is this all that is signified by the title, but also that
the first-born and those born after him draw their being from the same
source, without the first-born contributing at all to the birth of those
that come after him: so that hereby <span
id="fr_323"></span>[325](#fn_323) is maintained the falsehood of that
statement of John, which affirms that “all things were made by Him <span
id="fr_324"></span>[326](#fn_324) .” For if He is first-born, He differs
from those born after Him only by priority in time, while there must be
some one else by Whom the power to be at all is imparted alike to Him
and to the rest. But that we may not by our objections give any unfair
opponent ground for an insinuation that we do not receive the inspired
utterances of Scripture, we will first set before our readers our own
view about these titles, and then leave it to their judgment which is
the better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_308"></span>[CIX:310](2050066.htm#fr_308) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p3"></span> [Is. lix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[CIX:311](2050066.htm#fr_309) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p4"></span> [Rom. viii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[CIX:312](2050066.htm#fr_310) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p5"></span> This, or something like this,
appears to be the force of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p5.1"></span>ὅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p5.2"></span>λον</span>.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[CX:313](2050066.htm#fr_311) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p7"></span> The quotation does not verbally
correspond with Eunomius’ words as cited above.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[CX:314](2050066.htm#fr_312) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p8"></span> Cf. S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_313"></span>[CX:315](2050066.htm#fr_313) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p10"></span> [Gen. iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[CX:316](2050066.htm#fr_314) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p11"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_315"></span>[CXI:317](2050066.htm#fr_315) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p13"></span> [Ps.
148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005), [Ps.
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p13.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p13.2"></span>, or xxxiii. 9 in LXX.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[CXI:318](2050066.htm#fr_316) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p14"></span> [Gen. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[CXI:319](2050066.htm#fr_317) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p15"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[CXI:320](2050066.htm#fr_318) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p16"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="fn_319"></span>[CXI:321](2050066.htm#fr_319) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17.2"></span>ν ἀτονούσῃ τῇ λέξει</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17.4"></span>νατονούσῃ τῇ
λέξει</span> (the reading of the Paris edition, which Oehler follows).

<span id="fn_320"></span>[CXI:322](2050066.htm#fr_320) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p17.5"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p18"></span> Cf. [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p18.1"></span>. The quotation is not verbally exact.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[CXI:323](2050066.htm#fr_321) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p19"></span> Cf. [Rom. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#026)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_322"></span>[CXI:324](2050066.htm#fr_322) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20"></span> [Ps.
81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20.2"></span>, LXX. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20.3"></span>πρόσφατος</span>
(“new”) and <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p20.5"></span>λλότριος</span> (“alien”) are both
represented in the A.V. by “strange,” and so in R.V. The Prayer-book
version expresses them by “strange” and “any other.” Both words are
subsequently employed by Gregory in his argument.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[CXII:325](2050066.htm#fr_323) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p22"></span> Hereby, i.e. by the use of the term
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p22.1"></span>πρωτότοκος</span> as applicable to the
Divinity of the Son.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[CXII:326](2050066.htm#fr_324) <span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.vii-p23"></span> S. [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.vii-p23.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He further very appositely expounds the meaning of the term
“Only-Begotten,“ and of the term “First born,“ four times used by the
Apostle.](2050067)
