[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050083)  [Next](2050085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.i"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_CLII">p. CLII</span>
<span id="viii.i.vi.i-Page_CLII"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p1.1"></span>Book IV.</span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p2"></span>§1. *The fourth book discusses the
account of the nature of the “product of generation,” and of the
passionless generation of the Only-Begotten, and the text, “In the
beginning was the Word,” and the birth of the Virgin.*

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p3.1"></span>It</span> is, perhaps, time to examine in
our discourse that account of the nature of the “product of generation”
which is the subject of his ridiculous philosophizing. He says, then (I
will repeat word for word his beautifully composed argument against the
truth):—“Who is so indifferent and inattentive to the nature of things
as not to know, that of all bodies which are on earth, in their
generating and being generated, in their activity and passivity, those
which generate are found on examination to communicate their own
essence, and those which are generated naturally receive the same,
inasmuch as the material cause and the supply which flows in from
without are common to both; and the things begotten are generated by
passion, and those which beget, naturally have an action which is not
pure, by reason of their nature being linked with passions of all
kinds?” See in what fitting style he discusses in his speculation the
pre-temporal generation of the Word of God that was in the beginning! he
who closely examines the nature of things, bodies on the earth, and
material causes, and passion of things generating and generated, and all
the rest of it,—at which any man of understanding would blush, even were
it said of ourselves, if it were our nature, subject as it is to
passion, which is thus exposed to scorn by his words. Yet such is our
author’s brilliant enquiry into nature with regard to the Only-begotten
God. Let us lay aside complaints, however, (for what will sighing do to
help us to overthrow the malice of our enemy?) and make generally known,
as best we may, the sense of what we have quoted—concerning what sort of
“product” the speculation was proposed,—that which exists according to
the flesh, or that which is to be contemplated in the Only-begotten God.

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p4"></span>As the speculation is two-fold,
concerning that life which is Divine, simple, and immaterial, and
concerning that existence which is material and subject to passion, and
as the word “generation” is used of both, we must needs make our
distinction sharp and clear, lest the ambiguity of the term “generation”
should in any way pervert the truth. Since, then, the entrance into
being through the flesh is material, and is promoted by passion, while
that which is bodiless, impalpable, without form, and free from any
material commixture, is alien from every condition that admits of
passion, it is proper to consider about what sort of generation we are
enquiring—that which is pure and Divine, or that which is subject to
passion and pollution. Now, no one, I suppose, would deny that with
regard to the Only-begotten God, it is pre-temporal existence that is
proposed for the consideration <span id="fr_603"></span>[605](#fn_603)
of Eunomius’ discourse. Why, then, does he linger over this account of
corporeal nature, defiling our nature by the loathsome presentment of
his argument, and setting forth openly the passions that gather round
human generation, while he deserts the subject set before him? for it
was not about this animal generation, that is accomplished by means of
the flesh, that we had any need to learn. Who is so foolish, when he
looks on himself, and considers human nature in himself, as to seek
another interpreter of his own nature, and to need to be told all the
unavoidable passions which are included in the thought of bodily
generation—that he who begets is affected in one way, that which is
begotten in another—so that the man should learn from this instruction
that he himself begets by means of passion, and that passion was the
beginning of his own generation? For it is all the same whether these
things are passed over or spoken, and whether one publishes these
secrets at length, or keeps hidden in silence things that should be left
unsaid, we are not ignorant of the fact that our nature progresses by
way of passion. But what we are seeking is that a clear account should
be given of the exalted and unspeakable existence of the Only-begotten,
whereby He is believed to be of the Father.

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p6"></span>Now, while this is the enquiry set
before him, our new theologian enriches his discourse with <span
id="page_CLIII">p. CLIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-Page_CLIII"></span>“flowing,” and “passion,” and
“material cause,” and some “action” which “is not pure” from pollution,
and all other phrases of this kind <span
id="fr_604"></span>[606](#fn_604) . I know not under what influence it
is that he who says, in the superiority of his wisdom, that nothing
incomprehensible is left beyond his own knowledge, and promises to
explain the unspeakable generation of the Son, leaves the question
before him, and plunges like an eel into the slimy mud of his arguments,
after the fashion of that Nicodemus who came by night, who, when our
Lord was teaching him of the birth from above, rushed in thought to the
hollow of the womb, and raised a doubt how one could enter a second time
into the womb, with the words, “How can these things be? <span
id="fr_605"></span>[607](#fn_605) ” thinking that he would prove the
spiritual birth impossible, by the fact that an old man could not again
be born within his mother’s bowels. But the Lord corrects his erroneous
idea, saying that the properties of the flesh and the spirit are
distinct. Let Eunomius also, if he will, correct himself by the like
reflection. For he who ponders on the truth ought, I imagine, to
contemplate his subject according to its own properties, not to slander
the immaterial by a charge against things material. For if a man, or a
bull, or any other of those things which are generated by the flesh, is
not free from passion in generating or being generated, what has this to
do with that Nature which is without passion and without corruption? The
fact that we are mortal is no objection to the immortality of the
Only-begotten, nor does men’s propensity to vice render doubtful the
immutability that is found in the Divine Nature, nor is any other of our
proper attributes transferred to God; but the peculiar nature of the
human and the Divine life is separated, and without common ground, and
their distinguishing properties stand entirely apart, so that those of
the latter are not apprehended in the former, nor, conversely, those of
the former in the latter.

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p9"></span>How comes it, therefore, that Eunomius,
when the Divine generation is the subject for discourse, leaves his
subject, and discusses at length the things of earth, when on this
matter we have no dispute with him? Surely our craftsman’s aim is
clear,—that by the slanderous insinuation of passion he may raise an
objection to the generation of the Lord. And here I pass by the
blasphemous nature of his view, and admire the man for his
acuteness,—how mindful he is of his own zealous endeavour, who, having
by his previous statements established the theory that the Son must be,
and must be called, a “product of generation,” now contends for the view
that we ought not to entertain regarding Him the conception of
generation. For, if all generation, as this author imagines, has linked
with it the condition of passion, we are hereby absolutely compelled to
admit that what is foreign to passion is alien also from generation: for
if these things, passion and generation, are considered as conjoined, He
that has no share in the one would not have any participation in the
other. How then does he call Him a “product” by reason of His
generation, of Whom he tries to show by the arguments he now uses, that
He was not generated? and for what cause does he fight against our
master <span id="fr_606"></span>[608](#fn_606) , who counsels us in
matters of Divine doctrine not to presume in name-making, but to confess
that He is generated without transforming this conception into the
formula of a name, so as to call Him Who is generated “a product of
generation,” as this term is properly applied in Scripture to things
inanimate, or to those which are mentioned “as a figure of
wickedness <span id="fr_607"></span>[609](#fn_607) ”? When we speak of
the propriety of avoiding the use of the term “product,” he prepares for
action that invincible rhetoric of his, and takes also to support him
his frigid grammatical phraseology, and by his skilful misuse of names,
or equivocation, or whatever one may properly call his processes—by
these means, I say, he brings his syllogisms to their conclusion, “not
refusing to call Him Who is begotten by the name of ‘product of
generation.’” Then, as soon as we admit the term, and proceed to examine
the conception involved in the name, on the theory that thereby is
vindicated the community of essence, he again retracts his own words,
and contends for the view that the “product of generation” is not
generated, raising an objection by his foul account of bodily
generation, against the pure and Divine and passionless generation of
the Son, on the ground that it is not possible that the two things, the
true relationship to the Father, and exemption of His nature from
passion, should be found to coincide in God, but that, if there were no
passion, there would be no generation, and that, if one should
acknowledge the true relationship, he would thereby, in admitting
generation, certainly admit passion also.

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p12"></span>Not thus speaks the sublime John, not
thus that voice of thunder which proclaims the mystery of the Theology,
who both names Him Son of God and purges his proclamation from every
idea of passion. For behold how in the very beginning of his Gospel he
prepares our ears, how great forethought is shown by the teacher <span
id="page_CLIV">p. CLIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-Page_CLIV"></span>that none of his hearers should fall
into low ideas on the subject, slipping by ignorance into any
incongruous conceptions. For in order to lead the untrained hearing as
far away as possible from passion, he does not speak in his opening
words of “Son,” or “Father,” or “generation,” that no one should either,
on hearing first of all of a “Father,” be hurried on to the obvious
signification of the word, or, on learning the proclamation of a “Son,”
should understand that name in the ordinary sense, or stumble, as at a
“stone of stumbling <span id="fr_608"></span>[610](#fn_608) ,” at the
word “generation”; but instead of “the Father,” he speaks of “the
Beginning”: instead of “was begotten,” he says “was”: and instead of
“the Son,” he says “the Word”: and declares “In the Beginning was the
Word <span id="fr_609"></span>[611](#fn_609) .” What passion, pray, is
to be found in these words, “beginning,” and “was,” and “Word”? Is “the
beginning” passion? does “was” imply passion? does “the Word” exist by
means of passion? Or are we to say, that as passion is not to be found
in the terms used, so neither is affinity expressed by the proclamation?
Yet how could the Word’s community of essence, and real relationship,
and coeternity with the Beginning, be more strongly shown by other words
than by these? For he does not say, “Of the Beginning was begotten the
Word,” that he may not separate the Word from the Beginning by any
conception of extension in time, but he proclaims together with the
Beginning Him also Who was in the Beginning, making the word “was”
common to the Beginning and to the Word, that the Word may not linger
after the Beginning, but may, by entering in together with the faith as
to the Beginning, by its proclamation forestall our hearing, before this
admits the Beginning itself in isolation. Then he declares, “And the
Word was with God.” Once more the Evangelist fears for our untrained
state, once more he dreads our childish and untaught condition: he does
not yet entrust to our ears the appellation of “Father,” lest any of the
more carnally minded, learning of “the Father,” may be led by his
understanding to imagine also by consequence a mother. Neither does he
yet name in his proclamation the Son; for he still suspects our
customary tendency to the lower nature, and fears lest any, hearing of
the Son, should humanize the Godhead by an idea of passion. For this
reason, resuming his proclamation, he again calls him “the Word,” making
this the account of His nature to thee in thine unbelief. For as thy
word proceeds from thy mind, without requiring the intervention of
passion, so here also, in hearing of the Word, thou shalt conceive that
which is from something, and shalt not conceive passion. Hence, once
more resuming his proclamation, he says, “And the Word was with God.” O,
how does he make the Word commensurate with God! rather, how does he
extend the infinite in comparison with the infinite! “The Word was with
God”—the whole being of the Word, assuredly, with the whole being of
God. Therefore, as great as God is, so great, clearly, is the Word also
that is with Him; so that if God is limited, then will the Word also,
surely, be subject to limitation. But if the infinity of God exceeds
limit, neither is the Word that is contemplated with Him comprehended by
limits and measures. For no one would deny that the Word is contemplated
together with the entire Godhead of the Father, so that he should make
one part of the Godhead appear to be in the Word, and another destitute
of the Word. Once more the spiritual voice of John speaks, once more the
Evangelist in his proclamation takes tender care for the hearing of
those who are in childhood: not yet have we so much grown by the hearing
of his first words as to hear of “the Son,” and yet remain firm without
being moved from our footing by the influence of the wonted sense.
Therefore our herald, crying once more aloud, still proclaims in his
third utterance “the Word,” and not “the Son,” saying, “And the Word was
God.” First he declared wherein He was, then with whom He was, and now
he says what He is, completing, by his third repetition, the object of
his proclamation. For he says, “It is no Word of those that are readily
understood, that I declare to you, but God under the designation of the
Word.” For this Word, that was in the Beginning, and was with God, was
not anything else besides God, but was also Himself God. And forthwith
the herald, reaching the full height of his lofty speech, declares that
this God Whom his proclamation sets forth is He by Whom all things were
made, and is life, and the light of men, and the true light that shineth
in darkness, yet is not obscured by the darkness, sojourning with His
own, yet not received by His own: and being made flesh, and
tabernacling, by means of the flesh, in man’s nature. And when he has
first gone through this number and variety of statements, he then names
the Father and the Only-begotten, when there can be no danger that what
has been purified by so many precautions should be allowed, in
consequence of the sense of the word “Father,” to sink down to any
meaning tainted with pollution, for, “we beheld His glory,” he says,
“the glory as of the Only-begotten of the Father.”

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p15"></span>Repeat, then, Eunomius, repeat this
clever objection of yours to the Evangelist: “How dost thou give the
name of ‘Father’ in thy <span id="page_CLV">p. CLV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-Page_CLV"></span>discourse, how that of Only-begotten,
seeing that all bodily generation is operated by passion?” Surely truth
answers you on his behalf, that the mystery of theology is one thing,
and the physiology of unstable bodies is another. Wide is the interval
by which they are fenced off one from the other. Why do you join
together in your argument what cannot blend? how do you defile the
purity of the Divine generation by your foul discourse? how do you make
systems for the incorporeal by the passions that affect the body? Cease
to draw your account of the nature of things above from those that are
below. I proclaim the Lord as the Son of God, because the gospel from
heaven, given through the bright cloud, thus proclaimed Him; for “This,”
He saith, “is My beloved Son <span id="fr_610"></span>[612](#fn_610) .”
Yet, though I was taught that He is the Son, I was not dragged down by
the name to the earthly significance of “Son,” but I both know that He
is from the Father and do not know that He is from passion. And this,
moreover, I will add to what has been said, that I know even a bodily
generation which is pure from passion, so that even on this point
Eunomius’ physiology of bodily generation is proved false, if, that is
to say, a bodily birth can be found which does not admit passion. Tell
me, was the Word made flesh, or not? You would not, I presume, say that
It was not. It was so made, then, and there is none who denies it. How
then was it that “God was manifested in the flesh <span
id="fr_611"></span>[613](#fn_611) ”? “By birth,” of course you will say.
But what sort of birth do you speak of? Surely it is clear that you
speak of that from the virginity, and that “that which was conceived in
her was of the Holy Ghost <span id="fr_612"></span>[614](#fn_612) ,” and
that “the days were accomplished that she should be delivered, and she
brought forth <span id="fr_613"></span>[615](#fn_613) ,” and none the
less was her purity preserved in her child-bearing. You believe, then,
that that birth which took place from a woman was pure from passion, if
you do believe, but you refuse to admit the Divine and incorruptible
generation from the Father, that you may avoid the idea of passion in
generation. But I know well that it is not passion he seeks to avoid in
his doctrine, for that he does not discern at all in the Divine and
incorruptible nature; but to the end that the Maker of all creation may
be accounted a part of creation, he builds up these arguments in order
to a denial of the Only-begotten God, and uses his pretended caution
about passion to help him in his task.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_603"></span>[CLII:605](2050084.htm#fr_603) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p5"></span> Reading, with the older editions,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.i-p5.1"></span>τῇ θεωρί&
139·</span>. Oehler substitutes <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p5.2"></span>τὴν θεωρίαν</span> (a variation which seems
to give no good sense, unless <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p5.3"></span>θεωρία</span> be translated as “subject of
contemplation”), but alleges no <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p5.4"></span>ms.</span> authority for the change.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[CLIII:606](2050084.htm#fr_604) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p7"></span> Oehler’s punctuation seems less clear
than that of the older editions, which is here followed.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[CLIII:607](2050084.htm#fr_605) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p8"></span> S. [John iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#010)<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_606"></span>[CLIII:608](2050084.htm#fr_606) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p10"></span> *i.e.*S. Basil.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[CLIII:609](2050084.htm#fr_607) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p11"></span> The reference is to S. Basil’s
treatise against Eunomius (ii. 7–8; p. 242–4 in the Benedictine ed.).
Oehler’s punctuation is apparently wrong, for Gregory paraphrases not
only the rule, but the reason given for it, from S. Basil, from whom the
last words of the sentence are a direct quotation.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[CLIV:610](2050084.htm#fr_608) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p13"></span> [1 Pet.
2.8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[CLIV:611](2050084.htm#fr_609) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p14"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_610"></span>[CLV:612](2050084.htm#fr_610) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p16"></span> S. [Matt. xvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[CLV:613](2050084.htm#fr_611) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p17"></span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p17.1"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p17.2"></span>. Here, as elsewhere in Gregory’s
writings, it appears that he read <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p17.3"></span>θεὸς</span> in this passage.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[CLV:614](2050084.htm#fr_612) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p17.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p18"></span> S. [Matt. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020)<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_613"></span>[CLV:615](2050084.htm#fr_613) <span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.i-p19"></span> S. [Luke
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.vi.i-p19.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He convicts Eunomius of having used of the Only-begotten terms
applicable to the existence of the earth, and thus shows that his
intention is to prove the Son to be a being mutable and
created.](2050085)
