[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050218)  [Next](2050220) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.i"></span> <span id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="xi.ii.i-Page_471"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="xi.ii.i-p1.1"></span>The Great Catechism <span
id="fr_1932"></span>[1934](#fn_1932) .</span>

<span id="xi.ii.i-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="xi.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="xi.ii.i-p4.1"></span>Summary.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.i-p5"></span>The Trinity.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.i-p6.1"></span>Prologue</span> and Chapter 1.—The belief in
God rests on the art and wisdom displayed in the order of the world: the
belief in the *Unity* of God, on the *perfection* that must belong to
Him in respect of power, goodness, wisdom, etc. Still, the Christian who
combats polytheism has need of care lest in contending against Hellenism
he should fall unconsciously into Judaism. For God has a Logos: else He
would be without reason. And this Logos cannot be merely an attribute of
God. We are led to a more exalted conception of the Logos by the
consideration that in the measure in which God is greater than we, all
His predicates must also be higher than those which belong to us. Our
logos is limited and transient; but the subsistence of the Divine Logos
must be indestructible; and at the same time living, since the rational
cannot be lifeless, like a stone. It must also have an independent life,
not a participated life, else it would lose its simplicity; and, as
living, it must also have the faculty of will. This will of the Logos
must be equalled by his power: for a mixture of choice and impotence
would, again, destroy the simplicity. His will, as being Divine, must be
also good. From this ability and will to work there follows the
realization of the good; hence the bringing into existence of the wisely
and artfully adjusted world. But since, still further, the logical
conception of the Word is in a certain sense a relative one, it follows
that together with the Word He Who speaks it, *i.e.* the Father of the
Word, must be recognized as existing. Thus the mystery of the faith
avoids equally the absurdity of Jewish monotheism, and that of heathen
polytheism. On the one hand, we say that the Word has *life and
activity*; on the other, we affirm that we find in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="xi.ii.i-p6.2"></span>Λόγος</span>, whose
existence is derived from the Father, *all* the attributes of the
Father’s nature.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p7"></span>Chapter II.—By the analogy of human breath,
which is nothing but inhaled and exhaled fire, *i.e.* an object foreign
to us, is demonstrated the community of the Divine Spirit with the
essence of God, and yet the independence of Its existence.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p8"></span>Chapter III.—From the Jewish doctrine,
then, the unity of the Divine nature has been retained: from Hellenism
the distinction into hypostases.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p9"></span>Chapter IV.—The Jew convicted from
Scripture.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p10"></span>Reasonableness of the Incarnation.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p11"></span>Chapters V. and VI.—God created the world
by His reason and wisdom; for He cannot have proceeded irrationally in
that work; but His reason and wisdom are, as above shown, not to be
conceived as a spoken word, or as the mere possession of knowledge, but
as a personal and willing potency. If the entire world was created by
this second Divine hypostasis, then certainly was man also thus created;
yet not in view of any necessity, but *from superabounding love*, that
there might exist a being who should participate in the Divine
perfections. If man was to be receptive of these, it was necessary that
his nature should contain an element akin to God; and, in particular,
that he should be immortal. Thus, then, man was created in the image of
God. <span id="page_472">p. 472</span> <span
id="xi.ii.i-Page_472"></span>He could not therefore be without the gifts
of freedom, independence, self-determination; and his participation in
the Divine gifts was consequently made dependent on his virtue. Owing to
this *freedom* he could decide in favour of evil, which cannot have its
origin in the Divine will, but only in our inner selves, where it arises
in the form of a deviation from good, and so a privation of it. Vice is
opposed to virtue only as the absence of the better. Since, then, all
that is created is subject to change, it was possible that, in the first
instance, one of the created spirits should turn his eye away from the
good, and become envious, and that from this envy should arise a leaning
towards badness, which should, in natural sequence, prepare the way for
all other evil. He seduced the first men into the folly of turning away
from goodness, *by disturbing the Divinely ordered harmony between their
sensuous and intellectual natures*; and guilefully tainting their wills
with evil.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p12"></span>Chapters VII. and VIII.—God did not, on
account of His foreknowledge of the evil that would result from man’s
creation, leave man uncreated; for it was better to bring back sinners
to original grace by the way of repentance and physical suffering than
not to create man at all. The raising up of the fallen was a work
befitting the Giver of life, Who is the wisdom and power of God; and for
this purpose He became man.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p13"></span>Chapter IX.—The Incarnation was not
unworthy of Him; for *only evil brings degradation*.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p14"></span>Chapter X.—The objection that the finite
cannot contain the infinite, and that therefore the human nature could
not receive into itself the Divine, is founded on the false supposition
that the Incarnation of the Word means that the infinity of God was
contained in the limits of the flesh, as in a vessel.—Comparison of the
flame and wick.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p15"></span>Chapters XI., XII., XIII.—For the rest,
the manner in which the Divine nature was united to the human surpasses
our power of comprehension; although we are not permitted to doubt the
fact of that union in Jesus, *on account of the miracles which He
wrought.* The supernatural character of those miracles bears witness to
their Divine origin.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p16"></span>Chapters XIV., XV., XVI., XVII.—The scheme
of the Incarnation is still further drawn out, to show that this way for
man’s salvation was preferable to a single fiat of God’s will. Christ
took human *weakness* upon Him; but it was physical, not moral,
weakness. In other words the Divine goodness did not change to its
opposite, which is only vice. In Him soul and body were united, and then
separated, according to the course of nature; but after He had thus
purged human life, He reunited them *upon a more general scale,* for
all, and for ever, in the Resurrection.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p17"></span>Chapter XVIII.—The ceasing of
demon-worship, the Christian martyrdoms, and the devastation of
Jerusalem, are accepted by some as proofs of the Incarnation—

<span id="xi.ii.i-p18"></span>Chapters XIX., XX.—But not by the Greek
and the Jew. To return, then, to its *reasonableness.* Whether we regard
the goodness, the power, the wisdom, or the justice of God, it displays
a combination of all these acknowledged attributes, which, if one be
wanting, cease to be Divine. It is therefore true to the Divine
perfection.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p19"></span>Chapters XXI., XXII., XXIII.—What, then,
is the *justice* in it? We must remember that man was necessarily
created subject to change (to better or to worse). Moral beauty was to
be the direction in which his free will was to move; but then he was
deceived, to his ruin, by an illusion of that beauty. After we had thus
*freely* sold ourselves to the deceiver, He who of His goodness sought
to restore us to liberty could not, because He was just too, for this
end have recourse to measures of arbitrary violence. It was necessary
therefore that a ransom should be paid, which should exceed in value
that which was to be ransomed; and hence it was necessary that the Son
of God should surrender Himself to the power of death. God’s *justice*
then impelled Him to choose a method of exchange, as His *wisdom* was
seen in executing it.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p20"></span>Chapters XXIV., XXV.—But how about the
*power?* That was more conspicuously displayed in Deity descending to
lowliness, than in all the natural wonders of the universe. It was like
flame being made to stream downwards. Then, after such a birth, Christ
conquered death.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p21"></span>Chapter XXVI.—A certain deception was
indeed practised upon the Evil one, by concealing the Divine nature
within the human; but for the latter, as himself a deceiver, it was only
a just recompense that he should be deceived himself: the great
adversary must himself at last find that what has been done is just and
salutary, when he also shall experience the benefit of the Incarnation.
He, as well as humanity, will be purged.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p22"></span>Chapters XXVII., XXVIII.—A patient, to be
healed, must be *touched*; and humanity had to be touched by Christ. It
was not in “heaven”; so only through the Incarnation could it be
healed.—It was, besides, no more inconsistent with His Divinity to
assume a human than a “heavenly” body; all created beings are on a level
beneath Deity. Even “abundant honour” is due to the instruments of human
birth.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p23"></span>Chapters XXIX., XXX., XXXI.—As to the
delay of the Incarnation, it was necessary that <span id="page_473">p.
473</span> <span id="xi.ii.i-Page_473"></span>human degeneracy should
have reached the lowest point, before the work of salvation could enter
in. That, however, grace through faith has not come to all must be laid
to the account of human freedom; if God were to break down our
opposition by violent means, the praise-worthiness of human conduct
would be destroyed.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p24"></span>Chapter XXXII.—Even the death on the Cross
was sublime: for it was the culminating and necessary point in that
scheme of Love in which death was to be followed by blessed resurrection
for the whole “lump” of humanity: and the Cross itself has a mystic
meaning.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p25"></span>The Sacraments.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p26"></span>Chapters XXXIII., XXXIV., XXXV.,
XXXVI.—The saving nature of Baptism depends on three things; Prayer,
Water, and Faith. 1. It is shown how Prayer secures the Divine Presence.
God is a God of truth; and He has promised to come (as Miracles prove
that He has come already) if invoked *in a particular way*. 2. It is
shown how the Deity gives life from water. In human generation, even
without prayer, He gives life from a small beginning. In a higher
generation He transforms matter, not into soul, but into spirit. 3.
Human freedom, as evinced in faith and repentance, is also necessary to
Regeneration. Being thrice dipped in the water is our earliest
mortification; coming out of it is a forecast of the ease with which the
pure shall rise in a *blessed* resurrection: the whole process is an
imitation of Christ.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p27"></span>Chapter XXXVII.—The Eucharist unites the
body, as Baptism the soul, to God. Our bodies, having received poison,
need an Antidote; and only by eating and drinking can it enter. One
Body, the receptacle of Deity, is this Antidote, thus received. But how
can it enter whole into each one of the Faithful? This needs an
illustration. Water gives its own body to a skin-bottle. So nourishment
(bread and wine) by becoming flesh and blood gives bulk to the human
frame: the nourishment is the body. Just as in the case of other men,
our Saviour’s nourishment (bread and wine) was His Body; but these,
nourishment and Body, were in Him changed into the Body of God by the
Word indwelling. So now repeatedly the bread and wine, sanctified by the
Word (the sacred Benediction), is *at the same time* changed into the
Body of that Word; and this Flesh is disseminated amongst all the
Faithful.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p28"></span>Chapters XXXVIII., XXXIX.—It is essential
for Regeneration to believe that the Son and the Spirit are not created
spirits, but of like nature with God the Father; for he who would make
his salvation dependent (in the baptismal Invocation) on anything
created would trust to an imperfect nature, and one itself needing a
saviour.

<span id="xi.ii.i-p29"></span>Chapter XL.—He alone has truly become a
child of God who gives evidence of his regeneration by putting away from
himself all vice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1932"></span>[471:1934](2050219.htm#fr_1932) <span
id="xi.ii.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.i-p2"></span> It is not exactly clear why this
Instruction for Catechizers is called the “Great”: perhaps with
reference to some lesser manual. For its apologetic intention, see
*Prolegomena*, p. 12. Its genuineness, which has been called in question
by a few merely on the ground of opinions in it Origenistic and even
Eutychian, is confirmed by Theodoret, *Dial*. ii. 3, *contr. Eutych*.
Aubertin and Casaubon both recognize Gregory as its author. The
division, however, of the chapters, by whoever made, is far from a
correct guide to the contents; but, by grouping them, the main argument
can be made clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue.](2050220)
