[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050280)  [Next](2050282) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.xvi"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Letter XV</span>.—*To Adelphius the
Lawyer* <span id="fr_2226"></span>[2228](#fn_2226) .

<span id="xiii.xvi-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p3.1"></span>I write</span> you this letter from the sacred
Vanota, if I do not do the place injustice by giving it its local
title:—do it injustice, I say, because in its name it shows no polish.
At the same time the beauty of the place, great as it is, is not
conveyed by this Galatian epithet: eyes are needed to interpret its
beauty. For I, though I have before this seen much, and that in many
places, and have also observed many things by means of verbal
description in the accounts of old writers, think both all I have seen,
and all of which I have heard, of no account in comparison with the
loveliness that is to be found here. Your Helicon is nothing: the
Islands of the Blest are a fable: the Sicyonian plain is a trifle: the
accounts of the Peneus are another case of poetic exaggeration—that
river which they say by overflowing with its rich current the banks
which flank its course makes for the Thessalians their far-famed Tempe.
Why, what beauty is there in any one of these places I have mentioned,
such as Vanota can show us of its own? For if one seeks for natural
beauty in the place, it needs none of the adornments of art: and if one
considers what has been done for it by artificial aid, there has been so
much done, and that so well, as might overcome even natural
disadvantages. The gifts bestowed upon the spot by Nature who beautifies
the earth with unstudied grace are such as these: below, the river Halys
makes the place fair to look upon with his banks, and gleams like a
golden ribbon through their deep purple, reddening his current with the
soil he washes down. Above, a mountain densely overgrown with wood
stretches with its long ridge, covered at all points with the foliage of
oaks, worthy of finding some Homer to sing its praises more than that
Ithacan Neritus, which the poet calls “far-seen with quivering
leaves <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2229](#fn_2227) .” But the natural
growth of wood, as it comes down the hill-side, meets at the foot the
planting of men’s husbandry. For forthwith vines, spread out over the
slopes, and swellings, and hollows at the mountain’s base, cover with
their colour, like a green mantle, all the lower ground: and the season
at this time even added to their beauty, displaying its grape-clusters
wonderful to behold. Indeed this caused me yet more surprise, that while
the neighbouring country shows fruit still unripe, one might here enjoy
the full clusters, and be sated with their perfection. Then, far off,
like a watch-fire from some great beacon, there shone before our eyes
the fair beauty of the buildings. On the left as we entered was the
chapel built for the martyrs, not yet complete in its structure, but
still lacking the roof, yet making a good show notwithstanding. Straight
before us in the way were the beauties of the house, where one part is
marked out from another by some delicate invention. There were
projecting towers, and preparations for banqueting among the wide and
high-arched rows of trees crowning the entrance before the gates <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2230](#fn_2228) . Then about the buildings are the
Phaeacian gardens; rather, let not the beauties of Vanota be insulted by
comparison with those. Homer never saw “the apple with bright
fruit <span id="fr_2229"></span>[2231](#fn_2229) ” as we have it here,
approaching to the hue of its own blossom in the exceeding brilliancy of
its colouring: he never saw the pear whiter than new-polished ivory. And
what can one say of the varieties of the peach, diverse and multiform,
yet blended and compounded out of different species? For just as with
those who paint “goat-stags,” and “centaurs,” and the like, commingling
things of different kind, and making themselves wiser than Nature, so it
is in the case of this fruit: Nature, under the despotism of art, turns
one to an almond, an<span id="page_540">p. 540</span> <span
id="xiii.xvi-Page_540"></span>other to a walnut, yet another to a
“Doracinus <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2232](#fn_2230) ,” mingled alike
in name and in flavour. And in all these the number of single trees is
more noted than their beauty; yet they display tasteful arrangement in
their planting, and that harmonious form of drawing—drawing, I call it,
for the marvel belongs rather to the painter’s art than to the
gardener’s. So readily does Nature fall in with the design of those who
arrange these devices, that it seems impossible to express this by
words. Who could find words worthily to describe the road under the
climbing vines, and the sweet shade of their cluster, and that novel
wall-structure where roses with their shoots, and vines with their
trailers, twist themselves together and make a fortification that serves
as a wall against a flank attack, and the pond at the summit of this
path, and the fish that are bred there? As regards all these, the people
who have charge of your Nobility’s house were ready to act as our guides
with a certain ingenuous kindliness, and pointed them out to us, showing
us each of the things you had taken pains about, as if it were yourself
to whom, by our means, they were showing courtesy. There too, one of the
lads, like a conjuror, showed us such a wonder as one does not very
often find in nature: for he went down to the deep water and brought up
at will such of the fish as he selected; and they seemed no strangers to
the fisherman’s touch, being tame and submissive under the artist’s
hands, like well-trained dogs. Then they led me to a house as if to
rest—a house, I call it, for such the entrance betokened, but, when we
came inside, it was not a house but a portico which received us. The
portico was raised up aloft to a great height over a deep pool: the
basement supporting the portico of triangular shape, like a gateway
leading to the delights within, was washed by the water. Straight before
us in the interior a sort of house occupied the vertex of the triangle,
with lofty roof, lit on all sides by the sun’s rays, and decked with
varied paintings; so that this spot almost made us forget what had
preceded it. The house attracted us to itself; and again, the portico on
the pool was a unique sight. For the excellent fish would swim up from
the depths to the surface, leaping up into the very air like winged
things, as though purposely mocking us creatures of the dry land. For
showing half their form and tumbling through the air, they plunged once
more into the depth. Others, again, in shoals, following one another in
order, were a sight for unaccustomed eyes: while in another place one
might see another shoal packed in a cluster round a morsel of bread,
pushed aside one by another, and here one leaping up, there another
diving downwards. But even this we were made to forget by the grapes
that were brought us in baskets of twisted shoots, by the varied bounty
of the season’s fruit, the preparation for breakfast, the varied
dainties, and savoury dishes, and sweetmeats, and drinking of healths,
and wine-cups. So now since I was sated and inclined to sleep, I got a
scribe posted beside me, and sent to your Eloquence, as if it were a
dream, this chattering letter. But I hope to recount in full to yourself
and your friends, not with paper and ink, but with my own voice and
tongue, the beauties of your home.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[539:2228](2050281.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p2"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p2.1"></span>σχολαστικὸς</span>, or possibly “student,” but
the title of <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p2.2"></span>λογιστὴς</span>, afterwards employed of the
person to whom the letter is addressed, rather suggests the profession
of an “advocate,” than the occupation of a scholar.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[539:2229](2050281.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p4"></span> Cf. Hom. *Odyss.* ix. 22.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[539:2230](2050281.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p5"></span> The text is clearly erroneous, and
perhaps <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p5.1"></span>στεφανοῦσι</span> is the true reading: it
seems clearer in construction than <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.xvi-p5.2"></span>στεφανοῦσαι</span> suggested by Caraccioli.

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[539:2231](2050281.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p6"></span> Cf. Hom. *Od.* vii. 115.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[540:2232](2050281.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="xiii.xvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.xvi-p7"></span> The word seems otherwise unknown. It may
be a Græcizing of the Latin *“duracinus,”* for which cf. *Plin*. XV.
xii. 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Amphilochius.](2050282)
