[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050269)  [Next](2050271) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii.v"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.v-p1.1"></span>Letter IV</span>.—*To Cynegius* <span
id="fr_2176"></span>[2178](#fn_2176) .

<span id="xiii.v-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xiii.v-p3.1"></span>We</span> have a law that bids us “rejoice with
them that rejoice, and weep with them that weep”: but of these
commandments it often seems that it is in our power to put only one into
practice. For there is a great scarcity in the world of “them that
rejoice,” so that it is not easy to find with whom we may share our
blessings, but there are plenty who are in the opposite case. I write
thus much by way of preface, because of the sad tragedy which some
spiteful power has been playing among people of long-standing nobility.
A young man of good family, Synesius by name, not unconnected with
myself, in the full flush of youth, who has scarcely begun to live yet,
is in great dangers, from which God alone has power to rescue him, and
next to God, you, who are entrusted with the decisions of all questions
of life and death. An involuntary mishap has taken place. Indeed, what
mishap is voluntary? And now those who have made up this suit against
him, carrying with it the penalty of death, have turned his mishap into
matter of accusation. However, I will try by private letters to soften
their resentment and incline them to pity; but I beseech your kindliness
to side with justice and with us, that your benevolence may prevail over
the wretched plight of the youth, hunting up any and every device by
which the young man may be placed out of the reach of danger, having
conquered the spiteful power which assails him by the help of your
alliance. I have said all that I want in brief; but to go into details,
in order that my endeavour may be successful, would be to say what I
have no business to say, nor you to hear from me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[530:2178](2050270.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="xiii.v-p1.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.v-p2"></span> Cynegius was “prefect of the prætorium,”
from 384 to 390. Cod. Medic. has on the title, <span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.v-p2.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="xiii.v-p2.2"></span>Ιερί& 251· ῾Ηγέμονι</span>: but this must be
wrong. It was this Cynegius, not then Prefect of the East, whom Libanius
was to lead however unwilling, to the study of eloquence (see end of
Letter xi.). The four Prætorian Prefects remained, after Diocletian’s
institution of the four Princes, under whom they served, had been
abolished by Constantine. The Prefect of the East stretched his
jurisdiction “from the cataracts of the Nile to the banks of the Phasis,
and from the mountains of Thrace to the frontiers of Persia.” From all
inferior jurisdictions an appeal in every matter of importance, either
civil or criminal, might be brought before the tribunal of the Prefect;
but his sentence was final: the emperors themselves refused to dispute
it. Hence Gregory says, that, “next to God, Cynegius had the power to
remove his young relative from danger.” How intimate Gregory was, not
only with the highest officers, but at the Court itself, is shown in his
orations on Pulcheria and Flacilla. He must have been over sixty when
this letter was written.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Testimonial.](2050271)
