[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050052)  [Next](2050054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p1"></span> §37. *Defence of S. Basil’s
statement, attacked by Eunomius, that the terms ‘Father’ and ‘The
Ungenerate’ can have the same meaning*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p2"></span>The stream of his abuse is very
strong; insolence is at the bottom of every principle he lays down; and
vilification is put by him in the place of any demonstration of doubtful
points so let us briefly discuss the many misrepresentations about the
word Ungenerate with which he insults our Teacher himself and his
treatise. He has quoted the following words of our Teacher: “For my part
I should be inclined to say that this title of the Ungenerate, however
fitting it may seem to express our ideas, yet, as nowhere found in
Scripture and as forming the alphabet of Eunomius’ blasphemy, may very
well be suppressed, when we have the word Father meaning the same thing;
for One who essentially and alone is Father comes from none else; and
that which comes from none else is equivalent to the Ungenerate.” Now
let us hear what proof he brings of the ‘folly’ of these words:
“Overhastiness and shameless dishonesty prompt him to put this dose of
words <span id="fr_189"></span>[191](#fn_189) anomalously used into his
attempts; he turns completely round, because his judgment is wavering
and his powers of reasoning are feeble.” Notice how well-directed that
blow is; how skilfully, with all his mastery of logic, he takes Basil’s
words to pieces and puts a conception more consistent with piety in
their place! “Anomalous in phrase,” “hasty and dishonest in judgment,”
“wavering and turning round from feebleness of reasoning.” Why this?
what has exasperated this man, whose own judgment is so firm and
reasoning so sound? What is it that he most condemns in Basil’s words?
Is it, that he accepts the *idea* of the Ungenerate, but says that the
actual word, as misused by those who pervert it, should be suppressed?
Well; is the Faith in jeopardy only as regards words and outward
expressions, and need we take no account of the correctness of the
thought beneath? Or does not the Word of Truth rather exhort us first to
have a heart pure from evil thoughts, and then, for the manifestation of
the soul’s emotions, to use any words that can express these secrets of
the mind, without any minute care about this or that particular sound?
For the speaking in this way or in that is not the cause of the thought
within us; but the hidden conception of the heart supplies the motive
for such and such words; “for from the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaketh.” We make the words interpret the thought; we do not by a
reverse process gather <span id="fr_190"></span>[192](#fn_190) the
thought from the words. Should both be at hand, a man may certainly be
ready in both, in clever thinking and clever expression; but if the one
should be wanting, the loss to the illiterate is slight, if the
knowledge in his soul is perfect in the direction of moral goodness.
“This people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from
me <span id="fr_191"></span>[193](#fn_191) .” What is the meaning of
that? That the right attitude of the soul towards the truth is more
precious than the propriety of phrases in the sight of God, who hears
the “groanings that cannot be uttered.” Phrases can be used in opposite
senses; the tongue readily serving, at his will, the intention of the
speaker; but the disposition of the soul, as it is, so is it seen by Him
Who sees all secrets. Why, then, does he deserve to be called
“anomalous,” and “hasty,” and “dishonest,” for bidding us suppress all
in the term Ungenerate which can aid in their blasphemy those who
transgress the Faith, while minding and welcoming all the meaning in the
word which can be reverently held. If indeed he had said that we ought
not to think of the Deity as Ungenerate, there might have been some
occasion for these and even worse terms of abuse to be used against him.
But if he falls in with the general belief of the faithful and admits
this, and then pronounces an opinion well worthy of the Master’s
mind <span id="fr_192"></span>[194](#fn_192) , viz., “Refrain from the
use of the word, for into it, and from it, the subverting heresy is
fetched,” and bids us cherish the idea of an ungenerate Deity by means
of other names,—therein he does not <span id="page_LXXXVI">p.
LXXXVI</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-Page_LXXXVI"></span>deserve
their abuse. Are we not taught by the Truth Himself to act so, and not
to cling even to things exceeding precious, if any of them tend to
mischief? When He thus bids us to cut away the right eye or foot or
hand, if so be that one of them offends, what else does He imply by this
figure, than that He would have anything, however fair-seeming, if it
leads a man by an inconsiderate use to evil, remain inoperative and out
of use, assuring us that it is better for us to be saved by amputation
of the parts which led to sin, than to perish by retaining them?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p7"></span>What, too, does Paul, the
follower of Christ, say? He, too, in his deep wisdom teaches the same.
He, who declares that “everything is good, and nothing to be rejected,
if it be received with thanks <span id="fr_193"></span>[195](#fn_193) ,”
on some occasions, because of the ‘conscience of the weak brother,’ puts
some things back from the number which he has accepted, and commands us
to decline them. “If,” he says, “meat make my brother to offend, I will
eat no flesh while the world standeth <span
id="fr_194"></span>[196](#fn_194) .” Now this is just what our follower
of Paul did. He saw that the deceiving power of those who try to teach
the inequality of the Persons was increased by this word Ungenerate,
taken in their mischievous, heretical sense, and so he advised that,
while we cherish in our souls a devout consciousness of this ungenerate
Deity, we should not show any particular love for the actual word, which
was the occasion of sin to the reprobate; for that the title of Father,
if we follow out all that it implies, will suggest to us this meaning of
not having been generated. For when we hear the word Father, we think at
once of the Author of all beings; for if He had some further cause
transcending Himself, He would not have been called thus of proper right
Father; for that title would have had to be transferred higher, to this
pre-supposed Cause. But if He Himself is that Cause from which all
comes, as the Apostle says, it is plain that nothing can be thought of
beyond His existence. But this is to believe in that existence not
having been generated. But this man, who claims that even the Truth
shall not be considered more persuasive than himself, will not acquiesce
in this; he loudly dogmatizes against it; he jeers at the argument.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_189"></span>[LXXXV:191](2050053.htm#fr_189) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p3"></span> i.e. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>πατήρ, ἀγέννητος</span>

<span id="fn_190"></span>[LXXXV:192](2050053.htm#fr_190) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p4"></span> Putting a full stop at <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>συναγείρομεν</span>. Oehler
otherwise.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[LXXXV:193](2050053.htm#fr_191) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p5"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>[Isaiah xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p5.2"></span>; [Matthew xv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[LXXXV:194](2050053.htm#fr_192) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p6"></span> *the Master’s mind*. “But whoso
shall offend one of these little ones which believe in Me, it were
better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he
were drowned in the depth of the sea.” <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>[Matth. xviii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p6.2"></span>; [Mark ix.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#042)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p6.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[LXXXVI:195](2050053.htm#fr_193) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p8"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p8.1"></span> (R.V.)

<span id="fn_194"></span>[LXXXVI:196](2050053.htm#fr_194) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>[1 Cor. viii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxvii-p9.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Several ways of controverting his quibbling syllogisms.](2050054)
