[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050102)  [Next](2050104) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *Then returning to the words of
Peter, “God made Him Lord and Christ,” he skilfully explains it by many
arguments, and herein shows Eunomius as an advocate of the orthodox
doctrine, and concludes the book by showing that the Divine and Human
names are applied, by reason of the commixture, to either Nature.*

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p2"></span>But we must return once more to our
vehement writer of speeches, and take up again that severe invective of
his against ourselves. He makes it a complaint against us that we deny
that the Essence of the Son has been made, as contradicting the words of
Peter, “He made Him Lord and Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified <span
id="fr_789"></span>[791](#fn_789) ”; and he is very forcible in his
indignation and abuse upon this matter, and moreover maintains certain
points by which he thinks that he refutes our doctrine. Let us see,
then, the force of his attempts. “Who, pray, ye most reckless of men,”
he says, “when he has the form of a servant, takes the form of a
servant?” “No reasonable man,” shall be our reply to him, “would use
language of this kind, save such as may be entirely alien from the hope
of Christians. But to this class you belong, who charge us with
recklessness because we do not admit the Creator to be created. For if
the Holy Spirit does not lie, when He says by the prophet, ‘All things
serve Thee <span id="fr_790"></span>[792](#fn_790) ,’ and the whole
creation is in servitude, and the Son is, as you say <span
id="fr_791"></span>[793](#fn_791) , created, He is clearly a
fellow-servant with all things, being degraded by His partaking of
creation to partake also of servitude. And Him Who is in servitude you
will surely invest with the servant’s form: for you will not, of course,
be ashamed of the aspect of servitude when you acknowledge that He is a
servant by nature. Who now is it, I pray, my most keen rhetorician, who
transfers the Son from the servile form to another form of a servant? he
who claims for Him uncreated being, and thereby proves that He is no
servant, or you, rather, who continually cry that the Son is the servant
of the Father, and was actually under His dominion before He took the
servant’s form? I ask for no other judges; I leave the vote on these
questions in your own hands. For I suppose that no one is so shameless
in his dealings with the truth as to oppose acknowledged facts out of
sheer impudence. What we have said is clear to any one, that by the
peculiar attributes of servitude is marked that which is by nature
servile, and to be created is an attribute proper to servitude. Thus one
who asserts that He, being a servant, took upon Him our form, is surely
the man who transfers the Only-begotten from servitude to servitude.”

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p6"></span>He tries, however, to fight against
our words, and says, a little further on (for I will pass over at
present his intermediate remarks, as they have been more or less fully
discussed in my previous arguments), when he charges us with being “bold
in saying or thinking things uncontrivable,” and calls us “most
miserable <span id="fr_792"></span>[794](#fn_792) ,”—he adds, I say,
this:—“For if it is not of the Word Who was in the beginning and was God
that the blessed Peter speaks, but of Him Who was ‘seen,’ and Who
‘emptied Himself,’ as Basil says, and if the man Who was ‘seen’ ‘emptied
Himself’ to take ‘the form of a servant,’ and He Who ‘emptied Himself’
to take the form of a servant,’ ‘emptied Himself’ to come into being as
man, then the man who was ‘seen’ ‘emptied himself,’ to come into being
as man.” It may be that the judgment of my readers has immediately
detected from the above citation the knavery, and, at the same time, the
folly of the argument he maintains: yet a brief refutation of what he
says shall be subjoined on our side, not so <span id="page_CLXXXVIII">p.
CLXXXVIII</span> <span id="viii.i.viii.iv-Page_CLXXXVIII"></span>much to
overthrow his blundering sophism, which indeed is overthrown by itself
for those who have ears to hear, as to avoid the appearance of passing
his allegation by without discussion, under the pretence of contempt for
the worthlessness of his argument. Let us accordingly look at the point
in this way. What are the Apostle’s words? “Be it known,” he says, “that
God made Him Lord and Christ <span id="fr_793"></span>[795](#fn_793) .”
Then, as though some one had asked him on whom such a grace was
bestowed, he points as it were with his finger to the subject, saying,
“this Jesus, Whom ye crucified.” What does Basil say upon this? That the
demonstrative word declares that *that* person was made Christ, Who had
been crucified by the hearers;—for he says, “ye crucified,” and it was
likely that those who had demanded the murder that was done upon Him
were hearers of the speech; for the time from the crucifixion to the
discourse of Peter was not long. What, then, does Eunomius advance in
answer to this? “If it is not of the Word Who was in the beginning and
was God that the blessed Peter speaks, but of Him Who was ‘seen,’ and
Who ‘emptied Himself,’ as Basil says, and if the man who was ‘seen’
‘emptied himself’ to take ‘the form of a servant’”—Hold! who says this,
that the man who was seen emptied himself again to take the form of a
servant? or who maintains that the suffering of the Cross took place
before the manifestation in the flesh? The Cross did not precede the
body, nor the body “the form of the servant.” But God is manifested in
the flesh, while the flesh that displayed God in itself, after having by
itself fulfilled the great mystery of the Death, is transformed by
commixture to that which is exalted and Divine, becoming Christ and
Lord, being transferred and changed to that which He was, Who manifested
Himself in that flesh. But if we should say this, our champion of the
truth maintains once more that we say that He Who was shown upon the
Cross “emptied Himself” to become another man, putting his sophism
together as follows in its wording:—“If,” quoth he, “the man who was
‘seen’ ‘emptied himself’ to take the ‘form of a servant,’ and He Who
‘emptied Himself’ to take the ‘form of a servant,’ ‘emptied Himself’ to
come into being as man, then the man who was ‘seen’ ‘emptied himself’ to
come into being as man.”

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p9"></span>How well he remembers the task
before him! how much to the point is the conclusion of his argument!
Basil declares that the Apostle said that the man who was “seen” was
made Christ and Lord, and this clear and quick-witted over-turner of his
statements says, “If Peter does not say that the essence of Him Who was
in the beginning was made, the man who was ‘seen’ ‘emptied himself’ to
take the ‘form of a servant,’ and He Who ‘emptied Himself’ to take the
’form of a servant, emptied Himself to become man.” We are conquered,
Eunomius, by this invincible wisdom! The fact that the Apostle’s
discourse refers to Him Who was “crucified through weakness <span
id="fr_794"></span>[796](#fn_794) ” is forsooth powerfully disproved
when we learn that if we believe this to be so, the man who was “seen”
again becomes another, “emptying Himself” for another coming into being
of man. Will you never cease jesting against what should be secure from
such attempts? will you not blush at destroying by such ridiculous
sophisms the awe that hedges the Divine mysteries? will you not turn
now, if never before, to know that the Only-begotten God, Who is in the
bosom of the Father, being Word, and King, and Lord, and all that is
exalted in word and thought, needs not to *become* anything that is
good, seeing that He is Himself the fulness of all good things? What
then is that, by changing into which He becomes what He was not before?
Well, as He Who knew not sin becomes sin <span
id="fr_795"></span>[797](#fn_795) , that He may take away the sin of the
world, so on the other hand the flesh which received the Lord becomes
Christ and Lord, being transformed by the commixture into that which it
was not by nature: whereby we learn that neither would God have been
manifested in the flesh, had not the Word been made flesh, nor would the
human flesh that compassed Him about have been transformed to what is
Divine, had not that which was apparent to the senses become Christ and
Lord. But they treat the simplicity of what we preach with contempt, who
use their syllogisms to trample on the being of God, and desire to show
that He Who by creation brought into being all things that are, is
Himself a part of creation, and wrest, to assist them in such an effort
to establish their blasphemy, the words of Peter, who said to the Jews,
“Be it known to all the house of Israel that God made Him Lord and
Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified <span
id="fr_796"></span>[798](#fn_796) .” This is the proof they present for
the statement that the essence of the Only-begotten God is created!
What? tell me, were the Jews, to whom the words were spoken, in
existence before the ages? was the Cross before the world? was Pilate
before all creation? was Jesus in existence first, and after that the
Word? was the flesh more ancient than the Godhead? did Gabriel bring
glad tidings to Mary before the world was? did not the Man that was in
Christ take beginning by way of birth in the days of Cæsar Augustus,
while the Word that was God in the beginning is our King, as the prophet
testifies, before all ages <span id="fr_797"></span>[799](#fn_797) ? See
you not what confusion you bring <span id="page_CLXXXIX">p.
CLXXXIX</span> <span id="viii.i.viii.iv-Page_CLXXXIX"></span>upon the
matter, turning, as the phrase goes, things upside down? It was the
fiftieth day after the Passion, when Peter preached his sermon to the
Jews and said, “Him Whom ye crucified, God made Christ and Lord.” Do you
not mark the order of his saying? which stands first, which second in
his words? He did not say, “Him Whom God made Lord, ye crucified,” but,
“Whom ye crucified, Him God made Christ and Lord”: so that it is clear
from this that Peter is speaking, not of what was before the ages, but
of what was after the dispensation.

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p14"></span>How comes it, then, that you fail
to see that the whole conception of your argument on the subject is
being overthrown, and go on making yourself ridiculous with your
childish web of sophistry, saying that, if we believe that He who was
apparent to the senses has been made by God to be Christ and Lord, it
necessarily follows that the Lord once more “emptied Himself” anew to
become Man, and underwent a second birth? What advantage does your
doctrine get from this? How does what you say show the King of creation
to be created? For my own part I assert on the other side that our view
is supported by those who contend against us, and that the rhetorician,
in his exceeding attention to the matter, has failed to see that in
pushing, as he supposed, the argument to an absurdity, he is fighting on
the side of those whom he attacks, with the very weapons he uses for
their overthrow. For if we are to believe that the change of condition
in the case of Jesus was from a lofty state to a lowly one, and if the
Divine and uncreated Nature alone transcends the creation, he will,
perhaps, when he thoroughly surveys his own argument, come over to the
ranks of truth, and agree that the Uncreated came to be in the created,
in His love for man. But if he imagines that he demonstrates the created
character of the Lord by showing that He, being God, took part in human
nature, he will find many such passages to establish the same opinion
which carry out their support of his argument in a similar way. For
since He was the Word and was God, and “afterwards,” as the prophet
says, “was seen upon earth and conversed with men <span
id="fr_798"></span>[800](#fn_798) ,” He will hereby be proved to be one
of the creatures! And if this is held to be beside the question, similar
passages too are not quite akin to the subject. For in sense it is just
the same to say that the Word that was in the beginning was manifested
to men through the flesh, and to say that being in the form of God He
put on the form of a servant: and if one of these statements gives no
help for the establishment of his blasphemy, he must needs give up the
remaining one also. He is kind enough, however, to advise us to abandon
our error, and to point out the truth which He himself maintains. He
tells us that the Apostle Peter declares Him to have been made Who was
in the beginning the Word and God. Well, if he were making up dreams for
our amusement, and giving us information about the prophetic
interpretation of the visions of sleep, there might be no risk in
allowing him to set forth the riddles of his imagination at his
pleasure. But when he tells us that he is explaining the Divine
utterances, it is no longer safe for us to leave him to interpret the
words as he likes. What does the Scripture say? “God made Lord and
Christ this Jesus whom ye crucified <span
id="fr_799"></span>[801](#fn_799) .” When everything, then, is found to
concur—the demonstrative word denoting Him Who is spoken of by the Name
of His Humanity, the charge against those who were stained with
blood-guiltiness, the suffering of the Cross—our thought necessarily
turns to that which was apparent to the senses. But he asserts that
while Peter uses these words it is the pretemporal existence that is
indicated by the word “made” <span id="fr_800"></span>[802](#fn_800) .
Well, we may safely allow nurses and old wives to jest with children,
and to lay down the meaning of dreams as they choose: but when inspired
Scripture is set before us for exposition, the great Apostle forbids us
to have recourse to old wives’ tattle <span
id="fr_801"></span>[803](#fn_801) . When I hear “the Cross” spoken of, I
understand the Cross, and when I hear mention of a human name, I
understand the nature which that name connotes. So when I hear from
Peter that “this” one was made Lord and Christ, I do not doubt that he
speaks of Him Who had been before the eyes of men, since the saints
agree with one another in this matter as well as in others. For, as he
says that He Who was crucified has been made Lord, so Paul also says
that He was “highly exalted <span id="fr_802"></span>[804](#fn_802) ,”
after the Passion and the Resurrection, not being exalted in so far
forth as He is God. For what height is there more sublime than the
Divine height, that he should say God was exalted thereunto? But he
means that the lowliness of the Humanity was exalted, the word, I
suppose, indicating the assimilation and union of the Man Who was
assumed to the exalted state of the Divine Nature. And even if one were
to allow him licence to misinterpret the Divine utterance, not even so
will his argument conclude in accordance with the aim of his heresy. For
be it granted that Peter *does* say of Him Who was in the beginning,
“God made Him Lord and Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified,” we shall
find that even so his blasphemy does not gain any strength against the
truth. “God made Him,” he says, “Lord <span id="page_CXC">p. CXC</span>
<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-Page_CXC"></span>and Christ.” To which of the
words are we to refer the word *made?* with which of those that are
employed in this sentence are we to connect the word? There are three
before us:—“this,” and “Lord,” and “Christ.” With which of these three
will he construct the word “made”? No one is so bold against the truth
as to deny that “made” has reference to “Christ” and “Lord”; for Peter
says that He, being already whatever He was, was “made Christ and Lord”
by the Father.

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p20"></span>These words are not mine: they are
those of him who fights against the Word. For he says, in the very
passage that is before us for examination, exactly thus:—“The blessed
Peter speaks of Him Who was in the beginning and was God, and expounds
to us that it was He Who became Lord and Christ.” Eunomius, then, says
that He Who was whatsoever He was became Lord and Christ, as the history
of David tells us that he, being the son of Jesse, and a keeper of the
flocks, was anointed to be king: not that the anointing then made him to
be a man, but that he, being what he was by his own nature, was
transformed from an ordinary man to a king. What follows? Is it thereby
the more established that the essence of the Son was *made,* if, as
Eunomius says, God made Him, when He was in the beginning and was God,
both Lord and Christ? For Lordship is not a name of His *being* but of
His *being* in *authority,* and the appellation of Christ indicates His
kingdom, while the idea of His kingdom is one, and that of His Nature
another. Suppose that Scripture does say that these things took place
with regard to the Son of God. Let us then consider which is the more
pious and the more rational view. Which can we allowably say is made
partaker of superiority by way of advancement—God or man? Who has so
childish a mind as to suppose that the Divinity passes on to perfection
by way of addition? But as to the Human Nature, such a supposition is
not unreasonable, seeing that the words of the Gospel clearly ascribe to
our Lord *increase* in respect of His Humanity: for it says, “Jesus
increased in wisdom and stature and favour <span
id="fr_803"></span>[805](#fn_803) .” Which, then, is the more reasonable
suggestion to derive from the Apostle’s words?—that He Who was God in
the beginning became Lord by way of advancement, or that the lowliness
of the Human Nature was raised to the height of majesty as a result of
its communion with the Divine? For the prophet David also, speaking in
the person of the Lord, says, “I am established as king by Him <span
id="fr_804"></span>[806](#fn_804) ,” with a meaning very close to “I was
made Christ:” and again, in the person of the Father to the Lord, he
says, “Be Thou Lord in the midst of Thine enemies <span
id="fr_805"></span>[807](#fn_805) ,” with the same meaning as Peter, “Be
Thou *made* Lord of Thine enemies.” As, then, the establishment of His
kingdom does not signify the formation of His essence, but the advance
to His dignity, and He Who bids Him “be Lord” does not command that
which is non-existent to come into being at that particular time, but
gives to Him Who *is* the rule over those who are disobedient,—so also
the blessed Peter, when he says that one has been made Christ (that is,
king of all) adds the word “Him” to distinguish the idea both from the
essence and from the attributes contemplated in connection with it. For
He made Him what has been declared when He already *was* that which He
is. Now if it were allowable to assert of the transcendent Nature that
it became anything by way of advancement, as a king from being an
ordinary man, or lofty from being lowly, or Lord from being servant, it
might be proper to apply Peter’s words to the Only-begotten. But since
the Divine Nature, whatever it is believed to be, always remains the
same, being above all augmentation and incapable of diminution, we are
absolutely compelled to refer his saying to the Humanity. For God the
Word is now, and always remains, that which He was in the beginning,
always King, always Lord, always God and Most High, not having become
any of these things by way of advancement, but being in virtue of His
Nature all that He is declared to be, while on the other hand He Who
was, by being assumed, elevated from Man to the Divinity, *being* one
thing and *becoming* another, is strictly and truly said to have become
Christ and Lord. For He made Him to be Lord from being a servant, to be
King from being a subject, to be Christ from being in subordination. He
highly exalted that which was lowly, and gave to Him that had the Human
Name that Name which is above every name <span
id="fr_806"></span>[808](#fn_806) . And thus came to pass that
unspeakable mixture and conjunction of human littleness commingled with
Divine greatness, whereby even those names which are great and Divine
are properly applied to the Humanity, while on the other hand the
Godhead is spoken of by human names <span
id="fr_807"></span>[809](#fn_807) . For it is the same Person who both
has the Name which is above every name, and is worshipped by all
creation in the human Name of Jesus. For he says, “at the name of Jesus
every knee shall bow, of things in heaven and things in earth, and
things under the earth, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father <span
id="fr_808"></span>[810](#fn_808) .” But enough of these matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_789"></span>[CLXXXVII:791](2050103.htm#fr_789) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p3"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_790"></span>[CLXXXVII:792](2050103.htm#fr_790) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p4"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[CLXXXVII:793](2050103.htm#fr_791) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p5"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p5.1"></span>καθ᾽ ὑμᾶς</span> with the earlier
editions. Oehler alleges no authority for his reading <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p5.2"></span>καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς</span>,
which is probably a mere misprint.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[CLXXXVII:794](2050103.htm#fr_792) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p7"></span> Oehler’s punctuation here seems to
require correction.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[CLXXXVIII:795](2050103.htm#fr_793) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p8"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[CLXXXVIII:796](2050103.htm#fr_794) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p10"></span> <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p10.1"></span>[2 Cor. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[CLXXXVIII:797](2050103.htm#fr_795) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p11"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_796"></span>[CLXXXVIII:798](2050103.htm#fr_796) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p12"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[CLXXXVIII:799](2050103.htm#fr_797) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p13"></span> [Ps. lxxiv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p13.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_798"></span>[CLXXXIX:800](2050103.htm#fr_798) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p15"></span> [Bar. iii.
37](../../../bib/apo/bar003.htm#037)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[CLXXXIX:801](2050103.htm#fr_799) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p16"></span> [Acts ii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[CLXXXIX:802](2050103.htm#fr_800) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p17"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation,
which here seems certainly faulty: some slighter alterations have also
been made in what precedes, and in what follows.

<span id="fn_801"></span>[CLXXXIX:803](2050103.htm#fr_801) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p18"></span> Cf. [1 Tim. iv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p18.1"></span>. The quotation is not verbal.

<span id="fn_802"></span>[CLXXXIX:804](2050103.htm#fr_802) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p19"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_803"></span>[CXC:805](2050103.htm#fr_803) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p21"></span> S. [Luke ii.
52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_804"></span>[CXC:806](2050103.htm#fr_804) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p22"></span> [Ps. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p22.1"></span> (LXX).

<span id="fn_805"></span>[CXC:807](2050103.htm#fr_805) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p23"></span> [Ps. cx.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[CXC:808](2050103.htm#fr_806) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p24"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="fn_807"></span>[CXC:809](2050103.htm#fr_807) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p25"></span> This passage may be taken as
counterbalancing that in which S. Gregory seems to limit the
*communicatio idiomatum* (see above, page 184, n. 6): but he here
probably means no more than that *names* or *titles* which properly
belong to the Human Nature of our Lord are applied to His Divine
Personality.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[CXC:810](2050103.htm#fr_808) <span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.viii.iv-p26"></span> Cf. [Phil. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.viii.iv-p26.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII](2050104)
