[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050096)  [Next](2050098) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He shows the falsehood of
Eunomius’ calumnious charge that the great Basil had said that “man was
emptied to become man,” and demonstrates that the “emptying” of the
Only-begotten took place with a view to the restoration to life of the
Man Who had suffered* <span id="fr_725"></span>[727](#fn_725) .

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p3"></span>He asserts that we say that man has
emptied Himself to become man, and that He Who by obedience humbled
Himself to the form of the servant shared the form of men even before He
took that form. No change has been made in the wording; we have simply
transferred the very words from his speech to our own. Now if there is
anything of this sort in our writings, (for I call my master’s writings
*ours*) let no one blame our orator for calumny. I ask for all regard
for the truth: and we ourselves will give evidence. But if there is
nothing of all this in our writings, while his language not merely lays
blame upon us, but is indignant and wrathful as if the matter were
clearly proved, calling us full of absurdity, nonsense, confusion,
inconsistency, and so on, I am at a loss to see the right course to
take. Just as men who are perplexed at the groundless rages of madmen
can decide upon no plan to follow, so I myself can find no device to
meet this perplexity. Our master says (for I will again recite his
argument verbally), “He is not setting forth to us the mode of the
Divine existence, but the terms which belong to the Incarnation.” Our
accuser starts from this point, and says that we maintain that man
emptied Himself to become man! What community is there between one
statement and the other? If we say that the Apostle has not set forth to
us the mode of the Divine existence, but points by his phrase to the
dispensation of the Passion, we are on this ground charged with speaking
of the “emptying” of man to become man, and with saying that the “form
of the servant” had pretemporal existence, and that the Man Who was born
of Mary existed before the coming in the flesh! Well, I think it
superfluous to spend time in discussing what is admitted, seeing that
truth itself frees us from the charge. In a case, indeed, where one may
have given the calumniators some handle against oneself, it is proper to
resist accusers: but where there is no danger of being suspected of some
absurd charge, the accusation becomes a proof, not of the false charge
made against him who is calumniated, but of the madness of the accuser.
As, however, in dealing with the charge of being ashamed of the Cross,
we showed by our examination that the charge recoiled upon the accuser,
so we shall show how this charge too returns upon those who make it,
since it is they, and not we, who lay down the doctrine of the change of
the Son from like to like in the dispensation of the <span
id="page_CLXXIX">p. CLXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-Page_CLXXIX"></span>Passion. We will examine briefly,
bringing them side by side, the statements of each party. We say that
the Only-begotten God, having by His own agency brought all things into
being, by Himself <span id="fr_726"></span>[728](#fn_726) has full power
over all things, while the nature of man is also one of the things that
were made by Him: and that when this had fallen away to evil, and come
to be in the destruction of death, He by His own agency drew it up once
more to immortal life, by means of the Man in whom He tabernacled,
taking to Himself humanity in completeness, and that He mingled His
life-giving power with our mortal and perishable nature, and changed, by
the combination with Himself, our deadness to living grace and power.
And this we declare to be the mystery of the Lord according to the
flesh, that He Who is immutable came to be in that which is mutable, to
the end that altering it for the better, and changing it from the worse,
He might abolish the evil which is mingled with our mutable condition,
destroying the evil in Himself. For “our God is a consuming fire <span
id="fr_727"></span>[729](#fn_727) ,” by whom all the material of
wickedness is done away. This is our statement. What does our accuser
say? Not that He Who was immutable and uncreated was mingled with that
which came into being by creation, and which had therefore suffered a
change in the direction of evil; but he does say that He, being Himself
created, came to that which was kindred and homogeneous with Himself,
not coming from a transcendent nature to put on the lowlier nature by
reason of His love to man, but becoming that very thing which He was.

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p6"></span>For as regards the general character
of the appellation, the name of “creature” is one, as predicated of all
things that have come into being from nothing, while the divisions into
sections of the things which we contemplate as included in the term
“creature”, are separated one from the other by the variation of their
properties: so that if He is created, and man is created, He was
“emptied,” to use Eunomius’ phrase, to become Himself, and changed His
place, not from the transcendent to the lowly, but from what is similar
in kind to what (save in regard of the special character of body and the
incorporeal) is similar in dignity. To whom now will the just vote of
those who have to try our cause be given, or who will seem to them to be
under the weight of these charges? he who says that the created was
saved by the uncreated God, or he who refers the cause of our salvation
to the creature? Surely the judgment of pious men is not doubtful. For
any one who knows clearly the difference which there is between the
created and the uncreated, (terms of which the divergence is marked by
dominion and slavery, since the uncreated God, as the prophet says,
“ruleth with His power for ever <span id="fr_728"></span>[730](#fn_728)
,” while all things in the creation are servants to Him, according to
the voice of the same prophet, which says “all things serve Thee <span
id="fr_729"></span>[731](#fn_729) ,”) he, I say, who carefully considers
these matters, surely cannot fail to recognize the person who makes the
Only-begotten change from servitude to servitude. For if, according to
Paul, the whole creation “is in bondage <span
id="fr_730"></span>[732](#fn_730) ,” and if, according to Eunomius, the
essential nature of the Only-begotten is created, our adversaries
maintain, surely, by their doctrines, not that the master was mingled
with the servant, but that a servant came to be among servants. As for
our saying that the Lord was in the form of a servant before His
presence in the flesh, that is just like charging us with saying that
the stars are black and the sun misty, and the sky low, and water dry,
and so on:—a man who does not maintain a charge on the ground of what he
has heard, but makes up what seems good to him at his own sweet will,
need not be sparing in making against us such charges as these. It is
just the same thing for us to be called to account for the one set of
charges as for the other, so far as concerns the fact that they have no
basis for them in anything that we have said. How could one who says
distinctly that the true Son was in the glory of the Father, insult the
eternal glory of the Only-begotten by conceiving it to have been “in the
form of a servant”? When our author thinks proper to speak evil of us,
and at the same time takes care to present his case with some appearance
of truth, it may perhaps not be superfluous or useless to rebut his
unfounded accusations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_725"></span>[CLXXVIII:727](2050097.htm#fr_725) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p2"></span> This seems to be the sense of the
Greek title. The Latin version of the earlier editions appears to
represent a different reading, “contigisse, quando in passione homo
Christus passus est.”

<span id="fn_726"></span>[CLXXIX:728](2050097.htm#fr_726) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p4"></span> This seems to be the force of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p4.1"></span>αὐτῷ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p4.2"></span>;</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p4.3"></span>αὐτὸν</span> might
give a simpler construction, but the sense would not be changed. Oehler,
who here restores some words which were omitted in the earlier editions,
makes no mention of any variation of reading.

<span id="fn_727"></span>[CLXXIX:729](2050097.htm#fr_727) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p5"></span> [Heb. xii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#029)<span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_728"></span>[CLXXIX:730](2050097.htm#fr_728) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p7"></span> [Ps.
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007)<span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p7.1"></span>[Ps. lxvi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p7.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_729"></span>[CLXXIX:731](2050097.htm#fr_729) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p7.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p8"></span> [Ps. cxix.
91](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#091)<span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_730"></span>[CLXXIX:732](2050097.htm#fr_730) <span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.iv-p9"></span> Cf. [Rom. viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.vii.iv-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thereafter he shows that there are not two Christs or two Lords,
but one Christ and one Lord, and that the Divine nature, after mingling
with the Human, preserved the properties of each nature without
confusion, and declares that the operations are, by reason of the union,
predicated of the two natures in common, in the sense that the Lord took
upon Himself the sufferings of the servant, and the humanity is
glorified with Him in the honour that is the Lord's, and that by the
power of the Divine Nature that is made anew, conformably with that
Divine Nature Itself.](2050098)
