[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050088)  [Next](2050090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p1"></span> §6. *He then exposes argument about
the “Generate,” and the “product of making,” and “product of creation,”
and shows the impious nature of the language of Eunomius and Theognostus
on the “immediate” and “undivided” character of the essence, and its
“relation to its creator and maker.”*

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p2"></span>Let us listen, then, to what he says.
“One might reasonably say that the most proper and primary essence, and
that which alone exists by the operation of the Father, admits for
itself the appellations of ‘product of generation,’ ‘product of making,’
and ‘product of creation.’” Who knows not that what separates the Church
from heresy is this term, “product of creation,” applied to the Son?
Accordingly, the doctrinal difference being universally acknowledged,
what would be the reasonable course for a man to take who endeavours to
show that his opinions are more true than ours? Clearly, to establish
his own statement, by showing, by such proofs as he could, that we ought
to consider that the <span id="page_CLXIII">p. CLXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-Page_CLXIII"></span>Lord is created. Or omitting this,
should he rather lay down a law for his readers that they should speak
of matters of controversy as if they were acknowledged facts? For my own
part, I think he should take the former course, and perhaps all who
possess any share of intelligence demand this of their opponents, that
they should, to begin with, establish upon some incontrovertible basis
the first principle of their argument, and so proceed to press their
theory by inferences. Now our writer leaves alone the task of
establishing the view that we should think He is created, and goes on to
the next steps, fitting on the inferential process of his argument to
this unproved assumption, being just in the condition of those men whose
minds are deep in foolish desires, with their thoughts wandering upon a
kingdom, or upon some other object of pursuit. They do not think how any
of the things on which they set their hearts could possibly be, but they
arrange and order their good fortune for themselves at their pleasure,
as if it were theirs already, straying with a kind of pleasure among
non-existent things. So, too, our clever author somehow or other lulls
his own renowned dialectic to sleep, and before giving a demonstration
of the point at issue, he tells, as if to children, the tale of this
deceitful and inconsequent folly of his own doctrine, setting it forth
like a story told at a drinking-party. For he says that the essence
which “exists by the operation of the Father” admits the appellation of
“product of generation,” and of “product of making,” and of “product of
creation.” What reasoning showed us that the Son exists by any
constructive operation, and that the nature of the Father remains
inoperative with regard to the Personal existence <span
id="fr_647"></span>[649](#fn_647) of the Son? This was the very point at
issue in the controversy, whether the essence of the Father begat the
Son, or whether it made Him as one of the external things which
accompany His nature <span id="fr_648"></span>[650](#fn_648) . Now
seeing that the Church, according to the Divine teaching, believes the
Only-begotten to be verily God, and abhors the superstition of
polytheism, and for this cause does not admit the difference of
essences, in order that the Godheads may not, by divergence of essence,
fall under the conception of number (for this is nothing else than to
introduce polytheism into our life)—seeing, I say, that the Church
teaches this in plain language, that the Only-begotten is essentially
God, very God of the essence of the very God, how ought one who opposes
her decisions to overthrow the preconceived opinion? Should he not do so
by establishing the opposing statement, demonstrating the disputed point
from some acknowledged principle? I think no sensible man would look for
anything else than this. But our author starts from the disputed points,
and takes, as though it were admitted, matter which is in controversy as
a principle for the succeeding argument. If it had first been shown that
the Son had His existence through some operation, what quarrel should we
have with what follows, that he should say that the essence which exists
through an operation admits for itself the name of “product of making”?
But let the advocates of error tell us how the consequence has any
force, so long as the antecedent remains unestablished. For supposing
one were to grant by way of hypothesis that man is winged, there will be
no question of concession about what comes next: for he who becomes
winged will fly in some way or other, and lift himself up on high above
the earth, soaring through the air on his wings. But we have to see how
he whose nature is not aerial could become winged, and if this condition
does not exist, it is vain to discuss the next point. Let our author,
then, show this to begin with, that it is in vain that the Church has
believed that the Only-begotten Son truly exists, not adopted by a
Father falsely so called, but existing according to nature, by
generation from Him Who is, not alienated from the essence of Him that
begat Him. But so long as his primary proposition remains unproved, it
is idle to dwell on those which are secondary. And let no one interrupt
me, by saying that what we confess should also be confirmed by
constructive reasoning: for it is enough for proof of our statement,
that the tradition has come down to us from our fathers, handed on, like
some inheritance, by succession from the apostles and the saints who
came after them. They, on the other hand, who change their doctrines to
this novelty, would need the support of arguments in abundance, if they
were about to bring over to their views, not men light as dust, and
unstable, but men of weight and steadiness: but so long as their
statement is advanced without being established, and without being
proved, who is so foolish and so brutish as to account the teaching of
the evangelists and apostles, and of those who have successively shone
like lights in the churches, of less force than this undemonstrated
nonsense?

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p5"></span>Let us further look at the most
remarkable instance of our author’s cleverness; how, by the abundance of
his dialectic skill, he ingeniously draws over to the contrary view the
more simple sort. He throws in, as an addition to the title of “product
of making,” and that of “product of creation,” the further phrase,
“product of generation,” saying that the essence of the Son <span
id="page_CLXIV">p. CLXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-Page_CLXIV"></span>“admits these names for itself”; and
thinks that, so long as he harangues as if he were in some gathering of
topers, his knavery in dealing with doctrine will not be detected by any
one. For in joining “product of generation” with “product of making,”
and “product of creation,” he thinks that he stealthily makes away with
the difference in significance between the names, by putting together
what have nothing in common. These are his clever tricks of dialectic;
but we mere laymen in argument <span id="fr_649"></span>[651](#fn_649)
do not deny that, so far as voice and tongue are concerned, we are what
his speech sets forth about us, but we allow also that our ears, as the
prophet says, are made ready for intelligent hearing. Accordingly, we
are not moved, by the conjunction of names that have nothing in common,
to make a confusion between the things they signify: but even if the
great Apostle names together wood, hay, stubble, gold, silver, and
precious stones <span id="fr_650"></span>[652](#fn_650) , we reckon up
summarily the number of things he mentions, and yet do not fail to
recognize separately the nature of each of the substances named. So
here, too, when “product of generation” and “product of making” are
named together, we pass from the sounds to the sense, and do not behold
the same meaning in each of the names; for “product of creation” means
one thing, and “product of generation” another: so that even if he tries
to mingle what will not blend, the intelligent hearer will listen with
discrimination, and will point out that it is an impossibility for any
one nature to “admit for itself” the appellation of “product of
generation,” and that of “product of creation.” For, if one of these
were true, the other would necessarily be false, so that, if the thing
were a product of creation, it would not be a product of generation, and
conversely, if it were called a product of generation, it would be
alienated from the title of “product of creation.” Yet Eunomius tells us
that the essence of the Son “admits for itself the appellations of
‘product of generation,’ ‘product of making,’ and ‘product of
creation’”!

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p8"></span>Does he, by what still remains, make
at all more secure this headless and rootless statement of his, in
which, in its earliest stage, nothing was laid down that had any force
with regard to the point he is trying to establish? or does the rest
also cling to the same folly, not deriving its strength from any support
it gets from argument, but setting out its exposition of blasphemy with
vague details like the recital of dreams? He says (and this he subjoins
to what I have already quoted)—“Having its generation without
intervention, and preserving indivisible its relation to its Generator,
Maker, and Creator.” Well, if we were to leave alone the absence of
intervention and of division, and look at the meaning of the words as it
stands by itself, we shall find that everywhere his absurd teaching is
cast upon the ears of those whom he deceives, without corroboration from
a single argument. “Its Generator, and Maker, and Creator,” he says.
These names, though they seem to be three, include the sense of but two
concepts, since two of the words are equivalent in meaning. For to make
is the same as to create, but generation is another thing distinct from
those spoken of. Now, seeing that the result of the signification of the
words is to divide the ordinary apprehension of men into different
ideas, what argument demonstrates to us that making is the same thing
with generation, to the end that we may accommodate the one essence to
this difference of terms? For so long as the ordinary significance of
the words holds, and no argument is found to transfer the sense of the
terms to an opposite meaning, it is not possible that any one nature
should be divided between the conception of “product of making,” and
that of “product of generation.” Since each of these terms, used by
itself, has a meaning of its own, we must also suppose the relative
conjunction in which they stand to be appropriate and germane to the
terms. For all other relative terms have their connection, not with what
is foreign and heterogeneous, but, even if the correlative term be
suppressed, we hear spontaneously, together with the primary word, that
which is linked with it, as in the case of “maker,” “slave,” “friend,”
“son,” and so forth. For all names that are considered as relative to
another, present to us, by the mention of them, each its proper and
closely connected relationship with that which it declares, while they
avoid all mixture of that which is heterogeneous <span
id="fr_651"></span>[653](#fn_651) . For neither is the name of “maker”
linked with the word “son,” nor the term “slave” referred to the term
“maker,” nor does “friend” present to us a “slave,” nor “son” a
“master,” but we recognize clearly and distinctly the connection of each
of these with its correlative, conceiving by the word “friend” another
friend; by “slave,” a master; by “maker,” work; by “son,” a father. In
the same way, then, “product of generation” has its proper relative
sense; with the “product of generation,” surely, is linked the
*generator*, and with the “product of creation” the *creator*; and we
must certainly, if we are not prepared by a substitution of names to
<span id="page_CLXV">p. CLXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-Page_CLXV"></span>introduce a confusion of things,
preserve for each of the relative terms that which it properly connotes.

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p10"></span>Now, seeing that the tendency of the
meaning of these words is manifest, how comes it that one who advances
his doctrine by the aid of logical system failed to perceive in these
names their proper relative sense? But he thinks that he is linking on
the “product of generation” to “maker,” and the “product of making” to
“generator,” by saying that the essence of the Son “admits for itself
the appellations of ‘product of generation,’ ‘product of making,’ and
‘product of creation,’” and “preserves indivisible its relation to its
Generator, Maker, and Creator.” For it is contrary to nature, that a
single thing should be split up into different relations. But the Son is
properly related to the Father, and that which is begotten to him that
begat it, while the “product of making” has its relation to its “maker”;
save if one might consider some inexact use, in some undistinguishing
way of common parlance, to overrule the strict signification.

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p11"></span>By what reasoning then is it, and by
what arguments, according to that invincible logic of his, that he wins
back the opinion of the mass of men, and follows out at his pleasure
this line of thought, that as the God Who is over all is conceived and
spoken of both as “Creator” and as “Father,” the Son has a close
connection with both titles, being equally called both “product of
creation” and “product of generation”? For as customary accuracy of
speech distinguishes between names of this kind, and applies the name of
“generation” in the case of things generated from the essence itself,
and understands that of “creation” of those things which are external to
the nature of their maker, and as on this account the Divine doctrines,
in handing down the knowledge of God, have delivered to us the names of
“Father” and “Son,” not those of “Creator” and “work,” that there might
arise no error tending to blasphemy (as might happen if an appellation
of the latter kind repelled the Son to the position of an alien and a
stranger), and that the impious doctrines which sever the Only-begotten
from essential affinity with the Father might find no entrance—seeing
all this, I say, he who declares that the appellation of “product of
making” is one befitting the Son, will safely say by consequence that
the name of “Son” is properly applicable to that which is the product of
making; so that, if the Son is a “product of making,” the heaven is
called “Son,” and the individual things that have been made are,
according to our author, properly named by the appellation of “Son.” For
if He has this name, not because He shares in nature with Him that begat
Him, but is called Son for this reason, that He is created, the same
argument will permit that a lamb, a dog, a frog, and all things that
exist by the will of their maker, should be named by the title of “Son.”
If, on the other hand, each of these is not a Son and is not called God,
by reason of its being external to the nature of the Son, it follows,
surely, that He Who is truly Son is Son, and is confessed to be God by
reason of His being of the very nature of Him that begat Him. But
Eunomius abhors the idea of generation, and excludes it from the Divine
doctrine, slandering the term by his fleshly speculations. Well, our
discourse, in what precedes, showed sufficiently on this point that, as
the Psalmist says, “they are afraid where no fear is <span
id="fr_652"></span>[654](#fn_652) .” For if it was shown in the case of
men that not all generation exists by way of passion, but that that
which is material is by passion, while that which is spiritual is pure
and incorruptible, (for that which is begotten of the Spirit is spirit
and not flesh, and in spirit we see no condition that is subject to
passion,) since our author thought it necessary to estimate the Divine
power by means of examples among ourselves, let him persuade himself to
conceive from the other mode of generation the passionless character of
the Divine generation. Moreover, by mixing up together these three
names, of which two are equivalent, he thinks that his readers, by
reason of the community of sense in the two phrases, will jump to the
conclusion that the third is equivalent also. For since the appellation
of “product of making,” and “product of creation,” indicate that the
thing made is external to the nature of the maker, he couples with these
the phrase, “product of generation,” that this too may be interpreted
along with those above mentioned. But argument of this sort is termed
fraud and falsehood and imposition, not a thoughtful and skilful
demonstration. For that only is called demonstration which shows what is
unknown from what is acknowledged; but to reason fraudulently and
fallaciously, to conceal your own reproach, and to confound by
superficial deceits the understanding of men, as the Apostle says, “of
corrupt minds <span id="fr_653"></span>[655](#fn_653) ,” this no sane
man would call a skilful demonstration.

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p14"></span>Let us proceed, however, to what
follows in order. He says that the generation of the essence is “without
intervention,” and that it “preserves indivisible its relation to its
Generator, Maker, and Creator.” Well, if he had spoken of the immediate
and indivisible character of the essence, and stopped his discourse
there, it would not have swerved from the orthodox view, since we too
confess the close <span id="page_CLXVI">p. CLXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-Page_CLXVI"></span>connection and relation of the Son
with the Father, so that there is nothing inserted between them which is
found to intervene in the connection of the Son with the Father, no
conception of interval, not even that minute and indivisible one, which,
when time is divided into past, present, and future, is conceived
indivisibly by itself as the present, as it cannot be considered as a
part either of the past or of the future, by reason of its being quite
without dimensions and incapable of division, and unobservable, to
whichever side it might be added. That, then, which is perfectly
immediate, admits we say, of no such intervention; for that which is
separated by any interval would cease to be immediate. If, therefore,
our author, likewise, in saying that the generation of the Son is
“without intervention,” excluded all these ideas, then he laid down the
orthodox doctrine of the conjunction of Him Who is with the Father.
When, however, as though in a fit of repentance, he straightway
proceeded to add to what he had said that the essence “preserves its
relation to its Generator, Maker, and Creator,” he polluted his first
statement by his second, vomiting forth his blasphemous utterance upon
the pure doctrine. For it is clear that there too his “without
intervention” has no orthodox intention, but, as one might say that the
hammer is mediate between the smith and the nail, but its own making is
“without intervention,” because, when tools had not yet been found out
by the craft, the hammer came first from the craftsman’s hands by some
inventive process, not <span id="fr_654"></span>[656](#fn_654) by means
of any other tool, and so by it the others were made; so the phrase,
“without intervention,” indicates that this is also our author’s
conception touching the Only-begotten. And here Eunomius is not alone in
his error as regards the enormity of his doctrine, but you may find a
parallel also in the works of Theognostus <span
id="fr_655"></span>[657](#fn_655) , who says that God, wishing to make
this universe, first brought the Son into existence as a sort of
standard of the creation; not perceiving that in his statement there is
involved this absurdity, that what exists, not for its own sake, but for
the sake of something else, is surely of less value than that for the
sake of which it exists: as we provide an implement of husbandry for the
sake of life, yet the plough is surely not reckoned as equally valuable
with life. So, if the Lord also exists on account of the world, and not
all things on account of Him, the whole of the things for the sake of
which they say He exists, would be more valuable than the Lord. And this
is what they are here establishing by their argument, where they insist
that the Son has His relation to His Creator and Maker “without
intervention.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_647"></span>[CLXIII:649](2050089.htm#fr_647) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p3.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p3.2"></span>πόστασιν</span>

<span id="fn_648"></span>[CLXIII:650](2050089.htm#fr_648) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p4"></span> At a later stage Gregory points out
that the idea of creation is involved, if the thing produced is external
to the nature of the Maker.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[CLXIV:651](2050089.htm#fr_649) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6"></span> This phrase seems to be quoted from
Eunomius. The reference to the “prophet” may possibly be suggested by
<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.1"></span>[Is. vi.
9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.2"></span>: but it is more probably only concerned
with the words <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.3"></span>ὠ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.4"></span>τία</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.6"></span>κοὴν</span>, as applied to convey the idea
of mental alertness.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[CLXIV:652](2050089.htm#fr_650) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p6.7"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p7"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[CLXIV:653](2050089.htm#fr_651) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p9"></span> *E.g.*“A thing made” suggests to us
the thought of a “maker,” “a maker” the thought of the thing made; and
they suggest also a close connection as existing between the two
correlative terms of one of which the name is uttered; but neither
suggests in the same way any term which is not correlative, or with
which it is not, in some manner, *in pari materia.*

<span id="fn_652"></span>[CLXV:654](2050089.htm#fr_652) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p12"></span> Cf. [Ps. liii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006)<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="fn_653"></span>[CLXV:655](2050089.htm#fr_653) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p13"></span> [2 Tim. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[CLXVI:656](2050089.htm#fr_654) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p15"></span> It seems necessary for the sense to
read <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p15.1"></span>οὐ δι᾽
ἑτέρου τινὸς ὀργάνου</span>, since the force of the comparison consists
in the hammer being produced immediately by the smith: otherwise we must
understand <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p15.2"></span>δι᾽
ἑτέρου τινὸς ὀργάνου</span> to refer to the employment of some tool not
properly belonging to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p15.3"></span>τέχνη</span> of the smith: but even so
the parallel would be destroyed.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[CLXVI:657](2050089.htm#fr_655) <span
id="viii.i.vi.vi-p15.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vi.vi-p16"></span> Theognostus, a writer of the third
century, is said to have been the head of the Catechetical School at
Alexandria, and is quoted by S. Athanasius as an authority against the
Arians. An account of his work is to be found in Photius, and this is
extracted and printed with the few remaining fragments of his actual
writings in the 3rd volume of Routh’s *Reliquiæ Sacræ.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then clearly and skilfully criticises the doctrine of the
impossibility of comparison with the things made after the Son, and
exposes the idolatry contrived by Eunomius, and concealed by the
terminology of “Son” and “Only-begotten,” to deceive his
readers.](2050090)
