[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050073)  [Next](2050075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_CXXXI">p. CXXXI</span>
<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-Page_CXXXI"></span>§15. *Lastly he displays at
length the folly of Eunomius, who at times speaks of the Holy Spirit as
created, and as the fairest work of the Son, and at other times
confesses, by the operations attributed to Him, that He is God, and thus
ends the book.*

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p2"></span>He goes on to add, “Neither on the
same level with the Father, nor connumerated with the Father (for God
over all is one and only Father), nor on an equality with the Son, for
the Son is only-begotten, having none begotten with Him.” Well, for my
own part, if he had only added to his previous statement the remark that
the Holy Ghost is not the Father of the Son, I should even then have
thought it idle for him to linger over what no one ever doubted, and
forbid people to form notions of Him which not even the most witless
would entertain. But since he endeavours to establish his impiety by
irrelevant and unconnected statements, imagining that by denying the
Holy Spirit to be the Father of the Only-begotten he makes out that He
is subject and subordinate, I therefore made mention of these words, as
a proof of the folly of the man who imagines that he is demonstrating
the Spirit to be subject to the Father on the ground that the Spirit is
not Father of the Only-begotten. For what compels the conclusion, that
if He be not Father, He must be subject? If it had been demonstrated
that “Father” and “despot” were terms identical in meaning, it would no
doubt have followed that, as absolute sovereignty was part of the
conception of the Father, we should affirm that the Spirit is subject to
Him Who surpassed Him in respect of authority. But if by “Father” is
implied merely His relation to the Son, and no conception of absolute
sovereignty or authority is involved by the use of the word, how does it
follow, from the fact that the Spirit is not the Father of the Son, that
the Spirit is subject to the Father? “Nor on an equality with the Son,”
he says. How comes he to say this? for to be, and to be unchangeable,
and to admit no evil whatsoever, and to remain unalterably in that which
is good, all this shows no variation in the case of the Son and of the
Spirit. For the incorruptible nature of the Spirit is remote from
corruption equally with that of the Son, and in the Spirit, just as in
the Son, His essential goodness is absolutely apart from its contrary,
and in both alike their perfection in every good stands in need of no
addition.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p3"></span>Now the inspired Scripture teaches us
to affirm all these attributes of the Spirit, when it predicates of the
Spirit the terms “good,” and “wise,” and “incorruptible,” and
“immortal,” and all such lofty conceptions and names as are properly
applied to Godhead. If then He is inferior in none of these respects, by
what means does Eunomius determine the inequality of the Son and the
Spirit? “For the Son is,” he tells us, “Only-begotten, having no brother
begotten with Him.” Well, the point, that we are not to understand the
“Only-begotten” to have brethren, we have already discussed in our
comments upon the phrase “first-born of all creation <span
id="fr_482"></span>[484](#fn_482) .” But we ought not to leave
unexamined the sense that Eunomius now unfairly attaches to the term.
For while the doctrine of the Church declares that in the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost there is one power, and goodness, and essence,
and glory, and the like, saving the difference of the Persons, this man,
when he wishes to make the essence of the Only-begotten common to the
creation, calls Him “the first-born of all creation” in respect of His
pre-temporal existence, declaring by this mode of expression that all
conceivable objects in creation are in brotherhood with the Lord; for
assuredly the first-born is not the first-born of those otherwise
begotten, but of those begotten like Himself <span
id="fr_483"></span>[485](#fn_483) . But when he is bent upon severing
the Spirit from union with the Son, he calls Him “Only-begotten, not
having any brother begotten with Him,” not with the object of conceiving
of Him as without brethren, but that by the means of this assertion he
may establish touching the Spirit His essential alienation from the Son.
It is true that we learn from Holy Scripture not to speak of the Holy
Ghost as brother of the Son: but that we are not to say that the Holy
Ghost is homogeneous <span id="fr_484"></span>[486](#fn_484) with the
Son, is nowhere shown in the divine Scriptures. For if there does reside
in the Father and the Son a life-giving power, it is ascribed also to
the Holy Spirit, according to the words of the Gospel. If one may
discern alike in Father, Son, and Holy Spirit the properties of being
incorruptible, immutable, of admitting no evil, of being good, right,
guiding, of working all in all as He wills, and all the like attributes,
how is it possible by identity in these respects to infer difference in
kind? Accordingly the word of godliness agrees in affirming that we
ought not to regard any kind of brotherhood as attaching to the
Only-begotten; but to say that the Spirit is not homogeneous with the
Son, the upright with the upright, the good with the good, the
life-giving with the life-giving, this has been clearly demonstrated by
logical inference to be a piece of heretical knavery.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p7"></span>Why then is the majesty of the Spirit
curtailed by such arguments as these? For there is nothing <span
id="page_CXXXII">p. CXXXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-Page_CXXXII"></span>which can be the cause of producing
in him deviation by excess or defect from conceptions such as befit the
Godhead, nor, since all these are by Holy Scripture predicated equally
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, can he inform us wherein he discerns
inequality to exist. But he launches his blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost in its naked form, ill-prepared and unsupported by any consecutive
argument. “Nor yet ranked,” he says, “with any other: for He has gone
above <span id="fr_485"></span>[487](#fn_485) all the creatures that
came into being by the instrumentality of the Son in mode of being, and
nature, and glory, and knowledge, as the first and noblest work of the
Only-begotten, the greatest and most glorious.” I will leave, however,
to others the task of ridiculing the bad taste and surplusage of his
style, thinking as I do that it is unseemly for the gray hairs of age,
when dealing with the argument before us, to make vulgarity of
expression an objection against one who is guilty of impiety. I will
just add to my investigation this remark. If the Spirit has “gone above”
all the creations of the Son, (for I will use his own ungrammatical and
senseless phrase, or rather, to make things clearer, I will present his
idea in my own language) if he transcends all things wrought by the Son,
the Holy Spirit cannot be ranked with the rest of the creation; and if,
as Eunomius says, he surpasses them by virtue of priority of birth, he
must needs confess, in the case of the rest of creation, that the
objects which are first in order of production are more to be esteemed
than those which come after them. Now the creation of the irrational
animals was prior to that of man. Accordingly he will of course declare
that the irrational nature is more honourable than rational existence.
So too, according to the argument of Eunomius, Cain will be proved
superior to Abel, in that he was before him in time of birth, and so the
stars will be shown to be lower and of less excellence than all the
things that grow out of the earth; for these last sprang from the earth
on the third day, and all the stars are recorded by Moses to have been
created on the fourth. Well, surely no one is such a simpleton as to
infer that the grass of the earth is more to be esteemed than the
marvels of the sky, on the ground of its precedence in time, or to award
the meed to Cain over Abel, or to place below the irrational animals man
who came into being later than they. So there is no sense in our
author’s contention that the nature of the Holy Spirit is superior to
that of the creatures that came into being subsequently, on the ground
that He came into being before they did. And now let us see what he who
separates Him from fellowship with the Son is prepared to concede to the
glory of the Spirit: “For he too,” he says, “being one, and first and
alone, and surpassing all the creations of the Son in essence and
dignity of nature, accomplishing every operation and all teaching
according to the good pleasure of the Son, being sent by Him, and
receiving from Him, and declaring to those who are instructed, and
guiding into truth.” He speaks of the Holy Ghost as “accomplishing every
operation and all teaching.” What operation? Does he mean that which the
Father and the Son execute, according to the word of the Lord Himself
Who “hitherto worketh <span id="fr_486"></span>[488](#fn_486) ” man’s
salvation, or does he mean some other? For if His work is that named, He
has assuredly the same power and nature as Him Who works it, and in such
an one difference of kind from Deity can have no place. For just as, if
anything should perform the functions of fire, shining and warming in
precisely the same way, it is itself certainly fire, so if the Spirit
does the works of the Father, He must assuredly be acknowledged to be of
the same nature with Him. If on the other hand He operates something
else than our salvation, and displays His operation in a contrary
direction, He will thereby be proved to be of a different nature and
essence. But Eunomius’ statement itself bears witness that the Spirit
quickeneth in like manner with the Father and the Son. Accordingly, from
the identity of operations it results assuredly that the Spirit is not
alien from the nature of the Father and the Son. And to the statement
that the Spirit accomplishes the operation and teaching of the Father
according to the good pleasure of the Son we assent. For the community
of nature gives us warrant that the will of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost is one, and thus, if the Holy Spirit wills that which
seems good to the Son, the community of will clearly points to unity of
essence. But he goes on, “being sent by Him, and receiving from Him, and
declaring to those who are instructed, and guiding into truth.” If he
had not previously said what he has concerning the Spirit, the reader
would surely have supposed that these words applied to some human
teacher. For to receive a mission is the same thing as to be sent, and
to have nothing of one’s own, but to receive of the free favour of him
who gives the mission, and to minister his words to those who are under
instruction, and to be a guide into truth for those that are astray. All
these things, which Eunomius is good enough to allow to the Holy Spirit,
belong to the present pastors and teachers of the Church,—to be sent, to
receive, <span id="page_CXXXIII">p. CXXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-Page_CXXXIII"></span>to announce, to teach, to suggest
the truth. Now, as he had said above “He is one, and first, and alone,
and surpassing all,” had he but stopped there, he would have appeared as
a defender of the doctrines of truth. For He Who is indivisibly
contemplated in the One is most truly One, and first Who is in the
First, and alone Who is in the Only One. For as the spirit of man that
is in him, and the man himself, are but one man, so also the Spirit of
God which is in Him, and God Himself, would properly be termed One God,
and First and Only, being incapable of separation from Him in Whom He
is. But as things are, with his addition of his profane phrase,
“surpassing all the creatures of the Son,” he produces turbid confusion
by assigning to Him Who “breatheth where He willeth <span
id="fr_487"></span>[489](#fn_487) ,” and “worketh all in all <span
id="fr_488"></span>[490](#fn_488) ,” a mere superiority in comparison
with the rest of created things.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p12"></span>Let us now see further what he adds
to this “sanctifying the saints.” If any one says this also of the
Father and of the Son, he will speak truly. For those in whom the Holy
One dwells, He makes holy, even as the Good One makes men good. And the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are holy and good, as has been
shown. “Acting as a guide to those who approach the mystery.” This may
well be said of Apollos who watered what Paul planted. For the Apostle
plants by his guidance <span id="fr_489"></span>[491](#fn_489) , and
Apollos, when he baptizes, waters by Sacramental regeneration, bringing
to the mystery those who were instructed by Paul. Thus he places on a
level with Apollos that Spirit Who perfects men through baptism.
“Distributing every gift.” With this we too agree; for everything that
is good is a portion of the gifts of the Holy Spirit. “Co-operating with
the faithful for the understanding and contemplation of things
appointed.” As he does not add by whom they are appointed, he leaves his
meaning doubtful, whether it is correct or the reverse. But we will by a
slight addition advance his statement so as to make it consistent with
godliness. For since, whether it be the word of wisdom, or the word of
knowledge, or faith, or help, or government, or aught else that is
enumerated in the lists of saving gifts, “all these worketh that one and
the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as He will <span
id="fr_490"></span>[492](#fn_490) ,” we therefore do not reject the
statement of Eunomius when he says that the Spirit “co-operates with the
faithful for understanding and contemplation of things appointed” by
Him, because by Him all good teachings are appointed for us. “Sounding
an accompaniment to those who pray.” It would be foolish seriously to
examine the meaning of this expression, of which the ludicrous and
meaningless character is at once manifest to all. For who is so demented
and beside himself as to wait for us to tell him that the Holy Spirit is
not a bell nor an empty cask sounding an accompaniment and made to ring
by the voice of him who prays as it were by a blow? “Leading us to that
which is expedient for us.” This the Father and the Son likewise do: for
“He leadeth Joseph like a sheep <span id="fr_491"></span>[493](#fn_491)
,” and, “led His people like sheep <span
id="fr_492"></span>[494](#fn_492) ,” and, “the good Spirit leadeth us in
a land of righteousness <span id="fr_493"></span>[495](#fn_493) .”
“Strengthening us to godliness.” To strengthen man to godliness David
says is the work of God; “For Thou art my strength and my refuge <span
id="fr_494"></span>[496](#fn_494) ,” says the Psalmist, and “the Lord is
the strength of His people <span id="fr_495"></span>[497](#fn_495) ,”
and, “He shall give strength and power unto His people <span
id="fr_496"></span>[498](#fn_496) .” If then the expressions of Eunomius
are meant in accordance with the mind of the Psalmist, they are a
testimony to the Divinity of the Holy Ghost: but if they are opposed to
the word of prophecy, then by this very fact a charge of blasphemy lies
against Eunomius, because he sets up his own opinions in opposition to
the holy prophets. Next he says, “Lightening souls with the light of
knowledge.” This grace also the doctrine of godliness ascribes alike to
the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost. For He is called a light
by David <span id="fr_497"></span>[499](#fn_497) , and from thence the
light of knowledge shines in them who are enlightened. In like manner
also the cleansing of our thoughts of which the statement speaks is
proper to the power of the Lord. For it was “the brightness of the
Father’s glory, and the express image of His person,” Who “purged our
sins <span id="fr_498"></span>[500](#fn_498) .” Again, to banish devils,
which Eunomius says is a property of the Spirit, this also the
only-begotten God, Who said to the devil, “I charge thee <span
id="fr_499"></span>[501](#fn_499) ,” ascribes to the power of the
Spirit, when He says, “If I by the Spirit of God cast out devils <span
id="fr_500"></span>[502](#fn_500) ,” so that the expulsion of devils is
not destructive of the glory of the Spirit, but rather a demonstration
of His divine and transcendent power. “Healing the sick,” he says,
“curing the infirm, comforting the afflicted, raising up those who
stumble, recovering the distressed.” These are the words of those who
think reverently of the Holy Ghost, for no one would ascribe the
operation of any one of these effects to any one except to God. If then
heresy affirms that those things which it belongs to none save God alone
to effect, are wrought by the power of the Spirit, we have in support of
the truths for which we are contending the witness even of our
adversaries. How does the Psalmist seek his healing <span
id="page_CXXXIV">p. CXXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-Page_CXXXIV"></span>from God, saying, “Have mercy upon
me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my bones are vexed <span
id="fr_501"></span>[503](#fn_501) !” It is to God that Isaiah says, “The
dew that is from Thee is healing unto them <span
id="fr_502"></span>[504](#fn_502) .” Again, prophetic language attests
that the conversion of those in error is the work of God. For “they went
astray in the wilderness in a thirsty land,” says the Psalmist, and he
adds, “So He led them forth by the right way, that they might go to the
city where they dwelt <span id="fr_503"></span>[505](#fn_503) :” and,
“when the Lord turned again the captivity of Sion <span
id="fr_504"></span>[506](#fn_504) .” In like manner also the comfort of
the afflicted is ascribed to God, Paul thus speaking, “Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who comforteth us in all our
tribulation <span id="fr_505"></span>[507](#fn_505) .” Again, the
Psalmist says, speaking in the person of God, “Thou calledst upon Me in
trouble and I delivered thee <span id="fr_506"></span>[508](#fn_506) .”
And the setting upright of those who stumble is innumerable times
ascribed by Scripture to the power of the Lord: “Thou hast thrust sore
at me that I might fall, but the Lord was my help <span
id="fr_507"></span>[509](#fn_507) ,” and “Though he fall, he shall not
be cast away, for the Lord upholdeth him with His hand <span
id="fr_508"></span>[510](#fn_508) ,” and “The Lord helpeth them that are
fallen <span id="fr_509"></span>[511](#fn_509) .” And to the
loving-kindness of God confessedly belongs the recovery of the
distressed, if Eunomius means the same thing of which we learn in
prophecy, as the Scripture says, “Thou laidest trouble upon our loins;
Thou sufferedst men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and
water, and Thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place <span
id="fr_510"></span>[512](#fn_510) .”

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p35"></span>Thus far then the majesty of the
Spirit is demonstrated by the evidence of our opponents, but in what
follows the limpid waters of devotion are once more defiled by the mud
of heresy. For he says of the Spirit that He “cheers on those who are
contending”: and this phrase involves him in the charge of extreme folly
and impiety. For in the stadium some have the task of arranging the
competitions between those who intend to show their athletic vigour;
others, who surpass the rest in strength and skill, strive for the
victory and strip to contend with one another, while the rest, taking
sides in their good wishes with one or other of the competitors,
according as they are severally disposed towards or interested in one
athlete or another, cheer him on at the time of the engagement, and bid
him guard against some hurt, or remember some trick of wrestling, or
keep himself unthrown by the help of his art. Take note from what has
been said to how low a rank Eunomius degrades the Holy Spirit. For while
on the course there are some who arrange the contests, and others who
settle whether the contest is conducted according to rule, others who
are actually engaged, and yet others who cheer on the competitors, who
are acknowledged to be far inferior to the athletes themselves, Eunomius
considers the Holy Spirit as one of the mob who look on, or as one of
those who attend upon the athletes, seeing that He neither determines
the contest nor awards the victory, nor contends with the adversary, but
merely cheers without contributing at all to the victory. For He neither
joins in the fray, nor does He implant the power to contend, but merely
wishes that the athlete in whom He is interested may not come off second
in the strife. And so Paul wrestles “against principalities, against
powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this world, against
spiritual wickedness in high places <span
id="fr_511"></span>[513](#fn_511) ,” while the Spirit of power does not
strengthen the combatants nor distribute to them His gifts, “dividing to
every man severally as He will <span id="fr_512"></span>[514](#fn_512)
,” but His influence is limited to cheering on those who are engaged.

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p38"></span>Again he says, “Emboldening the
faint-hearted.” And here, while in accordance with his own method he
follows his previous blasphemy against the Spirit, the truth for all
that manifests itself, even through unfriendly lips. For to none other
than to God does it belong to implant courage in the fearful, saying to
the faint-hearted, “Fear not, for I am with thee, be not dismayed <span
id="fr_513"></span>[515](#fn_513) ,” as says the Psalmist, “Yea though I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death I will fear no evil, for
Thou art with me <span id="fr_514"></span>[516](#fn_514) .” Nay, the
Lord Himself says to the fearful,—“Let not your heart be troubled,
neither let it be afraid <span id="fr_515"></span>[517](#fn_515) ,” and,
“Why are ye fearful, O ye of little faith <span
id="fr_516"></span>[518](#fn_516) ?” and, “Be of good cheer, it is I, be
not afraid <span id="fr_517"></span>[519](#fn_517) ,” and again, “Be of
good cheer: I have overcome the world <span
id="fr_518"></span>[520](#fn_518) .” Accordingly, even though this may
not have been the intention of Eunomius, orthodoxy asserts itself by
means even of the voice of an enemy. And the next sentence agrees with
that which went before:—“Caring for all, and showing all concern and
forethought.” For in fact it belongs to God alone to care and to take
thought for all, as the mighty David has expressed it, “I am poor and
needy, but the Lord careth for me <span
id="fr_519"></span>[521](#fn_519) .” And if what remains seems to be
resolved into empty words, with sound and without sense, let no one find
fault, seeing that in most of what he says, so far as any sane meaning
is concerned, he is feeble and untutored. For what on earth he means
when he says, “for the onward leading of the better disposed and the
guardianship of the more faithful,” neither he himself, nor they who
senselessly admire his follies, could possibly tell us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_482"></span>[CXXXI:484](2050074.htm#fr_482) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p4"></span> See above, §8 of this book.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[CXXXI:485](2050074.htm#fr_483) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p5"></span> Or, “not the first-born of beings of
a different race, but of those of his own stock.”

<span id="fn_484"></span>[CXXXI:486](2050074.htm#fr_484) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p6.1"></span>ὁ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p6.2"></span>μογενῆ</span>, “of the same stock”: the
word being the same which (when coupled with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p6.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p6.4"></span>δελφὸν</span>) has been translated, in the
passages preceding, by “begotten with.”

<span id="fn_485"></span>[CXXXII:487](2050074.htm#fr_485) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p8.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p8.2"></span>ναβέβηκε</span>: the word apparently is
intended by Eunomius to have the force of “transcended”; Gregory, later
on, criticizes its employment in this sense.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[CXXXII:488](2050074.htm#fr_486) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p9"></span> S. [John v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017)<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_487"></span>[CXXXIII:489](2050074.htm#fr_487) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p10"></span> S. [John iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_488"></span>[CXXXIII:490](2050074.htm#fr_488) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p11"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[CXXXIII:491](2050074.htm#fr_489) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p13"></span> If we read <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p13.1"></span>κατηχσέως</span> for the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p13.2"></span>καθηγησέως</span> of
Oehler’s text we have a clearer sense, “the Apostle plants by his
instruction.”

<span id="fn_490"></span>[CXXXIII:492](2050074.htm#fr_490) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p13.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p14"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p14.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p14.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[CXXXIII:493](2050074.htm#fr_491) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p14.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p15"></span> [Ps. lxxx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[CXXXIII:494](2050074.htm#fr_492) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p16"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p16.1"></span>[Ps. lxxvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p16.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[CXXXIII:495](2050074.htm#fr_493) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p16.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p17"></span> Cf. [Ps. cxliii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[CXXXIII:496](2050074.htm#fr_494) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p18"></span> Cf. [Ps. xxxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="fn_495"></span>[CXXXIII:497](2050074.htm#fr_495) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p19"></span> [Ps. xxviii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[CXXXIII:498](2050074.htm#fr_496) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p20"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p20.1"></span>[Ps. lxviii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[CXXXIII:499](2050074.htm#fr_497) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p20.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p21"></span> [Ps. xxvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[CXXXIII:500](2050074.htm#fr_498) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p22"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[CXXXIII:501](2050074.htm#fr_499) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p23"></span> Cf. S. [Mark ix.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="fn_500"></span>[CXXXIII:502](2050074.htm#fr_500) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p24"></span> S. [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[CXXXIV:503](2050074.htm#fr_501) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p25"></span> [Ps. vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[CXXXIV:504](2050074.htm#fr_502) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p26"></span> [Is. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p26.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_503"></span>[CXXXIV:505](2050074.htm#fr_503) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p26.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p27"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p27.1"></span>[Ps. cviii.
4-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p27.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[CXXXIV:506](2050074.htm#fr_504) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p27.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p28"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[CXXXIV:507](2050074.htm#fr_505) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p29"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p29.1"></span>[2 Cor.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p29.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[CXXXIV:508](2050074.htm#fr_506) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p29.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p30"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[CXXXIV:509](2050074.htm#fr_507) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p31"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p31.1"></span>[Ps. cxviii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p31.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[CXXXIV:510](2050074.htm#fr_508) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p31.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p32"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p32.1"></span>[Ps. xxxvii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p32.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[CXXXIV:511](2050074.htm#fr_509) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p33"></span> [Ps. cxlvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_510"></span>[CXXXIV:512](2050074.htm#fr_510) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p34"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p34.1"></span>[Ps.
66:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p34.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_511"></span>[CXXXIV:513](2050074.htm#fr_511) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p36"></span> [Eph. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#012)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[CXXXIV:514](2050074.htm#fr_512) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p37"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p37.1"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p37.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_513"></span>[CXXXIV:515](2050074.htm#fr_513) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p39"></span> [Is. xli.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[CXXXIV:516](2050074.htm#fr_514) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p40"></span> [Ps. xxiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[CXXXIV:517](2050074.htm#fr_515) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p41"></span> S. [John xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="fn_516"></span>[CXXXIV:518](2050074.htm#fr_516) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p41.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p42"></span> S. [Matt. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_517"></span>[CXXXIV:519](2050074.htm#fr_517) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p43"></span> S. [Mark vi.
50](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#050)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p43.1"></span>

<span id="fn_518"></span>[CXXXIV:520](2050074.htm#fr_518) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p44"></span> S. [John xvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p44.1"></span>

<span id="fn_519"></span>[CXXXIV:521](2050074.htm#fr_519) <span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iv.xv-p45"></span> [Ps. xl.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i.iv.xv-p45.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](2050075)
