[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050134)  [Next](2050136) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He further proceeds notably to
interpret the language of the Gospel, “In the beginning was the Word,”
and “Life” and “Light,” and “The Word was made flesh,” which had been
misinterpreted by Eunomius; and overthrows his blasphemy, and shows that
the dispensation of the Lord took place by loving-kindness, not by lack
of power, and with the co-operation of the Father.*

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p2"></span><span id="page_CCXLIV">p.
CCXLIV</span> <span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-Page_CCXLIV"></span>But he puts
his strength into his idle contention and says, “From the facts
themselves, and from the oracles that are believed, I present the proof
of my statement.” Such is his promise, but whether the arguments he
advances bear out his professions, the discerning reader will of course
consider. “The blessed John,” he says, “after saying that the Word was
in the beginning, and after calling Him Life, and subsequently giving
the Life the further title of ‘Light,’ says, a little later, ‘And the
Word was made flesh <span id="fr_1045"></span>[1047](#fn_1045) .’ If
then the Light is Life, and the Word is Life, and the Word was made
flesh, it thence becomes plain that the Light was incarnate.” What then?
because the Light and the Life, and God and the Word, was manifested in
flesh, does it follow that the true Light is divergent in any degree
from the Light which is in the Father? Nay, it is attested by the Gospel
that, even when it had place in darkness, the light remained
unapproachable by the contrary element: for “the Light,” he says,
“shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1048](#fn_1046) .” If then the light when it found
place in darkness had been changed to its contrary, and overpowered by
gloom, this would have been a strong argument in support of the view of
those who wish to show how far inferior is this Light in comparison with
that contemplated in the Father. But if the Word, even though it be in
the flesh, remains the Word, and if the Light, even though it shines in
darkness, is no less Light, without admitting the fellowship of its
contrary, and if the Life, even though it be in death, remains secure in
Itself, and if God, even though He submit to take upon Him the form of a
servant, does not Himself become a servant, but takes away the slavish
subordination and absorbs it into lordship and royalty, making that
which was human and lowly to become both Lord and Christ,—if all this be
so, how does he show by this argument variation of the Light to
inferiority, when each Light has in equal measure the property of being
inconvertible to evil, and unalterable? And how is it that he also fails
to observe this, that he who looked on the incarnate Word, Who was both
Light and Life and God, recognized, through the glory which he saw, the
Father of glory, and says, “We beheld His glory, the glory as of the
Only-begotten of the Father <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1049](#fn_1047)
”?

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p6"></span>But he has reached the irrefutable
argument which we long ago detected lurking in the sequel of his
statements <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1050](#fn_1048) , but which is
here proclaimed aloud without disguise. For he wishes to show that the
essence of the Son is subject to passion, and to decay, and in no wise
differs from material nature, which is in a state of flux, that by this
means he may demonstrate His difference from the Father. For he says,
“If he can show that the God Who is over all, Who is the Light
unapproachable, was incarnate or could be incarnate, came under
authority, obeyed commands, came under the laws of men, bore the Cross,
let him say that the Light is equal to the Light.” If these words had
been brought forward by us as following by necessary consequence from
premises laid down by Eunomius, who would not have charged us with
unfairness, in employing an over-subtle dialectic to reduce our
adversaries’ statement to such an absurdity? But as things stand, the
fact that they themselves make no attempt to suppress the absurdity that
naturally follows from their assumption, helps to support our contention
that it was not without due reflection that, with the help of truth, we
censured the argument of heresy. For behold, how undisguised and
outspoken is their striving against the Only-begotten God! Nay, by His
enemies His work of mercy is reckoned a means of disparaging and
maligning the Nature of the Son of God, as though not of deliberate
purpose, but by a compulsion of His Nature he had slipped down to life
in the flesh, and to the suffering of the Cross! And as it is the nature
of a stone to fall downward, and of fire to rise upward, and as these
material objects do not exchange their natures one with another, so that
the stone should have an upward tendency, and fire be depressed by its
weight and sink downwards, even so they make out that passion was part
of the very Nature of the Son, and that for this cause He came to that
which was akin and familiar to Him, but that the Nature of the Father,
being free from such passions, remained unapproachable by the contact of
evil. For he says, that the God Who is over all, Who is Light
unapproachable, neither was incarnate nor could be incarnate. The first
of the two statements was quite enough, that the Father did not become
incarnate. But now by his addition a double absurdity arises; for he
either charges the Son with evil, or the Father with powerlessness. For
if to partake of our flesh is evil, then he predicates evil of the
Only-begotten God; but if the lovingkindness to man was good, then he
makes out the Father to be powerless for good, by saying that it would
not have been in His power to have effectually bestowed <span
id="page_CCXLV">p. CCXLV</span> <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-Page_CCXLV"></span>such grace by taking flesh. And
yet who in the world does not know that life-giving power proceeds to
actual operation both in the Father and in the Son? “For as the Father
raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them,” He says, “even so the Son
quickeneth whom He will <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1051](#fn_1049)
,”—meaning obviously by “dead” us who had fallen from the true life. If
then it is even so as the Father quickeneth, and not otherwise, that the
Son brings to operation the same grace, how comes it that the adversary
of God moves his profane tongue against both, insulting the Father by
attributing to Him powerlessness for good, and the Son by attributing to
Him association with evil. But “Light,” he says, “is not equal to
Light,” because the one he calls “true,” and the other “unapproachable.”
Is then the true considered to be a diminution of the unapproachable?
Why so? and yet their argument is that the Godhead of the Father must be
conceived to be greater and more exalted than that of the Son, because
the one is called in the Gospel “true God <span
id="fr_1050"></span>[1052](#fn_1050) ,” the other “God <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1053](#fn_1051) ” without the addition of “true.”
How then does the same term, as applied to the Godhead, indicate an
enhancement of the conception, and, as applied to Light, a diminution?
For if they say that the Father is greater than the Son because He is
true God, by the same showing the Son would be acknowledged to be
greater than the Father, because the former is called “true Light <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1054](#fn_1052) ,” and the latter not so. “But this
Light,” says Eunomius, “carried into effect the plan of mercy, while the
other remained inoperative with respect to that gracious action.” A new
and strange mode of determining priority in dignity! They judge that
which is ineffective for a benevolent purpose to be superior to that
which is operative. But such a notion as this neither exists nor ever
will be found amongst Christians,—a notion by which it is made out that
every good that is in existent things has not its origin from the
Father. But of goods that pertain to us men, the crowning blessing is
held by all right-minded men to be the return to life; and it is secured
by the dispensation carried out by the Lord in His human nature; not
that the Father remained aloof, as heresy will have it, ineffective and
inoperative during the time of this dispensation. For it is not this
that He indicates Who said, “He that sent Me is with Me <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1055](#fn_1053) ,” and “The Father that dwelleth in
Me, He doeth the works <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1056](#fn_1054) .”
With what right then does heresy attribute to the Son alone the gracious
intervention on our behalf, and thereby exclude the Father from having
any part or lot in our gratitude for its successful issue? For naturally
the requital of thanks is due to our benefactors alone, and He Who is
incapable of benefiting us is outside the pale of our gratitude. See you
how the course of their profane attack upon the Only-begotten Son has
missed its mark, and is working round in natural consequence so as to be
directed against the majesty of the Father? And this seems to me to be a
necessary result of their method of proceeding. For if he that honoureth
the Son honoureth the Father <span id="fr_1055"></span>[1057](#fn_1055)
, according to the Divine declaration, it is plain on the other side
that an assault upon the Son strikes at the Father. But I say that to
those who with simplicity of heart receive the preaching of the Cross
and the resurrection, the same grace should be a cause of equal
thankfulness to the Son and to the Father, and now that the Son has
accomplished the Father’s will (and this, in the language of the
Apostle, is “that all men should be saved <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1058](#fn_1056) ”), they ought for this boon to
honour the Father and the Son alike, inasmuch as our salvation would not
have been wrought, had not the good will of the Father proceeded to
actual operation for us through His own power. And we have learnt from
the Scripture that the Son is the power of the Father <span
id="fr_1057"></span>[1059](#fn_1057) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[CCXLIV:1047](2050135.htm#fr_1045) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p3"></span> Cf. S. [John
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[CCXLIV:1048](2050135.htm#fr_1046) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p4"></span> S. [John i.
5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p4.1"></span> (A.V., following the Vulgate). The word
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p4.2"></span>κατέλαβε</span> is perhaps better
rendered by “overtook.” “As applied to light this sense includes the
further notion of overwhelming, eclipsing. The relation of darkness to
light is one of essential antagonism. If the darkness is represented as
pursuing the light, it can only be to overshadow and not to appropriate
it.” (Westcott on S. John *ad loc.*)

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[CCXLIV:1049](2050135.htm#fr_1047) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p5"></span> S. [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[CCXLIV:1050](2050135.htm#fr_1048) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p7"></span> The passage has already been cited
by S. Gregory, Book V §3 (p. 176 *sup.*).

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[CCXLV:1051](2050135.htm#fr_1049) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p8"></span> S. [John v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[CCXLV:1052](2050135.htm#fr_1050) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p9"></span> S. [John xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[CCXLV:1053](2050135.htm#fr_1051) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p10"></span> S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[CCXLV:1054](2050135.htm#fr_1052) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p11"></span> S. [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[CCXLV:1055](2050135.htm#fr_1053) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p12"></span> Cf. S. [John
5:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037), [John
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#032)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p12.1"></span>[John v.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#037)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p12.2"></span>, and xvi. 32.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[CCXLV:1056](2050135.htm#fr_1054) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p13"></span> S. [John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[CCXLV:1057](2050135.htm#fr_1055) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p14"></span> Cf. S. [John v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#023)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[CCXLV:1058](2050135.htm#fr_1056) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p15"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1057"></span>[CCXLV:1059](2050135.htm#fr_1057) <span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p16"></span> [1 Cor. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)<span
id="viii.i.xiv.iii-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then again charges Eunomius with having learnt his term
ἀγεννησία from the hieroglyphic writings, and from the Egyptian
mythology and idolatry, and with bringing in Anubis, Osiris, and Isis to
the creed of Christians, and shows that, considered as admitting His
sufferings of necessity and not voluntarily, the Only-begotten is
entitled to no gratitude from men: and that fire has none for its
warmth, nor water for its fluidity, as they do not refer their results
to self-determining power, but to necessity of nature.](2050136)
