[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050127)  [Next](2050129) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p1"></span> §2. *He also ingeniously shows from
the passage of the Gospel which speaks of “Good Master,” from the
parable of the Vineyard, from Isaiah and from Paul, that there is not a
dualism in the Godhead of good and evil, as Eunomius’ ally Marcion
supposes, and declares that the Son does not refuse the title of “good”
or “Existent,” or acknowledge His alienation from the Father, but that
to Him also belongs authority over all things that come into being.*

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p2"></span>Not even Marcion himself, the patron
of your opinions, supports you in this. It is true that in common with
you he holds a dualism of gods, and thinks that one is different in
nature from the other, but it is the more courteous view to attribute
goodness to the God of the Gospel. You however actually separate the
Only-begotten God from the nature of good, that you may surpass even
Marcion in the depravity of your doctrines. However, they claim the
Scripture on their side, and say that they are hardly treated when they
are accused for using the very words of Scripture. For they say that the
Lord Himself has said, “There is none good but one, that is, God <span
id="fr_974"></span>[976](#fn_974) .” Accordingly, that misrepresentation
may not prevail against the Divine words, we will briefly examine the
actual passage in the Gospel. The history regards the rich man to whom
the Lord spoke this word as young—the kind of person, I suppose,
inclined to enjoy the pleasures of this life—and attached to his
possessions; for it says that he was grieved at the advice to part with
what he had, and that he did not choose to exchange his property for
life eternal. This man, when he heard that a teacher of eternal life was
in the neighbourhood, came to him in the expectation of living in
perpetual luxury, with life indefinitely extended, flattering the Lord
with the title of “good,”—flattering, I should rather say, not the Lord
as we conceive Him, but as He then appeared in the form of a servant.
For his character was not such as to enable him to penetrate the outward
veil of flesh, and see through it into the inner shrine of Deity. The
Lord, then, Who seeth the hearts, discerned the motive with which the
young man approached Him as a suppliant,—that he did so, not with a soul
intently fixed upon the Divine, but that it was the *man* whom he
besought, calling Him “Good Master,” because he hoped to learn from Him
some lore by which the approach of death might be hindered. Accordingly,
with good reason did He Who was thus besought by him answer even as He
was addressed <span id="fr_975"></span>[977](#fn_975) . For as the
entreaty was not addressed to God the Word, so correspondingly the
answer was delivered to the applicant by the Humanity of Christ, thereby
impressing on the youth a double lesson. For He teaches him, by one and
the same answer, both the duty of reverencing and paying homage to the
Divinity, not by flattering speeches but by his life, by keeping the
commandments and buying life eternal at the cost of all possessions, and
also the truth that humanity, having been sunk in depravity by reason of
sin, is debarred from the title of “Good”: and for this reason He says,
“Why callest Thou Me good?” suggesting in His answer by the word “Me”
that human nature which encompassed Him, while by attributing goodness
to the Godhead He expressly declared Himself to be good, seeing that
<span id="page_CCXXXII">p. CCXXXII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-Page_CCXXXII"></span>He is proclaimed to be God by
the Gospel. For had the Only-begotten Son been excluded from the title
of God, it would perhaps not have been absurd to think Him alien also
from the appellation of “good.” But if, as is the case, prophets,
evangelists, and Apostles proclaim aloud the Godhead of the
Only-begotten, and if the name of goodness is attested by the Lord
Himself to belong to God, how is it possible that He Who is partaker of
the Godhead should not be partaker of the goodness too? For that both
prophets, evangelists, disciples and apostles acknowledge the Lord as
God, there is none so uninitiated in Divine mysteries as to need to be
expressly told. For who knows not that in the forty-fourth <span
id="fr_976"></span>[978](#fn_976) Psalm the prophet in his word affirms
the Christ to be God, anointed by God? And again, who of all that are
conversant with prophecy is unaware that Isaiah, among other passages,
thus openly proclaims the Godhead of the Son, where he says: “The
Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over unto thee, and shall be
servants unto thee: they shall come after thee bound in fetters, and in
thee shall they make supplication, because God is in thee, and there is
no God beside thee; for thou art God <span
id="fr_977"></span>[979](#fn_977) .” For what other God there is Who has
God in Himself, and is Himself God, except the Only-begotten, let them
say who hearken not to the prophecy; but of the interpretation of
Emmanuel, and the confession of Thomas after his recognition of the
Lord, and the sublime diction of John, as being manifest even to those
who are outside the faith, I will say nothing. Nay, I do not even think
it necessary to bring forward in detail the utterances of Paul, since
they are, as one may say, in all men’s mouths, who gives the Lord the
appellation not only of “God,” but of “great God” and “God over all,”
saying to the Romans, “Whose are the fathers, and of whom, as concerning
the flesh, Christ came, Who is over all, God blessed for ever <span
id="fr_978"></span>[980](#fn_978) ,” and writing to his disciple Titus,
“According to the appearing of Jesus Christ the great God and our
Saviour <span id="fr_979"></span>[981](#fn_979) ,” and to Timothy,
proclaims in plain terms, “God was manifest in the flesh, justified in
the spirit <span id="fr_980"></span>[982](#fn_980) .” Since then the
fact has been demonstrated on every side that the Only-begotten God is
God <span id="fr_981"></span>[983](#fn_981) , how is it that he who says
that goodness belongs to God, strives to show that the Godhead of the
Son is alien from this ascription, and this though the Lord has actually
claimed for Himself the epithet “good” in the parable of those who were
hired into the vineyard? For there, when those who had laboured before
the others were dissatisfied at all receiving the same pay, and deemed
the good fortune of the last to be their own loss, the just judge says
to one of the murmurers <span id="fr_982"></span>[984](#fn_982) ,
“Friend, I do thee no wrong: did I not agree with thee for a penny a
day? Lo, there thou hast that is thine <span
id="fr_983"></span>[985](#fn_983) : I will bestow upon this last even as
upon thee. Have I not power to do what I will with mine own? Is thine
eye evil because I am good?” Of course no one will contest the point
that to distribute recompense according to desert is the special
function of the judge; and all the disciples of the Gospel agree that
the Only-begotten God is Judge; “for the Father,” He saith, “judgeth no
man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son <span
id="fr_984"></span>[986](#fn_984) .” But they do not set themselves in
opposition <span id="fr_985"></span>[987](#fn_985) to the Scriptures.
For they say that the word “one” absolutely points to the Father. For He
saith, “There is none good but one, that is God.” Will truth then lack
vigour to plead her own cause? Surely there are many means easily to
convict of deception this quibble also. For He Who said this concerning
the Father spake also to the Father that other word, “All Mine are
Thine, and Thine are Mine, and I am glorified in them <span
id="fr_986"></span>[988](#fn_986) .” Now if He says that all that is the
Father’s is also the Son’s, and goodness is one of the attributes
pertaining to the Father, either the Son has not all things if He has
not this, and they will be saying that the Truth lies, or if it is
impious to suspect the very Truth of being carried away into falsehood,
then He Who claimed all that is the Father’s as His own, thereby
asserted that He was not outside of goodness. For He Who has the Father
in Himself, and contains all things that belong to the Father,
manifestly has His goodness with “all things.” Therefore the Son is
Good. But “there is none good,” he says, “but one, that is God.” This is
what is alleged by our adversaries: nor do I myself reject the
statement. I do not, however, for this cause deny the Godhead of the
Son. But he who confesses that the Lord is God, by that very confession
assuredly also asserts of Him goodness. For if goodness is a property of
God, and if the Lord is God, then by our premises the Son is shown <span
id="page_CCXXXIII">p. CCXXXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-Page_CCXXXIII"></span>to be God. “But,” says our
opponent, “the word ‘one’ excludes the Son from participation in
goodness.” It is easy, however, to show that not even the word “one”
separates the Father from the Son. For in all other cases, it is true,
the term “one” carries with it the signification of not being coupled
with anything else, but in the case of the Father and the Son “one” does
not imply isolation. For He says, “I and the Father are one <span
id="fr_987"></span>[989](#fn_987) .” If, then, the good is one, and a
particular kind of unity is contemplated in the Father and the Son, it
follows that the Lord, in predicating goodness of “one,” claimed under
the term “one” the title of “good” also for Himself, Who is one with the
Father, and not severed from oneness of nature.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_974"></span>[CCXXXI:976](2050128.htm#fr_974) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p3"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[CCXXXI:977](2050128.htm#fr_975) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p4"></span> *i.e.*as man, and not as God.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[CCXXXII:978](2050128.htm#fr_976) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p5"></span> [Ps.
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>. (The Psalm is the 44th in the LXX.
numeration, and is so styled by S. Gregory.)

<span id="fn_977"></span>[CCXXXII:979](2050128.htm#fr_977) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p6"></span> Cf. [Isa.
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p6.1"></span> (LXX.).

<span id="fn_978"></span>[CCXXXII:980](2050128.htm#fr_978) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p7"></span> [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[CCXXXII:981](2050128.htm#fr_979) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p8"></span> Cf. [Tit. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>. The quotation is not verbal; and here
the rendering of the A.V. rather obscures the sense which it is
necessary for S. Gregory’s argument to bring out.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[CCXXXII:982](2050128.htm#fr_980) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>[1 Tim. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.2"></span> (reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.3"></span>Θεός</span>, or, if the citation is to
be considered as verbal, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.4"></span>ὁ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.5"></span>Θεός</span>).

<span id="fn_981"></span>[CCXXXII:983](2050128.htm#fr_981) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p9.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p10"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>τοῦ Θεὸν εἶναι τὸν μονογενῆ Θεὸν</span>
for <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p10.2"></span>τοῦ Θεοῦ
εἶναι κ.τ.λ</span>. The reading of the texts does not give the sense
required for the argument.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[CCXXXII:984](2050128.htm#fr_982) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p11"></span> Compare with what follows S. <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>[Matt.
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p11.2"></span>. S. Gregory seems to be quoting from
memory; his Greek is not so close to that of S. Matthew as the
translation to the A.V.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[CCXXXII:985](2050128.htm#fr_983) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p12"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xxv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>, from which this phrase is borrowed,
with a slight variation.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[CCXXXII:986](2050128.htm#fr_984) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p13"></span> S. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="fn_985"></span>[CCXXXII:987](2050128.htm#fr_985) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p14"></span> This seems a sense etymologically
possible for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>καθίστανται</span> with a genitive, a
use of which Liddell and Scott give no instances. The statement must of
course be taken as that of the adversaries themselves.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[CCXXXII:988](2050128.htm#fr_986) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p15"></span> S. [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[CCXXXIII:989](2050128.htm#fr_987) <span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p16"></span> Cf. S. [John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span
id="viii.i.xiii.ii-p16.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He then exposes the ignorance of Eunomius, and the incoherence
and absurdity of his arguments, in speaking of the Son as “the Angel of
the Existent,” and as being as much below the Divine Nature as the Son
is superior to the things created by Himself. And in this connection
there is a noble and forcible counter-statement and an indignant
refutation, showing that He Who gave the oracles to Moses is Himself the
Existent, the Only-begotten Son, Who to the petition of Moses, “If Thou
Thyself goest not with us, carry me not up hence,” said, “I will do this
also that thou hast said”; Who is also called “Angel” both by Moses and
Isaiah: wherein is cited the text, “Unto us a Child is born.”](2050129)
