[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050097)  [Next](2050099) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.vii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p1"></span> §5. *Thereafter he shows that there
are not two Christs or two Lords, but one Christ and one Lord, and that
the Divine nature, after mingling with the Human, preserved the
properties of each nature without confusion, and declares that the
operations are, by reason of the union, predicated of the two natures in
common, in the sense that the Lord took upon Himself the sufferings of
the servant, and the humanity is glorified with Him in the honour that
is the Lord’s, and that by the power of the Divine Nature that is made
anew, conformably with that Divine Nature Itself.*

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p2"></span>His next charge too has its own
absurdity of the same sort. For he reproaches us with saying that there
are “two Christs,” and “two Lords,” without being able to make good his
<span id="page_CLXXX">p. CLXXX</span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-Page_CLXXX"></span>charge from our words, but employing
falsehood at discretion to suit his fancy. Since, then, he deems it
within his power to say what he likes, why does he utter his falsehood
with such care about detail, and maintain that we speak but of two
Christs? Let him say, if he likes, that we preach ten Christs, or ten
times ten, or extend the number to a thousand, that he may handle his
calumny more vigorously. For blasphemy is equally involved in the
doctrine of two Christs, and in that of more, and the character of the
two charges is also equally devoid of proof. When he shows, then, that
we do speak of two Christs, let him have a verdict against us, as much
as though he had given proof of ten thousand. But he says that he
convicts us by our own statements. Well, let us look once more at those
words of our master by means of which he thinks to raise his charges
against us. He says “he” (he, that is, who says “Him God made Lord and
Christ, this Jesus Whom ye crucified”) “is not setting forth to us the
mode of the Divine existence, but the terms which belong to the
Incarnation…laying stress by the demonstrative word on that in Him which
was human and was seen by all.” This is what he wrote. But whence has
Eunomius managed by these words to bring on the stage his “two Christs”?
Does saying that the demonstrative word lays stress on that which is
visible, convey the proof of maintaining “two Christs”? Ought we (to
avoid being charged with speaking of “two Highests”) to deny the fact
that by Him the Lord was highly exalted after His Passion? seeing that
God the Word, Who was in the beginning, was Highest, and was also highly
exalted after His Passion when He rose from the dead, as the Apostle
says. We must of necessity choose one of two courses—either say that He
was highly exalted after the Passion (which is just the same as saying
that He was made Lord and Christ), and be impeached by Eunomius, or, if
we avoid the accusation, deny the confession of the high exaltation of
Him Who suffered.

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p3"></span>Now at this point it seems right to
put forward once more our accuser’s statement in support of our own
defence. We shall therefore repeat word for word the statement laid down
by him, which supports our argument as follows:—“The blessed John,” he
says, “teaches us that God the Word, by Whom all things were made, has
become incarnate, saying ‘And the Word was made flesh.’” Does he
understand what he is writing when he adds this to his own argument? I
can hardly myself think that the same man can at once be aware of the
meaning of these words and contend against our statement. For if any one
examines the words carefully, he will find that there is no mutual
conflict between what is said by us and what is said by him. For we both
consider the dispensation in the flesh apart, and regard the Divine
power in itself: and he, in like manner with ourselves, says that the
Word that was in the beginning has been manifested in the flesh: yet no
one ever charged him, nor does he charge himself, with preaching “two
Words”, Him Who was in the beginning, and Him Who was made flesh; for he
knows, surely, that the Word is identical with the Word, He who appeared
in the flesh with Him Who was with God. But the flesh was not identical
with the Godhead, till this too was transformed to the Godhead, so that
of necessity one set of attributes befits God the Word, and a different
set of attributes befits the “form of the servant <span
id="fr_731"></span>[733](#fn_731) .” If, then, in view of such a
confession, he does not reproach himself with the duality of Words, why
are we falsely charged with dividing the object of our faith into “two
Christs”?—we, who say that He Who was highly exalted after His Passion,
was made Lord and Christ by His union <span
id="fr_732"></span>[734](#fn_732) with Him Who is verily Lord and
Christ, knowing by what we have learnt that the Divine Nature is always
one and the same, and with the same mode of existence, while the flesh
in itself is that which reason and sense apprehend concerning it, but
when mixed <span id="fr_733"></span>[735](#fn_733) with the Divine no
longer remains in its own limitations and properties, but is taken up to
that which is overwhelming and transcendent. Our contemplation, however,
of the respective properties of the flesh and of the Godhead remains
free from confusion, so long as each of these is contemplated by
itself <span id="fr_734"></span>[736](#fn_734) , as, for example, “the
Word was before the ages, but the flesh came into being in the last
times”: but one could not reverse this statement, and say that the
latter is pretemporal, or that the Word has come into being in the last
times. The flesh is of a passible, the Word of an operative nature: and
neither is the flesh capable of making the things that are, nor is the
power possessed by the Godhead capable of suffering. The Word was <span
id="page_CLXXXI">p. CLXXXI</span> <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-Page_CLXXXI"></span>in the beginning with God, the man
was subject to the trial of death; and neither was the Human Nature from
everlasting, nor the Divine Nature mortal: and all the rest of the
attributes are contemplated in the same way. It is not the Human Nature
that raises up Lazarus, nor is it the power that cannot suffer that
weeps for him when he lies in the grave: the tear proceeds from the Man,
the life from the true Life. It is not the Human Nature that feeds the
thousands, nor is it omnipotent might that hastens to the fig-tree. Who
is it that is weary with the journey, and Who is it that by His word
made all the world subsist? What is the brightness of the glory, and
what is that that was pierced with the nails? What form is it that is
buffeted in the Passion, and what form is it that is glorified from
everlasting? So much as this is clear, (even if one does not follow the
argument into detail,) that the blows belong to the servant in whom the
Lord was, the honours to the Lord Whom the servant compassed about, so
that by reason of contact and the union of Natures the proper attributes
of each belong to both <span id="fr_735"></span>[737](#fn_735) , as the
Lord receives the stripes of the servant, while the servant is glorified
with the honour of the Lord; for this is why the Cross is said to be the
Cross of the Lord of glory <span id="fr_736"></span>[738](#fn_736) , and
why every tongue confesses that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of
God the Father <span id="fr_737"></span>[739](#fn_737) .

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p11"></span>But if we are to discuss the other
points in the same way, let us consider what it is that dies, and what
it is that destroys death; what it is that is renewed, and what it is
that empties itself. The Godhead “empties” Itself that It may come
within the capacity of the Human Nature, and the Human Nature is renewed
by becoming Divine through its commixture <span
id="fr_738"></span>[740](#fn_738) with the Divine. For as air is not
retained in water when it is dragged down by some weighty body and left
in the depth of the water, but rises quickly to its kindred element,
while the water is often raised up together with the air in its upward
rush, being moulded by the circle of air into a convex shape with a
slight and membrane-like surface, so too, when the true Life that
underlay the flesh sped up, after the Passion, to Itself, the flesh also
was raised up with It, being forced upwards from corruption to
incorruptibility by the Divine immortality. And as fire that lies in
wood hidden below the surface is often unobserved by the senses of those
who see, or even touch it, but is manifest when it blazes up, so too, at
His death (which He brought about at His will, Who separated His soul
from His Body, Who said to His own Father “Into Thy hands I commend My
Spirit <span id="fr_739"></span>[741](#fn_739) ,” Who, as He says, “had
power to lay it down and had power to take it again <span
id="fr_740"></span>[742](#fn_740) ”), He Who, because He is the Lord of
glory, despised that which is shame among men, having concealed, as it
were, the flame of His life in His bodily Nature, by the dispensation of
His death <span id="fr_741"></span>[743](#fn_741) , kindled and inflamed
it once more by the power of His own Godhead, fostering into life that
which had been brought to death, having infused with the infinity of His
Divine power that humble first-fruits of our nature, made it also to be
that which He Himself was—making the servile form to be Lord, and the
Man born of Mary to be Christ, and Him Who was crucified through
weakness to be Life and power, and making all that is piously conceived
to be in God the Word to be also in that which the Word assumed, so that
these attributes no longer seem to be in either Nature by way of
division, but that the perishable Nature being, by its commixture with
the Divine, made anew in conformity with the Nature that overwhelms it,
participates in the power of the Godhead, as if one were to say that
mixture makes a drop of vinegar mingled in the deep to be sea, by reason
that the natural quality of this liquid does not continue in the
infinity of that which overwhelms it <span
id="fr_742"></span>[744](#fn_742) . This is our doctrine, which does
not, as Eunomius charges against it, preach a plurality of Christs, but
the union of the Man with the Divinity, and which calls by the name of
“making” the transmutation of the Mortal to the Immortal, of the Servant
to the Lord, of Sin <span id="fr_743"></span>[745](#fn_743) to
Righteousness, of the Curse <span id="fr_744"></span>[746](#fn_744) to
the Blessing, of the Man to Christ. What further have our slanderers
left to say, to show that we preach “two Christs” in our doctrine, if we
refuse to say that He Who was in the beginning from the Father
uncreatedly Lord, and Christ, and the Word, and God, was “made,” and
declare that the blessed Peter was pointing briefly and incidentally to
the mystery of the Incarnation, according to the meaning now explained,
that the Nature which was crucified through weakness has Itself also, as
we have said, become, by the overwhelming power of Him Who dwells in It,
that which the Indweller Himself is in fact and in name, even Christ and
Lord?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_731"></span>[CLXXX:733](2050098.htm#fr_731) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p4"></span> This statement would seem to imply
that, at some time after the Incarnation, the Humanity of Christ was
transformed to the Divine Nature, and made identical with It. From other
passages in what has preceded, it would seem that this change in the
mutual relation of the two Natures might, according to the words of S.
Gregory, be conceived as taking place *after the Passion.* Thus it might
be said that S. Gregory conceived the union of the two Natures to be,
since the Passion (or, more strictly, since the “exaltation”), what the
Monophysites conceived it to be from the moment of the Incarnation. But
other phrases, again, seem to show that he conceived the two Natures
still to remain distinct (see note 4 *inf.*). There is, however, ample
justification in S. Gregory’s language for the remark of Bp. Hefele,
that S. Gregory “cannot entirely free himself from the notion of a
transmutation of the Human Nature into the Divine.” (Hefele, *Hist. of
the Councils,* Eng. Trans. vol. iii. p. 4.)

<span id="fn_732"></span>[CLXXX:734](2050098.htm#fr_732) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p5.1"></span>ἑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p5.2"></span>νωσέως</span>.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[CLXXX:735](2050098.htm#fr_733) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p6"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p6.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p6.2"></span>νακραθεῖσα πρὸς τὸ θεῖον</span>.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[CLXXX:736](2050098.htm#fr_734) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p6.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p7"></span> Here S. Gregory seems to state
accurately the differentiation of the two Natures, while he recognizes
the possibility of the *communicatio idiomatum:* but it is not clear
that he would acknowledge that the two Natures *still remain* distinct.
Even this, however, seems to be implied in his citation of [Phil. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p7.1"></span>, at a later point.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[CLXXXI:737](2050098.htm#fr_735) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p8"></span> Here is truly stated the ground of
the *communicatio idiomatum:* while the illustrations following seem to
show that S. Gregory recognized this *communicatio* as existing at the
time of our Lord’s humiliation, and as continuing to exist after His
“exaltation”; that he acknowledged, that is, the union of the two
Natures before the “exaltation,” and the distinction of the two Natures
after that event.

<span id="fn_736"></span>[CLXXXI:738](2050098.htm#fr_736) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p9"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_737"></span>[CLXXXI:739](2050098.htm#fr_737) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p10"></span> [Phil. ii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[CLXXXI:740](2050098.htm#fr_738) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p12"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p12.2"></span>νακρασεως</span>

<span id="fn_739"></span>[CLXXXI:741](2050098.htm#fr_739) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p12.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p13"></span> S. [Luke xxiii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[CLXXXI:742](2050098.htm#fr_740) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p14"></span> S. [John x.
18](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_741"></span>[CLXXXI:743](2050098.htm#fr_741) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p14.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p15"></span> Altering Oehler’s punctuation, which
would connect <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.2"></span>ν τῇ κατὰ τὸν θάνατον οἰκονομί&
139·</span>, not with <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.3"></span>συγκαλύψας</span>, but with <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.4"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.5"></span>νῆψε</span>.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[CLXXXI:744](2050098.htm#fr_742) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p15.6"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p16"></span> Here may be observed at once a
conformity to the phraseology of the Monophysites (bearing in mind that
S. Gregory is not speaking, as they were, of the union of the two
Natures in the Incarnation, but of the change wrought by the
“exaltation”), and a suggestion that the Natures still remain distinct,
as otherwise it would be idle to speak of the Human Nature as
*participating* in the power of the Divine.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[CLXXXI:745](2050098.htm#fr_743) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p17"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="fn_744"></span>[CLXXXI:746](2050098.htm#fr_744) <span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p17.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.vii.v-p18"></span> Cf. [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.vii.v-p18.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VI](2050099)
