[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050041)  [Next](2050043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p1"></span> §26. *It will not do to apply this
conception, as drawn out above, of the Father and Son to the Creation,
as they insist on doing: but we must contemplate the Son apart with the
Father, and believe that the Creation had its origin from a definite
point*.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p2"></span>But perhaps some of the opponents
of this will say, ‘The Creation also has an acknowledged beginning; and
yet the things in it are <span id="page_LXIX">p. LXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-Page_LXIX"></span>not connected in thought with the
everlastingness of the Father, and it does not check, by having a
beginning of its own, the infinitude of the divine life, which is the
monstrous conclusion this discussion has pointed out in the case of the
Father and the Son. One therefore of two things must follow. Either the
Creation is everlasting; or, it must be boldly admitted, the Son is
later in time (than the Father). The conception of an interval in time
will lead to monstrous conclusions, even when measured from the Creation
up to the Creator.’

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p3"></span>One who demurs so, perhaps from not
attending closely to the meaning of our belief, fights against it with
alien comparisons which have nothing to do with the matter in hand. If
he could point to anything above Creation which has its origin marked by
any interval of time, and it were acknowledged possible by all to think
of any time-interval as existing before Creation, he might have occasion
for endeavouring to destroy by such attacks that everlastingness of the
Son which we have proved above. But seeing that by all the suffrages of
the faithful it is agreed that, of all things that are, part is by
creation, and part before creation, and that the divine nature is to be
believed uncreate (although within it, as our faith teaches, there is a
cause, and there is a subsistence produced, but without separation, from
the cause), while the creation is to be viewed in an extension of
distances,—all order and sequence of time in events can be perceived
only in the ages (of this creation), but the nature pre-existent to
those ages escapes all distinctions of before and after, because reason
cannot see in that divine and blessed life the things which it observes,
and that exclusively, in creation. The creation, as we have said, comes
into existence according to a sequence of order, and is commensurate
with the duration of the ages, so that if one ascends along the line of
things created to their beginning, one will bound the search with the
foundation of those ages. But the world above creation, being removed
from all conception of distance, eludes all sequence of time: it has no
commencement of that sort: it has no end in which to cease its advance,
according to any discoverable method of order. Having traversed the ages
and all that has been produced therein, our thought catches a glimpse of
the divine nature, as of some immense ocean, but when the imagination
stretches onward to grasp it, it gives no sign in its own case of any
beginning; so that one who after inquiring with curiosity into the
‘priority’ of the ages tries to mount to the source of all things will
never be able to make a single calculation on which he may stand; that
which he seeks will always be moving on before, and no basis will be
offered him for the curiosity of thought.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p4"></span>It is clear, even with a moderate
insight into the nature of things, that there is nothing by which we can
measure the divine and blessed Life. It is not in time, but time flows
from it; whereas the creation, starting from a manifest beginning,
journeys onward to its proper end through spaces of time; so that it is
possible, as Solomon somewhere <span id="fr_147"></span>[149](#fn_147)
says, to detect in it a beginning, an end, and a middle; and mark the
sequence of its history by divisions of time. But the supreme and
blessed life has no time-extension accompanying its course, and
therefore no span nor measure. Created things are confined within the
fitting measures, as within a boundary, with due regard to the good
adjustment of the whole by the pleasure of a wise Creator; and so,
though human reason in its weakness cannot reach the whole way to the
contents of creation, yet still we do not doubt that the creative power
has assigned to all of them their limits and that they do not stretch
beyond creation. But this creative power itself, while circumscribing by
itself the growth of things, has itself no circumscribing bounds; it
buries in itself every effort of thought to mount up to the source of
God’s life, and it eludes the busy and ambitious strivings to get to the
end of the Infinite. Every discursive effort of thought to go back
beyond the ages will ascend only so far as to see that that which it
seeks can never be passed through: time and its contents seem the
measure and the limit of the movement and the working of human thought,
but that which lies beyond remains outside its reach; it is a world
where it may not tread, unsullied by any object that can be comprehended
by man. No form, no place, no size, no reckoning of time, or anything
else knowable, is there: and so it is inevitable that our apprehensive
faculty, seeking as it does always some object to grasp, must fall back
from any side of this incomprehensible existence, and seek in the ages
and in the creation which they hold its kindred and congenial sphere.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p6"></span>All, I say, with any insight,
however moderate, into the nature of things, know that the world’s
Creator laid time and space as a background to receive what was to be;
on this foundation He builds the universe. It is not possible that
anything which has come or is now coming into being by way of creation
can be independent of space or time. But the existence which is
all-sufficient, everlasting, world-enveloping, is not in space, nor in
time: it is before these, and <span id="page_LXX">p. LXX</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-Page_LXX"></span>above these in an ineffable way;
self-contained, knowable by faith alone; immeasurable by ages; without
the accompaniment of time; seated and resting in itself, with no
associations of past or future, there being nothing beside and beyond
itself, whose passing can make something past and something future. Such
accidents are confined to the creation, whose life is divided with
time’s divisions into memory and hope. But within that transcendent and
blessed Power all things are equally present as in an instant: past and
future are within its all-encircling grasp and its comprehensive view.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p7"></span>This is the Being in which, to use
the words of the Apostle, all things are formed; and we, with our
individual share in existence, live and move, and have our being <span
id="fr_148"></span>[150](#fn_148) . It is above beginning, and presents
no marks of its inmost nature: it is to be known of only in the
impossibility of perceiving it. That indeed is its most special
characteristic, that its nature is too high for any distinctive
attribute. A very different account to the Uncreate must be given of
Creation: it is this very thing that takes it out of all comparison and
connexion with its Maker; this difference, I mean, of essence, and this
admitting a special account explanatory of its nature which has nothing
in common with that of Him who made it. The Divine nature is a stranger
to these special marks in the creation: It leaves beneath itself the
sections of time, the ‘before’ and the ‘after,’ and the ideas of space:
in fact ‘higher’ cannot properly be said of it at all. Every conception
about that uncreate Power is a sublime principle, and involves the idea
of what is proper in the highest degree <span
id="fr_149"></span>[151](#fn_149) .

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p10"></span>We have shewn, then, by what we
have said that the Only-begotten and the Holy Spirit are not to be
looked for in the creation but are to be believed above it; and that
while the creation may perhaps by the persevering efforts of ambitious
seekers be seized in its own beginning, whatever that may be, the
supernatural will not the more for that come within the realm of
knowledge, for no mark before the ages indicative of its nature can be
found. Well, then, if in this uncreate existence those wondrous
realities, with their wondrous names of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are
to be in our thoughts, how can we imagine, of that pre-temporal world,
that which our busy, restless minds perceive in things here below by
comparing one of them with another and giving it precedence by an
interval of time? For there, with the Father, unoriginate, ungenerate,
always Father, the idea of the Son as coming from Him yet side by side
with Him is inseparably joined; and through the Son and yet with Him,
before any vague and unsubstantial conception comes in between, the Holy
Spirit is found at once in closest union; not subsequent in existence to
the Son, as if the Son could be thought of as ever having been without
the Spirit; but Himself also owning the same cause of His being, i.e.
the God over all, as the Only-begotten Light, and having shone forth in
that very Light, being divisible neither by duration nor by an alien
nature from the Father or from the Only-begotten. There are no intervals
in that pre-temporal world: and difference on the score of being there
is none. It is not even possible, comparing the uncreate with the
uncreated, to see differences; and the Holy Ghost is uncreate, as we
have before shewn.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p11"></span>This being the view held by all
who accept in its simplicity the undiluted Gospel, what occasion was
there for endeavouring to dissolve this fast union of the Son with the
Father by means of the creation, as if it were necessary to suppose
either that the Son was from everlasting along with the creation, or
that He too, equally with it, was later? For the generation of the Son
does not fall within time <span id="fr_150"></span>[152](#fn_150) , any
more than the creation was before time: so that it can in no kind of way
be right to partition the indivisible, and to insert, by declaring that
there was a time when the Author of all existence was not, this false
idea of time into the creative Source of the Universe.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p13"></span>Our previous contention,
therefore, is true, that the everlastingness of the Son is included,
<span id="page_LXXI">p. LXXI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-Page_LXXI"></span>along with the idea of His birth,
in the Father’s ungeneracy; and that, if any interval were to be
imagined dividing the two, that same interval would fix a beginning for
the life of the Almighty;—a monstrous supposition. But there is nothing
to prevent the creation, being, as it is, in its own nature something
other than its Creator and in no point trenching on that pure
pre-temporal world, from having, in our belief, a beginning of its own,
as we have said. To say that the heavens and the earth and other
contents of creation were out of things which are not, or, as the
Apostle says, out of “things not seen, <span
id="fr_151"></span>[153](#fn_151) ” inflicts no dishonour upon the Maker
of this universe; for we know from Scripture that all these things are
not from everlasting nor will remain for ever. If on the other hand it
could be believed that there is something in the Holy Trinity which does
not coexist with the Father, if following out this heresy any thought
could be entertained of stripping the Almighty of the glory of the Son
and Holy Ghost, it would end in nothing else than in a God manifestly
removed from every deed and thought that was good and godlike. But if
the Father, existing before the ages, is always in glory, and the
pre-temporal Son is His glory, and if in like manner the Spirit of
Christ is the Son’s glory, always to be contemplated along with the
Father and the Son, what training could have led this man of learning to
declare that there is a ‘before’ in what is timeless, and a ‘more
honourable’ in what is all essentially honourable, and preferring, by
comparisons, the one to the other, to dishonour the latter by this
partiality? The term in opposition <span
id="fr_152"></span>[154](#fn_152) to the more honourable makes it
clearer still whither he is tending.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_147"></span>[LXIX:149](2050042.htm#fr_147) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p5"></span> Compare [Eccl.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001), [Eccl.
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p5.1"></span>, “and a wise man’s heart discerneth
both time and judgment.”

<span id="fn_148"></span>[LXX:150](2050042.htm#fr_148) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p8"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p8.1"></span>[Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p8.2"></span>; [Col. i.
17](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#017)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p8.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[LXX:151](2050042.htm#fr_149) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p8.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>καὶ τὸν τοῦ κυριωτάτου λόγον
ἐπέχει·</span>

<span id="fn_150"></span>[LXX:152](2050042.htm#fr_150) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12"></span> *The generation of the Son does
not fall within time.* On this “eternal generation” Denys (*De la
Philosophie d’Origéne,* p. 452) has the following remarks, illustrating
the probable way that Athanasians would have dealt with Eunomius: “If we
do not see how God’s indivisibility remains in the co-existence of the
three Persons, we can throw the blame of this difficulty upon the
feebleness of our reason: while it is a manifest contradiction to admit
at one and the same time the simplicity of the Uncreated, and some
change or inequality within His Being. I know that the defenders of the
orthodox belief might be troubled with their adversaries’ argument.
(Eunom. Apol. 22.) ‘If we admit that the Son, the energy creative of the
world, is equal to the Father, it amounts to admitting that He is the
actual energy of the Father in Creation, and that this energy is equal
to His essence. But that is to return to the mistake of the Greeks who
identified His essence and His energy, and consequently made the world
coexist with God.’ A serious difficulty, certainly, and one that has
never yet been solved, nor will be; as all the questions likewise which
refer to the Uncreated and Created, to eternity and time. It is true we
cannot explain how God’s eternally active energy does prolong itself
eternally. But what is this difficulty compared with those which, with
the hypothesis of Eunomius, must be swallowed? We must suppose, so, that
the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>, since His energy is
*not eternal, became* in a given place and moment, and that He was at
that point the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.3"></span>Γεννητός</span>. We must suppose that
this activity communicated to a creature that privilege of the Uncreated
which is most incommunicable, viz. the power of creating other
creatures. We must suppose that these creatures, unconnected as they are
with the <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.4"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.5"></span>Αγέννητος</span> (since He has not
made them), nevertheless conceive of and see beyond their own creator a
Being, who cannot be anything to them. \[This direct intuition on our
part of the Deity was a special tenet of Eunomius.\] Finally we must
suppose that these creatures, seeing that Eunomius agrees with orthodox
believers that the end of this world will be but a commencement, will
enter into new relations with this <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.6"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p12.7"></span>Αγέννητος</span>, when the Son shall
have submitted all things to the Father.”

<span id="fn_151"></span>[LXXI:153](2050042.htm#fr_151) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p14"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p14.1"></span>[Heb. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p14.2"></span>; [2 Cor. iv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p14.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[LXXI:154](2050042.htm#fr_152) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p14.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p15"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p15.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxvi-p15.2"></span>ντιδιαστολὴ</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He falsely imagines that the same energies produce the same
works, and that variation in the works indicates variation in the
energies.](2050043)
