[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050124)  [Next](2050126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p1"></span> §4. *After this he shows that the
Son, who truly is, and is in the bosom of the Father, is simple and
uncompounded, and that, He Who redeemed us from bondage is not under
dominion of the Father, nor in a state of slavery: and that otherwise
not He alone, but also the Father Who is in the Son and is One with Him,
must be a slave; and that the word “being” is formed from the word to
“be.” And having excellently and notably discussed all these matters, he
concludes the book.*

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p2"></span>But not yet has the most grievous
part of his profanity been examined, which the sequel of his treatise
goes on to add. Well, let us consider his words sentence by sentence.
Yet I know not how I can dare to let my mouth utter the horrible and
godless language of him who fights against Christ. For I fear lest, like
some baleful drugs, the remnant of the pernicious bitterness should be
deposited upon the lips through which the words pass. “He that cometh
unto God,” says the Apostle, “must believe that He is <span
id="fr_951"></span>[953](#fn_951) .” Accordingly, true existence is the
special distinction of Godhead. But Eunomius makes out Him Who truly is,
either not to exist at all, or not to exist in a proper sense, which is
just the same as not existing at all; for he who does not properly
exist, does not really exist at all; as, for example, he is said to
“run” in a dream who in that state fancies he is exerting himself in the
race, while, since he untruly acts the semblance of the real race, his
fancy that he is running is not for this reason a race. But even though
in an inexact sense it is so called, still the name is given to it
falsely. Accordingly, he who dares to assert that the Only-begotten God
either does not properly exist, or does not exist at all, manifestly
blots out of his creed all faith in Him. For who can any longer believe
in something non-existent? or who would resort to Him Whose being has
been shown by the enemies of the true Lord to be improper and
unsubstantial?

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p4"></span>But that our statement may not be
thought <span id="page_CCXXV">p. CCXXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-Page_CCXXV"></span>to be unfair to our opponents, I
will set side by side with it the language of the impious persons, which
runs as follows:—“He Who is in the bosom of the Existent, and Who is in
the beginning and is with God, not being, or at all events not being in
a strict sense, even though Basil, neglecting this distinction and
addition, uses the title of ‘Existent’ interchangeably, contrary to the
truth—” What do you say? that He Who is in the Father is not, and that
He Who is in the beginning, and Who is in the bosom of the Father, is
not, for this very reason, that He is in the beginning and is in the
Father, and is discerned in the bosom of the Existent, and hence does
not in a strict sense exist, because He is in the Existent? Alas for the
idle and irrational tenets! Now for the first time we have heard this
piece of vain babbling,—that the Lord, by Whom are all things, does not
in a strict sense exist. And we have not yet got to the end of this
appalling statement; but something yet more startling remains behind,
that he not only affirms that He does not exist, or does not strictly
speaking exist, but also that the Nature in which He is conceived to
reside is various and composite. For he says “not being, or not being
simple.” But that to which simplicity does not belong is manifestly
various and composite. How then can the same Person be at once
non-existent and composite in essence? For one of two alternatives they
must choose: if they predicate of Him non-existence they cannot speak of
Him as composite, or if they affirm Him to be composite they cannot rob
Him of existence. But that their blasphemy may assume many and varied
shapes, it jumps at every godless notion when it wishes to contrast Him
with the existent, affirming that, strictly speaking, He does not exist,
and in His relation to the uncompounded Nature denying Him the attribute
of simplicity:—“not existing, not existing simply, not existing in the
strict sense.” Who among those who have transgressed the word and
forsworn the Faith was ever so lavish in utterances denying the Lord? He
has stood up in rivalry with the divine proclamation of John. For as
often as the latter has attested “was” of the Word, so often does he
apply to Him Who is an opposing “was not.” And he contends against the
holy lips of our father Basil, bringing against him the charge that he
“neglects these distinctions,” when he says that He Who is in the
Father, and in the beginning, and in the bosom of the Father, exists,
holding the view that the addition of “in the beginning,” and “in the
bosom of the Father,” bars the real existence of Him Who is. Vain
learning! What things the teachers of deceit teach! what strange
doctrines they introduce to their hearers! they instruct them that that
which is in something else does not exist! So, Eunomius, since your
heart and brain are within you, neither of them, according to your
distinction, exists. For if the Only-begotten God does not, strictly
speaking, exist, for this reason, that He is in the bosom of the Father,
then everything that is in something else is thereby excluded from
existence. But certainly your heart exists in you, and not
independently; therefore, according to your view, you must either say
that it does not exist at all, or that it does not exist in the strict
sense. However, the ignorance and profanity of his language are so gross
and so glaring, as to be obvious even before our argument, at all events
to all persons of sense: but that his folly as well as his impiety may
be more manifest, we will add thus much to what has gone before. If one
may only say that that in the strict sense exists, of which the word of
Scripture attests the existence detached from all relation to anything
else, why do they, like those who carry water, perish with thirst when
they have it in their power to drink? Even this man, though he had at
hand the antidote to his blasphemy against the Son, closed his eyes and
ran past it as though fearing to be saved, and charges Basil with
unfairness for having suppressed the qualifying words, and for only
quoting the “was” by itself, in reference to the Only-Begotten. And yet
it was quite in his power to see what Basil saw and what every one who
has eyes sees. And herein the sublime John seems to me to have been
prophetically moved, that the mouths of those fighters against Christ
might be stopped, who on the ground of these additions deny the
existence, in the strict sense, of the Christ, saying simply and without
qualification “The Word was God,” and was Life, and was Light <span
id="fr_952"></span>[954](#fn_952) , not merely speaking of Him as being
in the beginning, and with God, and in the bosom of the Father, so that
by their relation the absolute existence of the Lord should be done
away. But his assertion that He was God, by this absolute declaration
detached from all relation to anything else, cuts off every subterfuge
from those who in their reasonings run into impiety; and, in addition to
this, there is moreover something else which still more convincingly
proves the malignity of our adversaries. For if they make out that to
exist in something is an indication of not existing in the strict sense,
then certainly they allow that not even the Father exists absolutely, as
they have learnt in the Gospel, that just as the Son abides in the
Father, so the Father abides in the Son, according to the words of the
Lord <span id="fr_953"></span>[955](#fn_953) . For to say that the
Father is in the Son is equivalent to saying that the Son is in the
<span id="page_CCXXVI">p. CCXXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-Page_CCXXVI"></span>bosom of the Father. And in
passing let us make this further inquiry. When the Son, as they say,
“was not,” what did the bosom of the Father contain? For assuredly they
must either grant that it was full, or suppose it to have been empty. If
then the bosom was full, certainly the Son was that which filled the
bosom. But if they imagine that there was some void in the bosom of the
Father, they do nothing else than assert of Him perfection by way of
augmentation, in the sense that He passed from the state of void and
deficiency to the state of fulness and perfection. But “they knew not
nor understood,” says David of those that “walk on still in
darkness <span id="fr_954"></span>[956](#fn_954) .” For he who has been
rendered hostile to the true Light cannot keep his soul in light. For
this reason it was that they did not perceive lying ready to their hand
in logical sequence that which would have corrected their impiety,
smitten, as it were, with blindness, like the men of Sodom.

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p8"></span>But he also says that the essence of
the Son is controlled by the Father, his exact words being as
follows:—“For He Who is and lives because of the Father, does not
appropriate this dignity, as the essence which controls even Him
attracts to itself the conception of the Existent.” If these doctrines
approve themselves to some of the sages “who are without,” let not the
Gospels nor the rest of the teaching of the Holy Scripture be in any way
disturbed. For what fellowship is there between the creed of Christians
and the wisdom that has been made foolish <span
id="fr_955"></span>[957](#fn_955) ? But if he leans upon the support of
the Scriptures, let him show one such declaration from the holy
writings, and we will hold our peace. I hear Paul cry aloud, “There is
one Lord Jesus Christ <span id="fr_956"></span>[958](#fn_956) .” But
Eunomius shouts against Paul, calling Christ a slave. For we recognize
no other mark of a slave than to be subject and controlled. The slave is
assuredly a slave, but the slave cannot by nature be Lord, even though
the term be applied to Him by inexact use. And why should I bring
forward the declarations of Paul in evidence of the lordship of the
Lord? For Paul’s Master Himself tells His disciples that He is truly
Lord, accepting as He does the confession of those who called Him Master
and Lord. For He says, “Ye call Me Master and Lord; and ye say well, for
so I am <span id="fr_957"></span>[959](#fn_957) .” And in the same way
He enjoined that the Father should be called Father by them, saying,
“Call no man master upon earth: for one is your Master, even Christ: and
call no man father upon earth, for one is your Father, Which is in
heaven <span id="fr_958"></span>[960](#fn_958) .” To which then ought we
to give heed, as we are thus hemmed in between them? On one side the
Lord Himself, and he who has Christ speaking in him <span
id="fr_959"></span>[961](#fn_959) , enjoin us not to think of Him as a
slave, but to honour Him even as the Father is honoured, and on the
other side Eunomius brings his suit against the Lord, claiming Him as a
slave, when he says that He on Whose shoulders rests the government of
the universe is under dominion. Can our choice what to do be doubtful,
or is the decision which is the more advantageous course unimportant?
Shall I slight the advice of Paul, Eunomius? shall I deem the voice of
the Truth less trustworthy than thy deceit? But “if I had not come and
spoken unto them, they had not had sin <span
id="fr_960"></span>[962](#fn_960) .” Since then, He has spoken to them,
truly declaring Himself to be Lord, and that He is not falsely named
Lord (for He says, “I am,” not “I am called”), what need is there that
they should do that, whereon the vengeance is inevitable because they
are forewarned?

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p15"></span>But perhaps, in answer to this, he
will again put forth his accustomed logic, and will say that the same
Being is both slave and Lord, dominated by the controlling power but
lording it over the rest. These profound distinctions are talked of at
the cross-roads, circulated by those who are enamoured of falsehood, who
confirm their idle notions about the Deity by illustrations from the
circumstances of ordinary life. For since the occurrences of this world
give us examples of such arrangements <span
id="fr_961"></span>[963](#fn_961) (thus in a wealthy establishment one
may see the more active and devoted servant set over his fellow-servants
by the command of his master, and so invested with superiority over
others in the same rank and station), they transfer this notion to the
doctrines concerning the Godhead, so that the Only-begotten God, though
subject to the sovereignty of His superior, is no way hindered by the
authority of His sovereign in the direction of those inferior to Him.
But let us bid farewell to such philosophy, and proceed to discuss this
point according to the measure of our intelligence. Do they confess that
the Father is by nature Lord, or do they hold that He arrived at this
position by some kind of election? I do not think that a man who has any
share whatever of intellect could come to such a pitch of madness as not
to acknowledge that the lordship of the God of all is His by nature. For
that which is by nature simple, uncompounded, and indivisible, whatever
it happens to be, that it is throughout in all its entirety, not
becoming one thing after another by some process of change, but
remaining eternally in the condition in which it is. What, then, is
their <span id="page_CCXXVII">p. CCXXVII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-Page_CCXXVII"></span>belief about the Only-begotten?
Do they own that His essence is simple, or do they suppose that in it
there is any sort of composition? If they think that He is some
multiform thing, made up of many parts, assuredly they will not concede
Him even the name of Deity, but will drag down their doctrine of the
Christ to corporeal and material conceptions: but if they agree that He
is simple, how is it possible in the simplicity of the subject to
recognize the concurrence of contrary attributes? For just as the
contradictory opposition of life and death admits of no mean, so in its
distinguishing characteristics is domination diametrically and
irreconcilably opposed to servitude. For if one were to consider each of
these by itself, one could not properly frame any definition that would
apply alike to both, and where the definition of things is not
identical, their nature also is assuredly different. If then the Lord is
simple and uncompounded in nature, how can the conjunction of contraries
be found in the subject, as would be the case if servitude mingled with
lordship? But if He is acknowledged to be Lord, in accordance with the
teaching of the saints, the simplicity of the subject is evidence that
He can have no part or lot in the opposite condition: while if they make
Him out to be a slave, then it is idle for them to ascribe to Him the
title of lordship. For that which is simple in nature is not parted
asunder into contradictory attributes. But if they affirm that He is
one, and is called the other, that He is by nature slave and Lord in
name alone, let them boldly utter this declaration and relieve us from
the long labour of answering them. For who can afford to be so leisurely
in his treatment of inanities as to employ arguments to demonstrate what
is obvious and unambiguous? For if a man were to inform against himself
for the crime of murder, the accuser would not be put to any trouble in
bringing home to him by evidence the charge of blood-guiltiness. In like
manner we shall no longer bring against our opponents, when they advance
so far in impiety, a confutation framed after examination of their case.
For he who affirms the Only-begotten to be a slave, makes Him out by so
saying to be a fellow-servant with himself: and hence will of necessity
arise a double enormity. For either he will despise his fellow-slave and
deny the faith, having shaken off the yoke of the lordship of Christ, or
he will bow before the slave, and, turning away from the
self-determining nature that owns no Lord over it, will in a manner
worship himself instead of God. For if he sees himself in slavery, and
the object of his worship also in slavery, he of course looks at
himself, seeing the whole of himself in that which he worships. But what
reckoning can count up all the other mischiefs that necessarily
accompany this pravity of doctrine? For who does not know that he who is
by nature a slave, and follows his avocation under the constraint
imposed by a master, cannot be removed even from the emotion of fear?
And of this the inspired Apostle is a witness, when he says, “Ye have
not received the spirit of bondage again to fear <span
id="fr_962"></span>[964](#fn_962) .” So that they will be found to
attribute, after the likeness of men, the emotion of fear also to their
fellow-servant God.

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p18"></span>Such is the God of heresy. But what
we, who, in the words of the Apostle, have been called to liberty by
Christ <span id="fr_963"></span>[965](#fn_963) , Who hath freed us from
bondage, have been taught by the Scriptures to think, I will set forth
in few words. I take my start from the inspired teaching, and boldly
declare that the Divine Word does not wish even us to be slaves, our
nature having now been changed for the better, and that He Who has taken
all that was ours, on the terms of giving to us in return what is His,
even as He took disease, death, curse, and sin, so took our slavery
also, not in such a way as Himself to have what He took, but so as to
purge our nature of such evils, our defects being swallowed up and done
away with in His stainless nature. As therefore in the life that we hope
for there will be neither disease, nor curse, nor sin, nor death, so
slavery also along with these will vanish away. And that what I say is
true I call the Truth Himself to witness, Who says to His disciples “I
call you no more servants, but friends <span
id="fr_964"></span>[966](#fn_964) .” If then our nature will be free at
length from the reproach of slavery, how comes the Lord of all to be
reduced to slavery by the madness and infatuation of these deranged men,
who must of course, as a logical consequence, assert that He does not
know the counsels of the Father, because of His declaration concerning
the slave, which tells us that “the servant knoweth not what his lord
doeth <span id="fr_965"></span>[967](#fn_965) ”? But when they say this,
let them hear that the Son has in Himself all that pertains to the
Father, and sees all things that the Father doeth, and none of the good
things that belong to the Father is outside the knowledge of the Son.
For how can He fail to have anything that is the Father’s, seeing He has
the Father wholly in Himself? Accordingly, if “the servant knoweth not
what his lord doeth,” and if He has in Himself all things that are the
Father’s, let those who are reeling with strong drink at last become
sober, and let them now, if never before, look up at the truth, and see
that He who has all things that the Father has is lord of all, and not a
slave. For how can the personality that owns no lord over it bear on
<span id="page_CCXXVIII">p. CCXXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-Page_CCXXVIII"></span>itself the brand of slavery? How
can the King of all fail to have His form of like honour with Himself?
how can dishonour—for slavery is dishonour—constitute the brightness of
the true glory? and how is the King’s son born into slavery? No, it is
not so. But as He is Light of Light, and Life of Life, and Truth of
Truth, so is He Lord of Lord, King of King, God of God, Supreme of
Supreme; for having in Himself the Father in His entirety, whatever the
Father has in Himself He also assuredly has, and since, moreover, all
that the Son has belongs to the Father, the enemies of God’s glory are
inevitably compelled, if the Son is a slave, to drag down to servitude
the Father as well. For there is no attribute of the Son which is not
absolutely the Father’s. “For all Mine are Thine,” He says, “and Thine
are Mine <span id="fr_966"></span>[968](#fn_966) .” What then will the
poor creatures say? Which is more reasonable—that the Son, Who has said,
“Thine are Mine, and I am glorified in them <span
id="fr_967"></span>[969](#fn_967) ,” should be glorified in the
sovereignty of the Father, or that insult should be offered to the
Father by the degradation involved in the slavery of the Son? For it is
not possible that He Who contains in Himself all that belongs to the
Son, and Who is Himself in the Son, should not also absolutely be in the
slavery of the Son, and have slavery in Himself. Such are the results
achieved by Eunomius’ philosophy, whereby he inflicts upon his Lord the
insult of slavery, while he attaches the same degradation to the
stainless glory of the Father.

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p24"></span>Let us however return once more to
the course of his treatise. What does Eunomius say concerning the
Only-begotten? That He “does not appropriate the dignity,” for he calls
the appellation of “being” a “dignity.” A startling piece of philosophy!
Who of all men that have ever been, whether among Greeks or barbarian
sages, who of the men of our own day, who of the men of all time ever
gave “being” the name of “dignity”? For everything that is regarded as
subsisting <span id="fr_968"></span>[970](#fn_968) is said, by the
common custom of all who use language, to “be”: and from the word “be”
has been formed the term “being.” But now the expression “dignity” is
applied in a new fashion to the idea expressed by “being.” For he says
that “the Son, Who is and lives because of the Father, does not
appropriate this dignity,” having no Scripture to support his statement,
and not conducting his statement to so senseless a conclusion by any
process of logical inference, but as if he had taken into his intestines
some windy food, he belches forth his blasphemy in its crude and
unmethodized form, like some unsavoury breath. “He does not appropriate
this dignity.” Let us concede the point of “being” being called
“dignity.” What then? does He Who is not appropriate being? “No,” says
Eunomius, “because He exists by reason of the Father.” Do you not then
say that He Who does not appropriate being is not? for “not to
appropriate” has the same force as “to be alien from”, and the mutual
opposition of the ideas <span id="fr_969"></span>[971](#fn_969) is
evident. For that which is “proper” is not “alien,” and that which is
“alien” is not “proper.” He therefore Who does not “appropriate” being
is obviously alien from being: and He Who is alien from being is
nonexistent.

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p27"></span>But his cogent proof of this
absurdity he brings forward in the words, “as the essence which controls
even Him attracts to itself the conception of the Existent.” Let us say
nothing about the awkwardness of the combination here: let us examine
his serious meaning. What argument ever demonstrated this? He
superfluously reiterates to us his statement of the Essence of the
Father having sovereignty over the Son. What evangelist is the patron of
this doctrine? What process of dialectic conducts us to it. What
premises support it? What line of argument ever demonstrated by any
logical consequence that the Only-begotten God is under dominion? “But,”
says he, “the essence that is dominant over the Son attracts to itself
the conception of the Existent.” What is the meaning of the attraction
of the existent? and how comes the phrase of “attracting” to be flung on
the top of what he has said before? Assuredly he who considers the force
of words will judge for himself. About this, however, we will say
nothing: but we will take up again that argument that he does not grant
essential being to Him to Whom he does not leave the title of the
Existent. And why does he idly fight with shadows, contending about the
non-existent being this or that? For that which does not exist is of
course neither like anything else, nor unlike. But while granting that
He is existent he forbids Him to be so called. Alas for the vain
precision of haggling about the sound of a word while making concessions
on the more important matter! But in what sense does He, Who, as he
says, has dominion over the Son, “attract to Himself the conception of
the Existent”? For if he says that the Father attracts His own essence,
this process of attraction is superfluous: for existence is His already,
without being attracted. If, on the other hand, his meaning is that the
existence of the Son is attracted by the Father, I cannot make out how
existence is to be <span id="page_CCXXIX">p. CCXXIX</span> <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-Page_CCXXIX"></span>wrenched from the Existent, and to
pass over to Him Who “attracts” it. Can he be dreaming of the error of
Sabellius, as though the Son did not exist in Himself, but was painted
on to the personal existence of the Father? is this his meaning in the
expression that the conception of the Existent is attracted by the
essence which exercises domination over the Son? or does he, while not
denying the personal existence of the Son, nevertheless say that He is
separated from the meaning conveyed by the term “the Existent”? And yet,
how can “the Existent” be separated from the conception of existence?
For as long as anything is what it is, nature does not admit that it
should not be what it is.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_951"></span>[CCXXIV:953](2050125.htm#fr_951) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p3"></span> [Heb. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_952"></span>[CCXXV:954](2050125.htm#fr_952) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p5"></span> Cf. S. [John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_953"></span>[CCXXV:955](2050125.htm#fr_953) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p6"></span> S. [John xiv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#011)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_954"></span>[CCXXVI:956](2050125.htm#fr_954) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p7"></span> Cf. [Ps. lxxxii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_955"></span>[CCXXVI:957](2050125.htm#fr_955) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p9"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="fn_956"></span>[CCXXVI:958](2050125.htm#fr_956) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p10"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. viii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#006)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[CCXXVI:959](2050125.htm#fr_957) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John xiii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[CCXXVI:960](2050125.htm#fr_958) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p12"></span> Cf. S. [Matt. xxiii.
8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#008)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[CCXXVI:961](2050125.htm#fr_959) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p13"></span> Cf. [2 Cor. xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[CCXXVI:962](2050125.htm#fr_960) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p14"></span> S. [John xv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#022)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="fn_961"></span>[CCXXVI:963](2050125.htm#fr_961) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p16"></span> Oehler’s punctuation seems here to
require alteration.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[CCXXVII:964](2050125.htm#fr_962) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p17"></span> [Rom. viii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[CCXXVII:965](2050125.htm#fr_963) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p19"></span> Cf. [Gal. v.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="fn_964"></span>[CCXXVII:966](2050125.htm#fr_964) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p20"></span> Cf. S. [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_965"></span>[CCXXVII:967](2050125.htm#fr_965) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p21"></span> Cf. S. [John xv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="fn_966"></span>[CCXXVIII:968](2050125.htm#fr_966) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p22"></span> S. [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[CCXXVIII:969](2050125.htm#fr_967) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p23"></span> S. [John xvii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[CCXXVIII:970](2050125.htm#fr_968) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p25"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p25.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p25.2"></span>ν ὑποστάσει θεωρούμενον</span>

<span id="fn_969"></span>[CCXXVIII:971](2050125.htm#fr_969) <span
id="viii.i.xii.iv-p25.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xii.iv-p26"></span> The ideas of “own” implied in
“appropriate,” and that of incongruity implied in “alienation.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI](2050126)
