[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050055)  [Next](2050057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p1"></span> §40. *His unsuccessful attempt to be
consistent with his own statements after Basil has confuted him.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p2"></span>For notice how bitter he is against
one who did detect the rottenness and weakness of his work of mischief;
how he revenges himself all he can, and that is only by abuse and
vilification: in these, however, he possesses abundant ability. Those
who would give elegance of style to a discourse have a way of filling
out the places that want rhythm with certain conjunctive particles <span
id="fr_219"></span>[221](#fn_219) , whereby they introduce more euphony
and connexion into the assembly of their phrases; so does Eunomius
garnish his work with abusive epithets in most of his passages, as
though he wished to make a display of this overflowing power of
invective. Again we are ‘fools,’ again we ‘fail in correct reasoning,’
and ‘meddle in the controversy without the preparation which its
importance requires,’ and ‘miss the speaker’s meaning.’ Such, and still
more than these, are the phrases used of our Master by this decorous
orator. But perhaps after all there is good reason in his anger; and
this pamphleteer is justly indignant. For why should Basil have stung
him by thus exposing the weakness of this teaching of his? Why should he
have uncovered to the sight of the simpler brethren the blasphemy veiled
beneath his plausible sophistries? Why should he not have let silence
cover the unsoundness of this view? Why gibbet the wretched man, when he
ought to have pitied him, and kept the veil over the indecency of his
argument? He actually finds out and makes a spectacle of one who has
somehow got to be admired amongst his private pupils for cleverness and
shrewdness! Eunomius had said somewhere in his works that the attribute
of being ungenerate “follows” the deity. Our Master remarked upon this
phrase of his that a thing which “follows” must be amongst the
externals, whereas the actual Being is not one of these, but indicates
the very existence of anything, so far as it does exist. Then this
gentle yet unconquerable opponent is furious, and pours along a copious
stream of invective, because our Master, on hearing that phrase,
apprehended the sense of it as well. But what did he do wrong, if he
firmly insisted only upon the meaning of your own writings. If indeed he
had seized illogically on what was said, all that you say would be true,
and we should have to ignore what he did; but seeing that you are
blushing at his reproof, why do you not erase the word from your
pamphlet, instead of abusing the reprover? ‘Yes, but he did not
understand the drift of the argument. Well, how do we do wrong, if being
human, we guessed at the meaning from your actual words, having no
comprehension of that which was buried in your heart? It is for God to
see the inscrutable, and to inspect the characters of that which we have
no means of comprehending, and to be cognizant of *unlikeness* <span
id="fr_220"></span>[222](#fn_220) in the invisible world. We can only
judge by what we hear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[XCVI:221](2050056.htm#fr_219) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xl-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p3"></span> *conjunctive particles,* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p3.1"></span>σύνδεσμοι</span>. In
Aristotle’s Poetics (xx. 6), these are reckoned as one of the 8 ‘parts
of speech.’ The term <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xl-p3.2"></span>σύνδεσμος</span> is illustrated by the
examples <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p3.3"></span>μὲν,
ἤτοι, δὴ</span>, which leaves no doubt that it includes at all events
conjunctions and particles. Its general character is defined in his
Rhetoric iii. 12, 4: “It makes many (sentences) one.” Harris (*Hermes*
ii. c. 2), thus defines a conjunction, “A part of speech devoid of
signification itself, but so formed as to help signification by making
two or more significant sentences to be one significant sentence,” a
definition which manifestly comes from Aristotle.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p4"></span>The comparison here seems to be
between these constantly recurring particles, themselves ‘devoid of
signification,’ in an ‘elegant’ discourse, and the perpetually used
epithets, “fools,” &c., which, though utterly meaningless, serve to
connect his dislocated paragraphs. The ‘assembly’ (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p4.1"></span>σύναξις</span>,
always of the synagogue or the Communion. See Suicer) of his words is
brought, it is ironically implied, into some sort of harmony by these
means.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[XCVI:222](2050056.htm#fr_220) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xl-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xl-p5"></span> A hit at the Anomœans. ‘Your subtle
distinctions, in the invisible world of your own mind, between the
meanings of “following” are like the *unlikenesses* which you see
between the Three Persons.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The thing that follows is not the same as the thing that it
follows.](2050057)
