[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050079)  [Next](2050081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.v.v"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p1"></span> §5. *He discusses the
incomprehensibility of the Divine essence, and the saying to the woman
of Samaria, “Ye worship ye know not what.”*

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p2"></span>Now if any one should ask for some
interpretation, and description, and explanation of the Divine essence,
we are not going to deny that in this kind of wisdom we are unlearned,
acknowledging only so much as this, that it is not possible that that
which is by nature infinite should be comprehended in any conception
expressed by words. The fact that the Divine greatness has no limit is
proclaimed by prophecy, which declares expressly that of His splendour,
His glory, His holiness, “there is no end <span
id="fr_585"></span>[587](#fn_585) :” and if His surroundings have no
limit, much more is He Himself in His essence, whatever it may be,
comprehended by no limitation in any way. If then interpretation by way
of words and names implies by its meaning <span id="page_CXLVII">p.
CXLVII</span> <span id="viii.i.v.v-Page_CXLVII"></span>some sort of
comprehension of the subject, and if, on the other hand, that which is
unlimited cannot be comprehended, no one could reasonably blame us for
ignorance, if we are not bold in respect of what none should venture
upon. For by what name can I describe the incomprehensible? by what
speech can I declare the unspeakable? Accordingly, since the Deity is
too excellent and lofty to be expressed in words, we have learnt to
honour in silence what transcends speech and thought: and if he who
“thinketh more highly than he ought to think <span
id="fr_586"></span>[588](#fn_586) ,” tramples upon this cautious speech
of ours making a jest of our ignorance of things incomprehensible, and
recognizes a difference of unlikeness in that which is without figure,
or limit, or size, or quantity (I mean in the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Spirit), and brings forward to reproach our ignorance that phrase
which is continually alleged by the disciples of deceit, “‘Ye worship ye
know not what <span id="fr_587"></span>[589](#fn_587) ,’ if ye know not
the essence of that which ye worship,” we shall follow the advice of the
prophet, and not fear the reproach of fools <span
id="fr_588"></span>[590](#fn_588) , nor be led by their reviling to talk
boldly of things unspeakable, making that unpractised speaker Paul our
teacher in the mysteries that transcend knowledge, who is so far from
thinking that the Divine nature is within the reach of human perception,
that he calls even the judgments of God “unsearchable,” and His ways
“past finding out <span id="fr_589"></span>[591](#fn_589) ,” and affirms
that the things promised to them that love Him, for their good deeds
done in this life, are above comprehension so that it is not possible to
behold them with the eye, nor to receive them by hearing, nor to contain
them in the heart <span id="fr_590"></span>[592](#fn_590) . Learning
this, therefore, from Paul, we boldly declare that, not only are the
judgments of God too high for those who try to search them out, but that
the ways also that lead to the knowledge of Him are even until now
untrodden and impassable. For this is what we understand that the
Apostle wishes to signify, when he calls the ways that lead to the
incomprehensible “past finding out,” showing by the phrase that that
knowledge is unattainable by human calculations, and that no one ever
yet set his understanding on such a path of reasoning, or showed any
trace or sign of an approach, by way of perception, to the things
incomprehensible.

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p9"></span>Learning these things, then, from the
lofty words of the Apostle, we argue, by the passage quoted, in this
way:—If His judgments cannot be searched out, and His ways are not
traced, and the promise of His good things transcends every
representation that our conjectures can frame, by how much more is His
actual Godhead higher and loftier, in respect of being unspeakable and
unapproachable, than those attributes which are conceived as
accompanying it, whereof the divinely instructed Paul declares that
there is no knowledge:—and by this means we confirm in ourselves the
doctrine they deride, confessing ourselves inferior to them in the
knowledge of those things which are beyond the range of knowledge, and
declare that we really worship what we know. Now we know the loftiness
of the glory of Him Whom we worship, by the very fact that we are not
able by reasoning to comprehend in our thoughts the incomparable
character of His greatness; and that saying of our Lord to the Samaritan
woman, which is brought forward against us by our enemies, might more
properly be addressed to them. For the words, “Ye worship ye know not
what,” the Lord speaks to the Samaritan woman, prejudiced as she was by
corporeal ideas in her opinions concerning God: and to her the phrase
well applies, because the Samaritans, thinking that they worship God,
and at the same time supposing the Deity to be corporeally settled in
place, adore Him in name only, worshipping something else, and not God.
For nothing is Divine that is conceived as being circumscribed, but it
belongs to the Godhead to be in all places, and to pervade all things,
and not to be limited by anything: so that those who fight against
Christ find the phrase they adduce against us turned into an accusation
of themselves. For, as the Samaritans, supposing the Deity to be
compassed round by some circumscription of place, were rebuked by the
words they heard, “‘Ye worship ye know not what,’ and your service is
profitless to you, for a God that is deemed to be settled in any place
is no God,”—so one might well say to the new Samaritans, “In supposing
the Deity to be limited by the absence of generation, as it were by some
local limit, ‘ye worship ye know not what,’ doing service to Him indeed
as God, but not knowing that the infinity of God exceeds all the
significance and comprehension that names can furnish.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_585"></span>[CXLVI:587](2050080.htm#fr_585) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p3"></span> Cf. [Ps. cxlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="fn_586"></span>[CXLVII:588](2050080.htm#fr_586) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p4"></span> [Rom. xii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[CXLVII:589](2050080.htm#fr_587) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p5"></span> S. [John iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="fn_588"></span>[CXLVII:590](2050080.htm#fr_588) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p6"></span> Cf. [Is. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="fn_589"></span>[CXLVII:591](2050080.htm#fr_589) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p6.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p7"></span> [Rom. xi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[CXLVII:592](2050080.htm#fr_590) <span
id="viii.i.v.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.v.v-p8"></span> Cf. [1 Cor. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009)<span id="viii.i.v.v-p8.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thereafter he expounds the appellation of “Son,” and of “product
of generation,” and very many varieties of “sons,” of God, of men, of
rams, of perdition, of light, and of day.](2050081)
