[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050054)  [Next](2050056) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p1"></span> <span id="page_XCIII">p.
XCIII</span> <span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-Page_XCIII"></span>§39. *Answer
to the question he is always asking, “Can He who is be begotten?”*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p2"></span>Eunomius does not like the meaning
of the Ungenerate to be conveyed by the term Father, because he wants to
establish that there was a time when the Son was not. It is in fact a
constant question amongst his pupils, “How can He who (always) is be
begotten?” This comes, I take it, of not weaning oneself from the human
application of words, when we have to think about God. But let us
without bitterness at once expose the actual falseness of this ‘arrière
pensée’ of his <span id="fr_208"></span>[210](#fn_208) , stating first
our conclusions upon the matter.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p4"></span>These names have a different
meaning with us, Eunomius; when we come to the transcendent energies
they yield another sense. Wide, indeed, is the interval in all else that
divides the human from the divine; experience cannot point here below to
anything at all resembling in amount what we may guess at and imagine
there. So likewise, as regards the meaning of our terms, though there
may be, so far as words go, some likeness between man and the Eternal,
yet the gulf between these two worlds is the real measure of the
separation of meanings. For instance, our Lord calls God a ‘man’ that
was a ‘householder’ in the parable <span
id="fr_209"></span>[211](#fn_209) ; but though this title is ever so
familiar to us, will the person we think of and the person there meant
be of the same description; and will our ‘house’ be the same as that
large house, in which, as the Apostle says, there are the vessels of
gold, and those of silver <span id="fr_210"></span>[212](#fn_210) , and
those of the other materials which are recounted? Or will not *those*
rather be beyond our immediate apprehension and to be contemplated in a
blessed immortality, while ours are earthern, and to dissolve to earth?
So in almost all the other terms there is a similarity of names between
things human and things divine, revealing nevertheless underneath this
sameness a wide difference of meanings. We find alike in both worlds the
mention of bodily limbs and senses; as with us, so with the life of God,
which all allow to be above sense, there are set down in order fingers
and arm and hand, eye and eyelids, hearing, heart, feet and sandals,
horses, cavalry, and chariots; and other metaphors innumerable are taken
from human life to illustrate symbolically divine things. As, then, each
one of these names has a human sound, but not a human meaning, so also
that of Father, while applying equally to life divine and human, hides a
distinction between the uttered meanings exactly proportionate to the
difference existing between the subjects of this title. We think of
man’s generation one way; we surmise of the divine generation in
another. A man is born in a stated time; and a particular place must be
the receptacle of his life; without it it is not in nature that he
should have any concrete substance: whence also it is inevitable that
sections of time are found enveloping his life; there is a Before, and
With, and After him. It *is* true to say of any one whatever of those
born into this world that there was a time when he was not, that he is
now, and again there will be time when he will cease to exist; but into
the Eternal world these ideas of time do not enter; to a sober thinker
they have nothing akin to that world. He who considers what the divine
life really is will get beyond the ‘sometime,’ the ‘before,’ and the
‘after,’ and every mark whatever of this extension in time; he will have
lofty views upon a subject so lofty; nor will he deem that the Absolute
is bound by those laws which he observes to be in force in human
generation.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p7"></span>Passion precedes the concrete
existence of man; certain material foundations are laid for the
formation of the living creature; beneath it all is Nature, by God’s
will, with her wonder-working, putting everything under contribution for
the proper proportion of nutrition for that which is to be born, taking
from each terrestrial element the amount necessary for the particular
case, receiving the co-operation of a measured time, and as much of the
food of the parents as is necessary for the formation of the child: in a
word Nature, advancing through all these processes by which a human life
is built up, brings the non-existent to the birth; and accordingly we
say that, non-existent once, it now is born; because, at one time not
being, at another it begins to be. But when it comes to the Divine
generation the mind rejects this ministration of Nature, and this
fulness of time in contributing to the development, and everything else
which our argument contemplated as taking place in human generation; and
he who enters on divine topics with no carnal conceptions will not fall
down again to the level of any of those debasing thoughts, but seeks for
one in keeping with the majesty of the thing to be expressed; he will
not think of passion in connexion with that which is passionless, or
count the Creator of all Nature as in need of Nature’s help, or admit
extension in time into the Eternal life; he will see that the Divine
generation is to be cleared of all such ideas, and will allow to the
title ‘Father’ only the meaning that the Only-begotten is not Himself
without a source, but derives from That the cause of His being; though,
<span id="page_XCIV">p. XCIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-Page_XCIV"></span>as for the actual beginning of
His subsistence, he will not calculate that, because he will not be able
to see any sign of the thing in question. ‘Older’ and ‘younger’ and all
such notions are found to involve intervals of time; and so, when you
mentally abstract time in general, all such indications are got rid of
along with it.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p8"></span>Since, then, He who *is* with the
Father, in some inconceivable category, before the ages admits not of a
‘sometime,’ He exists by generation indeed, but nevertheless He never
begins to exist. His life is neither in time, nor in place. But when we
take away these and all suchlike ideas in contemplating the subsistence
of the Son, there is only one thing that we can even think of as before
Him—i.e. the Father. But the Only-begotten, as He Himself has told us,
is in the Father, and so, from His nature, is not open to the
supposition that He ever existed not. If indeed the Father ever was not,
the eternity of the Son must be cancelled retrospectively in consequence
of this nothingness of the Father: but if the Father is always, how can
the Son ever be non-existent, when He cannot be thought of at all by
Himself apart from the Father, but is always implied silently in the
name Father. This name in fact conveys the two Persons equally; the idea
of the Son is inevitably suggested by that word. When was it, then, that
the Son was not? In what category shall we detect His non-existence? In
place? There is none. In time? Our Lord was before all times; and if so,
when was He not? And if He was in the Father, in what place was He not?
Tell us that, ye who are so practised in seeing things out of sight.
What kind of interval have your cogitations given a shape to? What
vacancy in the Son, be it of substance or of conception, have you been
able to think of, which shows the Father’s life, when drawn out in
parallel, as surpassing that of the Only-begotten? Why, even of men we
cannot say absolutely that any one was not, and then was born. Levi,
many generations before his own birth in the flesh, was tithed by
Melchisedech; so the Apostle says, “Levi also, who receiveth tithes,
payed tithes (in Abraham),” <span id="fr_211"></span>[213](#fn_211)
adding the proof, “for he was yet in the loins of his father, when”
Abraham met the priest of the Most High. If, then, a man in a certain
sense is not, and is then born, having existed beforehand by virtue of
kinship of substance in his progenitor, according to an Apostle’s
testimony, how as to the Divine life do they dare to utter the thought
that He was not, and then was begotten? For He ‘is in the Father,’ as
our Lord has told us; “I am in the Father, and the Father in Me <span
id="fr_212"></span>[214](#fn_212) ,” each of course being in the other
in two different senses; the Son being in the Father as the beauty of
the image is to be found in the form from which it has been outlined;
and the Father in the Son, as that original beauty is to be found in the
image of itself. Now in all hand-made images the interval of time is a
point of separation between the model and that to which it lends its
form; but there the one cannot be separated from the other, neither the
“express image” from the “Person,” to use the Apostle’s words <span
id="fr_213"></span>[215](#fn_213) , nor the “brightness” from the
“glory” of God, nor the representation from the goodness; but when once
thought has grasped one of these, it has admitted the associated Verity
as well. “*Being*,” he says (not becoming), “the brightness of His
glory <span id="fr_214"></span>[216](#fn_214) ;” so that clearly we may
rid ourselves for ever of the blasphemy which lurks in either of those
two conceptions; viz., that the Only-begotten can be thought of as
Ungenerate (for he says “the brightness of His glory,” the brightness
coming from the glory, and not, reversely, the glory from the
brightness); or that He ever began to be. For the word “being” is a
witness that interprets to us the Son’s continuity and eternity and
superiority to all marks of time.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p13"></span>What occasion, then, had our foes
for proposing for the damage of our Faith that trifling question, which
they think unanswerable and, so, a proving of their own doctrine, and
which they are continually asking, namely, ‘whether One who is can be
generated.’ We may boldly answer them at once, that He who is in the
Ungenerate *was* generated from Him, and *does* derive His source from
Him. ‘I live by the Father <span id="fr_215"></span>[217](#fn_215) :’
but it is impossible to name the ‘when’ of His beginning. When there is
no intermediate matter, or idea, or interval of time, to separate the
being of the Son from the Father, no symbol can be thought of, either,
by which the Only-begotten can be unlinked from the Father’s life, and
shewn to proceed from some special source of His own. If, then, there is
no other principle that guides the Son’s life, if there is nothing that
a devout mind can contemplate before (but not divided from) the
subsistence of the Son, but the Father only; and if the Father is
without beginning or generation, as even our adversaries admit, how can
He who can be contemplated only within the Father, who is without
beginning, admit Himself of a beginning?

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p15"></span><span id="page_XCV">p. XCV</span>
<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-Page_XCV"></span>What harm, too, does our
Faith suffer from our admitting those expressions of our opponents which
they bring forward against us as absurd, when they ask ‘whether He which
is can be begotten?’ We do not assert that this can be so in the sense
in which Nicodemus put his offensive question <span
id="fr_216"></span>[218](#fn_216) , wherein *he* thought it impossible
that one who was in existence could come to a second birth: but we
assert that, having His existence attached to an Existence which is
always and is without beginning, and accompanying every investigator
into the antiquities of time, and forestalling the curiosity of thought
as it advances into the world beyond, and intimately blended as He is
with all our conceptions of the Father, He has no beginning of His
existence any more than He is Ungenerate: but He was both begotten and
was, evincing on the score of causation generation from the Father, but
by virtue of His everlasting life repelling any moment of non-existence.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p17"></span>But this thinker in his exceeding
subtlety contravenes this statement; he sunders the being of the
Only-begotten from the Father’s nature, on the ground of one being
Generated, the other Ungenerate; and although there are such a number of
names which with reverence may be applied to the Deity, and all of them
suitable to both Persons equally, he pays no attention to anyone of
them, because these others indicate that in which Both participate; he
fastens on the name Ungenerate, and that alone; and even of this he will
not adopt the usual and approved meaning; he revolutionizes the
conception of it, and cancels its common associations. Whatever can be
the reason of this? For without some very strong one he would not wrest
language away from its accepted meaning, and innovate <span
id="fr_217"></span>[219](#fn_217) by changing the signification of
words. He knows perfectly well that if their meaning was confined to the
customary one he would have no power to subvert the sound doctrine; but
that if such terms are perverted from their common and current
acceptation, he will be able to spoil the doctrine along with the word.
For instance (to come to the actual words which he misuses), if,
according to the common thinking of our Faith he had allowed that God
was to be called Ungenerate only because He was never generated, the
whole fabric of his heresy would have collapsed, with the withdrawal of
his quibbling about this Ungenerate. If, that is, he was to be
persuaded, by following out the analogy of almost all the names of God
in use for the Church, to think of the God over all as Ungenerate, just
as He is invisible, and passionless, and immaterial; and if he was
agreed that in every one of these terms there was signified only that
which in no way belongs to God—body, for instance, and passion and
colour, and derivation from a cause—then, if his view of the case had
been like that, his party’s tenet of the *Unlikeness* would lose its
meaning; for in all else (except the Ungeneracy) that is conceived
concerning the God of all even these adversaries allow the likeness
existing between the Only-begotten and the Father. But to prevent this,
he puts the term Ungenerate in front of all these names indicating God’s
transcendent nature; and he makes this one a vantage-ground from which
he may sweep down upon our Faith; he transfers the contrariety between
the actual expressions ‘Generated’ and ‘Ungenerate’ to the Persons
themselves to whom these words apply; and thereby, by this difference
between the words he argues by a quibble for a difference between the
Beings; not agreeing with us that Generated is to be used only because
the Son was generated, and Ungenerate because the Father exists without
having been generated; but affirming that he thinks the former has
acquired existence by having been generated; though what sort of
philosophy leads him to such a view I cannot understand. If one were to
attend to the mere meanings of those words by themselves, abstracting in
thought those Persons for whom the names are taken to stand, one would
discover the groundlessness of these statements of theirs. Consider,
then, not that, in consequence of the Father being a conception prior to
the Son (as the Faith truly teaches), the order of the names themselves
must be arranged so as to correspond with the value and order of that
which underlies them; but regard them alone by themselves, to see which
of them (the word, I repeat, not the Reality which it represents) is to
be placed before the other as a conception of our mind; which of the two
conveys the assertion of an idea, which the negation of the same; for
instance (to be clear, I think similar pairs of words will give my
meaning), Knowledge, Ignorance—Passion, Passionlessness—and suchlike
contrasts, which of them possess priority of conception before the
others? Those which posit the negation, or those which posit the
assertion of the said quality? I take it the latter do so. Knowledge,
anger, passion, are conceived of first; and then comes the negation of
these ideas. And let no one, in his excess of devotion <span
id="fr_218"></span>[220](#fn_218) , blame this argument, as if it would
put the <span id="page_XCVI">p. XCVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-Page_XCVI"></span>Son before the Father. We are not
making out that the Son is to be placed in conception before the Father,
seeing that the argument is discriminating only the meanings of
‘Generated,’ and ‘Ungenerate.’ So Generation signifies the assertion of
some reality or some idea; while Ungeneracy signifies its negation; so
that there is every reason that Generation must be thought of first.
Why, then, do they insist herein on fixing on the Father the second, in
order of conception, of these two names; why do they keep on thinking
that a negation can define and can embrace the whole substance of the
term in question, and are roused to exasperation against those who point
out the groundlessness of their arguments?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[XCIII:210](2050055.htm#fr_208) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p3.1"></span>αὐτὸ τὸ πεπλασμενον τῆς
ὑπονοιας</span>.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[XCIII:211](2050055.htm#fr_209) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p5"></span> *the parable,* i.e. of the Tares.
[Matt. 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027),
[52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p5.1"></span>[Matthew xiii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p5.2"></span>: cf. v. 52.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[XCIII:212](2050055.htm#fr_210) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p6"></span> [2 Tim. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_211"></span>[XCIV:213](2050055.htm#fr_211) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p9.1"></span>[Heb.
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#010)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p9.2"></span>; [Genesis xiv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p9.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_212"></span>[XCIV:214](2050055.htm#fr_212) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p9.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p10"></span> [John x.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#038)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[XCIV:215](2050055.htm#fr_213) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p11"></span> [Heb.
i](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#000)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_214"></span>[XCIV:216](2050055.htm#fr_214) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p12"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p12.1"></span>. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p12.2"></span>ὢ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p12.3"></span>ν</span>, not <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p12.4"></span>γενόμενος</span>).

<span id="fn_215"></span>[XCIV:217](2050055.htm#fr_215) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p14"></span> [John iv.
57](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#057)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[XCV:218](2050055.htm#fr_216) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p16"></span> [John iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#004)<span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[XCV:219](2050055.htm#fr_217) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p18"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p18.1"></span>ξενίζει</span>, intrans. N.T. Polyb.
Lucian.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[XCV:220](2050055.htm#fr_218) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p19"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p19.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xxxix-p19.2"></span>θελοθρησκείας</span>, “will worship.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His unsuccessful attempt to be consistent with his own statements
after Basil has confuted him.](2050056)
