[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050113)  [Next](2050115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.x.iv"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p1"></span> §4. *He further shows the operations
of God to be expressed by human illustrations; for what hands and feet
and the other parts of the body with which men work are, that, in the
case of God, the will alone is, in place of these. And so also arises
the divergence of generation; wherefore He is called Only-begotten,
because He has no community with other generation such as is observed in
creation* <span id="fr_869"></span>[871](#fn_869) , *but in that He is
called the “brightness of glory,” and the “savour of ointment,” He shows
the close conjunction and co-eternity of His Nature with the
Father* <span id="fr_870"></span>[872](#fn_870)

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p4"></span>Now these modes of generation being
well known to men, the loving dispensation of the Holy Spirit, in
delivering to us the Divine mysteries, conveys its instruction on those
matters which transcend language by means of what is within our
capacity, as it does also constantly elsewhere, when it portrays the
Divinity in bodily terms, making mention, in speaking concerning God, of
His eye, His eyelids, His ear, His fingers, His hand, His right hand,
His arm, His feet, His shoes <span id="fr_871"></span>[873](#fn_871) ,
and the like,—none of which things is apprehended to belong in its
primary sense to the Divine Nature,—but turning its teaching to what we
can easily perceive, it describes by terms well worn in human use, facts
that are beyond every name, while by each of the terms employed
concerning God we are led analogically to some more exalted conception.
In this way, then, it employs the numerous forms of generation to
present to us, from the inspired teaching, the unspeakable existence of
the Only-begotten, taking just so much from each as may be reverently
admitted into our conceptions concerning God. For as its mention of
“fingers,” “hand,” and “arm,” in speaking of God, does not by the phrase
portray the structure of the limb out of bones and sinews and flesh and
ligaments, but signifies by such an expression His effective and
operative power, and as it indicates by each of the other words of this
kind those conceptions concerning God which correspond to them, not
admitting the corporeal senses of the words, so also it speaks indeed of
the forms of these modes of coming into being as applied to the Divine
<span id="page_CCV">p. CCV</span> <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-Page_CCV"></span>Nature, yet does not speak in that
sense which our customary knowledge enables us to understand. For when
it speaks of the formative power, it calls that particular energy by the
name of “generation,” because the word expressive of Divine power must
needs descend to our lowliness, yet it does not indicate all that is
associated with formative generation among ourselves,—neither place nor
time nor preparation of material, nor the co-operation of instruments,
nor the purpose in the things produced, but it leaves these out of
sight, and greatly and loftily claims for God the generation of the
things that are, where it says, “He spake and they were begotten, He
commanded and they were created <span id="fr_872"></span>[874](#fn_872)
.” Again, when it expounds that unspeakable and transcendent existence
which the Only-begotten has from the Father, because human poverty is
incapable of the truths that are too high for speech or thought, it uses
our language here also, and calls Him by the name of “Son,”—a name which
our ordinary use applies to those who are produced by matter and nature.
But just as the word, which tells us in reference to God of the
“generation” of the creation, did not add the statement that it was
generated by the aid of any material, declaring that its material
substance, its place, its time, and all the like, had their existence in
the power of His will, so here too, in speaking of the “Son,” it leaves
out of sight both all other things which human nature sees in earthly
generation (passions, I mean, and dispositions, and the co-operation of
time and the need of place, and especially matter), without all which
earthly generation as a result of nature does not occur. Now every such
conception of matter and interval being excluded from the sense of the
word “Son,” nature alone remains, and hereby in the word “Son” is
declared concerning the Only-begotten the close and true character of
His manifestation from the Father. And since this particular species of
generation did not suffice to produce in us an adequate idea of the
unspeakable existence of the Only-begotten, it employs also another
species of generation, that which is the result of efflux, to express
the Divine Nature of the Son, and calls Him “the brightness of
glory <span id="fr_873"></span>[875](#fn_873) ,” the “savour of
ointment <span id="fr_874"></span>[876](#fn_874) ,” the “breath of
God <span id="fr_875"></span>[877](#fn_875) ,” which our accustomed use,
in the scientific discussion we have already made, calls material
efflux. But just as in the previous cases neither the making of creation
nor the significance of the word “Son” admitted time, or matter, or
place, or passion, so here also the phrase, purifying the sense of
“brightness” and the other terms from every material conception, and
employing only that element in this particular species of generation
which is suitable to the Divinity, points by the force of this mode of
expression to the truth that He is conceived as being both from Him and
with Him. For neither does the word “breath” present to us dispersion
into the air from the underlying matter, nor “savour” the transference
that takes place from the quality of the ointment to the air, nor
“brightness” the efflux by means of rays from the body of the sun; but
this only, as we have said, is manifested by this particular mode of
generation, that He is conceived to be of Him and also with Him, no
intermediate interval existing between the Father and that Son Who is of
Him. And since, in its abundant loving-kindness, the grace of the Holy
Spirit has ordered that our conceptions concerning the Only-begotten Son
should arise in us from many sources, it has added also the remaining
species of things contemplated in generation,—that, I mean, which is the
result of mind and word. But the lofty John uses especial foresight that
the hearer may not by any means by inattention or feebleness of thought
fall into the common understanding of “Word,” so that the Son should be
supposed to be the voice of the Father. For this reason he prepares us
at his first proclamation to regard the Word as in essence, and not in
any essence foreign to or dissevered from that essence whence It has Its
being, but in that first and blessed Nature. For this is what he teaches
us when he says the Word “was in the beginning <span
id="fr_876"></span>[878](#fn_876) ,” and “was with God <span
id="fr_877"></span>[879](#fn_877) ,” being Himself also both God and all
else that the “Beginning” is. For thus it is that he makes his discourse
on the Godhead, touching the eternity of the Only-begotten. Seeing then
that these modes of generation (those, I mean, which are the result of
cause) are ordinarily known among us, and are employed by Holy Scripture
for our instruction on the subjects before us, in such a way as it might
be expected that each of them would be applied to the presentation of
Divine conceptions, let the reader of our argument “judge righteous
judgement <span id="fr_878"></span>[880](#fn_878) ,” whether any of the
assertions that heresy makes have any force against the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_869"></span>[CCIV:871](2050114.htm#fr_869) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p2"></span> This passage is clearly corrupt: the
general sense as probably intended is given here.

<span id="fn_870"></span>[CCIV:872](2050114.htm#fr_870) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p3"></span> See note 7 in the last section.

<span id="fn_871"></span>[CCIV:873](2050114.htm#fr_871) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p5"></span> The reference is probably to [Ps.
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008), [Ps.
108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p5.1"></span>[Ps. lx.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p5.2"></span>,
and [Ps. cviii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009)<span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_872"></span>[CCV:874](2050114.htm#fr_872) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p5.4"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p6"></span> <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p6.1"></span>[Ps. cxlviii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p6.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_873"></span>[CCV:875](2050114.htm#fr_873) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p6.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p7"></span> [Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[CCV:876](2050114.htm#fr_874) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p8"></span> Perhaps [Song of Sol.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_875"></span>[CCV:877](2050114.htm#fr_875) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p9"></span> [Wisd. vii.
25](../../../bib/apo/wis007.htm#025)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[CCV:878](2050114.htm#fr_876) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p10"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="fn_877"></span>[CCV:879](2050114.htm#fr_877) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p11"></span> Cf. S. [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_878"></span>[CCV:880](2050114.htm#fr_878) <span
id="viii.i.x.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p12"></span> S. [John vii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#024)<span id="viii.i.x.iv-p12.1"></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then, after showing that the Person of the Only-begotten and
Maker of things has no beginning, as have the things that were made by
Him, as Eunomius says, but that the Only-begotten is without beginning
and eternal, and has no community, either of essence or of names, with
the creation, but is co-existent with the Father from everlasting,
being, as the all-excellent Wisdom says, “the beginning and end and
midst of the times,” and after making many observations on the Godhead
and eternity of the Only-begotten, and also concerning souls and angels,
and life and death, he concludes the book.](2050115)
