[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050117)  [Next](2050119) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p1"></span> §2. *He then ingeniously shows that
the generation of the Son is not according to the phrase of Eunomius,
“The Father begat Him at that time when He chose, and not before:” but
that the Son, being the fulness of all that is good and excellent, is
always contemplated in the Father; using for this demonstration the
support of Eunomius’ own arguments.*

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p2"></span>However, though there is no interval
between them, he does not admit that their communion is immediate and
intimate, but condescends to the measure of our knowledge, and converses
<span id="page_CCXIII">p. CCXIII</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-Page_CCXIII"></span>with us in human phrase as one of
ourselves, himself quietly confessing the impotence of reasoning and
taking refuge in a line of argument that was never taught by Aristotle
and his school. He says, “It was good and proper that He should beget
His Son at that time when He willed: and in the minds of sensible men
there does not hence arise any questioning why He did not do so before.”
What does this mean, Eunomius? Are you too going afoot like us
unlettered men? are you leaving your artistic periods and actually
taking refuge in unreasoning assent? you, who so much reproached those
who take in hand to write without logical skill? You, who say to Basil,
“You show your own ignorance when you say that definitions of the terms
that express things spiritual are an impossibility for men,” who again
elsewhere advance the same charge, “you make your own impotence common
to others, when you declare that what is not possible for you is
impossible for all”? Is this the way that you, who say such things as
these, approach the ears of him who questions about the reason why the
Father defers becoming the Father of such a Son? Do you think it an
adequate explanation to say, “He begat Him at that time when He chose:
let there be no questioning on this point”? Has your apprehensive fancy
grown so feeble in the maintenance of your doctrines? What has become of
your premises that lead to dilemmas? What has become of your forcible
proofs? how comes it that those terrible and inevitable syllogistic
conclusions of your art have dissolved into vanity and nothingness? “He
begat the Son at that time when He chose: let there be no questioning on
this point!” Is this the finished product of your many labours, of your
voluminous undertakings? What was the question asked? “If it is good and
fitting for God to have such a Son, why are we not to believe that the
good is always present with Him <span id="fr_908"></span>[910](#fn_908)
?” What is the answer he makes to us from the very shrine of his
philosophy, tightening the bonds of his argument by inevitable
necessity? “He made the Son at that time when He chose: let there be no
questioning as to why He did not do so before.” Why, if the inquiry
before us were concerning some irrational being, that acts by natural
impulse, why it did not sooner do whatever it may be,—why the spider did
not make her webs, or the bee her honey, or the turtle-dove her
nest,—what else could you have said? would not the same answer have been
ready—“She did it at that time when she chose: let there be no
questioning on this matter”? Nay, if it were concerning some sculptor or
painter who works in paintings or in sculptures by his imitative art,
whatever it may be (supposing that he exercises his art without being
subject to any authority), I imagine that such an answer would meet the
case of any one who wished to know why he did not exercise his art
sooner,—that, being under no necessity, he made his own choice the
occasion of his operation. For men, because they do not always wish the
same things <span id="fr_909"></span>[911](#fn_909) , and commonly have
not power co-operating with their will, do something which seems good to
them at that time when their choice inclines to the work, and they have
no external hindrance. But that nature which is always the same, to
which no good is adventitious, in which all that variety of plans which
arises by way of opposition, from error or from ignorance, has no place,
to which there comes nothing as a result of change, which was not with
it before, and by which nothing is chosen afterwards which it had not
from the beginning regarded as good,—to say of this nature that it does
not always possess what is good, but afterwards chooses to have
something which it did not choose before,—this belongs to wisdom that
surpasses us. For we were taught that the Divine. Nature is at all times
full of all good, or rather is itself the fulness of all goods, seeing
that it needs no addition for its perfecting, but is itself by its own
nature the perfection of good. Now that which is perfect is equally
remote from addition and from diminution; and therefore, we say that
perfection of goods which we behold in the Divine Nature always remains
the same, as, in whatsoever direction we extend our thoughts, we there
apprehend it to be such as it is. The Divine Nature, then, is never void
of good: but the Son is the fulness of all good: and accordingly He is
at all times contemplated in that Father Whose Nature is perfection in
all good. But he says, “let there be no questioning about this point,
why He did not do so before:” and we shall answer him,—“It is one thing,
most sapient sir, to lay down as an ordinance some proposition that you
happen to approve <span id="fr_910"></span>[912](#fn_910) , and another
to make converts by reasoning on the points of controversy. So long,
therefore, as you cannot assign any reason why we may piously say that
the Son was “afterwards” begotten by the Father, your ordinances will be
of no effect with sensible men.”

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p6"></span>Thus it is then that Eunomius brings
the truth to light for us as the result of his scientific attack. And we
for our part shall apply his argument, as we are wont to do, for the
establishment of the true doctrine, so that even by this <span
id="page_CCXIV">p. CCXIV</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-Page_CCXIV"></span>passage it may be clear that at
every point, constrained against their will, they advocate our view. For
if, as our opponent says, “He begat the Son at that time when He chose,”
and if He always chose that which is good, and His power coincided with
His choice, it follows that the Son will be considered as always with
the Father, Who always both chooses that which is excellent, and is able
to possess what He chooses. And if we are to reduce his next words also
to truth, it is easy for us to adapt them also to the doctrine we
hold:—“Let there be no questioning among sensible men on this point, why
He did not do so before”—for the word “before” has a temporal sense,
opposed to what is “afterwards” and “later”: but on the supposition that
time does not exist, the terms expressing temporal interval are surely
abolished with it. Now the Lord was before times and before ages:
questioning as to “before” or “after” concerning the Maker of the ages
is useless in the eyes of reasonable men: for words of this class are
devoid of all meaning, if they are not used in reference to time. Since
then the Lord is antecedent to times, the words “before” and “after”
have no place as applied to Him. This may perhaps be sufficient to
refute arguments that need no one to overthrow them, but fall by their
own feebleness. For who is there with so much leisure that he can give
himself up to such an extent to listen to the arguments on the other
side, and to our contention against the silly stuff? Since, however, in
men prejudiced by impiety, deceit is like some ingrained dye, hard to
wash out, and deeply burned in upon their hearts, let us spend yet a
little time upon our argument, if haply we may be able to cleanse their
souls from this evil stain. After the utterances that I have quoted, and
after adding to them, in the manner of his teacher Prunicus, <span
id="fr_911"></span>[913](#fn_911) some unconnected and ill-arranged
octads of insolence and abuse, he comes to the crowning point of his
arguments, and, leaving the illogical exposition of his folly, arms his
discourse once more with the weapons of dialectic, and maintains his
absurdity against us, as he imagines, syllogistically.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_908"></span>[CCXIII:910](2050118.htm#fr_908) <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p3"></span> Cf. S. Basil adv. Eun. II. 12, quoted
above, p. 207.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[CCXIII:911](2050118.htm#fr_909) <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p4"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p4.1"></span>ταὐτὰ</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p4.2"></span>ταῦτα</span>, which appears in the text of
Oehler as well as in the earlier editions.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[CCXIII:912](2050118.htm#fr_910) <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p5"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p5.1"></span>τι τῶν κατὰ γνωμὴν</span>, for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p5.2"></span>τι τῶν
καταγνωμῶν</span>, which is the reading of the editions, but introduces
a word otherwise apparently unknown.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[CCXIV:913](2050118.htm#fr_911) <span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7"></span> So in Book I. <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.1"></span>πρῶτον μὲν τῆς
Προυνίκου σοφίας γίνεται μαθητὴς</span>, and Book XIII. p. 844 (Paris
Edit.). It may be questioned whether the phrase in Books I. and XIII.,
and that here, refers to a supposed connection of Eunomius with
Gnosticism. The <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.2"></span>Προύνικος Σοφία</span> of the Gnostics was
a “male-female,” and hence the masculine <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.3"></span>τὸν παιδεύτην</span> might properly be
applied to it. If this point were cleared up, we might be more certain
of the meaning to be attached to the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.4"></span>ὀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.5"></span>κτάδας</span>, which is also possibly
borrowed from the Gnostic phraseology, being akin to the form <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.6"></span>ὀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.ii-p7.7"></span>γδοάδας</span>. \[On
the Gnostic conception of “Prunicus,” see the note on the subject in
Harvey’s *Irenæus* (vol. I. p. 225), and Smith and Wace’s *Dict. Chr.
Biogr.* s.v. On the Gnostic Ogdoads, see Mansel’s *Gnostic Heresies,*
pp. 152 sqq., 170 sqq., and the articles on Basilides and Valentinus in
*Dict. Chr. Biogr.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He further shows that the pretemporal generation of the Son is
not the subject of influences drawn from ordinary and carnal generation,
but is without beginning and without end, and not according to the
fabrications constructed by Eunomius, in ignorance of His power, from
the statements of Plato concerning the soul and from the sabbath rest of
the Hebrews.](2050119)
