[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050118)  [Next](2050120) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p1"></span> §3. *He further shows that the
pretemporal generation of the Son is not the subject of influences drawn
from ordinary and carnal generation, but is without beginning and
without end, and not according to the fabrications constructed by
Eunomius, in ignorance of His power, from the statements of Plato
concerning the soul and from the sabbath rest of the Hebrews.*

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p2"></span>What he says runs thus:—“As all
generation is not protracted to infinity, but ceases on arriving at some
end, those who admit the origination of the Son are absolutely obliged
to say that He then ceased being generated, and not to look
incredulously on the beginning of those things which cease being
generated, and therefore also surely *begin*: for the cessation of
generation establishes a beginning of begetting and being begotten: and
these facts cannot be disbelieved, on the ground at once of nature
itself and of the Divine laws <span id="fr_912"></span>[914](#fn_912) .”
Now since he endeavours to establish his point inferentially, laying
down his universal proposition according to the scientific method of
those who are skilled in such matters, and including in the general
premise the proof of the particular, let us first consider his
universal, and then proceed to examine the force of his inferences. Is
it a reverent proceeding to draw from “all generation” evidence even as
to the pre-temporal generation of the Son? and ought we to put forward
ordinary nature as our instructor on the being of the Only-begotten? For
my own part, I should not have expected any one to reach such a point of
madness, that any such idea of the Divine and unsullied generation
should enter his fancy. “All generation,” he says, “is not protracted to
infinity.” What is it that he understands by “generation”? Is he
speaking of fleshly, bodily birth, or of the formation of inanimate
objects? The affections involved in bodily generation are well
known—affections which no one would think of transferring to the Divine
Nature. In order therefore that our discourse may not, by mentioning the
works of nature at length, be made to appear redundant, we shall pass
such matters by in silence, as I suppose that every sensible man is
himself aware of the causes by which generation is protracted, both in
regard to its beginning and to its cessation: it would be tedious and at
the same time superfluous to express them all minutely, the coming
together of those who generate, the formation in the womb of that which
is generated, travail, birth, place, time, without which the generation
of a body cannot be brought about,—things which are all equally alien
from the Divine generation of the Only-begotten: for if any one of these
<span id="page_CCXV">p. CCXV</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-Page_CCXV"></span>things were admitted, the rest will
of necessity all enter with it. That the Divine generation, therefore,
may be clear of every idea connected with passion, we shall avoid
conceiving with regard to it even that extension which is measured by
intervals. Now that which begins and ends is surely regarded as being in
a kind of extension, and all extension is measured by time, and as time
(by which we mark both the end of birth and its beginning) is excluded,
it would be vain, in the case of the uninterrupted generation, to
entertain the idea of end or beginning, since no idea can be formed to
mark either the point at which such generation begins or that at which
it ceases. If on the other hand it is the inanimate creation to which he
is looking, even in this case, in like manner, place, and time, and
matter, and preparation, and power of the artificer, and many like
things, concur to bring the product to perfection. And since time
assuredly is concurrent with all things that are produced, and since
with everything that is created, be it animate or inanimate, there are
conceived also bases of construction relative to the product, we can
find in these cases evident beginnings and endings of the process of
formation. For even the procuring of material is actually the beginning
of the fabric, and is a sign of place, and is logically connected with
time. All these things fix for the products their beginnings and
endings; and no one could say that these things have any participation
in the pretemporal generation of the Only-begotten God, so that, by the
aid of the things now under consideration, we are able to calculate,
with regard to that generation, any beginning or end.

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p4"></span>Now that we have so far discussed
these matters, let us resume consideration of our adversaries’ argument.
It says, “As all generation is not protracted to infinity, but ceases on
arriving at some end.” Now, since the sense of “generation” has been
considered with respect to either meaning,—whether he intends by this
word to signify the birth of corporeal beings, or the formation of
things created (neither of which has anything in common with the
unsullied Nature), the premise is shown to have no connection with the
subject <span id="fr_913"></span>[915](#fn_913) . For it is not a matter
of absolute necessity, as he maintains, that, because all making and
generation ceases at some limit, therefore those who accept the
generation of the Son should circumscribe it by a double limit, by
supposing, as regards it, a beginning and an end. For it is only as
being circumscribed in some quantitative way that things can be said
either to begin or to cease on arriving at a limit, and the measure
expressed by time (having its extension concomitant with the quantity of
that which is produced) differentiates the beginning from the end by the
interval between them. But how can any one measure or treat as extended
that which is without quantity and without extension? What measure can
he find for that which has no quantity, or what interval for that which
has no extension? or how can any one define the infinite by “end” and
“beginning?” for “beginning” and “end” are names of limits of extension,
and, where there is no extension, neither is there any limit. Now the
Divine Nature is without extension, and, being without extension, it has
no limit; and that which is limitless is infinite, and is spoken of
accordingly. Thus it is idle to try to circumscribe the infinite by
“beginning” and “ending”—for what is circumscribed cannot be infinite.
How comes it, then, that this Platonic Phædrus disconnectedly tacks on
to his own doctrine those speculations on the soul which Plato makes in
that dialogue? For as Plato there spoke of “cessation of motion,” so
this writer too was eager to speak of “cessation of generation,” in
order to impose upon those who have no knowledge of these matters, with
fine Platonic phrases. “And these facts,” he tells us, “cannot be
disbelieved, on the ground at once of nature itself and of the Divine
laws.” But nature, from our previous remarks, appears not to be
trustworthy for instruction as to the Divine generation,—not even if one
were to take the universe itself as an illustration of the argument:
since through its creation also, as we learn in the cosmogony of Moses,
there ran the measure of time, meted out in a certain order and
arrangement by stated days and nights, for each of the things that came
into being: and this even our adversaries’ statement does not admit with
regard to the being of the Only-begotten, since it acknowledges that the
Lord was before the times of the ages.

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p6"></span>It remains to consider his support of
his point by “the Divine laws,” by which he undertakes to show both an
end and a beginning of the generation of the Son. “God,” he says,
“willing that the law of creation should be impressed upon the Hebrews,
did not appoint the first day of generation for the end of creation, or
to be the evidence of its beginning; for He gave them as the memorial of
the creation, not the first day of generation, but the seventh, whereon
He rested from His works.” Will any one believe that this was written by
Eunomius, and that the words cited have not been inserted by us, by way
of misrepresenting his composition so as to make him appear ridiculous
to our readers, in dragging in to prove his point <span
id="page_CCXVI">p. CCXVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-Page_CCXVI"></span>matters that have nothing to do
with the question? For the matter in hand was to show, as he undertook
to do, that the Son, not previously existing, came into being; and that
in being generated, He took a beginning of generation, and of
cessation <span id="fr_914"></span>[916](#fn_914) ,—His generation being
protracted in time, as it were by a kind of travail. And what is his
resource for establishing this? The fact that the people of the Hebrews,
according to the Law, keep sabbath on the seventh day! How well the
evidence agrees with the matter in hand! Because the Jew honours his
sabbath by idleness, the fact, as he says, is proved that the Lord both
had a beginning of birth and ceased being born! How many other
testimonies on this matter has our author passed by, not at all of less
weight than that which he employs to establish the point at issue!—the
circumcision on the eighth day, the week of unleavened bread, the
mystery on the fourteenth day of the moon’s course, the sacrifices of
purification, the observation of the lepers, the ram, the calf, the
heifer, the scapegoat, the he-goat. If these things are far removed from
the point, let those who are so much interested in the Jewish mysteries
tell us how that particular matter is within range of the question. We
judge it to be mean and unmanly to trample on the fallen, and shall
proceed to enquire, from what follows in his writings, whether there is
anything there of such a kind as to give trouble to his opponent. All,
then, that he maintains in the next passage, as to the impropriety of
supposing anything intermediate between the Father and the Son, I shall
pass by, as being, in a sense, in agreement with our doctrine. For it
would be alike undiscriminating and unfair not to distinguish in his
remarks what is irreproachable, and what is blamable, seeing that, while
he fights against his own statements, he does not follow his own
admissions, speaking of the immediate character of the connection while
refusing to admit its continuity, and conceiving that nothing was before
the Son and having some suspicion that the Son *was* while yet
contending that He came into being when He was not. We shall spend but a
short time on these points (since the argument has already been
established beforehand), and then proceed to handle the arguments
proposed.

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p8"></span>It is not allowable for the same
person to set nothing above the existence of the Only-begotten, and to
say that before His generation He was not, but that He was generated
*then* when the Father willed. For “*then*” and “*when*” have a sense
which specially and properly refers to the denoting of time, according
to the common use of men who speak soundly, and according to their
signification in Scripture. One may take “*then* shall they say among
the heathen <span id="fr_915"></span>[917](#fn_915) ,” and “*when* I
sent you <span id="fr_916"></span>[918](#fn_916) ” and “*then* shall the
kingdom of heaven be likened <span id="fr_917"></span>[919](#fn_917) ,”
and countless similar phrases through the whole of Scripture, to prove
this point, that the ordinary Scriptural use employs these parts of
speech to denote time. If therefore, as our opponent allows, time was
not, the signifying of time surely disappears too: and if this did not
exist, it will necessarily be replaced by eternity in our
conception <span id="fr_918"></span>[920](#fn_918) . For in the phrase
“was not” there is surely implied “once”: as, if he should speak of “not
being,” without the qualification “once,” he would also deny his
existence *now:* but if he admits His present existence, and contends
against His eternity, it is surely not “not being” *absolutely,* but
“not being” *once* which is present to his mind. And as this phrase is
utterly unreal, unless it rests upon the signification of time, it would
be foolish and idle to say that nothing was before the Son, and yet to
maintain that the Son did not always exist. For if there is neither
place nor time, nor any other creature where the Word that was in the
beginning is not, the statement that the Lord “once was not” is entirely
removed from the region of orthodox doctrine. So he is at variance not
so much with us as with himself, who declares that the Only-begotten
both was and was not. For in confessing that the conjunction of the Son
with the Father is not interrupted by anything, He clearly testifies to
His eternity. But if he should say that the Son was not in the Father,
we shall not ourselves say anything against such a statement, but shall
oppose to it the Scripture which declares that the Son is in the Father,
and the Father in the Son, without adding to the phrase “once” or “when”
or “then,” but testifying His eternity by this affirmative and
unqualified utterance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_912"></span>[CCXIV:914](2050119.htm#fr_912) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p3"></span> This quotation from Eunomius
presents some difficulties, but it is quite as likely that they are due
to the obscurity of his style, as that they are due to corruption of the
text.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[CCXV:915](2050119.htm#fr_913) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p5"></span> *i. e.*with the subject of
discussion, the generation of the Only-begotten.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[CCXVI:916](2050119.htm#fr_914) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p7"></span> The genitive <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p7.1"></span>ληξέως</span> is
rather awkward; it may be explained, however, as dependent upon <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p7.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p7.3"></span>ρχήν</span>; “He
began to be generated: He began to cease being generated.”

<span id="fn_915"></span>[CCXVI:917](2050119.htm#fr_915) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p9"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003)<span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_916"></span>[CCXVI:918](2050119.htm#fr_916) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p10"></span> S. [Luke xxii.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#035)<span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_917"></span>[CCXVI:919](2050119.htm#fr_917) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p11"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001)<span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="fn_918"></span>[CCXVI:920](2050119.htm#fr_918) <span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="viii.i.xi.iii-p12"></span> The phrase is obscure, and the text
possibly corrupt. To read <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.xi.iii-p12.1"></span>τὰς ἐννοίας</span> (as Gulonius seems to
have done) would simplify matters: but the general sense is clear—that
the denial of the existence of time implies eternity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Then, having shown that Eunomius' calumny against the great
Basil, that he called the Only-begotten “Ungenerate,” is false, and
having again with much ingenuity discussed the eternity, being, and
endlessness of the Only-begotten, and the creation of light and of
darkness, he concludes the book.](2050120)
