[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050160)  [Next](2050162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.</span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p2.1"></span>Now</span> those who take a superficial
and unreflecting view of things observe the outward appearance of
anything they meet, *e.g.* of a man, and then trouble themselves no more
about him. The view they have taken of the bulk of his body is enough to
make them think that they know all about him. But the penetrating and
scientific mind will not trust to the eyes alone the task of taking the
measure of reality; it will not stop at appearances, nor count that
which is not seen amongst unrealities. It inquires into the qualities of
the man’s soul. It takes those of its characteristics which have been
developed by his bodily constitution, both in combination and singly;
first singly, by analysis, and then in that living combination which
makes the personality of the subject. As regards the inquiry into the
nature of beauty, we see, again, that the man of half-grown
intelligence, when he observes an object which is bathed in the glow of
a seeming beauty, thinks that that object is in its essence beautiful,
no matter what it is that so prepossesses him with the pleasure of the
eye. He will not go deeper into the subject. But the other, whose mind’s
eye is clear, and who can inspect such appearances, will neglect those
elements which are the material only upon which the Form of Beauty
works; to him they will be but the ladder by which he climbs to the
prospect of that Intellectual Beauty, in accordance with their share in
which all other beauties get their existence and their name. But for the
majority, I take it, who live all their lives with such obtuse faculties
of thinking, it is a difficult thing to perform this feat of mental
analysis and of discriminating the material vehicle from the immanent
beauty, and thereby of grasping the actual nature of the Beautiful; and
if any one wants to know the exact source of all the false and
pernicious conceptions of it, he would find it in nothing else but this,
viz. the absence, in the soul’s faculties of feeling, of that exact
training which would enable them to distinguish between true Beauty and
the reverse. Owing to this men give up all search after the true Beauty.
Some slide into mere sensuality. Others incline in their desires to dead
metallic coin. Others limit their imagination of the beautiful to
worldly honours, fame, and power. There is another class which is
enthusiastic about art and science. The most debased make their gluttony
the test of what is good. But he who turns from all grosser thoughts and
all passionate longings after what is seeming, and explores the nature
of the beauty which is simple, immaterial, formless, would never make a
mistake like that when he has to choose between all the objects of
desire; he would never be so misled by these attractions as not to see
the transient character of their pleasures and not to win his way to an
utter contempt for every one of them. This, then, is the path to lead us
to the discovery of the Beautiful. All other objects that attract men’s
love, be they never so fashionable, be they prized never so much and
embraced never so eagerly, must be <span id="page_356">p. 356</span>
<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-Page_356"></span>left below us, as too low, too
fleeting, to employ the powers of loving which we possess; not indeed
that those powers are to be locked up within us unused and motionless;
but only that they must first be cleansed from all lower longings; then
we must lift them to that height to which sense can never reach.
Admiration even of the beauty of the heavens, and of the dazzling
sunbeams, and, indeed, of any fair phenomenon, will then cease. The
beauty noticed there will be but as the hand to lead us to the love of
the supernal Beauty whose glory the heavens and the firmament declare,
and whose secret the whole creation sings. The climbing soul, leaving
all that she has grasped already as too narrow for her needs, will thus
grasp the idea of that magnificence which is exalted far above the
heavens. But how can any one reach to this, whose ambitions creep below?
How can any one fly up into the heavens, who has not the wings of heaven
and is not already buoyant and lofty-minded by reason of a heavenly
calling? Few can be such strangers to evangelic mysteries as not to know
that there is but one vehicle on which man’s soul can mount into the
heavens, viz. the self-made likeness in himself to the descending Dove,
whose wings <span id="fr_1400"></span>[1402](#fn_1400) David the Prophet
also longed for. This is the allegorical name used in Scripture for the
power of the Holy Spirit; whether it be because not a drop of gall <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1403](#fn_1401) is found in that bird, or because
it cannot bear any noisome smell, as close observers tell us. He
therefore who keeps away from all bitterness and all the noisome
effluvia of the flesh, and raises himself on the aforesaid wings above
all low earthly ambitions, or, more than that, above the whole universe
itself, will be the man to find that which is alone worth loving, and to
become himself as beautiful as the Beauty which he has touched and
entered, and to be made bright and luminous himself in the communion of
the real Light. We are told by those who have studied the subject, that
those gleams which follow each other so fast through the air at night
and which some call shooting stars <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1404](#fn_1402) , are nothing but the air itself
streaming into the upper regions of the sky under stress of some
particular blasts. They say that the fiery track is traced along the sky
when those blasts ignite in the ether. In like manner, then, as this air
round the earth is forced upwards by some blast and changes into the
pure splendour of the ether, so the mind of man leaves this murky miry
world, and under the stress of the spirit becomes pure and luminous in
contact with the true and supernal Purity; in such an atmosphere it even
itself emits light, and is so filled with radiance, that it becomes
itself a Light, according to the promise of our Lord that “the righteous
should shine forth as the sun <span id="fr_1403"></span>[1405](#fn_1403)
.” We see this even here, in the case of a mirror, or a sheet of water,
or any smooth surface that can reflect the light; when they receive the
sunbeam they beam themselves; but they would not do this if any stain
marred their pure and shining surface. We shall become then as the
light, in our nearness to Christ’s true light, if we leave this dark
atmosphere of the earth and dwell above; and we shall be light, as our
Lord says somewhere to His disciples <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[1406](#fn_1404) , if the true Light that shineth in
the dark comes down even to us; unless, that is, any foulness of sin
spreading over our hearts should dim the brightness of our light.
Perhaps these examples have led us gradually on to the discovery that we
can be changed into something better than ourselves; and it has been
proved as well that this union of the soul with the incorruptible Deity
can be accomplished in no other way but by herself attaining by her
virgin state to the utmost purity possible,—a state which, being like
God, will enable her to grasp that to which it is like, while she places
herself like a mirror beneath the purity of God, and moulds her own
beauty at the touch and the sight of the Archetype of all beauty. Take a
character strong enough to turn from all that is human, from persons,
from wealth, from the pursuits of Art and Science, even from whatever in
moral practice and in legislation is viewed as right (for still in all
of them error in the apprehension of the Beautiful comes in, sense being
the criterion); such a character will feel as a passionate lover only
towards that Beauty which has no source but Itself, which is not such at
one particular time or relatively only, which is Beautiful from, and
through, and in itself, not such at one moment and in the next ceasing
to be such, above all increase and addition, incapable of change and
alteration. I venture to affirm that, to one who has cleansed all the
powers of his being from every form of vice, the Beauty which is
essential, the source of every beauty and every good, will become
visible. The visual eye, purged from its blinding humour, can clearly
discern objects even on the <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-Page_357"></span>distant sky <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1407](#fn_1405) ; so to the soul by virtue of her
innocence there comes the power of taking in that Light; and the real
Virginity, the real zeal for chastity, ends in no other goal than this,
viz. the power thereby of seeing God. No one in fact is so mentally
blind as not to understand *that* without telling; viz. that the God of
the Universe is the only absolute, and primal, and unrivalled <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[1408](#fn_1406) Beauty and Goodness. All, maybe,
know that; but there are those who, as might have been expected, wish
besides this to discover, if possible, a process by which we may be
actually guided to it. Well, the Divine books are full of such
instruction for our guidance; and besides that many of the Saints cast
the refulgence of their own lives, like lamps, upon the path for those
who are “walking with God <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1409](#fn_1407) .”
But each may gather in abundance for himself suggestions towards this
end out of either Covenant in the inspired writings; the Prophets and
the Law are full of them; and also the Gospel and the Traditions of the
Apostles. What we ourselves have conjectured in following out the
thoughts of those inspired utterances is this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[356:1402](2050161.htm#fr_1400) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p3"></span> [Ps. lv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[356:1403](2050161.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p4"></span> Cf. Augustine, Tract. 6 in Joann.:
“Columba fel non habet. Simon habebat; ideo separatus est a columbæ
visceribus.” Aristotle asserts the contrary; but even Galen denies that
it possesses a bladder (*lib. de atr. bil. sub fin.*).

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[356:1404](2050161.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>διᾴττοντας</span>, corrected by Livineius,
the transcriber of the Vatican <span class="c22"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.2"></span>ms.</span>, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.3"></span>διατάττοντας</span>. Cf. Arist. *Meteor.*
I. iv: <span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.4"></span>καὶ
ὁμοίως κατὰ πλάτος καὶ βάθος οἱ δοκοῦντες ἀστέρες διᾴττειν
γίνονται</span>: and, in the same chapter, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.5"></span>διαθέοντες ἀστέρες</span>. Cf. Seneca.
*Nat. Quæst.* iii. 14: “Videmus ergo ‘Stellarum longos a tergo albescere
tractus.’ Hæc velut stellæ exsiliunt et transvolant.” This and much
else, in the preceding and following notes to this treatise, is taken
from those of Fronto Ducæus, printed in the Paris Edit. The Paris
Editors, Fronto Ducæus and Claude Morell, used Livineius’ edition (1574)
of this treatise, which is based on the Vatican Cod. and Bricman’s (of
Cologne); and they corrected from the Cod. of F. Morell, Regius
Professor of Theology; and from the Cod. Regius.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[356:1405](2050161.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p5.6"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p6"></span> S. [Matt. xiii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[356:1406](2050161.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p7"></span> S. [John
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#005), [John
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[357:1407](2050161.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>τὰ ἐν τῷ οὐρανῷ τηλαυγῶς καθορᾶται</span>.
The same word in S. [Mark viii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/mar008.htm#025)<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.2"></span>
(“clearly”) evidently refers to the second stage of recovered sight, the
power of seeing the *perspective.* The <span class="c22"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.3"></span>mss.</span> reading is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.4"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.5"></span>ν τῷ ἁγίω</span>, for
which <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.6"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.7"></span>έ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.8"></span>ρι</span> and <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.9"></span>ἡ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.10"></span>λί& 251·</span> have been conjectured;
<span class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.11"></span>οὐρανῷ</span>
is due to Galesinius; there is a similar place in Dio Chrys. (*de regno
et tyrann.*): “impaired sight,” he says, “cannot see even what is quite
close, <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.12"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.13"></span>γιὲς δὲ οὖσα μέχρις οὐρανοῦ τε καὶ
ἀστέρων ἐξικνεῖται</span>, *i.e.* the distant sky. Just above, <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.14"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.15"></span>ποῤ&
191·υψαμένῳ</span> (purged) is a better reading than <span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.16"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.17"></span>ποῤ&
191·ιψαμένῳ</span>, and supported by F. Morell’s <span class="c22"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.18"></span>ms.</span>

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[357:1408](2050161.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p8.19"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p9"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>μόνως</span>.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[357:1409](2050161.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p10"></span> <span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>[Gen. v.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)<span
id="ix.ii.ii.xii-p10.2"></span>; vi. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII](2050162)
