[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050190)  [Next](2050192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="x.ii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.x-p1"></span> IX. *That the form of man was framed to
serve as an instrument for the use of reason* <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1620](#fn_1618) .

<span id="x.ii.ii.x-p3"></span>1. Now since our Maker has bestowed upon
our formation a certain Godlike grace, by implanting in His image the
likeness of His own excellences, for this reason He gave, of His bounty,
His other good gifts to human nature; but mind and reason we cannot
strictly say that He *gave*, but that He *imparted* them, adding to the
image the proper adornment of His own nature. Now since the mind is a
thing intelligible and incorporeal, its grace would have been
incommunicable and isolated, if its motion were not manifested by some
contrivance. For this cause there was still need of this instrumental
organization, that it might, like a plectrum, touch the vocal organs and
indicate by the quality of the notes struck, the motion within.

<span id="x.ii.ii.x-p4"></span>2. And as some skilled musician, who may
have been deprived by some affection of his own voice, and yet wish to
make his skill known, might make melody with voices of others, and
publish his art by the aid of flutes or of the lyre, so also the human
mind being a discoverer of all sorts of conceptions, seeing that it is
unable, by the mere soul, to reveal to those who hear by bodily senses
the motions of its understanding, touches, like some skilful composer,
these animated instruments, and makes known its hidden thoughts by means
of the sound produced upon them.

<span id="x.ii.ii.x-p5"></span>3. Now the music of the human instrument
is a sort of compound of flute and lyre, sounding together in
combination as in a concerted piece of music. For the breath, as it is
forced up from the air-receiving vessels through the windpipe, when the
speaker’s impulse to utterance attunes the harmony to sound, and as it
strikes against the internal protuberances which divide this flute-like
passage in a circular arrangement, imitates in a way the sound uttered
through a flute, being driven round and round by the membranous
projections. But the palate receives the sound from below in its own
concavity, and dividing the sound by the two passages that extend to the
nostrils, and by the cartilages about the perforated bone, as it were by
some scaly protuberance, makes its resonance louder; while the cheek,
the tongue, the mechanism of the pharynx by which the chin is relaxed
when drawn in, and tightened when extended to a point—all these in many
different ways answer to the motion of the plectrum upon the strings,
varying very quickly, as occasion requires, the arrangement of the
tones; and the opening and closing of the lips has the same effect as
players produce when they check the breath of the flute with their
fingers according to the measure of the tune.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[395:1620](2050191.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="x.ii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="x.ii.ii.x-p2"></span> This and part of the next chapter,
according to the division of the Greek, are included in the ninth
chapter of the Latin Version.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: That the mind works by means of the senses.](2050192)
