[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050033)  [Next](2050035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p1"></span> §18. *He has no reason for
distinguishing a plurality of beings in the Trinity. He offers no
demonstration that it is so.*

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p2"></span>Let us examine the following as
well. He calls one Being the work of another, the second of the first,
and the third of the second. On what previous demonstration does this
statement rest: what proofs does he make use of, what method, to compel
belief in the succeeding Being as a result of the preceding? For even if
it were possible to draw an analogy for this from created things, such
conjecturing about the transcendent from lower existences would not be
altogether sound, though the error in arguing from natural phenomena to
the incomprehensible might then be pardonable. But as it is, none would
venture to affirm that, while the heavens are the work of God, the sun
is that of the heavens, and the moon that of the sun, and the stars that
of the moon, and other created things that of the stars: seeing that all
are the work of One: for there is one God and Father of all, of Whom are
all things. If anything is produced by mutual transmission, such as the
race of animals, not even here does one produce another, for nature runs
on through each generation. How then, when it is impossible to affirm it
of the created world, can he declare of the transcendent existencies
that the second is a work of the first, and so on? If, however, he is
thinking of animal generation, and fancies that such a process is going
on also amongst pure existences, so that the older produces the younger,
even so he fails to be consistent: for such productions are of the same
type as their progenitors: whereas he assigns to the members of his
succession strange and uninherited qualities: and thus displays a
superfluity of falsehood, while striving to strike truth with both hands
at once, in a clever boxer’s fashion. In order to show the inferior rank
and diminution in intrinsic value of the Son and Holy Spirit, he
declares that “one is produced from *another;*” in order that those who
understand about mutual generation might entertain no idea of family
relationship here: he contradicts the law of nature by declaring that
“one is produced from *another,*” and at the same time exhibiting the
Son as a bastard when compared with His Father’s nature.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p3"></span>But one might find fault with him,
I think, before coming to all this. If, that is, any one else,
previously unaccustomed to discussion and unversed in logical
expression, delivered his ideas in this chance fashion, some indulgence
might be shown him for not using the recognized methods for establishing
his views. But considering that Eunomius has such an abundance of this
power, that he can advance by his ‘irresistible’ method <span
id="fr_111"></span>[113](#fn_111) of proof even into the <span
id="page_LVI">p. LVI</span> <span
id="viii.i.iii.xviii-Page_LVI"></span>supra-natural, how can he be
ignorant of the starting-point from which this ‘irresistible’ perception
of a hidden truth takes its rise in all these logical excursions. Every
one knows that all such arguing must start from plain and well-known
truths, to compel belief through itself in still doubtful truths: and
that none of these last can be grasped without the guidance of what is
obvious leading us towards the unknown. If on the other hand that which
is adopted to start with for the illustration of this unknown is at
variance with universal belief, it will be a long time before the
unknown will receive any illustration from it.

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p5"></span>The whole controversy, then,
between the Church and the Anomœans turns on this: Are we to regard the
Son and the Holy Spirit as belonging to created or uncreated existence?
Our opponent declares that to be the case which all deny: he boldly lays
it down, without looking about for any proof, that each being is the
work of the preceding being. What method of education, what school of
thought can warrant him in this, it is difficult to see. Some axiom that
cannot be denied or assailed must be the beginning of every process of
proof; so as for the unknown quantity to be demonstrated from what has
been assumed, being legitimately deduced by intervening syllogisms. The
reasoner, therefore, who makes what ought to be the object of inquiry
itself a premiss of his demonstration is only proving the obscure by the
obscure, and illusion by illusion. He is making ‘the blind lead the
blind,’ for it is a truly blind and unsupported statement to say that
the Creator and Maker of all things is a creature made: and to this they
link on a conclusion that is also blind: namely, that the Son is alien
in nature, *unlike* in being to the Father, and quite devoid of His
essential character. But of this enough. Where his thought is nakedly
blasphemous, there we too can defer its refutation. We must now return
to consider his words which come next in order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_111"></span>[LV:113](2050034.htm#fr_111) <span
id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4.1"></span>καταληπτικῆς ἐφόδου</span>—<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4.2"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4.3"></span>κατάληψις</span>.
These words are taken from the Stoic logic, and refer to the Stoic view
of the standard of truth. To the question, How are true perceptions
distinguished from false ones, the Stoics answered, that a true
perception is one which represents a real object as it really is. To the
further question, How may it be known that a perception faithfully
represents a reality, they replied by pointing to a relative not an
absolute test—*the degree of strength with which certain perceptions
force themselves* upon our notice. Some of our perceptions are of such a
kind that they at once oblige us to bestow on them assent. Such
perceptions produce in us that strength of conviction which the Stoics
call a conception. Whenever a perception forces itself upon us in this
irresistible form, we are no longer dealing with a fiction of the
imagination but with something real. The test of irresistibility (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4.4"></span>κατάληψις</span>)
was, in the first place, understood to apply to sensations from without,
such sensations, according to the Stoic view, alone supplying the
material for knowledge. An equal degree of certainty was, however,
attached to terms deduced from originally true data, either by the
universal and natural exercise of thought, or by scientific processes of
proof. It is <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.i.iii.xviii-p4.5"></span>καταλέψεις</span> obtained in this
last way that Gregory refers to, and Eunomius was endeavouring to create
in the supra-natural world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His acknowledgment that the Divine Being is 'single' is only
verbal.](2050035)
