[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050248)  [Next](2050250) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xi.ii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.</span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>But</span> they change their ground and
endeavour to vilify our faith in another way. They ask, if what took
place was not to the dishonour of <span id="page_498">p. 498</span>
<span id="xi.ii.xxxi-Page_498"></span>God or unworthy of Him, why did He
delay the benefit so long? Why, since evil was in the beginning, did He
not cut off its further progress?—To this we have a concise answer; viz.
that this delay in conferring the benefit was owing to wisdom and a
provident regard for that which would be a gain for our nature. In
diseases, for instance, of the body, when some corrupt humour spreads
unseen beneath the pores, before all the unhealthy secretion has been
detected on the skin, they who treat diseases by the rules of art do not
use such medicines as would harden the flesh, but they wait till all
that lurks within comes out upon the surface, and then, with the disease
unmasked, apply their remedies. When once, then, the disease of evil had
fixed itself in the nature of mankind, He, the universal Healer, waited
for the time when no form of wickedness was left still hidden in that
nature. For this reason it was that He did not produce his healing for
man’s disease immediately on Cain’s hatred and murder of his brother;
for the wickedness of those who were destroyed in the days of Noah had
not yet burst into a flame, nor had that terrible disease of Sodomite
lawlessness been displayed, nor the Egyptians’ war against God <span
id="fr_2008"></span>[2010](#fn_2008) , nor the pride of Assyria, nor the
Jews’ bloody persecution of God’s saints, nor Herod’s cruel murder of
the children, nor whatever else is recorded, or if unrecorded was done
in the generations that followed, the root of evil budding forth in
divers manners in the wilful purposes of man. When, then, wickedness had
reached its utmost height, and there was no form of wickedness which men
had not dared to do, to the end that the healing remedy might pervade
the whole of the diseased system, He, accordingly, ministers to the
disease; not at its beginning, but when it had been completely
developed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[498:2010](2050249.htm#fr_2008) <span
id="xi.ii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="xi.ii.xxxi-p3"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="xi.ii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>θεομαχία</span>, a word often applied by the
Greek Fathers to the conduct of the Egyptians, in reference, of course,
to Pharaoh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](2050250)
