[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050139)  [Next](2050141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_CCL">p. CCL</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCL"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Answer to Eunomius’ Second Book <span
id="fr_1064"></span>[1066](#fn_1064) .</span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>The</span> first part of my contentions
against Eunomius has with God’s help been sufficiently established in
the preceding work, as all who will may see from what I have worked out,
how in that former part his fallacy has been completely exposed, and its
falsehood has no further force against the truth, except in the case of
those who show a very shameless animus against her. But since, like some
robber’s ambuscade, he has got together a second work against orthodoxy,
again with God’s help the truth takes up arms through me against the
array of her enemies, commanding my arguments like a general and
directing them at her pleasure against the foe; following whose steps I
shall boldly venture on the second part of my contentions, nothing
daunted by the array of falsehood, notwithstanding its display of
numerous arguments. For faithful is He who has promised that “a thousand
shall be chased by one,” and that “ten thousand shall be put to flight
by two” <span id="fr_1065"></span>[1067](#fn_1065) , victory in battle
being due not to numbers, but to righteousness. For even as bulky
Goliath, when he shook against the Israelites that ponderous spear we
read of, inspired no fear in his opponent, though a shepherd and
unskilled in the tactics of war, but having met him in fight loses his
own head by a direct reversal of his expectations, so our Goliath, the
champion of this alien system, stretching forth his blasphemy against
his opponents as though his hand were on a naked sword, and flashing the
while with sophisms fresh from his whetstone, has failed to inspire us,
though no soldiers, with any fear of his prowess, or to find himself
free to exult in the dearth of adversaries; on the contrary, he has
found us warriors improvised from the Lord’s sheepfold, untaught in
logical warfare, and thinking it no detriment to be so, but simply
slinging our plain, rude argument of truth against him. Since then, that
shepherd who is in the record, when he had cast down the alien with his
sling, and broken his helmet with the stone, so that it gaped under the
violence of the blow, did not confine his valour to gazing on his fallen
foe, but running in upon him, and depriving him of his head, returns
bearing it as a trophy to his people, parading that braggart head
through the host of his countrymen; looking to this example it becomes
us also to advance nothing daunted to the second part of our labours,
but as far as possible to imitate David’s valour, and, like him, after
the first blow to plant our foot upon the fallen foe, so that enemy of
the truth may be exhibited as much as possible as a headless trunk. For
separated as he is from the true faith he is far more truly beheaded
than that Philistine. For since Christ is the head of every man, as
saith the Apostle <span id="fr_1066"></span>[1068](#fn_1066) , and it is
only reasonable that the believer alone should be so termed (for Christ,
I take it, cannot be the head of the unbelieving also), it follows that
he who is severed from the saving faith must be headless like Goliath,
being severed from the true head by his own sword which he had whetted
against the truth; which head it shall be our task not to cut off, but
to show that it is cut off.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p7"></span>And let no one suppose that it is
through pride or desire of human reputation that I go down to this
truceless and implacable warfare to engage with the foe. For if it were
allowed me to pass a peaceful life meddling with no one, it would be far
enough from my disposition to wantonly disturb my tranquillity, by
voluntarily provoking and stirring up a war against myself. But now that
God’s city, the Church, is besieged, and the great wall of the faith is
shaken, battered by the encircling engines of heresy, and there is no
small risk of the word of the Lord being swept into captivity through
their devilish onslaught, deeming it a dreadful thing to decline taking
part in the Christian conflict, I have not turned aside to repose, but
have looked on the sweat of toil as more honourable than the relaxation
of repose, knowing well that just as every man, as saith the Apostle,
shall receive his own reward <span id="fr_1067"></span>[1069](#fn_1067)
according to his own <span id="page_CCLI">p. CCLI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLI"></span>labour, so as a matter of course he
shall receive punishment for neglect of labour proportioned to his
strength. Accordingly I supported the first encounter in the discussion
with good courage, discharging from my shepherd’s scrip, *i.e.* from the
teaching of the Church, my natural and unpremeditated arguments for the
subversion of this blasphemy, needing not at all the equipment of
arguments from profane sources to qualify me for the contest; and now
also I do not hang back from the second part of the encounter, fixing my
hope like great David <span id="fr_1068"></span>[1070](#fn_1068) on Him
“Who teacheth my hands to war, and my fingers to fight,” if haply the
hand of the writer may in my case also be guided by Divine power to the
overthrow of these heretical opinions, and my fingers may serve for the
overthrow of their malignant array by directing my argument with skill
and precision against the foe. But as in human conflicts those who excel
in valour and might, secured by their armour and having previously
acquired military skill by their training for facing danger, station
themselves at the head of their column, encountering danger for those
ranged behind them, while the rest of the company, though serving only
to give an appearance of numbers, seem nevertheless, if only by their
serried shields, to conduce to the common good, so in these our
conflicts that noble soldier of Christ and vehement champion against the
aliens, the mighty spiritual warrior Basil—equipped as he is with the
whole armour described by the Apostle, and secured by the shield of
faith, and ever holding before him that weapon of defence, the sword of
the spirit—fights in the van of the Lord’s host by his elaborated
argument against this heresy, alive and resisting and prevailing over
the foe, while we the common herd, sheltering ourselves beneath the
shield of that champion of the faith, shall not hold back from any
conflicts within the compass of our power, according as our captain may
lead us on against the foe. As he, then, in his refutation of the false
and untenable opinion maintained by this heresy, affirms that
“ungenerate” cannot be predicated of God except as a mere notion or
conception, whereof he has adduced proofs supported by common sense and
the evidence of Scripture, while Eunomius, the author of the heresy,
neither falls in with his statements nor is able to overturn them, but
in his conflict with the truth, the more clearly the light of true
doctrine shines forth, the more, like nocturnal creatures, does he shun
the light, and, no longer able to find the sophistical hiding-places to
which he is accustomed, he wanders about at random, and getting into the
labyrinth of falsehood goes round and round in the same place, almost
the whole of his second treatise being taken up with this empty
trifling—it is well accordingly that our battle with those opposed to us
should take place on the same ground whereon our champion by his own
treatise has been our leader.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p10"></span>First of all, however, I think it
advisable to run briefly over our own doctrinal views and our opponent’s
disagreement with them, so that our review of the propositions in
question may proceed methodically. Now the main point of Christian
orthodoxy <span id="fr_1069"></span>[1071](#fn_1069) is to believe that
the Only-begotten God, Who is the truth and the true light, and the
power of God and the life, is truly all that He is said to be, both in
other respects and especially in this, that He is God and the truth,
that is to say, God in truth, ever being what He is conceived to be and
what He is called, Who never at any time was not, nor ever will cease to
be, Whose being, such as it is essentially, is beyond the reach of the
curiosity that would try to comprehend it. But to us, as saith the word
of Wisdom, <span id="fr_1070"></span>[1072](#fn_1070) He makes Himself
known that He is “by the greatness and beauty of His creatures
proportionately” to the things that are known, vouchsafing to us the
gift of faith by the operations of His hands, but not the comprehension
of what He is. Whereas, then, such is the opinion prevailing among all
Christians, (such at least as are truly worthy of the appellation,
those, I mean, who have been taught by the law to worship nothing that
is not very God, and by that very act of worship confess that the
Only-begotten is God in truth, and not a God falsely so called,) there
arose this deadly blight of the Church, bringing barrenness on the holy
seeds of the faith, advocating as it does the errors of Judaism, and
partaking to a certain extent in the impiety of the Greeks. For in its
figment of a created God it advocates the error of the Greeks, and in
not accepting the Son it supports that of the Jews. This school, then,
which would do away with the very Godhead of the Lord and teach men to
conceive of Him as a created being, and not that which the Father is in
essence and power and dignity, since these misty ideas find no support
when exposed on all sides to the light of truth, have overlooked all
those names supplied by Scripture for the glorification of God, and
predicated in like manner of the Father and of the Son, <span
id="page_CCLII">p. CCLII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLII"></span>and have betaken themselves to the
word “ungenerate,” a term fabricated by themselves to throw contempt on
the greatness of the Only-begotten God. For whereas an orthodox
confession teaches us to believe in the Only-begotten God so that all
men should honour the Son even as they honour the Father, these men,
rejecting the orthodox terms whereby the greatness of the Son is
signified as on a par with the dignity of the Father, draw from thence
the beginnings and foundations of their heresy in regard to His
Divinity. For as the Only-begotten God, as the voice of the Gospel
teaches, came forth from the Father and is of Him, misrepresenting this
doctrine by a change of terms, they make use of them to rend the true
faith in pieces. For whereas the truth teaches that the Father is from
no pre-existing cause, these men have given to such a view the name of
“ungeneracy,” and signify the substance of the Only-begotten from the
Father by the term “generation,”—then comparing the two terms
“ungenerate” and “generate” as contradictories to each other, they make
use of the opposition to mislead their senseless followers. For, to make
the matter clearer by an illustration, the expressions, He was generated
and He was not generated, are much the same as, He is seated and He is
not seated, and all such-like expressions. But they, forcing these
expressions away from the natural significance of the terms, are eager
to put another meaning upon them with a view to the subversion of
orthodoxy. For whereas, as has been said, the words “is seated” and “is
not seated” are not equivalent in meaning (the one expression being
contradictory of the other), they pretend that this formal contradiction
in expression indicates an essential difference, ascribing generation to
the Son and non-generation to the Father as their essential attributes.
Yet, as it is impossible to regard a man’s sitting down or not as the
essence of the man (for one would not use the same definition for a
man’s sitting as for the man himself), so, by the analogy of the above
example, the non-generated essence is in its inherent idea something
wholly different from the thing expressed by “not having been
generated.” But our opponents, with an eye to their evil object, that of
establishing their denial of the Godhead of the Only-begotten, do not
say that the essence of the Father is ungenerate, but, conversely, they
declare ungeneracy to be His essence, in order that by this distinction
in regard to generation they may establish, by the verbal opposition, a
diversity of natures. In the direction of impiety they look with ten
thousand eyes, but with regard to the impracticability of their own
contention they are as incapable of vision as men who deliberately close
their eyes. For who but one whose mental optics are utterly purblind can
fail to discern the loose and unsubstantial character of the principle
of their doctrine, and that their argument in support of ungeneracy as
an essence has nothing to stand upon? For this is the way in which their
error would establish itself.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p13"></span>But to the best of my ability I will
raise my voice to rebut our enemies’ argument. They say that God is
declared to be without generation, that the Godhead is by nature simple,
and that which is simple admits of no composition. If, then, God Who is
declared to be without generation is by His nature without composition,
His title of Ungenerate must belong to His very nature, and that nature
is identical with ungeneracy. To whom we reply that the terms
incomposite and ungenerate are not the same thing, for the former
represents the simplicity of the subject, the other its being without
origin, and these expressions are not convertible in meaning, though
both are predicated of one subject. But from the appellation of
Ungenerate we have been taught that He Who is so named is without
origin, and from the appellation of simple that He is free from all
admixture (or composition), and these terms cannot be substituted for
each other. There is therefore no necessity that, because the Godhead is
by its nature simple, that nature should be termed ungeneracy; but in
that He is indivisible and without composition, He is spoken of as
simple, while in that He was not generated, He is spoken of as
ungenerate.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p14"></span>Now if the term ungenerate did not
signify the being without origin, but the idea of simplicity entered
into the meaning of such a term, and He were called ungenerate in their
heretical sense, merely because He is simple and incomposite, and if the
terms simple and ungenerate are the same in meaning, then too must the
simplicity of the Son be equivalent with ungeneracy. For they will not
deny that God the Only-begotten is by His nature simple, unless they are
prepared to deny that He is God. Accordingly the term simplicity will in
its meaning have no such connection with being ungenerate as that, by
reason of its incomposite character, His nature should be termed
ungeneracy; or they draw upon themselves one of two absurd alternatives,
either denying the Godhead of the Only-begotten, or attributing
ungeneracy to Him also. For if God is simple, and the term simplicity
is, according to them, identical with ungenerate, they must either make
out the Son to be of composite nature, by which term it is implied that
neither is He God, or if they allow His Godhead, and God (as I have
said) is simple, <span id="page_CCLIII">p. CCLIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLIII"></span>then they make Him out at the same
time to be ungenerate, if the terms simple and ungenerate are
convertible. But to make my meaning clearer I will recapitulate. We
affirm that each of these terms has its own peculiar meaning, and that
the term indivisible cannot be rendered by ungenerate, nor ungenerate by
simple; but by simple we understand uncompounded, and by ungenerate we
are taught to understand what is without origin. Furthermore we hold
that we are bound to believe that the Son of God, being Himself God, is
Himself also simple, because God is free from all compositeness; and in
like manner in speaking of Him also by the appellation of Son we neither
denote simplicity of substance, nor in simplicity do we include the
notion of Son, but the term Son we hold to indicate that He is of the
substance of the Father, and the term simple we hold to mean what the
word bears upon its face. Since, then, the meaning of the term simple in
regard to essence is one and the same whether spoken of the Father or of
the Son, differing in no degree, while there is a wide difference
between generate and ungenerate (the one containing a notion not
contained in the other), for this reason we assert that there is no
necessity that, the Father being ungenerate, His essence should, because
that essence is simple, be defined by the term ungenerate. For neither
of the Son, Who is simple, and Whom also we believe to be generated, do
we say that His essence is simplicity. But as the essence is simple and
not simplicity, so also the essence is ungenerate and not ungeneracy. In
like manner also the Son being generated, our reason is freed from any
necessity that, because His essence is simple, we should define that
essence as generateness; but here again each expression has its peculiar
force. For the term generated suggests to you a source whence, and the
term simple implies freedom from composition. But this does not approve
itself to them. For they maintain that since the essence of the Father
is simple, it cannot be considered as other than ungeneracy; on which
account also He is said to be ungenerate. In answer to whom we may also
observe that, since they call the Father both Creator and Maker, whereas
He Who is so called is simple in regard to His essence, it is high time
for such sophists to declare the essence of the Father to be creation
and making, since the argument about simplicity introduces into His
essence any signification of any name we give Him. Either, then, let
them separate ungeneracy from the definition of the Divine essence,
allowing the term no more than its proper signification, or, if by
reason of the simplicity of the subject they define His essence by the
term ungeneracy, by a parity of reasoning let them likewise see creation
and making in the essence of the Father, not as though the power
residing in the essence created and made, but as though the power itself
meant creation and making. But if they reject this as bad and absurd,
let them be persuaded by what logically follows to reject the other
proposition as well. For as the essence of the builder is not the thing
built, no more is ungeneracy the essence of the Ungenerate. But for the
sake of clearness and conciseness I will restate my arguments. If the
Father is called ungenerate, not by reason of His having never been
generated, but because His essence is simple and incomposite, by a
parity of reasoning the Son also must be called ungenerate, for He too
is a simple and incomposite essence. But if we are compelled to confess
the Son to be generated because He *was* generated, it is manifest that
we must address the Father as ungenerate, because He was *not*
generated. But if we are compelled to this conclusion by truth and the
force of our premises, it is clear that the term ungenerate is no part
of the essence, but is indicative of a difference of conceptions,
distinguishing that which is generated from that which is ungenerate.
But let us discuss this point also in addition to what I have said. If
they affirm that the term ungenerate signifies the essence <span
id="fr_1071"></span>[1073](#fn_1071) (of the Father), and not that He
has His substance without origin, what term will they use to denote the
Father’s being without origin, when they have set aside the term
ungenerate to indicate His essence? For if we are not taught the
distinguishing difference of the Persons by the term ungenerate, but are
to regard it as indicating His very nature as flowing in a manner from
the subject-matter, and disclosing what we seek in articulate syllables,
it must follow that God is not, or is not to be called, ungenerate,
there being no word left to express such peculiar significance in regard
to <span id="page_CCLIV">p. CCLIV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLIV"></span>Him. For inasmuch as according to them
the term ungenerate does not mean without origin, but indicates the
Divine nature, their argument will be found to exclude it altogether,
and the term ungenerate slips out of their teaching in respect to God.
For there being no other word or term to represent that the Father is
ungenerate, and that term signifying, according to their fallacious
argument, something else, and not that He was not generated, their whole
argument falls and collapses into Sabellianism. For by this reasoning we
must hold the Father to be identical with the Son, the distinction
between generated and ungenerate having been got rid of from their
teaching, so that they are driven to one of two alternatives: either
they must again adopt the view of the term as denoting a difference in
the attributes proper to either Person, and not as denoting the nature,
or, abiding by their conclusions as to the word, they must side with
Sabellius. For it is impossible that the difference of the persons
should be without confusion, unless there be a distinction between
generated and ungenerate. Accordingly if the term denotes difference,
essence will in no way be denoted by the appellation. For the
definitions of difference and essence are by no means the same. But if
they divert the meaning of the word so as to signify nature, they must
be drawn into the heresy of those who are called “Son-Fathers <span
id="fr_1072"></span>[1074](#fn_1072) ,” all accuracy of definition in
regard to the Persons being rejected from their account. But if they say
that there is nothing to hinder the distinction between generated and
ungenerate from being rendered by the term ungenerate, and that term
represents the essence too, let them distinguish for us the kindred
meanings of the word, so that the notion of ungenerate may properly
apply to either of them taken by itself. For the expression of the
difference by means of this term involves no ambiguity, consisting as it
does of a verbal opposition. For as an equivalent to saying “The Son
has, and the Father has not, been generated,” we too assent to the
statement that the latter is ungenerate and the former generated, by a
sort of verbal correlation. But from what point of view a clear
manifestation of essence can be made by this appellation, this they are
unable to say. But keeping silence on this head, our novel theologian
weaves us a web of trifling subtleties in his former treatise. Because
God, saith he, being simple, is called ungenerate, therefore God is
ungeneracy. What has the notion of simplicity to do with the idea of
ungenerate? For not only is the Only-begotten generated, but, without
controversy, He is simple also. But, saith he, He is without parts also,
and incomposite. But what is this to the point? For neither is the Son
multiform and composite: and yet He is not on that account ungenerate.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p17"></span>But, saith he, He is without both
quantity and magnitude. Granted: for the Son also is unlimited by
quantity and magnitude, and yet is He the Son. But this is not the
point. For the task set before us is this: in what signification of
ungenerate is essence declared? For as this word marks the difference of
the properties, so they maintain that the essence also is indicated
without ambiguity by one of the things signified by the appellation.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p18"></span>But this thing he leaves untold, and
only says that ungeneracy should not be predicated of God as a mere
conception. For what is so spoken, saith he, is dissolved, and passes
away with its utterance. But what is there that is uttered but is so
dissolved? For we do not keep undissolved, like those who make pots or
bricks, what we utter with our voice in the mould of the speech which we
form once for all with our lips, but as soon as one speech has been sent
forth by our voice, what we have said ceases to exist. For the breath of
our voice being dispersed again into the air, no trace of our words is
impressed upon the spot in which such dispersion of our voice has taken
place: so that if he makes this the distinguishing characteristic of a
term that expresses a mere conception, that it does not remain, but
vanishes with the voice that gives it utterance, he may as well at once
call every term a mere conception, inasmuch as no substance remains in
any term subsequent to its utterance. No, nor will he be able to show
that ungeneracy itself, which he excepts from the products of
conception, is indissoluble and fixed when it has been uttered, for this
expression of the voice through the lips does not abide in the air. And
from this we may see the unsubstantial character of his assertions;
because, even if without speech we describe in writing our mental
conceptions, it is not as though the substantial objects of our thoughts
will acquire their significance from the letters, while the
non-substantial will have no part in what the letters express. For
whatever comes into our mind, whether intellectually existing, or
otherwise, it is possible for us at our discretion to store away in
writing. And the voice and letters are of equal value for the expression
of thought, for we communicate what we think by the latter as well as by
the former. What he sees, then, to justify his making the mental
conception perish with the voice only, I fail to comprehend. For in the
case of all speech uttered by means <span id="page_CCLV">p. CCLV</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLV"></span>of sound, the passage of the
breath indeed which conveys the voice is towards its kindred element,
but the sense of the words spoken is engraved by hearing on the memory
of the hearer’s soul, whether it be true or false. Is not this, then, a
weak interpretation of this “conception” of his that our writer offers,
when he characterizes and defines it by the dissolution of the voice?
And for this reason the understanding hearer, as saith Isaiah, objects
to this inconceivable account of mental conception, showing it, to use
the man’s own words, to be a veritably dissoluble and unsubstantial one,
and he discusses scientifically the force inherent in the term,
advancing his argument by familiar examples to the contemplation of
doctrine. Against whom Eunomius exalting himself with this pompous
writing, endeavours to overthrow the true account of mental conception,
after this manner.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p19"></span>But before we examine what he has
written, it may be better to enquire with what purpose it is that he
refuses to admit that ungenerate can be predicated of God by way of
conception. Now the tenet which has been held in common by all who have
received the word of our religion is, that all hope of salvation should
be placed in Christ, it being impossible for any to be found among the
righteous, unless faith in Christ supply what is desired. And this
conviction being firmly established in the souls of the faithful, and
all honour and glory and worship being due to the Only-begotten God as
the Author of life, Who doeth the works of the Father, as the Lord
Himself saith in the Gospel <span id="fr_1073"></span>[1075](#fn_1073) ,
and Who falls short of no excellence in all knowledge of that which is
good, I know not how they have been so perverted by malignity and
jealousy of the Lord’s honour, that, as though they judged the worship
paid by the faithful to the Only-begotten God to be a detriment to
themselves, they oppose His Divine honours, and try to persuade us that
nothing that is said of them is true. For with them neither is He very
God, though called so, it would seem, by Scripture, nor, though called
Son, has He a nature that makes good the appellation, nor has He a
community of dignity or of nature with the Father. For, say they, it is
not possible for Him that is begotten to be of equal honour with Him Who
made Him, either in dignity, or in power, or in nature, because the life
of the latter is infinite, and His existence from eternity, while the
life of the Son is in a manner circumscribed, the beginning of His being
begotten limiting His life at the commencement, and preventing it from
being coextensive with the eternity of the Father, so that His life also
is to be regarded as defective; and the Father was not always what He
now is and is said to be, but, having been something else before, He
afterwards determined that He would be a Father, or rather that He would
be so called. For not even of the Son was He rightly called Father, but
of a creature supposititiously invested with the title of son. And every
way, say they, the younger is of necessity inferior to the elder, the
finite to the eternal, that which is begotten by the will of the
begetter, to the begetter himself, both in power, and dignity, and
nature, and precedence due to age, and all other prerogatives of
respect. But how can we justly dignify with the honours due to the true
God that which is wanting in the perfection of the diviner attributes?
Thus they would establish the doctrine that one who is limited in power,
and wanting in the perfection of life, and subject to a superior, and
doing nothing of himself but what is sanctioned by the authority of the
more powerful, is in no divine honour and consideration, but that, while
we call him God, we are employing a term empty of all grandeur in its
significance. And since such statements as these, when stripped of their
plausible dress, move indignation and make the hearer shudder at their
strangeness (for who can tolerate an evil counsellor nakedly and
unadvisably urging the overthrow of the majesty of Christ?), they
therefore try to pervert foolish hearers with these foreign notions by
enveloping their malignant and insidious arguments in a number of
seductive fallacies. For after laying down such premises as might
naturally lead the mind of the hearers in the desired direction, they
leave the hearer to draw his conclusion for himself.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p21"></span>For after saying that the Only-begotten
God is not the same in essence with the true Father, and after
sophistically inferring this from the opposition between generate and
ungenerate, they work in silence to the conclusion, their impiety
prevailing by the natural course of inference. And as the poisoner makes
his drug acceptable to his victim by sweetening its deadliness with
honey, and, as for himself, has only to offer it, while the drug
insinuating itself into the vitals without further action on the part of
the poisoner does its deadly work,—so, too, do our opponents act. For
qualifying their pernicious teaching with their sophistical refinements,
as with honey, when they have infused into the mind of the hearer the
venomous fallacy that God the Only-begotten is not very God, they cause
all the rest to be inferred without saying a word. For when they are
persuaded that He is not truly God, it follows as a matter of course
that no other Divine <span id="page_CCLVI">p. CCLVI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLVI"></span>attribute is truly applicable. For if
He is truly neither Son nor God, except by an abuse of terms, then the
other names which are given to Him in Holy Scripture are a divergence
from the truth. For the one thing cannot be predicated of Him with
truth, and the other be destitute of it; but they must needs follow one
another, so that, if He be truly God, it follows that He is Judge and
King, and that His several attributes are such as they are described,
while, if His godhead be falsely asserted, neither will the truth hold
respecting any of His other attributes. They, then, having been deceived
into the persuasion that the attribute of Godhead is falsely applied to
the Only-begotten, it follows that He is not rightly the object of
worship and adoration, or, in fact, of any of the honours that are paid
to God. In order, then, to render their attack upon the Saviour
efficacious, this is the blasphemous method that they have adopted.
There is no need, they urge, of looking at the collective attributes by
which the Son’s equality in honour and dignity with the Father is
signified, but from the opposition between generate and ungenerate we
must argue a distinctive difference of nature; for the Divine nature is
that which is denoted by the term ungenerate. Again, since all men of
sense regard it as impracticable to indicate the ineffable Being by any
force of words, because neither does our knowledge extend to the
comprehension of what transcends knowledge, nor does the ministry of
words have such power in us as to avail for the full enunciation of our
thought, where the mind is engaged on anything eminently lofty and
divine,—these wise folk, on the contrary, convicting men in general of
want of sense and ignorance of logic, assert their own knowledge of such
matters, and their ability to impart it to whomsoever they will; and
accordingly they maintain that the divine nature is simply ungeneracy
*per se,* and declaring this to be sovereign and supreme, they make this
word comprehend the whole greatness of Godhead, so as to necessitate the
inference that if ungeneracy is the main point of the essence, and the
other divine attributes are bound up with it, viz. Godhead, power,
imperishableness and so on—if (I say) ungeneracy mean these, then, if
this ungeneracy cannot be predicated of something, neither can the rest.
For as reason, and risibility, and capacity of knowledge are proper to
man, and what is not humanity may not be classed among the properties of
his nature, so, if true Godhead consists in ungeneracy, then, to
whatsoever thing the latter name does not properly belong, no one at all
of the other distinguishing attributes of Godhead will be found in it.
If, then, ungeneracy is not predicable of the Son, it follows that no
other of His sublime and godlike attributes are properly ascribed to
Him. This, then, they define as a right comprehension of the divine
mysteries—the rejection of the Son’s Godhead—all but shouting in the ear
of those who would listen to them; “To you it is given to be perfect in
knowledge <span id="fr_1074"></span>[1076](#fn_1074) , if only you
believe not in God the Only-begotten as being very God, and honour not
the Son as the Father is honoured, but regard Him as by nature a created
being, not Lord and Master, but slave and subject.” For this is the aim
and object of their design, though the blasphemy is cloaked in different
terms.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p23"></span>Accordingly, enveloping his former
special-pleading in the mazy evolutions of his sophistries, and dealing
subtly with the term ungenerate, he steals away the intelligence of his
dupes, saying to them, "Well, then, if neither by way of conception it
is so, nor by deprivation, nor by division (for He is without parts),
nor as being another in Himself <span
id="fr_1075"></span>[1077](#fn_1075) (for He is the one only
ungenerate), He Himself must be, in essence, ungenerate.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p25"></span>Seeing, then, the mischief resulting to
the dupes of this fallacious reasoning—that to assent to His not being
very God is a departure from our confession of Him as our Lord, to which
conclusion indeed his words would bring his teaching—our master does not
indeed deny that ungenerate is no partial predicate of God, himself also
admitting that God is without quantity, or magnitude, or parts; but the
statement that this term ought not to be applied to Him by way of mental
conception he impugns, and gives his proofs. But again, shifting from
this position, our writer in the second of <span id="page_CCLVII">p.
CCLVII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLVII"></span>his treatises
meets us with his sophistry, combating his own statements in regard to
mental conception.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p26"></span>It will presently be time to bring to
their own recollection the method of this argument. Suffice it first to
say this. There is no faculty in human nature adequate to the full
comprehension of the divine essence. It may be that it is easy to show
this in the case of human capacity alone, and to say that the
incorporeal creation is incapable of taking in and comprehending that
nature which is infinite will not be far short of the truth, as we may
see by familiar examples; for as there are many and various things that
have fleshly life, winged things, and things of the earth, some that
mount above the clouds by virtue of their wings, others that dwell in
hollows or burrow in the ground, on comparing which it would appear that
there was no small difference between the inhabitants of air and of
land; while, if the comparison be extended to the stars and the fixed
circumference, it will be seen that what soars aloft on wings is not
less widely removed from heaven than from the animals that are on the
earth; so, too, the strength of angels compared with our own seems
preeminently great, because, undisturbed by sensation, it pursues its
lofty themes with pure naked intelligence. Yet, if we weigh even their
comprehension with the majesty of Him Who really is, it may be that if
any one should venture to say that even their power of understanding is
not far superior to our own weakness, his conjecture would fall within
the limits of probability, for wide and insurmountable is the interval
that divides and fences off uncreated from created nature. The latter is
limited, the former not. The latter is confined within its own
boundaries according to the pleasure of its Maker. The former is bounded
only by infinity. The latter stretches itself out within certain degrees
of extension, limited by time and space: the former transcends all
notion of degree, baffling curiosity from every point of view. In this
life we can apprehend the beginning and the end of all things that
exist, but the beatitude that is above the creature admits neither end
nor beginning, but is above all that is connoted by either, being ever
the same, self-dependent, not travelling on by degrees from one point to
another in its life; for there is no participation of other life in its
life, such that we might infer end and beginning; but, be it what it
may, it is life energizing in itself, not becoming greater or less by
addition or diminution. For increase has no place in the infinite, and
that which is by its nature passionless excludes all notion of decrease.
And as, when looking up to heaven, and in a measure apprehending by the
visual organs the beauty that is in the height, we doubt not the
existence of what we see, but if asked what it is, we are unable to
define its nature, but we simply admire as we contemplate the
overarching vault, the reverse planetary motion <span
id="fr_1076"></span>[1078](#fn_1076) , the so-called Zodiac graven
obliquely on the pole, whereby astronomers observe the motion of bodies
revolving in an opposite direction, the differences of luminaries
according to their magnitude, and the specialities of their rays, their
risings and settings that take place according to the circling year ever
at the same seasons undeviatingly, the conjunctions of planets, the
courses of those that pass below, the eclipses of those that are above,
the obumbrations of the earth, the reappearance of eclipsed bodies, the
moon’s multiform changes, the motion of the sun midway within the poles,
and how, filled with his own light, and crowned with his encircling
beams, and embracing all things in his sovereign light, he himself also
at times suffers eclipse (the disc of the moon, as they say, passing
before him), and how, by the will of Him Who has so ordained, ever
running his own particular course, he accomplishes his appointed orbit
and progress, opening out the four seasons of the year in succession;
we, as I say, when we contemplate these phenomena by the aid of sight,
are in no doubt of their existence, though we are as far from
comprehending their essential nature as if sight had not given us any
glimpse whatever of what we have seen; and even so, with regard to the
Creator of the world, we know that He exists, but of His essential
nature we cannot deny that we are ignorant. But, boasting as they do
that they know these things, let them first tell us about the things of
inferior nature; what they think of the body of the heavens, of the
machinery which conveys the stars in their eternal courses, or of the
sphere in which they move; for, however far speculation may proceed,
when it comes to the uncertain and incomprehensible it must stop. For
though any one say that another body, like in fashion (to that body of
the heavens), fitting to its circular shape, checks its velocity, so
that, ever turning in its course, it revolves conformably to that other
upon itself, being retained by the force that embraces it from flying
off at a tangent, yet how can he assert that these bodies will remain
unspent by their constant friction with each other? And how, again, is
motion produced in the case <span id="page_CCLVIII">p. CCLVIII</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLVIII"></span>of two coeval bodies mutually
conformed, when the one remains motionless (for the inner body, one
would have thought, being held as in a vice by the motionlessness of
that which embraces it, will be quite unable to act); and what is it
that maintains the embracing body in its fixedness, so that it remains
unshaken and unaffected by the motion of that which fits into it? And if
in restless curiosity of thought we should conceive of some position for
it that should keep it stationary, we must go on in logical consistency
to search for the base of that base, and of the next, and of the next,
and so on, and so the inquiry, proceeding from like to like, will go on
to infinity, and end in helpless perplexity, still, even when some body
has been put for the farthest foundation of the system of the universe,
reaching after what is beyond, so that there is no stopping in our
inquiry after the limit of the embracing circles. But not so, say
others: but (according to the vain theory of those who have speculated
on these matters) there is an empty space spread over the back of the
heavens, working in which vacuum the motion of the universe revolves
upon itself, meeting with no resistance from any solid body capable of
retarding it by opposition and of checking its course of revolution.
What, then, is that vacuum, which they say is neither a body nor an
idea? How far does it extend, and what succeeds it, and what relation
exists between the firm, resisting body, and that void and unsubstantial
one? What is there to unite things so contrary by nature? and how can
the harmony of the universe consist out of elements so incongruous; and
what can any one say of Heaven itself? That it is a mixture of the
elements which it contains, or one of them, or something else beside
them? What, again, of the stars themselves? whence comes their radiance?
what is it and how is it composed? and what is the reason of their
difference in beauty and magnitude? and the seven inner orbs revolving
in an opposite direction to the motion of the universe, what are they,
and by what influence are they propelled? Then, too, what is that
immaterial and ethereal empyrean, and the intermediate air which forms a
wall of partition between that element in nature which gives heat and
consumes, and that which is moist and combustible? And how does earth
below form the foundation of the whole, and what is it that keeps it
firmly in its place? what is it that controls its downward tendency? If
any one should interrogate us on these and such-like points, will any of
us be found so presumptuous as to promise an explanation of them? No!
the only reply that can be given by men of sense is this:—that He Who
made all things in wisdom can alone furnish an account of His creation.
For ourselves, “through faith we understand that the worlds were framed
by the word of God,” as saith the Apostle <span
id="fr_1077"></span>[1079](#fn_1077) .

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p29"></span>If, then, the lower creation which
comes under our organs of sense transcends human knowledge, how can He,
Who by His mere will made the worlds, be within the range of our
apprehension? Surely this is vanity, and lying madness, as saith the
Prophet <span id="fr_1078"></span>[1080](#fn_1078) , to think it
possible to comprehend the things which are incomprehensible. So may we
see tiny children busying themselves in their play. For oft-times, when
a sunbeam streams down upon them through a window, delighted with its
beauty they throw themselves on what they see, and are eager to catch
the sunbeam in their hands, and struggle with one another, and grasp the
light in the clutch of their fingers, and fancy they have imprisoned the
ray in them, but presently when they unclasp their hands and find that
the sunbeam which they held has slipped through their fingers, they
laugh and clap their hands. In like manner the children of our
generation, as saith the parable, sit playing in the market-places; for,
seeing the power of God shining in upon their souls through the
dispensations of His providence, and the wonders of His creation like a
warm ray emanating from the natural sun, they marvel not at the Divine
gift, nor adore Him Whom such things reveal, but passing beyond the
limits of the soul’s capabilities, they seek with their sophistical
understanding to grasp that which is intangible, and think by their
reasonings to lay hold of what they are persuaded of; but when their
argument unfolds itself and discloses the tangled web of their
sophistries, men of discernment see at once that what they have
apprehended is nothing at all; so pettily and so childishly labouring in
vain at impossibilities do they set themselves to include the
inconceivable nature of God in the few syllables of the term
“ungenerate,” and applaud their own folly, and imagine God to be such
that human reasoning can include Him under one single term: and while
they pretend to follow the teaching of the sacred writers, they are not
afraid of raising themselves above them. For what cannot be shown to
have been said by any of those blessed ones, any words of whose are
recorded in the sacred books, these things, as saith the Apostle,
“understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm <span
id="fr_1079"></span>[1081](#fn_1079) ,” they nevertheless say they know,
and boast of guiding others to such knowledge. And on this account they
declare that they have appre<span id="page_CCLIX">p. CCLIX</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLIX"></span>hended that God the Only-begotten is
not what He is called. For to this conclusion they are compelled by
their premises.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p32"></span>How pitiable are they for their
cleverness! how wretched, how fatal is their over-wise philosophy! Who
is there who goes of his own accord to the pit so eagerly as these men
labour and bestir themselves to dig out their lake of blasphemy? How far
have they separated themselves from the hope of the Christian! What a
gulf have they fixed between themselves and the faith which saves! How
far have they withdrawn themselves from Abraham the father of the faith!
He indeed, if in the lofty spirit of the Apostle we may take the words
allegorically, and so penetrate to the inner sense of the history,
without losing sight of the truth of its facts—he, I say, went out by
Divine command from his own country and kindred on a journey worthy of a
prophet eager for the knowledge of God <span
id="fr_1080"></span>[1082](#fn_1080) . For no local migration seems to
me to satisfy the idea of the blessings which it is signified that he
found. For going out from himself and from his country, by which I
understand his earthly and carnal mind, and raising his thoughts as far
as possible above the common boundaries of nature, and forsaking the
soul’s kinship with the senses,—so that untroubled by any of the objects
of sense his eyes might be open to the things which are invisible, there
being neither sight nor sound to distract the mind in its
work,—“walking,” as saith the Apostle, “by faith, not by sight,” he was
raised so high by the sublimity of his knowledge that he came to be
regarded as the acme of human perfection, knowing as much of God as it
was possible for finite human capacity at its full stretch to attain.
Therefore also the Lord of all creation, as though He were a discovery
of Abraham, is called specially the God of Abraham. Yet what saith the
Scripture respecting him? That he went out not knowing whither he went,
no, nor even being capable of learning the name of Him whom he loved,
yet in no wise impatient or ashamed on account of such ignorance.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p34"></span>This, then, was the meaning of his safe
guidance on the way to what he sought—that he was not blindly led by any
of the means ready to hand for his instruction in the things of God, and
that his mind, unimpeded by any object of sense, was never hindered from
its journeying in quest of what lies beyond all that is known, but
having gone by reasoning far beyond the wisdom of his countrymen, (I
mean the philosophy of the Chaldees, limited as it was to the things
which do appear,) and soaring above the things which are cognizable by
sense, from the beauty of the objects of contemplation, and the harmony
of the heavenly wonders, he desired to behold the archetype of all
beauty. And so, too, all the other things which in the course of his
reasoning he was led to apprehend as he advanced, whether the power of
God, or His goodness, or His being without beginning, or His infinity,
or whatever else is conceivable in respect to the divine nature, using
them all as supplies and appliances for his onward journey, ever making
one discovery a stepping-stone to another, ever reaching forth unto
those things which were before, and setting in his heart, as saith the
Prophet, each fair stage of his advance <span
id="fr_1081"></span>[1083](#fn_1081) , and passing by all knowledge
acquired by his own ability as falling short of that of which he was in
quest, when he had gone beyond every conjecture respecting the divine
nature which is suggested by any name amongst all our conceptions of
God, having purged his reason of all such fancies, and arrived at a
faith unalloyed and free from all prejudice, he made this a sure and
manifest token of the knowledge of God, viz. the belief that He is
greater and more sublime than any token by which He may be known. On
this account, indeed, after the ecstasy which fell upon him, and after
his sublime meditations, falling back on his human weakness, “I am,”
saith he, “but dust and ashes <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1084](#fn_1082)
,” that is to say, without voice or power to interpret that good which
his mind had conceived. For dust and ashes seem to denote what is
lifeless and barren; and so there arises a law of faith for the life to
come, teaching those who would come to God, by this history of Abraham,
that it is impossible to draw near to God, unless faith mediate, and
bring the seeking soul into union with the incomprehensible nature of
God. For leaving behind him the curiosity that arises from knowledge,
Abraham, says the Apostle, “believed God, and it was counted unto him
for righteousness <span id="fr_1083"></span>[1085](#fn_1083) .” “Now it
was not written for his sake,” the Apostle says, “but for us,” that God
counts to men for righteousness their faith, not their knowledge. For
knowledge acts, as it were, in a commercial spirit, dealing only with
what is known. But the faith of Christians acts otherwise. For it is the
substance, not of things known, but of things hoped for. Now that which
we have already we no longer hope for. “For what a man hath,” says the
Apostle, “why doth he yet hope for <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[1086](#fn_1084) ”? But faith makes our own that
which we see not, assuring us by its own certainty of that which does
not appear. For so speaks the Apostle of the believer, that “he endured
as seeing Him Who is invisible <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[1087](#fn_1085) .” <span id="page_CCLX">p.
CCLX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLX"></span>Vain, therefore, is
he who maintains that it is possible to take knowledge of the divine
essence, by the knowledge which puffeth up to no purpose. For neither is
there any man so great that he can claim equality in understanding with
the Lord, for, as saith David, “Who is he among the clouds that shall be
compared unto the Lord? <span id="fr_1086"></span>[1088](#fn_1086) ” nor
is that which is sought so small that it can be compassed by the
reasonings of human shallowness. Listen to the preacher exhorting not to
be hasty to utter anything before God, “for God,” (saith he,) “is in
heaven above, and thou upon earth beneath <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1089](#fn_1087) .”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p42"></span>He shows, I think, by the relation of
these elements to each other, or rather by their distance, how far the
divine nature is above the speculations of human reason. For that nature
which transcends all intelligence is as high above earthly calculation
as the stars are above the touch of our fingers; or rather, many times
more than that.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p43"></span>Knowing, then, how widely the Divine
nature differs from our own, let us quietly remain within our proper
limits. For it is both safer and more reverent to believe the majesty of
God to be greater than we can understand, than, after circumscribing His
glory by our misconceptions, to suppose there is nothing beyond our
conception of it.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p44"></span>And on other accounts also it may be
called safe to let alone the Divine essence, as unspeakable, and beyond
the scope of human reasoning. For the desire of investigating what is
obscure and tracing out hidden things by the operation of human
reasoning gives an entrance to false no less than to true notions,
inasmuch as he who aspires to know the unknown will not always arrive at
truth, but may also conceive of falsehood itself as truth. But the
disciple of the Gospels and of Prophecy believes that He Who is, is;
both from what he has learnt from the sacred writers, and from the
harmony of things which do appear, and from the works of Providence. But
what He is and how—leaving this as a useless and unprofitable
speculation, such a disciple will open no door to falsehood against
truth. For in speculative enquiry fallacies readily find place. But
where speculation is entirely at rest, the necessity of error is
precluded. And that this is a true account of the case, may be seen if
we consider how it is that heresies in the churches have wandered off
into many and various opinions in regard to God, men deceiving
themselves as they are swayed by one mental impulse or another; and how
these very men with whom our treatise is concerned have slipped into
such a pit of profanity. Would it not have been safer for all, following
the counsel of wisdom, to abstain from searching into such deep matters,
and in peace and quietness to keep inviolate the pure deposit of the
faith? But since, in fact, human nothingness has commenced intruding
recklessly into matters that are above comprehension, and supporting by
dogmatic teaching the figments of their vain imagination, there has
sprung up in consequence a whole host of enemies to the truth, and among
them these very men who are the subject of this treatise; dogmatizers of
deceit who seek to limit the Divine Being, and all but openly idolize
their own imagination, in that they deify the idea expressed by this
“ungeneracy” of theirs, as not being only in a certain relation
discernible in the Divine nature, but as being itself God, or the
essence of God. Yet perchance they would have done better to look to the
sacred company of the Prophets and Patriarchs, to whom “at sundry times,
and in divers manners <span id="fr_1088"></span>[1090](#fn_1088) ,” the
Word of truth spake, and, next in order, those who were eye-witnesses
and ministers of the word, that they might give honour due to the claims
on their belief of the things attested by the Holy Spirit Himself, and
abide within the limits of their teaching and knowledge, and not venture
on themes which are not comprehended in the canon of the sacred writers.
For those writers, by revealing God, so long unknown to human life by
reason of the prevalence of idolatry, and making Him known to men, both
from the wonders which manifest themselves in His works, and from the
names which express the manifold variety of His power, lead men, as by
the hand, to the understanding of the Divine nature, making known to
them the bare grandeur of the thought of God; while the question of His
essence, as one which it is impossible to grasp, and which bears no
fruit to the curious enquirer, they dismiss without any attempt at its
solution. For whereas they have set forth respecting all other things,
that they were created, the heaven, the earth, the sea, times, ages, and
the creatures that are therein, but what each is in itself, and how and
whence, on these points they are silent; so, too, concerning God
Himself, they exhort men to “believe that He is, and that He is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek Him <span
id="fr_1089"></span>[1091](#fn_1089) ,” but in regard to His nature, as
being above every name, they neither name it nor concern themselves
about it. For if we have learned any names expressive of the knowledge
of God, all these are related and have analogy to such names as denote
human characteristics. For as they who would indicate some person
unknown by marks of recognition speak of him as of good parentage and
descent, if such happen <span id="page_CCLXI">p. CCLXI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXI"></span>to be the case, or as distinguished
for his riches or his worth, or as in the prime of life, or of such or
such stature, and in so speaking they do not set forth the nature of the
person indicated, but give certain notes of recognition (for neither
advantages of birth, nor of wealth, nor of reputation, nor of age,
constitute the man; they are considered, simply as being observable in
the man), thus too the expressions of Holy Scripture devised for the
glory of God set forth one or another of the things which are declared
concerning Him, each inculcating some special teaching. For by these
expressions we are taught either His power, or that He admits not of
deterioration, or that He is without cause and without limit, or that He
is supreme above all things, or, in short, something, be it what it may,
respecting Him. But His very essence, as not to be conceived by the
human intellect or expressed in words, this it has left untouched as a
thing not to be made the subject of curious enquiry, ruling that it be
revered in silence, in that it forbids the investigation of things too
deep for us, while it enjoins the duty of being slow to utter any word
before God. And therefore, whosoever searches the whole of Revelation
will find therein no doctrine of the Divine nature, nor indeed of
anything else that has a substantial existence, so that we pass our
lives in ignorance of much, being ignorant first of all of ourselves, as
men, and then of all things besides. For who is there who has arrived at
a comprehension of his own soul? Who is acquainted with its very
essence, whether it is material or immaterial, whether it is purely
incorporeal, or whether it exhibits anything of a corporeal character;
how it comes into being, how it is composed, whence it enters into the
body, how it departs from it, or what means it possesses to unite it to
the nature of the body; how, being intangible and without form, it is
kept within its own sphere, what difference exists among its powers, how
one and the same soul, in its eager curiosity to know the things which
are unseen, soars above the highest heavens, and again, dragged down by
the weight of the body, falls back on material passions, anger and fear,
pain and pleasure, pity and cruelty, hope and memory, cowardice and
audacity, friendship and hatred, and all the contraries that are
produced in the faculties of the soul? Observing which things, who has
not fancied that he has a sort of populace of souls crowded together in
himself, each of the aforesaid passions differing widely from the rest,
and, where it prevails, holding lordship over them all, so that even the
rational faculty falls under and is subject to the predominating power
of such forces, and contributes its own co-operation to such impulses,
as to a despotic lord? What word, then, of the inspired Scripture has
taught us the manifold and multiform character of what we understand in
speaking of the soul? Is it a unity composed of them all, and, if so,
what is it that blends and harmonizes things mutually opposed, so that
many things become one, while each element, taken by itself, is shut up
in the soul as in some ample vessel? And how is it that we have not the
perception of them all as being involved in it, being at one and the
same time confident and afraid, at once hating and loving and feeling in
ourselves the working as well of all other emotions confused and
intermingled; but, on the contrary, take knowledge only of their
alternate control, when one of them prevails, the rest remaining
quiescent? What in short is this composition and arrangement, and this
capacious void within us, such that to each is assigned its own post, as
though hindered by middle walls of partition from holding intercourse
with its neighbour? And then again what account has explained whether
passion is the fundamental essence of the soul, or fear, or any of the
other elements which I have mentioned; and what emotions are
unsubstantial? For if these have an independent subsistence, then, as I
have said, there is comprehended in ourselves not one soul, but a
collection of souls, each of them occupying its distinct position as a
particular and individual soul. But if we must suppose these to be a
kind of emotion without subsistence, how can that which has no essential
existence exercise lordship over us, having reduced us as it were to
slave under whichsoever of these things may have happened to prevail?
And if the soul is something that thought only can grasp, how can that
which is manifold and composite be contemplated as such, when such an
object ought to be contemplated by itself, independently of these bodily
qualities? Then, as to the soul’s power of growth, of desire, of
nutrition, of change, and the fact that all the bodily powers are
nourished, while feeling does not extend through all, but, as in things
without life, some of our members are destitute of feeling, the bones
for example, the cartilages, the nails, the hair, all of which take
nourishment, but do not feel,—tell me who is there that understands this
only half-complete operation of the soul as to these? And why do I speak
of the soul? Even the inquiry as to that thing in the flesh itself which
assumes all the corporeal qualities has not been pursued to any definite
result. For if any one has made a mental analysis of that which is seen
into its component parts, and, having stripped the object of its
qualities, has attempted to consider it by itself, I fail to see what
will have been left for investigation. <span id="page_CCLXII">p.
CCLXII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXII"></span>For when you take
from a body its colour, its shape, its degree of resistance, its weight,
its quantity, its position, its forces active or passive, its relation
to other objects, what remains, that can still be called a body, we can
neither see of ourselves, nor are we taught it by Scripture. But how can
he who is ignorant of himself take knowledge of anything that is above
himself? And if a man is familiarized with such ignorance of himself, is
he not plainly taught by the very fact not to be astonished at any of
the mysteries that are without? Wherefore also, of the elements of the
world, we know only so much by our senses as to enable us to receive
what they severally supply for our living. But we possess no knowledge
of their substance, nor do we count it loss to be ignorant of it. For
what does it profit me to inquire curiously into the nature of fire, how
it is struck out, how it is kindled, how, when it has caught hold of the
fuel supplied to it, it does not let it go till it has devoured and
consumed its prey; how the spark is latent in the flint, how steel, cold
as it is to the touch, generates fire, how sticks rubbed together kindle
flame, how water shining in the sun causes a flash; and then again the
cause of its upward tendency, its power of incessant motion?—Putting
aside all which curious questions and investigations, we give heed only
to the subservience of this fire to life, seeing that he who avails
himself of its service fares no worse than he who busies himself with
inquiries into its nature.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p47"></span>Wherefore Holy Scripture omits all idle
inquiry into substance as superfluous and unnecessary. And methinks it
was for this that John, the Son of Thunder, who with the loud voice of
the doctrines contained in his Gospel rose above that of the preaching
which heralded them, said at the close of his Gospel, “There are also
many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should be written
every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the
books that should be written <span id="fr_1090"></span>[1092](#fn_1090)
.” He certainly does not mean by these the miracles of healing, for of
these the narrative leaves none unrecorded, even though it does not
mention the names of all who were healed. For when he tells us that the
dead were raised, that the blind received their sight, that the deaf
heard, that the lame walked, and that He healed all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease, he does not in this leave any miracle
unrecorded, but embraces each and all in these general terms. But it may
be that the Evangelist means this in his profound wisdom: that we are to
learn the majesty of the Son of God not by the miracles alone which He
did in the flesh. For these are little compared with the greatness of
His other work. “But look thou up to Heaven! Behold its glories!
Transfer your thought to the wide compass of the earth, and the watery
depths! Embrace with your mind the whole world, and when you have come
to the knowledge of supramundane nature, learn that these are the true
works of Him Who sojourned for thee in the flesh,” which (saith he), “if
each were written”—and the essence, manner, origin, and extent of each
given—the world itself could not contain the fulness of Christ’s
teaching about the world itself. For since God hath made all things in
wisdom, and to His wisdom there is no limit (for “His understanding,”
saith the Scripture, “is infinite” <span
id="fr_1091"></span>[1093](#fn_1091) ), the world, that is bounded by
limits of its own, cannot contain within itself the account of infinite
wisdom. If, then, the whole world is too little to contain the teaching
of the works of God, how many worlds could contain an account of the
Lord of them all? For perhaps it will not be denied even by the tongue
of the blasphemer that the Maker of all things, which have been created
by the mere fiat of His will, is infinitely greater than all. If, then,
the whole creation cannot contain what might be said respecting itself
(for so, according to our explanation, the great Evangelist testifies),
how should human shallowness contain all that might be said of the Lord
of Creation? Let those grand talkers inform us what man is, in
comparison with the universe, what geometrical point is so without
magnitude, which of the atoms of Epicurus is capable of such
infinitesimal reduction in the vain fancy of those who make such
problems the object of their study, which of them falls so little short
of non-existence, as human shallowness, when compared with the universe.
As saith also great David, with a true insight into human weakness,
“Mine age is as nothing unto Thee <span
id="fr_1092"></span>[1094](#fn_1092) ,” not saying that it is absolutely
nothing, but signifying, by this comparison to the non-existent, that
what is so exceedingly brief is next to nothing at all.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p51"></span>But, nevertheless, with only such a
nature for their base of operations, they open their mouths wide against
the unspeakable Power, and encompass by one appellation the infinite
nature, confining the Divine essence within the narrow limits of the
term ungeneracy, that they may thereby pave a way for their blasphemy
against the Only-begotten; but although the great Basil had corrected
this false opinion, and pointed out, in regard to the terms, that they
have no existence in nature, but are attached as conceptions to the
things signified, so far are <span id="page_CCLXIII">p. CCLXIII</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXIII"></span>they from returning to the
truth, that they stick to what they have once advanced, as to birdlime,
and will not loose their hold of their fallacious mode of argument, nor
do they allow the term “ungeneracy” to be used in the way of a mental
conception, but make it represent the Divine nature itself. Now to go
through their whole argument, and to attempt to overthrow it by
discussing word by word their frivolous and long-winded nonsense, would
be a task requiring much leisure, and time, and freedom from calls of
business. Just as I hear that Eunomius, after applying himself at his
leisure, and laboriously, for a number of years exceeding those of the
Trojan war, has fabricated this dream for himself in his deep slumbers,
studiously seeking, not how to interpret any of the ideas which he has
arrived at, but how to drag and force them into keeping with his
phrases, and going round and collecting out of certain books the words
in them that sound grandest. And as beggars in lack of clothing pin and
tack together tunics for themselves out of rags, so he, cropping here a
phrase and there a phrase, has woven together for himself the patchwork
of his treatise, glueing in and fixing together the joinings of his
diction with much labour and pains, displaying therein a petty and
juvenile ambition for combat, which any man who has an eye to actuality
would disdain, just as a steadfast wrestler, no longer in the prime of
life, would disdain to play the woman by over-niceness in dress. But to
me it seems that, when the scope of the whole question has been briefly
run through, his roundabout flourishes may well be let alone.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p52"></span>I have said, then (for I make my
master’s words my own), that reason supplies us with but a dim and
imperfect comprehension of the Divine nature; nevertheless, the
knowledge that we gather from the terms which piety allows us to apply
to it is sufficient for our limited capacity. Now we do not say that all
these terms have a uniform significance; for some of them express
qualities inherent in God, and others qualities that are not, as when we
say that He is just or incorruptible, by the term “just” signifying that
justice is found in Him, and by “incorruptible” that corruption is not.
Again, by a change of meaning, we may apply terms to God in the way of
accommodation, so that what is proper to God may be represented by a
term which in no wise belongs to Him, and what is foreign to His nature
may be represented by what belongs to Him. For whereas justice is the
contradictory of injustice, and everlastingness the contrary of
destruction, we may fitly and without impropriety employ contraries in
speaking of God, as when we say that He is ever existent, or that He is
not unjust, which is equivalent to saying that He is just, and that He
admits not of corruption. So, too, we may say that other names of God,
by a certain change of signification, may be suitably employed to
express either meaning, for example “good,” and “immortal,” and all
expressions of like formation; for each of these terms, according as it
is taken, is capable of indicating what does or what does not appertain
to the Divine nature, so that, notwithstanding the formal change, our
orthodox opinion in regard to the object remains immovably fixed. For it
amounts to the same, whether we speak of God as unsusceptible of evil,
or whether we call Him good; whether we confess that He is immortal, or
say that He ever liveth. For we understand no difference in the sense of
these terms, but we signify one and the same thing by both, though the
one may seem to convey the notion of affirmation, and the other of
negation. And so again, when we speak of God as the First Cause of all
things, or again, when we speak of Him as without cause, we are guilty
of no contradiction in sense, declaring as we do by either name that God
is the prime Ruler and First Cause of all. Accordingly when we speak of
Him as without cause, and as Lord of all, in the former case we signify
what does not attach to Him, in the latter case what does; it being
possible, as I have said, by a change of the things signified, to give
an opposite sense to the words that express them, and to signify a
property by a word which for the time takes a negative form, and *vice
versa.* For it is allowable, instead of saying that He Himself has no
primal cause, to describe Him as the First Cause of all, and again,
instead of this, to hold that He alone exists ungenerately, so that
while the words seem by the formal change to be at variance with each
other, the sense remains one and the same. For the object to be aimed
at, in questions respecting God, is not to produce a dulcet and
melodious harmony of words, but to work out an orthodox formula of
thought, whereby a worthy conception of God may be ensured. Since, then,
it is only orthodox to infer that He Who is the First Cause of all is
Himself without cause, if this opinion is established, what further
contention of words remains for men of sense and judgment, when every
word whereby such a notion is conveyed to us has the same signification?
For whether you say that He is the First Cause and Principle of all, or
speak of Him as without origin, whether you speak of Him as of
ungenerate or eternal subsistence, as the Cause of all or as alone
without cause, all these words are, in a manner, of like force, and
equivalent to one another, as far as the meaning of the things signified
is concerned; and it is mere folly to contend for <span
id="page_CCLXIV">p. CCLXIV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXIV"></span>this or that vocal intonation, as if
orthodoxy were a thing of sounds and syllables rather than of the mind.
This view, then, has been carefully enunciated by our great master,
whereby all whose eyes are not blindfolded by the veil of heresy may
clearly see that, whatever be the nature of God, He is not to be
apprehended by sense, and that He transcends reason, though human
thought, busying itself with curious inquiry, with such help of reason
as it can command, stretches out its hand and just touches His
unapproachable and sublime nature, being neither keen-sighted enough to
see clearly what is invisible, nor yet so far withheld from approach as
to be unable to catch some faint glimpse of what it seeks to know. For
such knowledge it attains in part by the touch of reason, in part from
its very inability to discern it, finding that it is a sort of knowledge
to know that what is sought transcends knowledge (for it has learned
what is contrary to the Divine nature, as well as all that may fittingly
be conjectured respecting it). Not that it has been able to gain full
knowledge of that nature itself about which it reasons, but from the
knowledge of those properties which are, or are not, inherent in it,
this mind of man sees what alone can be seen, that that which is far
removed from all evil, and is understood in all good, is altogether such
as I should pronounce ineffable and incomprehensible by human reason.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p53"></span>But although our great master has thus
cleared away all unworthy notions respecting the Divine nature, and has
urged and taught all that may be reverently and fittingly held
concerning it, viz. that the First Cause is neither a corruptible thing,
nor one brought into being by any birth, but that it is outside the
range of every conception of the kind; and that from the negation of
what is not inherent, and the affirmation of what may be with reverence
conceived to be inherent therein, we may best apprehend what He
is—nevertheless this vehement adversary of the truth opposes these
teachings, and hopes with the sounding word “ungeneracy” to supply a
clear definition of the essence of God.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p54"></span>And yet it is plain to every one who
has given any attention to the uses of words, that the word incorruption
denotes by the privative particle that neither corruption nor birth
appertains to God: just as many other words of like formation denote the
absence of what is not inherent rather than the presence of what is;
*e.g.* harmless, painless, guileless, undisturbed, passionless,
sleepless, undiseased <span id="fr_1093"></span>[1095](#fn_1093) ,
impossible, unblamable, and the like. For all these terms are truly
applicable to God, and furnish a sort of catalogue and muster of evil
qualities from which God is separate. Yet the terms employed give no
positive account of that to which they are applied. We learn from them
what it is not; but what it is, the force of the words does not
indicate. For if some one, wishing to describe the nature of man, were
to say that it is not lifeless, not insentient, not winged, not
four-footed, not amphibious, he would not indicate what it is: he would
simply declare what it is not, and he would be no more making untrue
statements respecting man than he would be positively defining his
subject. In the same way, from the many things which are predicated of
the Divine nature, we learn under what conditions we may conceive God as
existing, but what He is essentially, such statements do not inform us.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p56"></span>While, however, we strenuously avoid
all concurrence with absurd notions in our thoughts of God, we allow
ourselves in the use of many diverse appellations in regard to Him,
adapting them to our point of view. For whereas no suitable word has
been found to express the Divine nature, we address God by many names,
each by some distinctive touch adding something fresh to our notions
respecting Him,—thus seeking by variety of nomenclature to gain some
glimmerings for the comprehension of what we seek. For when we question
and examine ourselves as to what God is, we express our conclusions
variously, as that He is that which presides over the system and working
of the things that are, that His existence is without cause, while to
all else He is the Cause of being; that He is that which has no
generation or beginning, no corruption, no turning backward, no
diminution of supremacy; that He is that in which evil finds no place,
and from which no good is absent.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p57"></span>And if any one would distinguish such
notions by words, he would find it absolutely necessary to call that
which admits of no changing to the worse unchanging and invariable, and
to call the First Cause of all ungenerate, and that which admits not of
corruption incorruptible; and that which ceases at no limit immortal and
never failing; and that which presides over all Almighty. And so,
framing names for all other Divine attributes in accordance with
reverent conceptions of Him, we designate them now by one name, now by
another, according to our varying lines of thought, as power, or
strength, or goodness, or ungeneracy, or perpetuity.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p58"></span>I say, then, that men have a right to
such <span id="page_CCLXV">p. CCLXV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXV"></span>word-building, adapting their
appellations to their subject, each man according to his judgment; and
that there is no absurdity in this, such as our controversialist makes a
pretence of, shuddering at it as at some gruesome hobgoblin, and that we
are fully justified in allowing the use of such fresh applications of
words in respect to all things that can be named, and to God Himself.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p59"></span>For God is not an expression, neither
hath He His essence in voice or utterance. But God is of Himself what
also He is believed to be, but He is named, by those who call upon Him,
not what He is essentially (for the nature of Him Who alone is is
unspeakable), but He receives His appellations from what are believed to
be His operations in regard to our life. To take an instance ready to
our hand; when we speak of Him as God, we so call Him from regarding Him
as overlooking and surveying all things, and seeing through the things
that are hidden. But if His essence is prior to His works, and we
understand His works by our senses, and express them in words as we are
best able, why should we be afraid of calling things by words of later
origin than themselves? For if we stay to interpret any of the
attributes of God till we understand them, and we understand them only
by what His works teach us, and if His power precedes its exercise, and
depends on the will of God, while His will resides in the spontaneity of
the Divine nature, are we not clearly taught that the words which
represent things are of later origin than the things themselves, and
that the words which are framed to express the operations of things are
reflections of the things themselves? And that this is so, we are
clearly taught by Holy Scripture, by the mouth of great David, when, as
by certain peculiar and appropriate names, derived from his
contemplation of the works of God, he thus speaks of the Divine nature:
“The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, long-suffering, and of great
goodness <span id="fr_1094"></span>[1096](#fn_1094) .” Now what do these
words tell us? Do they indicate His operations, or His nature? No one
will say that they indicate aught but His operations. At what time,
then, after showing mercy and pity, did God acquire His name from their
display? Was it before man’s life began? But who was there to be the
object of pity? Was it, then, after sin entered into the world? But sin
entered after man. The exercise, therefore, of pity, and the name
itself, came after man. What then? will our adversary, wise as he is
above the Prophets, convict David of error in applying names to God
derived from his opportunities of knowing Him? or, in contending with
him, will he use against him the pretence in his stately passage as out
of a tragedy, saying that “he glories in the most blessed life of God
with names drawn from human imagination, whereas it gloried in itself
alone, long before men were born to imagine them”? The Psalmist’s
advocate will readily admit that the Divine nature gloried in itself
alone even before the existence of human imagination, but will contend
that the human mind can speak only so much in respect of God as its
capacity, instructed by His works, will allow. “For,” as saith the
Wisdom of Solomon, “by the greatness and beauty of the creatures
proportionably the Maker of them is seen <span
id="fr_1095"></span>[1097](#fn_1095) .”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p62"></span>But in applying such appellations to
the Divine essence, “which passeth all understanding,” we do not seek to
glory in it by the names we employ, but to guide our own selves by the
aid of such terms towards the comprehension of the things which are
hidden. “I said unto the Lord,” saith the Prophet, “Thou art my God, my
goods are nothing unto Thee <span id="fr_1096"></span>[1098](#fn_1096)
.” How then are we glorifying the most blessed life of God, as this man
affirms, when (as saith the Prophet) “our goods are nothing unto Him”?
Is it that he takes “call” to mean “glory in”? Yet those who employ the
latter word rightly, and who have been trained to use words with
propriety, tell us that the word “glory in” is never used of mere
indication, but that that idea is expressed by such words as “to make
known,” “to show,” “to indicate,” or some other of the kind, whereas the
word for “glory in” means to be proud of, or delight in a thing, and the
like. But he affirms that by employing names drawn from human
imagination we “glory in” the blessed life. We hold, however, that to
add any honour to the Divine nature, which is above all honour, is more
than human infirmity can do. At the same time we do not deny that we
endeavour, by words and names devised with due reverence, to give some
notion of its attributes. And so, following studiously in the path of
due reverence, we apprehend that the first cause is that which has its
subsistence not from any cause superior to itself. Which view, if so be
one accepts it as true, is praiseworthy for its truth alone. But if one
should judge it to be superior to other aspects of the Divine nature,
and so should say that God, exulting and rejoicing in this alone,
glories in it, as of paramount excellence, one would find support only
from the Muse by whom Eunomius is inspired, when he says, that
“ungeneracy” glories in itself, that which, mark you, he calls <span
id="page_CCLXVI">p. CCLXVI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXVI"></span>God’s essence, and styles the blessed
and Divine life.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p64"></span>But let us hear how, “in the way most
needed, and the form that preceded” (for with such rhymes he again gives
us a taste of the flowers of style), let us hear, I say, how by such
means he proposes to refute the opinion formed of him, and to keep in
the dark the ignorance of those whom he has deluded. For I will use our
dithyrambist’s own verbal inflections and phraseology. When, says he, we
assert that words by which thought is expressed die as soon as they are
uttered, we add that whether words are uttered or not, whether they are
yet in existence or not, God was and is ungenerate. Let us learn, then,
what connection there is between the conception or the formation of
words, and the things which we signify by this or that mode of
utterance. Accordingly, if God is ungenerate before the creation of man,
we must esteem as of no account the words which indicate that thought,
inasmuch as they are dispersed along with the sounds that express them,
if such thought happen to be named after human notion. For to be, and to
be called, are not convertible terms. But God is by His nature what He
is, but He is called by us by such names as the poverty of our nature
will allow us to make use of, which is incapable of enunciating thought
except by means of voice and words. Accordingly, understanding Him to be
without origin, we enunciate that thought by the term ungenerate. And
what harm is it to Him Who indeed is, that He should be named by us as
we conceive Him to be? For His ungenerate existence is not the result of
His being called ungenerate, but the name is the result of the
existence. But this our acute friend fails to see, nor does he take a
clear view of his own positions. For if he did, he would certainly have
left off reviling those who framed the word ungeneracy to express the
idea in their minds. For look at what he says, “Words so spoken perish
as soon as they are spoken; but God both is and was ungenerate, both
after the words were spoken and before. You see that the Supreme Being
is what He is, before the creation of all things, whether silent or not,
being what He is neither in greater nor in less degree; while the use of
words and names was not devised till after the creation of man, endowed
by God with the faculty of reason and speech.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p65"></span>If, then, the creation is of later date
than its Creator, and man is the latest in the scale of creation, and if
speech is a distinctive characteristic of man, and verbs and nouns are
the component elements of speech, and ungeneracy is a noun, how is it
that he does not understand that he is combating his own arguments? For
we, on our side, say that by human thought and intelligence words have
been devised expressive of things which they represent, and he, on his
side, allows that those who employ speech are demonstrably later in
point of time than the Divine life, and that the Divine nature is now,
and ever has been, without generation. If, then, he allows the blessed
life to be anterior to man (for to that point I return), and we do not
deny man’s later creation, but contend that we have used forms of speech
ever since we came into being and received the faculty of reason from
our Maker, and if ungeneracy is a word expressive of a special idea, and
every word is a part of human speech,—it follows that he who admits that
the Divine nature was anterior to man must at the same time admit that
the name invented by man to express that nature was itself later in
being. For it was not likely that the use of speech should be exercised
before the existence of creatures to use it, any more than that farming
should be exercised before the existence of farmers, or navigation
before that of navigators, or in fact any of the occupations of life
before that of life itself. Why, then, does he contend with us, instead
of following his premises to their legitimate conclusion?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p66"></span>He says that God was what He is, before
the creation of man. Nor do we deny it. For whatsoever we conceive of
God existed before the creation of the world. But we maintain that it
received its name after the namer came into being. For if we use words
for this purpose, that they may supply us with teaching about the things
which they signify, and it is ignorance alone that requires teaching,
while the Divine Nature, as comprehending all knowledge, is above all
teaching, it follows that names were invented to denote the Supreme
Being, not for His sake, but for our own. For He did not attach the term
ungeneracy to His nature in order that He Himself might be instructed.
For He Who knoweth all things has no need of syllables and words to
instruct Him as to His own nature and majesty.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p67"></span>But that we might gain some sort of
comprehension of what with reverence may be thought respecting Him, we
have stamped our different ideas with certain words and syllables,
labelling, as it were, our mental processes with verbal formulæ to serve
as characteristic notes and indications, with the object of giving a
clear and simple declaration of our mental processes by means of words
attached to, and expressive of, our ideas. Why, then, does he find fault
with our contention that the term ungeneracy was devised to indicate the
existence of God without origin or beginning, and that, independently of
all exercise of speech, or <span id="page_CCLXVII">p. CCLXVII</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXVII"></span>silence, or thought, and
before the very idea of creation, God was and remains ungenerate? If,
indeed, any one should argue that God was not ungenerate till the name
ungeneracy had been found, the man might be pardonable for writing as he
has written, in contravention of such an absurdity. But if no one denies
that He existed before speech and reason, whereas, while the form of
words by which the meaning is expressed is said by us to have been
devised by mental conception, the end and aim of his controversy with us
is to show that the name is not of man’s device, but that it existed
before our creation, though by whom it was spoken I do not know <span
id="fr_1097"></span>[1099](#fn_1097) , what has the assertion that God
existed ungenerately before all things, and the contention that <span
id="fr_1098"></span>[1100](#fn_1098) mental conception is posterior to
God, got to do with this aim of his? For that God is not a conception
has been fully demonstrated, so that we may press him with the same sort
of argument, and reply, so to say, in his own words, *e.g.* “It is utter
folly to regard understanding as of earlier birth than those who
exercise it”; or again, as he proceeds a little below, “Nor as though we
intended this, *i.e.* to make men, the latest of God’s works of
creation, anterior to the conceptions of their own understanding.” Great
indeed would be the force of the argument, if any one of us, out of
sheer folly and madness, should argue that God was a conception of the
mind. But if this is not so, nor ever has been, (for who would go to
such a pitch of folly as to assert that He Who alone is, and Who brought
all else whatsoever into being, has no substantial existence of His own,
and to make Him out to be a mere conception of a name?) why does he
fight with shadows, contending with imaginary propositions? Is not the
cause of this unreasonable litigiousness clear, that, feeling ashamed of
the fallacy respecting ungeneracy with which his dupes have been deluded
(since it has been proved that the word is very far removed from the
Divine essence), he is deliberately shuffling up his arguments, shifting
the controversy from words to things, so that by throwing all into
confusion the unwary may more easily be seduced, by imagining that God
has been described by us either as a conception, or as posterior in
existence to the invention of human terminology; and thus, leaving our
argument unrefuted, he is shifting his position to another quarter of
the field? For our conclusion was, as I have said, that the term
ungeneracy does not indicate the Divine nature, but is applicable to it
as the result of a conception by which the fact that God subsists
without prior cause is pointed at. But what they were for establishing
was this: that the word was indicative of the Divine essence itself. Yet
how has it been established that the word has this force? I suppose the
handling of this question is in reserve in some other of his writings.
But here he makes it his main object to show that God exists
ungenerately, just as though some one were simply questioning him on
such points as these—what view he held as to the term ungenerate,
whether he thought it invented to show that the First Cause was without
beginning and origin, or as declaring the Divine essence itself; and he,
with much assumption of gravity and wisdom, were replying that he, for
his part, had no doubt that God was the Maker of heaven and earth. How
widely this method of proceeding differs from, and is unconnected with,
his first contention, you may see, in the same way as you may see how
little his fine description of his controversy with us is connected with
the question at issue. For let us look at the matter in this wise.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p70"></span>They say that God is ungenerate, and in
this we agree. But that ungeneracy itself constitutes the Divine
essence, here we take exception. For we maintain that this term is
declarative of God’s ungenerate subsistence, but not that ungeneracy is
God. But of what nature is his refutation? It is this: that before man’s
creation God existed ungenerately. But what has this to do with the
point which he promises to establish, that the term and its Subject are
identical? For he lays it down that ungeneracy is the Divine essence.
But what sort of a fulfilment of his promise is it, to show that God
existed before beings capable of speech? What a wonderful, what an
irresistible demonstration! what perfection of logical refinement! Who
that has not been initiated in the mysteries of the awful craft may
venture to look it in the face? Yet in particularizing the meanings of
the term “conception,” he makes a solemn travesty of it. For, saith he,
of words used to express a conception of the mind, some exist only in
pronunciation, as for instance those which signify nonentity, while
others have their peculiar meaning; and of these some have an amplifying
force, as in the case of things colossal, others a diminishing, as in
that of pigmies, others a multiplying, as in that of many-headed
monsters, others a combinative, as in that of centaurs. After thus
reducing the force of the term “conception” to its lowest value, our
clever friend will allow it, you see, no further extension. He <span
id="page_CCLXVIII">p. CCLXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXVIII"></span>says that it is without sense and
meaning, that it fancies the unnatural, either contracting or extending
the limits of nature, or putting heterogeneous notions together, or
juggling with strange and monstrous combinations.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p71"></span>With such gibes at the term
“conception,” he shows, to the best of his ability, that it is useless
and unprofitable for the life of man. What, then, was the origin of our
higher branches of learning, of geometry, arithmetic, the logical and
physical sciences, of the inventions of mechanical art, of the marvels
of measuring time by the brazen dial and the water-clock? What, again,
of ontology, of the science of ideas, in short of all intellectual
speculation as applied to great and sublime objects? What of
agriculture, of navigation, and of the other pursuits of human life? how
comes the sea to be a highway for man? how are things of the air brought
into the service of things of the earth, wild things tamed, objects of
terror brought into subjection, animals stronger than ourselves made
obedient to the rein? Have not all these benefits to human life been
achieved by conception? For, according to my account of it, conception
is the method by which we discover things that are unknown, going on to
further discoveries by means of what adjoins to and follows <span
id="fr_1099"></span>[1101](#fn_1099) from our first perception with
regard to the thing studied. For when we have formed some idea of what
we seek to know, by adapting what follows to the first result of our
discoveries we gradually conduct our inquiry to the end of our proposed
research.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p73"></span>But why enumerate the greater and more
splendid results of this faculty? For every one who is not unfriendly to
truth can see for himself that all else that Time has discovered for the
service and benefit of human life, has been discovered by no other
instrumentality than that of conception. And it seems to me, that any
one who should judge this faculty more precious than any other with the
exercise of which we are gifted in this life by Divine Providence would
not be far mistaken in his judgment. And in saying this I am supported
by Job’s teaching, where he represents God as answering His servant by
the tempest and the clouds, saying both other things meet for Him to
say, and that it is He Who hath set man over the arts, and given to
woman her skill in weaving and embroidery <span
id="fr_1100"></span>[1102](#fn_1100) .

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p75"></span>Now that He did not teach us such
things by some visible operation, Himself presiding over the work, as we
may see in matters of bodily teaching, no one would gainsay whose nature
is not altogether animal and brutish. But still it has been said that
our first knowledge of such arts is from Him, and, if such is the case,
surely He Who endowed our nature with such a faculty of conceiving and
finding out the objects of our investigation was Himself our Guide to
the arts. And by the law of causation, whatever is discovered and
established by conception must be ascribed to Him Who is the Author of
that faculty. Thus human life invented the Art of Healing, but
nevertheless he would be right who should assert that Art to be a gift
from God. And whatever discovery has been made in human life, conducive
to any useful purposes of peace or war, came to us from no other quarter
but from an intelligence conceiving and discovering according to our
several requirements; and that intelligence is a gift of God. It is to
God, then, that we owe all that intelligence supplies to us. Nor do I
deny the objection made by our adversaries, that lying wonders also are
fabricated by this faculty. For their contention as to this makes for
our own side in the argument. For we too assert that the science of
opposites is the same, whether beneficial or the reverse; *e.g.* in the
case of the arts of healing and navigation, and so on. For he who knows
how to relieve the sick by drugs will also know, if indeed he were to
turn his art to an evil purpose, how to mix some deleterious ingredient
in the food of the healthy. And he who can steer a boat with its rudder
into port can also steer it for the reef or the rock, if minded to
destroy those on board. And the painter, with the same art by which he
depicts the fairest form on his canvas, could give us an exact
representation of the ugliest. So, too, the wrestling-master, by the
experience which he has gained in anointing, can set a dislocated limb,
or, should he wish to do so, dislocate a sound one. But why encumber our
argument by multiplying instances? As in the above-mentioned cases no
one would deny that he who has learned to practise an art for right
purposes can also abuse it for wrong ones, so we say that the faculty of
thought and conception was implanted by God in human nature for good,
but, with those who abuse it as an instrument of discovery, it
frequently becomes the handmaid of pernicious inventions. But although
it is thus possible for this faculty to give a plausible shape to what
is false and unreal, it is none the less competent to investigate what
actually and in very truth subsists, and its ability for the one must in
fairness be regarded as an evidence of its ability for the other.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p76"></span>For that one who proposes to himself to
terrify or charm an audience should have plenty <span
id="page_CCLXIX">p. CCLXIX</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXIX"></span>of conception to effect such a
purpose, and should display to the spectators many-handed, many-headed,
or fire-breathing monsters, or men enfolded in the coils of serpents, or
that he should seem to increase their stature, or enlarge their natural
proportions to a ridiculous extent, or that he should describe men
metamorphosed into fountains and trees and birds, a kind of narrative
which is not without its attraction for such as take pleasure in things
of that sort;—all this, I say, is the clearest of demonstrations that it
is possible to arrive at higher knowledge also by means of this
inventive faculty.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p77"></span>For it is not the case that, while the
intelligence implanted in us by the Giver is fully competent to conjure
up non-realities, it is endowed with no faculty at all for providing us
with things that may profit us. But as the impulsive and elective
faculty of the soul is established in our nature, to incite us to what
is good and noble, though a man may also abuse it for what is evil, and
no one can call the fact that the elective faculty sometimes inclines to
evil a proof that it never inclines to what is good—so the bias of
conception towards what is vain and unprofitable does not prove its
inability for what is profitable, but, on the contrary, is a
demonstration of its not being unserviceable for what is beneficial and
necessary to the mind. For as, in the one case, it discovers means to
produce pleasure or terror, so, in the other, it does not fail to find
ways for getting at truth. Now one of the objects of inquiry was whether
the First Cause, viz. God, exists without beginning, or whether His
existence is dependent on some beginning. But perceiving, by the aid of
thought, that that cannot be a First Cause which we conceive of as the
consequence of another, we devised a word expressive of such a notion,
and we say that He who is without anterior cause exists without origin,
or, so to say, ungenerately. And Him Who so exists we call ungenerate
and without origin, indicating, by that appellation, not what He is, but
what He is not.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p78"></span>But as far as possible to elucidate the
idea, I will endeavour to illustrate it by a still plainer example. Let
us suppose the inquiry to be about some tree, whether it is cultivated
or wild. If the former, we call it planted, if the latter, not planted.
And such a term exactly hits the truth, for the tree must needs be after
this manner or that. And yet the word does not indicate the peculiar
nature of the plant. From the term “not-planted” we learn that it is of
spontaneous growth; but whether what is thus signified is a plane, or a
vine, or some other such plant, the name applied to it does not inform
us.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p79"></span>This example being understood, it is
time to go on to the thing which it illustrates. This much we
comprehend, that the First Cause has His existence from no antecedent
one. Accordingly, we call God ungenerate as existing ungenerately,
reducing this notion of ungeneracy into verbal form. That He is without
origin or beginning we show by the force of the term. But what that
Being is which exists ungenerately, this appellation does not lead us to
discern. Nor was it to be supposed that the processes of conception
could avail to raise us above the limits of our nature, and open up the
incomprehensible to our view, and enable us to compass the knowledge of
that which no knowledge can approach <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1103](#fn_1101) . Nevertheless, our adversary
storms at our Master, and tries to tear to pieces his teaching
respecting the faculty of thought and conception, and derides what has
been said, revelling as usual in the rattle of his jingling phraseology,
and saying that he (Basil) shrinks from adducing evidence respecting
those things of which he presumes to be the interpreter. For, quoting
certain of the Master’s speculations on the faculty of conception, in
which he shows that its exercise finds place, not only in reference to
vain and trivial objects, but that it is competent to deal also with
weightier matters, he, by means of his speculation about the corn, and
seed, and other food (in Genesis), brings Basil into court with the
charge, that his language is a following of pagan philosophy <span
id="fr_1102"></span>[1104](#fn_1102) , and <span id="page_CCLXX">p.
CCLXX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXX"></span>that he is
circumscribing Divine Providence, as not allowing that words were given
to things by God, and that he is fighting in the ranks of the Atheists,
and taking arms against Providence, and that he admires the doctrines of
the profane rather than the laws of God, and ascribes to them the palm
of wisdom, not having observed in the earliest of the sacred records,
that before the creation of man, the naming of fruit and seed are
mentioned in Holy Writ.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p82"></span>Such are his charges against us; not
indeed his notions as expressed in his own phraseology, for we have made
such alterations as were required to correct the ruggedness and
harshness of his style. What, then, is our answer to this careful
guardian of Divine Providence? He asserts that we are in error, because,
while we do not deny man’s having been created a rational being by God,
we ascribe the invention of words to the logical faculty implanted by
God in man’s nature. And this is the bitterest of his accusations,
whereby our teacher of righteousness is charged with deserting to the
tenets of the Atheists, and is denounced as partaking with and
supporting their lawless company, and indeed as guilty of all the most
atrocious offences. Well, then, let this corrector of our blunders tell
us, *did* God give names to the things which He created? For so says our
new interpreter of the mysteries: “Before the creation of man God named
germ, and herb, and grass, and seed, and tree, and the like, when by the
word of His power He brought them severally into being.” If, then, he
abides by the bare letter, and so far Judaizes, and has yet to learn
that the Christian is a disciple not of the letter but of the Spirit
(for the letter killeth, says the Apostle, but the Spirit giveth
life <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1105](#fn_1103) ), and quotes to us the
bare literal reading of the words as though God Himself pronounced
them—if, I say, he believes this, that, after the similitude of men, God
made use of fluency of speech, expressing His thoughts by voice and
accent—if, I repeat, he believes this, he cannot reasonably deny what
follows as its logical consequence. For our speech is uttered by the
organs of speech, the windpipe, the tongue, the teeth, and the mouth,
the inhalation of air from without and the breath from within working
together to produce the utterance. For the windpipe, fitting into the
throat like a flute, emits a sound from below; and the roof of the
mouth, by reason of the void space above extending to the nostrils, like
some musical instrument, gives volume from above to the voice. And the
cheeks, too, are aids to speech, contracting and expanding in accordance
with their structural arrangement, or propelling the voice through a
narrow passage by various movements of the tongue, which it effects now
with one part of itself now with another, giving hardness or softness to
the sound which passes over it by contact with the teeth or with the
palate. Again, the service of the lips contributes not a little to the
result, affecting the voice by the variety of their distinctive
movements, and helping to shape the words as they are uttered.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p84"></span>If, then, God gives things their names
as our new expositor of the Divine record assures us, naming germ, and
grass, and tree, and fruit, He must of necessity have pronounced each of
these words not otherwise than as it is pronounced; *i.e*. according to
the composition of the syllables, some of which are sounded by the lips,
others by the tongue, others by both. But if none of these words could
be uttered, except by the operation of vocal organs producing each
syllable and sound by some appropriate movement, he must of necessity
ascribe the possession of such organs to God, and fashion the Divine
Being according to the exigencies of speech. For each adaptation of the
vocal organs must be in some form or other, and form is a bodily
limitation. Further, we know very well that all bodies are composite,
but where you see composition you see also dissolution, and dissolution,
as the notion implies, is the same thing as destruction. This, then, is
the upshot of our controversialist’s victory over us; to show us the God
of his imagining whom he has fashioned by the name ungeneracy—speaking,
indeed, that He may not lose His share in the invention of names, but
provided with vocal organs with which to utter them, and not without
bodily nature to enable Him to employ them (for you cannot conceive of
formal utterance in the abstract apart from a body), and gradually going
on to the congenital affections of the body—through the composite to
dissolution, and so finding His end in destruction.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p85"></span>Such is the nature of this new-fangled
Deity, as deducible from the words of our new God-maker. But he takes
his stand on the Scriptures, and maintains that Moses explicitly
declares this, when he says, “God said,” adding His words, “Let there be
light,” and, “Let there be a firmament,” and, “Let the waters be
gathered together…and let the dry land appear,” and, “Let the earth
bring forth,” and, “Let the waters bring forth,” and, whatsoever else is
written in its order. Let us, then, examine the meaning of what is said.
Who does not know, even if he be the merest simpleton, that there is a
natural correlation between hearing and speech, and that, as it is
impossible <span id="page_CCLXXI">p. CCLXXI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXI"></span>for hearing to discharge its function
when no one is speaking, so speech is ineffectual unless directed to
hearing? If, then, he means literally that “God said,” let him tell us
also to what hearing His words were addressed. Does he mean that He said
them to Himself? If so, the commands which He issues, He issues to
Himself. Yet who will accept this interpretation, that God sits upon His
throne prescribing what He Himself must do, and employing Himself as His
minister to do His bidding? But even supposing one were to allow that it
was not blasphemy to say this, who has any need of words and speech for
himself, even though a man? For every one’s own mental action suffices
him to produce choice and volition. But he will doubtless say that the
Father held converse with the Son. But what need of vocal utterance for
that? For it is a property of bodily nature to signify the thoughts of
the heart by means of words, whence also written characters equivalent
to speech were invented for the expression of thought. For we declare
thought equally by speaking and by writing, but in the case of those who
are not too far distant we reach their hearing by voice, but declare our
mind to those who are at a distance by written characters; and in the
case of those present with us, in proportion to their distance from us,
we raise or lower the tones of our voice, and to those close by us we
sometimes point out what they are to do simply by a nod; and such or
such an expression of the eye is sufficient to convey our determination,
or a movement of the hand is sufficient to signify our approval or
disapproval of something going on. If, then, those who are encompassed
by the body are able to make known the hidden working of their minds to
their neighbours, even without voice, or speech, or correspondence by
means of letters, and silence causes no hindrance to the despatch of
business, can it be that in the case of the immaterial, and intangible,
and, as Eunomius says, the Supreme and first Being, there is any need of
words to indicate the thought of the Father and to make known His will
to the Only-Begotten Son—words, which, as he himself says, are wont to
perish as soon as they are uttered? No one, methinks, who has common
sense will accept this as the truth, especially as all sound is poured
forth into the air. For voice cannot be produced unless it takes
consistence in air. Now, even they themselves must suppose some medium
of communication between the speaker and him to whom he speaks. For if
there were no such medium, how could the voice travel from the speaker
to the hearer? What, then, will they say is the medium or interval by
which they divide the Father from the Son? Between bodies, indeed, there
is an interval of atmospheric space, differing in its nature from the
nature of human bodies. But God, Who is intangible, and without form,
and pure from all composition, in communicating His counsels with the
Only-Begotten Son, Who is similarly, or rather in the same manner,
immaterial and without body—if He made His communication by voice, what
medium would He have had through which the word, transmitted as in a
current, might reach the ears of the Only-Begotten? For we need hardly
stop to consider that God is not separable into apprehensive faculties,
as we are, whose perceptions separately apprehend their corresponding
objects; *e.g.* sight apprehends what may be seen, hearing what may be
heard, so that touch does not taste, and hearing has no perception of
odours and flavours, but each confines itself to that function to which
it was appointed by nature, holding itself insensible, as it were, to
those with which it has no natural correspondence, and incapable of
tasting the pleasure enjoyed by its neighbour sense. But with God it is
otherwise. All in all, He is at once sight, and hearing, and knowledge;
and there we stop, for it is not permitted us to ascribe the more animal
perceptions to that refined nature. Still we take a very low view of
God, and drag down the Divine to our own grovelling standard, if we
suppose the Father speaking with His mouth, and the Son’s ear listening
to His words. What, then, are we to suppose is the medium which conveys
the Father’s voice to the hearing of the Son? It must be created or
uncreate. But we may not call it created; for the Word was before the
creation of the world: and beside the Divine nature there is nothing
uncreate. If, therefore, there was no creation then, and the Word spoken
of in the cosmogony was older than creation, will he, who maintains that
speech and a voice are meant by “the Word,” suggest what medium existed
between the Father and the Son, whereby those words and sounds were
expressed? For if a medium exist, it must needs exist in a nature of its
own, so as to differ in nature both from the Father and the Son. Being,
then, something of necessity different, it divides the Father and the
Son from each other, as though inserted between the two. What, then,
could it be? Not created, for creation is younger than the Word.
Generated we have learnt the Only-begotten (and Him alone) to be. Except
the Father, none is ungenerate. Truth, therefore, obliges us to the
conclusion that there is no medium between the Father and the Son. But
where separation is not conceived of the closest connection is naturally
implied. And what is so connected needs no medium for voice or speech.
Now, by “connected,” I mean here <span id="page_CCLXXII">p.
CCLXXII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXII"></span>what is in all
respects inseparable. For in the case of a spiritual nature the term
connection does not mean corporeal connection, but the union and
blending of spiritual with spiritual through identity of will.
Accordingly, there is no divergence of will between the Father and the
Son, but the image of goodness is after the Archetype of all goodness
and beauty, and as, if a man should look at himself in a glass (for it
is perfectly allowable to explain the idea by corporeal illustrations),
the copy will in all respects be conformed to the original, the shape of
the man who is reflected being the cause of the shape on the glass, and
the reflection making no spontaneous movement or inclination unless
commenced by the original, but, if it move, moving along with it,—in
like manner we maintain that our Lord, the Image of the invisible God,
is immediately and inseparably one with the Father in every movement of
His Will. If the Father will anything, the Son Who is in the Father
knows the Father’s will, or rather He is Himself the Father’s will. For,
if He has in Himself all that is the Father’s, there is nothing of the
Father’s that He cannot have. If, then, He has all things that are the
Father’s in Himself, or, say we rather, if He has the Father Himself,
then, along with the Father and the things that are the Father’s, He
must needs have in Himself the whole of the Father’s will. He needs not,
therefore, to know the Father’s will by word, being Himself the Word of
the Father, in the highest acceptation of the term. What, then, is the
word that can be addressed to Him who is the Word indeed? And how can He
Who is the Word indeed require a second word for instruction?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p86"></span>But it may be said that the voice of
the Father was addressed to the Holy Spirit. But neither does the Holy
Spirit require instruction by speech, for being God, as saith the
Apostle, He “searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God <span
id="fr_1104"></span>[1106](#fn_1104) .” If, then, God utters any word,
and all speech is directed to the ear, let those who maintain that God
expresses Himself in the language of continuous discourse, inform us
what audience He addressed. Himself He needs not address. The Son has no
need of instruction by words. The Holy Ghost searcheth even the deep
things of God. Creation did not yet exist. To whom, then, was God’s word
addressed?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p88"></span>But, says he, the record of Moses does
not lie, and from it we learn that God spake. No! nor is great David of
the number of those who lie, and he expressly says; “The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament showeth His handy work. Day unto day
uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge;” and after
saying that the heavens and the firmament declare, and that day and that
night showeth knowledge and speech, he adds to what he has said, that
“there is neither speech nor language, and that their voices are not
heard <span id="fr_1105"></span>[1107](#fn_1105) .” Yet how can such
declaring and showing forth be other than words, and how is it that no
voice addresses itself to the ear? Is the prophet contradicting himself,
or is he stating an impossibility, when he speaks of words without
sound, and declaration without language, and announcement without voice?
or, is there not rather the very perfection of truth in his teaching,
which tells us, in the words which I have quoted, that the declaration
of the heavens, and the word shouted forth by the day, is no articulate
voice nor language of the lips, but is a revelation of the power of God
to those who are capable of hearing it, even though no voice be heard?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p90"></span>What, then, do we think of this
passage? For it may be that, if we understand it, we shall also
understand the meaning of Moses. It often happens that Holy Scripture,
to enable us more clearly to comprehend a matter to be revealed, makes
use of a bodily illustration, as would seem to be the case in this
passage from David, who teaches us by what he says that none of the
things which are have their being from chance or accident, as some have
imagined that our world and all that is therein was framed by fortuitous
and undesigned combinations of first elements, and that no Providence
penetrated the world. But we are taught that there is a cause of the
system and government of the Universe, on Whom all nature depends, to
Whom it owes its origin and cause, towards Whom it inclines and moves,
and in Whom it abides. And since, as saith the Apostle, His eternal
power and godhead are understood, being clearly seen through the
creation of the world <span id="fr_1106"></span>[1108](#fn_1106) ,
therefore all creation and, before all, as saith the Scripture, the
system of the heavens, declare the wisdom of the Creator in the skill
displayed by His works. And this is what it seems to me that he is
desirous to set forth, viz. the testimony of the things which do appear
to the fact that the worlds were framed with wisdom and skill, and abide
for ever by the power of Him who is the Ruler over all. The very
heavens, he says, in displaying the wisdom of Him Who made them, all but
shout aloud with a voice, and, though without voice, proclaim the wisdom
of their Creator. For we can hear as it were words teaching us: “O men,
when ye gaze upon us and behold our beauty and magnitude, and this
ceaseless revolution, with its well-<span id="page_CCLXXIII">p.
CCLXXIII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXIII"></span>ordered and
harmonious motion, working in the same direction and in the same manner,
turn your thoughts to Him Who presides over our system, and, by aid of
the beauty which you see, imagine to yourselves the beauty of the
invisible Archetype. For in us there is nothing without its Lord,
nothing that moves of its own proper motion: but all that appears, or
that is conceivable in respect to us, depends on a Power Who is
inscrutable and sublime.” This is not given in articulate speech, but by
the things which are seen, and it instils into our minds the knowledge
of Divine power more than if speech proclaimed it with a voice. As,
then, the heavens declare, though they do not speak, and the firmament
shows God’s handy-work, yet requires no voice for the purpose, and the
day uttereth speech, though there is no speaking, and no one can say
that Holy Scripture is in error—in like manner, since both Moses and
David have one and the same Teacher, I mean the Holy Spirit, Who says
that the fiat went before the creation, we are not told that God is the
Creator of words, but of things made known to us by the signification of
our words. For, lest we should suppose the creation to be without its
Lord, and spontaneously originated, He says that it was created by the
Divine Being, and that it is established in an orderly and connected
system by Him. Now it would be a work of time to discuss the order of
what Moses didactically records in his historical summary respecting the
creation of the world. Or (if we did) <span
id="fr_1107"></span>[1109](#fn_1107) each second passage would serve to
prove more clearly the erroneous and futile character of our
adversaries’ opinion. But whoever cares to do so may read what we have
written on Genesis, and judge whether our teaching or theirs is the more
reasonable.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p93"></span>But to return to the matter in
question. We assert that the words “He said” do not imply voice and
words on the part of God; but the writer, in showing <span
id="fr_1108"></span>[1110](#fn_1108) the power of God to be concurrent
with His will, renders the idea more easy of apprehension. For since by
the will of God all things were created, and it is the ordinary way of
men to signify their will first of all by speech, and so to bring their
work into harmony with their will, and the scriptural account of the
Creation is the learner’s introduction, as it were, to the knowledge of
God, representing to our minds the power of the Divine Being by objects
more ready to our comprehension (for sensible apprehension is an aid to
intellectual knowledge), on this account, Moses, by saying that God
commanded all things to be, signifies to us the inciting power of His
will, and by adding, “and it was so,” he shows that in the case of God
there is no difference between will and performance; but, on the
contrary, that though the purposing initiates God’s activity, the
accomplishment keeps pace with the purpose, and that the two are to be
considered together and at once, viz. the deliberate motion of the mind,
and the power that effects its purpose. For the idea of the Divine
purpose and action leaves no conceivable interval between them, but as
light is produced along with the kindling of fire, at once coming out
from it and shining forth along with it—in the same manner the existence
of things created is an effect of the Divine will, but not posterior to
it in time.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p95"></span>For the case is different from that of
men endowed by nature with practical ability, where you may look at
capability and execution apart from each other. For example, we say of a
man who possesses the art of shipbuilding, that he is always a
shipbuilder in respect of his ability to build ships, but that he
operates only when he displays his skill in working. It is otherwise
with God; for all that we can conceive as in Him is entirely work and
action, His will passing over immediately to its object. As, then, the
mechanism of the heavens testifies to the glory of their Creator and
confesses Him Who made them, and needs no voice for the purpose, so on
the other hand any one who is acquainted with the Mosaic Scripture will
see that God speaks of the world as His creation, having brought the
whole into being by the fiat of His will, and that He needs no words to
make known His mind. As, then, he who heard the heavens declaring the
glory of God looked not for set speech on the occasion (for, to those
who can understand it, the universe speaks through the things which are
being done, without regard or care for verbal explanation), so, even if
any one hears Moses telling how God gave order and arrangement to each
several part of Creation by name, let him not suppose the prophet to
speak falsely, nor degrade the contemplation of sublime verities by mean
and grovelling notions, thus, as it were, reducing God to a mere human
standard, and supposing that after the manner of men he directs His
operations by the instrumentality of speech; but let His fiat mean His
will only, and let the names of those created things denote the mere
reality of their coming into being. And thus he will learn these two
things from what is recorded: (1) That God made all things by His will,
and (2) that without any trouble or difficulty the Divine Will became
nature.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p96"></span>But if any one would give a more
sensuous interpretation to the words “God said,” as proving that
articulate speech was His creation, by a <span id="page_CCLXXIV">p.
CCLXXIV</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXIV"></span>parity of
reason he must understand by the words “God saw,” that He did so by
faculties of perception like our own, through the organs of vision; and
so again by the words “The Lord heard me and had mercy upon me,” and
again, “He smelled a sweet savour <span
id="fr_1109"></span>[1111](#fn_1109) ,” and whatever other sensuous
expressions are employed by Scripture in reference to head, or foot, or
hand, or eyes, or fingers, or sandals, as appertaining to God, taking
them, I say, in their plain literal acceptation, he will present to us
an anthropomorphous deity, after the similitude of what is seen among
ourselves. But if any one hearing that the heavens are the work of His
fingers, that He has a strong hand, and a mighty arm, and eyes, and
feet, and sandals, deduces from such words ideas worthy of God, and does
not degrade the idea of His pure nature by carnal and sensuous
imaginations, it will follow that on the one hand he will regard the
verbal utterances as indications of the Divine will, but on the other he
will not conceive of them as articulate sounds, but will reason thus;
that the Creator of human reason has gifted us with speech
proportionally to the capacity of our nature, so that we might be able
thereby to signify the thoughts of our minds; but that, so far as the
Divine nature differs from ours, so great will be the degree of
difference between our notions respecting it and its own inherent
majesty and godhead. And as our power compared with God’s, and our life
with His life, is as nothing, and all else that is ours, compared with
what is in Him, is “as nothing in comparison <span
id="fr_1110"></span>[1112](#fn_1110) ” with Him, as saith the inspired
Teaching, so also our word as compared with Him, Who is the Word indeed,
is as nothing <span id="fr_1111"></span>[1113](#fn_1111) . For this word
of yours was not in the beginning, but was created along with our
nature, nor is it to be regarded as having any reality of its own, but,
as our master (Basil) somewhere has said, it vanishes along with the
sound of the voice, nor is any operation of the word discernible, but it
has its subsistence in voice only, or in written characters. But the
word of God is God Himself, the Word that was in the beginning and that
abideth for ever, through Whom all things were and are, Who ruleth over
all, and hath all power over the things in heaven and the things on
earth, being Life, and Truth, and Righteousness, and Light, and all that
is good, and upholding all things in being. Such, then, and so great
being the word, as we understand it, of God, our opponent allows God, as
some great thing, the power of language, made up of nouns, verbs, and
conjunctions, not perceiving that, as He Who conferred practical powers
on our nature is not spoken of as fabricating each of their several
results, but, while He gave our nature its ability, it is by us that a
house is constructed, or a bench, or a sword, or a plough, and
whatsoever thing our life happens to be in need of, each of which things
is our own work, although it may be ascribed to Him Who is the author of
our being, and Who created our nature capable of every science,—so also
our power of speech is the work of Him Who made our nature what it is,
but the invention of each several term required to denote objects in
hand is of our own devising. And this is proved by the fact that many
terms in use are of a base and unseemly character, of which no man of
sense would conceive God the inventor: so that, if certain of our
familiar expressions are ascribed by Holy Scripture to God as the
speaker, we should remember that the Holy Spirit is addressing us in
language of our own, as *e.g.* in the history of the Acts we are told
that each man received the teaching of the disciples in his own language
wherein he was born, understanding the sense of the words by the
language which he knew. And, that this is true, may be seen yet more
clearly by a careful examination of the enactments of the Levitical law.
For they make mention of pans, and cakes, and fine flour <span
id="fr_1112"></span>[1114](#fn_1112) , and the like, in the mystic
sacrifices, instilling wholesome doctrine under the veil of symbol and
enigma. Mention, too, is made of certain measures then in use, such as
ephah, and nebel <span id="fr_1113"></span>[1115](#fn_1113) , and hin,
and the like. Are we, then, to suppose that God made these names and
appellations, or that in the beginning He commanded them to be such, and
to be so named, calling one kind of grain wheat, and its pith flour, and
flat sweetmeats, whether heavy or light, cakes; and that He commanded a
vessel of the kind in which a moist lump is boiled or baked to be called
a pan, or that He spoke of a certain liquid measure by the name of hin
or nebel, and measured dry produce by the homer? surely it is trifling
and mere Jewish folly, far removed from the grandeur of Christian
simplicity, to think that God, Who is the Most High and above every name
and thought, Who by sole virtue of His will governs the world, which He
brought into existence, and upholds it in being, should set Himself like
some schoolmaster to settle the niceties of terminology. Rather let us
say, that as we indicate to the deaf what we want them to do, by
gestures and signs, not because we have no voice of our own, but because
a verbal <span id="page_CCLXXV">p. CCLXXV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXV"></span>communication would be utterly
useless to those who cannot hear, so, in as much as human nature is in a
sense deaf and insensible to higher truths, we maintain that the grace
of God at sundry times and in divers manners spake by the Prophets,
ordering their voices conformably to our capacity and the modes of
expression with which we are familiar, and that by such means it leads
us, as with a guiding hand, to the knowledge of higher truths, not
teaching us in terms proportioned to their inherent sublimity, (for how
can the great be contained by the little?) but descending to the lower
level of our limited comprehension. And as God, after giving animals
their power of motion, no longer prescribes each step they take, for
their nature, having once for all taken its beginning from the Creator,
moves of itself, and makes its way, adapting its power of motion to its
object from time to time (except in so far as it is said that a man’s
steps are directed by the Lord), so our nature, having received from God
the power of speech and utterance and of expressing the will by the
voice, proceeds on its way through things, giving them distinctive names
by varying inflections of sound; and these signs are the verbs and nouns
which we use, and through which we signify the meaning of the things.
And though the word “fruit” is made use of by Moses before the creation
of fruit, and “seed” before that of seed, this does not disprove our
assertion, nor is the sense of the lawgiver opposed to what we have said
in respect to thought and conception. For that end of past husbandry
which we speak of as fruit, and that beginning of future husbandry which
we speak of as seed, this thing, I mean, underlying these names,—whether
wheat or some other produce which is increased and multiplied by
sowing—does not, he teaches us, grow spontaneously, but by the will of
Him Who created them to grow with their peculiar power, so as to be the
same fruit and to reproduce themselves as seed, and to support mankind
with their increase. And by the Divine will the thing is produced, not
the name, so that the substantial thing <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1116](#fn_1114) is the work of the Creator, but the
distinguishing names of things, by which speech furnishes us with a
clear and accurate description of them, are the work and the invention
of man’s reasoning faculty, though the reasoning faculty itself and its
nature are a work of God. And since all men are endowed with reason,
differences of language will of necessity be found according to
differences of country. But if any one maintain that light, or heaven,
or earth, or seed were named after human fashion by God, he will
certainly conclude that they were named in some special language. What
that was, let him show. For he who knows the one thing will not, in all
probability, be ignorant of the other. For at the river Jordan, after
the descent of the Holy Ghost, and again in the hearing of the Jews, and
at the Transfiguration, there came a voice from heaven, teaching men not
only to regard the phenomenon as something more than a figure, but also
to believe the beloved Son of God to be truly God. Now that voice was
fashioned by God, suitably to the understanding of the hearers, in airy
substance, and adapted to the language of the day, God, “who willeth
that all men should be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1117](#fn_1115) ,” having so
articulated His words in the air with a view to the salvation of the
hearers, as our Lord also saith to the Jews, when they thought it
thundered because the sound took place in the air. “This voice came not
because of Me, but for your sakes <span
id="fr_1116"></span>[1118](#fn_1116) .” But before the creation of the
world, inasmuch as there was no one to hear the word, and no bodily
element capable of accentuating the articulate voice, how can he who
says that God used words give any air of probability to his assertion?
God Himself is without body, creation did not yet exist. Reason does not
suffer us to conceive of anything material in respect to Him. They who
might have been benefited by the hearing were not yet created. And if
men were not yet in being, neither had any form of language been struck
out in accordance with national peculiarities, by what arguments, then,
can he who looks to the bare letter make good his assertion, that God
spoke thus using human parts of speech?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p105"></span>And the futility of such assertions
may be seen also by this. For as the natures of the elements, which are
the work of the Creator, appear alike to all, and there is no difference
to human sense in men’s experience of fire, or air, or water, but the
nature of each is one and unchanging, working in the same way, and
suffering no modification from the differences of those who partake of
it, so also the imposition of names, if applied to things by God, would
have been the same for all. But, in point of fact, while the nature of
things as constituted by God remains the same, the names which denote
them are divided by so many differences of language, that it were no
easy task even to calculate their number.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p106"></span>And if any one cites the confusion of
tongues that took place at the building of the tower, as contradicting
what I have said, not even there <span id="page_CCLXXVI">p.
CCLXXVI</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXVI"></span>is God spoken
of as creating men’s languages, but as confounding the existing
one <span id="fr_1117"></span>[1119](#fn_1117) , that all might not hear
all. For when all lived together and were not as yet divided by various
differences of race, the aggregate of men dwelt together with one
language among them; but when by the Divine will it was decreed that all
the earth should be replenished by mankind, then, their community of
tongue being broken up, men were dispersed in various directions and
adopted this and that form of speech and language, possessing a certain
bond of union in similarity of tongue, not indeed disagreeing from
others in their knowledge of things, but differing in the character of
their names. For a stone or a stick does not seem one thing to one man
and another to another, but the different peoples call them by different
names. So that our position remains unshaken, that human language is the
invention of the human mind or understanding. For from the beginning, as
long as all men had the same language, we see from Holy Scripture that
men received no teaching of God’s words, nor, when men were separated
into various differences of language, did a Divine enactment prescribe
how each man should talk. But God, willing that men should speak
different languages, gave human nature full liberty to formulate
arbitrary sounds, so as to render their meaning more intelligible.
Accordingly, Moses, who lived many generations after the building of the
tower, uses one of the subsequent languages in his historical narrative
of the creation, and attributes certain words to God, relating these
things in his own tongue in which he had been brought up, and with which
he was familiar, not changing the names for God by foreign peculiarities
and turns of speech, in order by the strangeness and novelty of the
expressions to prove them the words of God Himself <span
id="fr_1118"></span>[1120](#fn_1118) .

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p109"></span>But some who have carefully studied
the Scriptures tell us that the Hebrew tongue is not even ancient <span
id="fr_1119"></span>[1121](#fn_1119) like the others, but that along
with other miracles this miracle was wrought in behalf of the
Israelites, that after the Exodus from Egypt, the language was hastily
improvised <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1122](#fn_1120) for the use of the
nation. And there is a <span id="fr_1121"></span>[1123](#fn_1121)
passage in the Prophet which confirms this. For he says, “when he came
out of the land of Egypt he heard a strange language <span
id="fr_1122"></span>[1124](#fn_1122) .” If, then, Moses was a Hebrew,
and the language of the Hebrews was subsequent to the others, Moses, I
say, who was born some thousands of years after the Creation of the
world, and who relates the words of God in his own language—does he not
clearly teach us that he does not attribute to God such a language of
human fashion, but that he speaks as he does because it was impossible
otherwise than in human language to express his meaning, though the
words he uses have some Divine and profound significance?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p114"></span>For to suppose that God used the
Hebrew tongue, when there was no one to hear and understand such a
language, methinks no reasonable being will consent. We read in the Acts
that the Divine power divided itself into many languages for this
purpose, that no one of alien tongue might lose his share of the
benefit. But if God spoke in human language before the Creation, whom
was He to benefit by using it? For that His speech should have some
adaptation to the capacity of the hearers, with a view to their profit,
no one would conceive to be unworthy of God’s love to man, for Paul the
follower of Christ knew how to adapt his words suitably to the habits
and disposition of his hearers, making himself milk for babes and strong
meat for grown men <span id="fr_1123"></span>[1125](#fn_1123) . But
where no object was to be gained by such use of language, to argue that
God, as it were, declaimed such words by Himself, when there was no one
in need of the information they would convey—such an idea, methinks, is
at once both blasphemous and absurd. Neither, then, did God speak in the
Hebrew language, nor did He express Himself according to any form in use
among the Gentiles. But whatsoever of God’s words are recorded by Moses
or the Prophets, are indications of the Divine will, flashing forth, now
in one way, now in another, on the pure intellect of those holy men,
according to the measure of the grace of which they were partakers.
Moses, then, spoke his mother-tongue, and that in which he was educated.
But he attributed these words to God, as I have said, repeatedly, <span
id="page_CCLXXVII">p. CCLXXVII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXVII"></span>on account of the childishness of
those who were being brought to the knowledge of God, in order to give a
clear representation of the Divine will, and to render his hearers more
obedient, as being awed by the authority of the speaker.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p116"></span>But this is denied by Eunomius, the
author of all this contumely with which we are assailed, and the
companion and adviser of this impious band. For, changing insolence into
courtesy, I will present him with his own words. He maintains, in so
many words, that he has the testimony of Moses himself to his assertion
that men were endowed with the use of the things named, and of their
names, by the Creator of nature, and that the naming of the things given
was prior in time to the creation of those who should use them. Now, if
he is in possession of some Moses of his own, from whom he has learned
this wisdom, and, making this his base of operations, relies on such
statements as these, viz. that God, as he himself says, lays down the
laws of human speech, enacting that things shall be called in one way
and not in another, let him trifle as much as he pleases, with his Moses
in the background to support his assertions. But if there is only one
Moses whose writings are the common source of instruction to those who
are learned in the Divine Word, we will freely accept our condemnation
if we find ourselves refuted by the law of that Moses. But where did he
find this law respecting verbs and nouns? Let him produce it in the very
words of the text. The account of the Creation, and the genealogy of the
successive generations, and the history of certain events, and the
complex system of legislation, and various regulations in regard to
religious service and daily life, these are the chief heads of the
writings of Moses. But, if he says that there was any legislative
enactment in regard to words, let him point it out, and I will hold my
tongue. But he cannot; for, if he could, he would not abandon the more
striking evidences of the Deity, for such as can only procure him
ridicule, and not credit, from men of sense. For to think it the
essential point in piety to attribute the invention of words to God,
Whose praise the whole world and the wonders that are therein are
incompetent to celebrate—must it not be a proceeding of extreme folly so
to neglect higher grounds of praise, and to magnify God on such as are
purely human? His fiat preluded Creation, but it was recorded by Moses
after human fashion, though Divinely issued. That will of God, then,
which brought about the creation of the world by His Divine power,
consisted, says our careful student of the Scriptures, in the teaching
of words. And as though God had said, “Let there be a word,” or, “Let
speech be created,” or, “Let this or that have such or such an
appellation,” so, in advocacy of his trifling, he brings forward the
fact that it was by the impulse of the Divine will that Creation took
place. For with all his study and experience in the Scriptures he knows
not even this, that the impulse of the mind is frequently spoken of in
Scripture as a voice. And for this we have the evidence of Moses
himself, whose meaning he frequently perverts, but whom on this point he
simply ignores. For who is there, however slightly acquainted with the
holy volume, who does not know this, that the people of Israel who had
just escaped <span id="fr_1124"></span>[1126](#fn_1124) from Egypt were
suddenly affrighted in the wilderness by the pursuit of the Egyptians,
and when dangers encompassed them on all sides, and on one side the sea
cut off their passage as by a wall, while the enemy barred their flight
in the rear, the people coming together to the Prophet charged him with
being the cause of their helpless condition? And when he comforted them
in their abject terror, and roused them to courage, a voice came from
God, addressing the Prophet by name, “Wherefore criest thou unto
Me? <span id="fr_1125"></span>[1127](#fn_1125) ” And yet before this the
narrative makes no mention of any utterance on the part of Moses. But
the thought which the Prophet had lifted up to God is called a cry,
though uttered in silence in the hidden thought of his heart. If, then,
Moses cries, though without speaking, as witnessed by Him Who hears,
those “groanings which cannot be uttered <span
id="fr_1126"></span>[1128](#fn_1126) ,” is it strange that the Prophet,
knowing the Divine will, so far as it was lawful for him to tell it and
for us to hear it, revealed it by known and familiar words, describing
God’s discourse after human fashion, not indeed expressed in words, but
signified by the effects themselves? “In the beginning,” he says, “God
created,” not the names of heaven and earth, but, “the heaven and the
earth <span id="fr_1127"></span>[1129](#fn_1127) .” And again, “God
said, Let there be light,” not the name Light: and having divided the
light from the darkness, “God called,” he says, “the light Day, and the
darkness He called Night.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p121"></span>On these passages it is probable that
our opponents will take their stand. And I will agree for them with what
is said, and will myself take advantage of their positions <span
id="fr_1128"></span>[1130](#fn_1128) further on in our inquiry, in order
that what we teach may be more firmly established, no <span
id="page_CCLXXVIII">p. CCLXXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXVIII"></span>point in controversy being left
without due examination. “God called,” he says, “the firmament Heaven,
and He called the dry land Earth, and the light Day, and the darkness He
called Night.” How comes it, then, they will ask, when the Scripture
admits that their appellations were given them by God, that you say that
their names are the work of human invention? What, then, is our reply?
We return to our plain statement, and we assert, that He Who brought all
creation into being out of nothing is the Creator of things seen in
substantial existence, not of unsubstantial words having no existence
but in the sound of the voice and the lisp of the tongue. But things are
named by the indication of the voice in conformity with the nature and
qualities inherent in each, the names being adapted to the things
according to the vernacular language of each several race.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p123"></span>But since the nature of most things
that are seen in Creation is not simple, so as to allow of all that they
connote being comprehended in one word, as, for instance, in the case of
fire, the element itself is one thing in its nature, while the word
which denotes it is another (for fire itself possesses the qualities of
shining, of burning, of drying and heating, and consuming whatever fuel
it lays hold of, but the name is but a brief word of one syllable), on
this account speech, which distinguishes the powers and qualities seen
in fire, gives each of them a name of its own, as I have said before.
And one cannot say that only a name has been given to fire when it is
spoken of as bright, or consuming, or anything else that we observe it
to be. For such words denote qualities physically inherent in it. So
likewise, in the case of heaven and the firmament, though one nature is
signified by each of these words, their difference represents one or
other of its peculiar characteristics, in looking at which we learn one
thing by the appellation “heaven,” and another by “firmament.” For when
speech would define the limit of sensible creation, beyond which it is
succeeded by the transmundane void apprehended by the mind alone, in
contrast with the intangible and incorporeal and invisible, the
beginning and the end of all material subsistences is called the
firmament. And when we survey the environment of terrestrial things, we
call that which encompasses all material nature, and which forms the
boundary of all things visible, by the name of heaven. In the same
manner with regard to earth and dry land, since all heavy and
downward-tending nature was divided into these two elements, earth and
water, the appellation “dry” defines to a certain extent its opposite,
for earth is called dry in opposition to moist, since having thrown off,
by Divine command, the water that overspread it, it appeared in its own
character. But the name “earth” does not continue to express the
signification of some one only of its qualities, but, by virtue of its
meaning, it embraces all that the word connotes, *e.g.* hardness,
density, weight, resistance, capability of supporting animal and
vegetable life. Accordingly, the word “dry” was not changed by speech to
the last name put upon it (for its new name did not make it cease to be
called so), but while both the appellations remained, a peculiar
signification attached itself to each, the one distinguishing it in
nature and property from its opposite, the other embracing all its
attributes collectively. And so in light and day, and again in night and
darkness, we do not find a pronunciation of syllables created to suit
them by the Maker of all things, but rather through these appellations
we note the substance of the things which they signify. At the entrance
of light, by the will of God the darkness that prevailed over the
earliest creation is scattered. But the earth lying in the midst, and
being upheld on all sides by its surrounding of different elements, as
Job saith, “He hangeth the earth upon nothing <span
id="fr_1129"></span>[1131](#fn_1129) ,” it was necessary when light
travelled over one side and the earth obstructed it on the opposite by
its own bulk, that a side of darkness should be left by the obscuration,
and so, as the perpetual motion of the heavens cannot but carry along
with it the darkness resulting from the obscuration, God ordained this
revolution for a measure of duration of time. And that measure is day
and night. For this reason Moses, according to his wisdom, in his
historical elucidation of these matters, named the shadow resulting from
the earth’s obstruction, a dividing of the light from the darkness, and
the constant and measured alternation of light and darkness over the
surface of the earth he called day and night. So that what was called
light was not named day, but as “there was light,” and not the bare name
of light, so the measure of time also was created and the name followed,
not created by God in a sound of words, but because the very nature of
the thing assumed this vocal notation. And as, if it had been plainly
said by the Lawgiver that nothing that is seen or named is of
spontaneous generation or unfashioned, but that it has its subsistence
from God, we might have concluded of ourselves that God made the world
and all its parts, and the order which is seen in them, and the faculty
of distinguishing them, so also by what he says he leads us on to
understand and believe that nothing which exists is without beginning.
And with this view he describes the successive events of Creation in
orderly method, enumerating them one after <span id="page_CCLXXIX">p.
CCLXXIX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXIX"></span>another. But it
was impossible to represent them in language, except by expressing their
signification by words that should indicate it. Since, then, it is
written that God called the light day, it must be understood that God
made the day from light, being something different, by the force of the
term. For you cannot apply the same definition to “light” and “day,” but
light is what we understand by the opposite of darkness, and day is the
extent of the measure of the interval of light. In the same way you may
regard night and darkness by the same difference of description,
defining darkness as the negation of light, and calling night the extent
of the encompassing darkness. Thus in every way our argument is
confirmed, though not, perhaps, drawn out in strict logical form—showing
that God is the Maker of things, not of empty words. For things have
their names not for His sake but for ours. For as we cannot always have
all things before our eyes, we take knowledge of some of the things that
are present with us from time to time, and others we register in our
memories. But it would be impossible to keep memory unconfused unless we
had the notation of words to distinguish the things that are stored up
in our minds from one another. But to God all things are present, nor
does He need memory, all things being within the range of His
penetrating vision. What need, then, in His case, of parts of speech,
when His own wisdom and power embraces and holds the nature of all
things distinct and unconfused? Wherefore all things that exist
substantially are from God; but, for our guidance, all things that exist
are provided with names to indicate them. And if any one say that such
names were imposed by the arbitrary usage of mankind, he will be guilty
of no offence against the scheme of Divine Providence. For we do not say
that the nature of things was of human invention, but only their names.
The Hebrew calls Heaven by one name, the Canaanite by another, but both
of them understand it alike, being in no way led into error by the
difference of the sounds that convey the idea of the object. But the
over-cautious and timid will-worship of these clever folk, on whose
authority he asserts that, if it were granted that words were given to
things by men, men would be of higher authority than God, is proved to
be unsubstantial even by the example which we find recorded of Moses.
For who gave Moses his name? Was it not Pharaoh’s daughter who named him
from what had happened <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1132](#fn_1130) ? For
water is called Moses in the language of the Egyptians. Since, then, in
consequence of the tyrant’s order, his parents had placed the babe in an
ark and consigned it to the stream (for so some related concerning him),
but by the will of God the ark was floated by the current and carried to
the bank, and found by the princess, who happened just then to be taking
the refreshment of the bath, as the child had been gained “from the
water,” she is said to have given him his name as a memorial of the
occurrence,—a name by which God Himself did not disdain to address His
servant, nor did He deem it beneath Him to allow the name given by the
foreign woman to remain the Prophet’s proper appellation.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p126"></span>In like manner before him Jacob,
having taken hold of his brother’s heel, was called a supplanter <span
id="fr_1131"></span>[1133](#fn_1131) , from the attitude in which he
came to the birth. For those who are learned in such matters tell us
that such is the interpretation of the word “Jacob,” as translated into
Greek. So, too, Pharez was so named by his nurse from the incident at
his birth <span id="fr_1132"></span>[1134](#fn_1132) , yet no one on
that account, like Eunomius, displayed any jealousy of his assuming an
authority above that of God. Moreover the mothers of the patriarchs gave
them their names, as Reuben, and Simeon, and Levi <span
id="fr_1133"></span>[1135](#fn_1133) , and all those who came after
them. And no one started up, like our new author, as patron of Divine
providence, to forbid women to usurp Divine authority by the imposition
of names. And what shall we say of other particulars in the sacred
record, such as the “waters of strife,” and the “place of mourning,” and
the “hill of the foreskins,” and the “valley of the cluster,” and the
“field of blood,” and such-like names, of human imposing, but oftentimes
recorded to have been uttered by the Person of God, from which we may
learn that men may notify the meaning of things by words without
presumption, and that the Divine nature does not depend on words for its
evidence to itself?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p130"></span>But I will pass over his other
babblings against the truth, possessing as they do no force against our
doctrines, for I deem it superfluous to linger any longer over such
absurdities. For who can be so wanting in the more important subjects of
thought as to waste energy on silly arguments, and to contend with men
who speak of us as asserting that “man’s forethought is of superior
weight and authority to God’s guardianship,” and that we “ascribe the
carelessness which confuses the feebler minds to the providence of God”?
These are the exact words of our calumniator. But I, for my part, think
it equally as absurd to pay attention to remarks like that, as to occupy
myself with old wives’ dreams. For to think of securing the dignity of
rule and sovereignty to the Divine <span id="page_CCLXXX">p.
CCLXXX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXX"></span>Being by a form
of words, and to show the great power of God to be dependent upon this,
and on the other hand to neglect Him and disregard the providence which
belongs to Him, and to lay it to our reproach that men, having received
from God the faculty of reason, make an arbitrary use of words to
signify things—what is this but an old wife’s fable, or a drunkard’s
dream? For the true power, and authority, and dominion, and sovereignty
of God do not, we think, consist in syllables. Were it so, any and every
inventor of words might claim equal honour with God. But the infinite
ages, and the beauties of the universe, and the beams of the heavenly
luminaries, and all the wonders of land and sea, and the angelic hosts
and supra-mundane powers, and whatever else there is whose existence in
the realm above is revealed to us under various figures by Holy
Scripture—these are the things that bear witness to God’s power over
all. Whereas, to attribute the invention of vocal sound to those who are
naturally endowed with the faculty of speech, this involves no impiety
towards Him Who gave them their voice. Nor indeed do we hold it to be a
great thing to invent words significative of things. For the being to
whom Holy Scripture in the history of the creation gave the name of
“man <span id="fr_1134"></span>[1136](#fn_1134) ” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p131.2"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p131.3"></span>νθρωπος</span>), a
word of human devising, that same being Job calls “mortal <span
id="fr_1135"></span>[1137](#fn_1135) ” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p132.3"></span>βροτός</span>), while of profane writers,
some call him “human being” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p132.4"></span>φώς</span>), and others “articulate
speaker” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p132.5"></span>μέροψ</span>)—to say nothing of other
varieties of the name. Do we, then, elevate them to equal honour with
God, because they also invented names equivalent to that of “man,” alike
signifying their subject. But, as I have said before, let us leave this
idle talk, and make no account of his string of revilings, in which he
charges us with lying against the Divine oracles, and uttering slanders
with effrontery even against God.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p133"></span>To pass on, then, to what remains. He
brings forward once more some of the Master’s words, to this effect:
“And it is in precisely the same manner that we are taught by Holy
Scripture the employment of a conception. Our Lord Jesus Christ, when
declaring to men the nature of His Godhead, explains it by certain
special characteristics, calling Himself the Door, the Bread, the Way,
the Vine, the Shepherd, the Light.” Now I think it seemly to pass over
his insolent remarks on these words (for it is thus that his rhetorical
training has taught him to contend with his opponents), nor will I
suffer myself to be disturbed by his ebullitions of childish folly. Let
us, however, examine one pungent and “irresistible” argument which he
puts forward for our refutation. Which of the sacred writers, he asks,
gives evidence that these names were attributed to our Lord by a
conception? But which of them, I reply, forbids it, deeming it a
blasphemy to regard such names as the result of a conception? For if he
maintains that its not being mentioned is a proof that it is forbidden,
by a parity of reasoning he must admit that its not being forbidden is
an argument that it is permitted. Is our Lord called by these names, or
does Eunomius deny this also? If he does deny that these names are
spoken of Christ, we have conquered without a battle. For what more
signal victory could there be, than to prove our adversary to be
fighting against God, by robbing the sacred words of the Gospel of their
meaning? But if he admits that it is true that Christ is named by these
names, let him say in what manner they may be applied without
irreverence to the Only-begotten Son of God. Does he take “the stone” as
indicative of His nature? Does he understand His essence under the
figure of the Axe (not to encumber our argument by enumerating the
rest)? None of these names represents the nature of the Only-begotten,
or His Godhead, or the peculiar character of His essence. Nevertheless
He is called by these names, and each appellation has its own special
fitness. For we cannot, without irreverence, suppose anything in the
words of God to be idle and unmeaning. Let him say, then, if he
disallows these names as the result of a conception, how *do* they apply
to Christ? For we on our part say this, that as our Lord provided for
human life in various forms, each variety of His beneficence is suitably
distinguished by His several names, His provident care and working on
our behalf passing over into the mould of a name. And such a name is
said by us to be arrived at by a conception. But if this is not
agreeable to our opponents, let it be as each of them pleases. In his
ignorance, however, of the figures of Scripture, our opponent
contradicts what is said. For if he had learned the Divine names, he
must have known that our Lord is called a Curse and Sin <span
id="fr_1136"></span>[1138](#fn_1136) , and a Heifer <span
id="fr_1137"></span>[1139](#fn_1137) , and a lion’s Whelp <span
id="fr_1138"></span>[1140](#fn_1138) , and a Bear bereaved of her
whelps <span id="fr_1139"></span>[1141](#fn_1139) , and a Leopard <span
id="fr_1140"></span>[1142](#fn_1140) and such-like names, according to
various modes of conception, by Holy Scripture, the sacred and inspired
writers by such names, as by well-directed shafts, indicating the
central point of the idea they had in view; even though these words,
when taken in their literal and obvious signification, seem not above
suspicion, but each single one of them, unless we allow it to be
predicated of God by some process of conception, will not escape the
<span id="page_CCLXXXI">p. CCLXXXI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXI"></span>taint of a blasphemous suggestion.
But it would be a lengthy task to bring them forward, and elucidate in
every case how, in the general idea, these words have been
perverted <span id="fr_1141"></span>[1143](#fn_1141) out of their
obvious meanings, and how it is only in connection with the conceptive
faculty that the names of God can be reconciled with that reverence
which is His due.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p140"></span>But to return. Such names are used of
our Lord, and no one familiar with the inspired Scriptures can deny the
fact. What then? Does Eunomius affirm that the words are indicative of
His nature itself? If so, he asserts that the Divine nature is
multiform, and that the variety which it displays in what is signified
by the names is very complex. For the meanings of the words Bread and
Lion are not the same, nor those of Axe and Water <span
id="fr_1142"></span>[1144](#fn_1142) , but to each of them we can assign
a definition of its own, of which the others do not partake. They do
not, therefore, signify nature or essence, yet no one will presume to
say that this nomenclature is quite inappropriate and unmeaning. If,
then, these words are given us, but not as indicative of essence, and
every word given in Scripture is just and appropriate, how else can
these appellations be fitly applied to the Only-begotten Son of God,
except in connection with the faculty of conception? For it is clear
that the Divine Being is spoken of under various names, according to the
variety of His operations, so that we may think of Him in the aspect so
named. What harm, then, is done to our reverential ideas of God by this
mental operation, instituted with a view to our thinking upon the things
done, and which *we* call conception, though if any one choose to call
it by some other name, we shall make no objection.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p142"></span>But, like a mighty wrestler, he will
not relinquish his irresistible hold on us, and affirms in so many
words, that “these names are the work of human thought and conception,
and that, by the exercise of this operation of the mind by some, results
are arrived at which no Apostle or Evangelist has taught.” And after
this doughty onslaught he raises that sanctimonious voice of his,
spitting out his foul abuse at us with a tongue well schooled to such
language. “For,” says he, “to ascribe homonyms, drawn from analogy, to
human thought and conception is the work of a mind that has lost all
judicial sense, and that studies the words of the Lord with an enfeebled
understanding and dishonest habit of thought.” Mercy on us! what a
logical argument! how scientifically it proceeds to its conclusion! Who
after this will dare to speak up for the cause of conception, when such
a stench is poured forth from his mouth upon those who attempt speaking?
I suppose, then, that we, who do attempt speaking, must forbear to
examine his argument, for fear of his stirring up against us the
cesspool of his abuse. And verily it is weak-minded <span
id="fr_1143"></span>[1145](#fn_1143) to let ourselves be irritated by
childish absurdities. We will therefore allow our insolent adversary
full liberty to indulge in his method as he will. But we will return to
the Master’s argument, that thence too we may muster reinforcements for
the truth. Eunomius has been reminded of “analogy” and has perceived
“the homonyms to be derived from it.” Now where or from whom did he
learn these terms? Not from Moses, not from the Prophets and Apostles,
not from the Evangelists. It is impossible that he should have learned
them from the teaching of any Scripture. How came he, then, to use them?
The very word which describes this or that signification of a thought as
analogy, is it not the invention of the thinking faculty of him who
utters it <span id="fr_1144"></span>[1146](#fn_1144) ? How is it, then,
that he fails to perceive that he is using the views he fights against
as his allies in the war? For he makes war against our principle of
words being formed by the operation of conception, and would endeavour
to establish, by the aid of words formed on that very principle, that it
is unlawful to use them. “It is not,” says he, “the teaching of any of
the sacred writers.” To whom, then, of the ancients do you yourself
ascribe the term “ungenerate,” and its being predicated of the essence
of God? or is it allowable for you, when you want to establish some of
your impious conclusions, to coin and invent terms to your own liking;
but if anything is said by some one else in contravention of your
impiety, to deprive your adversary of similar licence? Great indeed
would be the power you would assume if you could make good your claim to
such authority as this, that what you refuse to others should be
allowable to you alone, and that what you yourself presume to do by
virtue of it, you should prevent others from doing. You condemn, as by
an edict, the doctrine that these names were applied to Christ as a
result of conception, because none of the sacred writers have declared
that they ought so to be applied. How, then, can you lay down the law
that the Divine essence should be denoted by the word “ungenerate”—a
term which none of the sacred writers can <span id="page_CCLXXXII">p.
CCLXXXII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXII"></span>be shown to
have handed down to us? For if this is the test of the right use of
words, that only such shall be employed as the inspired word of
Scripture shall authorize, the word “ungenerate” must be erased from
your own writings, since none of the sacred writers has sanctioned the
expression. But perhaps you accept it by reason of the sense that
resides in it. Well, we ourselves in the same way accept the term
“conception” by reason of the sense that resides in it. Accordingly we
will either exclude both from use, or neither, and whichever alternative
be adopted, we are equally masters of the field. For if the term
“ungenerate” be altogether suppressed, all our adversaries’ clamour
against the truth is suppressed along with it, and a doctrine worthy of
the Only-begotten Son of God will shine forth, inasmuch as logical
opposition can furnish no name <span
id="fr_1145"></span>[1147](#fn_1145) to detract from the majesty of the
Lord. But if both be retained, in that case also the truth will prevail,
and we along with it, when we have altered the word “ungeneracy” from
the substance, into a conception, of the Deity. But so long as he does
not exclude the term “ungenerate” from his own writings, let our modern
Pharisee admonish himself not to behold the mote that is in our eye,
before he has cast out the beam that is in his own.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p146"></span>“But God,” he says, “gave the weakest
of terrestrial things a share in the most honourable names, though not
giving them an equal share of dignity, and to the highest He imparted
the names of the lowest, though the natural inferiority of the latter
was not transferred to the former along with their names.” We quote this
in his very words. If they contain some deep and recondite meaning which
has escaped us, let those inform us who see what is beyond our range of
vision—initiated as they are by him in his esoteric and unspeakable
mysteries. But if they admit of no interpretation beyond what is
obvious, I scarcely know which of the two are more to be pitied, those
who say such things or those who listen to them. To the weakest of
terrestrial things, he says, God has given names in common with the most
honourable, though not giving them an equal share of dignity. Let us
examine what is meant by this. The weakest things, he says, are
dignified with the bare name belonging to the honourable, their nature
not corresponding with their name. And this he states to be the work of
the God of truth—to dignify the worse nature with the worthier
appellation! On the other hand, he says that God applies the less
honourable names to things superior in their nature, the nature of the
latter not being carried over to the former along with the appellation.
But that the matter may be made plainer still, the absurdity shall be
shown by actual instances. If any one should call a man who is esteemed
for every virtue, intemperate; or, on the other hand, a man equally in
disrepute for his vices, good and moral, would sensible people think him
of sound mind, or one who had any regard for truth, reversing, as would
be the case, the meanings of words, and giving them a non-natural
signification? I for my part think not. He speaks, then, of things
relating to God, out of all keeping with our common ideas and with the
holy Scriptures. For in matters of ordinary life it is only those who
are unsettled by drink or madness that go wrong in names, and use them
out of their proper meaning, calling, it may be, a man a dog, or vice
versa. But Holy Scripture is so far from sanctioning such confusion,
that we may clearly hear the voice of prophecy lamenting it. “Woe unto
him,” says Isaiah, “that calls darkness light, and light darkness, that
calls bitter sweet, and sweet bitter <span
id="fr_1146"></span>[1148](#fn_1146) .” Now what induces Eunomius to
apply this absurdity to his God? Let those who are initiated in his
mysteries say what they judge those weakest of terrestrial things to be,
which God has dignified with most honourable appellations. The weakest
of existing things are those animals whose generation takes place from
the corruption of moist elements, as the most honourable are virtue, and
holiness, and whatever else is pleasing in the sight of God. Are flies,
then, and midges, and frogs, and whatever insects are generated from
dung, dignified with the names of holiness and virtue, so as to be
consecrated with honourable names, though not sharing in such high
qualities, as saith Eunomius? But never as yet have we heard anything
like this, that these weak things are called by high-sounding titles, or
that what is great and honourable by nature is degraded by the name of
any one of them. Noah was a righteous man, saith the Scripture, Abraham
was faithful, Moses meek, Daniel wise, Joseph chaste, Job blameless,
David perfect in patience. Let them say, then, whether all these had
their names by contraries; or, to take the case of those who are
unfavourably spoken of, as Nabal the Carmelite, and Pharaoh the
Egyptian, and Abimelech the alien, and all those who are mentioned for
their vices, whether they were dignified with honourable names by the
voice of God. Not so! But God judges and distinguishes His creatures as
they are in nature and truth, not by names contrary to them, but by such
appropriate appellations as may give the clearest idea of their meaning.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p148"></span><span id="page_CCLXXXIII">p.
CCLXXXIII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXIII"></span>This it is
that our strong-minded opponent, who accuses us of dishonesty, and
charges us with being irrational in judgment,—this it is that he
pretends to know of the Divine nature. These are the opinions that he
puts forth respecting God, as though He mocked His creatures with names
untrue to their meaning, bestowing on the weakest the most honourable
appellations, and pouring contempt on the honourable by making them
synonymous with the base. Now a virtuous man, if carried, even
involuntarily, beyond the limits of truth, is overwhelmed with shame.
Yet Eunomius thinks it no shame to God that He should seem to give a
false colour to things by their appellations. Not such is the testimony
of the Scriptures to the Divine nature. “God is long-suffering, and
plenteous in mercy and truth,” says David <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1149](#fn_1147) . But how can He be a God of truth
Who gives false names to things, and Who perverts the truth in the
meanings of their names? Again, He is called by him a righteous
Lord <span id="fr_1148"></span>[1150](#fn_1148) . Is it, then, a
righteous thing to dignify things without honour by honourable names,
and, while giving the bare name, to grudge the honour that it denotes?
Such is the testimony of these Theologians to their new-fangled God.
This is the end of their boasted dialectic cleverness, to display God
Himself delighting in deceit, and not superior to the passion of
jealousy. For surely it is no better than deceit not to name weak
things, as they are in their true nature and worth, but to invest them
with empty names, derived from superior things, not proportioning their
value to their name; and it is no better than jealousy if, having it in
His power to bestow the more honourable appellation on things to be
named for some superiority, He grudged them the honour itself, as
deeming the happiness of the weak a loss to Himself personally. But I
should recommend all who are wise, even if the God of these
Gnostics <span id="fr_1149"></span>[1151](#fn_1149) is by stress of
logic shown to be of such a character, not to think thus of the true
God, the Only-begotten, but to look at the truth of facts, giving each
of them their due, and thence to deduce His name. “Come, ye blessed,”
saith our Lord; and again, “Depart, ye cursed <span
id="fr_1150"></span>[1152](#fn_1150) ,” not honouring him who deserves
cursing with the name of “blessed,” nor, on the other hand, dismissing
him who has treasured up for himself the blessing, along with the
wicked.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p153"></span>But what is our author’s meaning, and
what is the object of this argument of his? For no one need imagine
that, for lack of something to say, in order that he may seem to extend
his discourse to the utmost, he has indulged in all this senseless
twaddle. Its very senselessness is not without a meaning, and smacks of
heresy. For to say that the most honourable names are applied to the
weakest things, though not having by nature an equal apportionment of
dignity, secretly paves the way, as it were, for the blasphemy to
follow, that he may teach his disciples this; that although the
Only-begotten is called God, and Wisdom, and Power, and Light, and the
Truth, and the Judge, and the King, and God over all, and the great God,
and the Prince of peace, and the Father of the world to come, and so
forth, His honour is limited to the name.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p154"></span>He does not, in fact, partake of that
dignity which the meaning of those names indicates; and whereas wise
Daniel, in setting right the Babylonians’ error of idolatry, that they
should not worship the brazen image or the dragon, but reverence the
name of God, which men in their folly had ascribed to them, clearly
showed by what he did that the high and lofty name of God had no
likeness to the reptile, or to the image of molten brass—this enemy of
God exerts himself in his teaching to prove the very opposite of this in
regard to the Only-begotten Son of God, exclaiming in the style which he
affects, “Do not regard the names of which our Lord is a partaker, so as
to infer His unspeakable and sublime nature. For many of the weakest
things are likewise invested with names of honour, lofty indeed in
sound, though their nature is not transformed so as to come up to the
grandeur of their appellations.” Accordingly he says that inferior
things receive their honour from God only so far as their names go, no
equality of dignity accompanying their appellations. When, therefore, we
have learned all the names of the Son that are of lofty signification,
we must bear in mind that the honour which they imply is ascribed to Him
only so far as the words go, but that, according to the system of
nomenclature which they adopt, He does not partake of the dignity
implied by the words.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p155"></span>But in dwelling on such nonsense I
fear that I am secretly gratifying our adversaries. For in setting the
truth against their vain and empty words, I seem to myself to be wearing
out the patience of my audience before we come to the brunt of the
battle. These points, then, I will leave it to my more learned hearers
to dispose of, and proceed with my task. Nor will I now notice a thing
he has said, which, however, is closely connected with our inquiry; viz.
that these things have been so arranged that human thought and
conception can claim no authority over names. But who is there that
maintains <span id="page_CCLXXXIV">p. CCLXXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXIV"></span>that what is not seen in its own
subsistence has authority over anything? For only those creatures that
are governed by their own deliberate will are capable of acting with
authority. But thought and conception are an operation of the mind,
which depends on the deliberate choice of those who speak, having no
independent subsistence, but subsisting only in the force of the things
said. But this, he says, belongs to God, the Creator of all things, who,
by limitations and rules of relation, operation, and proportion, applies
suitable appellations to each of the things named. But this either is
sheer nonsense, or contradicts his previous assertions. For if he now
professes that God affixes names suitable to their subjects, why does he
argue, as we have seen that God bestows lofty names on things without
honour, not allowing them a share in the dignity which their names
indicate, and again, that He degrades things of a lofty nature by names
without honour, their nature not being affected by the meanness of their
appellations? But perhaps we are unfair to him in subjecting his
senseless collocation of phrases to such accusations as these. For they
are altogether alien to any sense (I do not mean only to a sense in
keeping with reverence), and they will be found to be utterly devoid of
reason by all who understand how to form an accurate judgment in such
matters. Since, then, like the fish called the sea-lung, what we see
appears to have bulk and volume, which turns out, however, to be only
viscous matter disgusting to look at, and still more disgusting to
handle, I shall pass over his remarks in silence, deeming that the best
answer to his idle effusions. For it would be better that we should not
inquire what law governs “operation,” and “proportion,” and “relation,”
and who it is that prescribes laws to God in respect to rules and modes
of proportion and relation, than that, by busying ourselves in such
matters, we should nauseate our hearers, and digress from more important
matters of inquiry.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p156"></span>But I fear that all we shall find in
the discourse of Eunomius will turn out to be mere tumours and sea
lungs, so that what has been said must necessarily close our argument,
as his writings will supply no material to work on. For as a smoke or a
mist makes the air in which it resides heavy and thick, and
incapacitates the eye for the discharge of its natural function, yet
does not form itself into so dense a body that he who will may grasp and
hold it in his palms, and offer resistance to its stroke, so if one
should say the same of his pompous piece of writing, the comparison
would not be untrue. Much nonsense is worked up in his tumid and viscous
discourse, and to one not gifted with over-much discernment, like a mist
to one viewing it from afar, it seems to have some substance and shape,
but if you come up to it and scrutinize what is said, the theories slip
from your hold like smoke, and vanish into nothing, nor have they any
solidity or resistance to oppose to the stroke of your argument. It is
difficult, therefore, to know what to do. For to those who like to
complain either alternative will seem objectionable; whether, leaping
over his empty wordiness, as over a ravine, we direct the course of our
argument to the level and open country, against those points which seem
to have any strength against the truth, or form our absurd battle along
the whole line of his inanities. For in the latter case, to those who do
not love hard work, our labour, extending over some thousands of lines
to no useful purpose, will be wearisome and unprofitable. But if we
attack those points only which seem to have some force against the
truth, we shall give occasion to our adversaries to accuse us of passing
over arguments of theirs which we are unable to refute. Since, then, two
courses are open to us, either to take all their arguments seriatim, or
to run through those only which are more important—the one course
tedious to our hearers, the other liable to be suspected by our
assailants—I think it best to take a middle course, and so, as far as
possible, to avoid censure on either hand. What, then, is our method?
After clearing his vain productions, as well as we can, of the rubbish
they have accumulated, we will summarily run through the main points of
his argument in such a way as neither to plunge needlessly into the
profundities of his nonsense, nor to leave any of his statements
unexamined. Now his whole treatise is an ambitious attempt to show that
God speaks after the manner of men, and that the Creator of all things
gives them suitable names, indicative of the things themselves. And,
therefore, opposing himself to him who contended that such names are
given by that rational nature which we have received from God, he
accuses him of error, and of desertion from his fundamental proposition:
and having brought this charge against him, he uses the following
arguments in support of his position.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p157"></span>Basil, he says, asserts that after we
have obtained our first idea of a thing, the more minute and accurate
investigation of the thing under consideration is called conception. And
Eunomius disproves this, as he thinks, by the following argument, that
where this first, and this second notion, *i.e.* one more minute and
accurate than the other, are not found, the operation which we call
thought and conception does not find place. Here, however, he will be
convicted of dishonesty by all who have ears to hear. For it was not of
all thought and <span id="page_CCLXXXV">p. CCLXXXV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXV"></span>conception that our master (Basil)
laid down this definition, but, after making a special subdivision of
the objects of thought and conception (not to encumber the question with
too many words), and having made this part clear, he left men of sense
to reason out the whole from the part for themselves. And as, if any one
should say that we get our definition of an animal from considering a
number of animals of different species, he could not be convicted of
missing the truth in making man an instance in point, nor would there be
any need to correct him as deviating from the fact, unless he should
give the same definition of a winged, or four-footed, or aquatic animal
as of a man, so, when the points of view from which we may consider this
conception are so many and various, it is no refutation of Basil’s
statement to say that it is improperly so called in one case because
there is another species. Accordingly, even if another species come
under consideration, it by no means follows that the one previously
given is erroneously so called. Now if, says he, one of the Apostles or
Prophets could be shown to have used these names of Christ, the
falsehood would have something for its encouragement. To what
industrious study of the word of God on the part of our opponent do not
these words bear testimony! None of the Prophets or Apostles has spoken
of our Lord as Bread, or a Stone, or a Fountain, or an Axe, or Light, or
a Shepherd! What, then, saith David, and of whom? “The Lord shepherds
me.” “Thou Who shepherdest Israel, give ear <span
id="fr_1151"></span>[1153](#fn_1151) .” What difference does it make
whether He is spoken of as shepherding, or as a Shepherd? And again,
“With Thee is the Well of life <span
id="fr_1152"></span>[1154](#fn_1152) .” Does he deny that our Lord is
called a “Well”? And again, “The Stone which the builders rejected <span
id="fr_1153"></span>[1155](#fn_1153) .” And John, too,—where,
representing our Lord’s power to uproot evil under the name of an axe,
he says, “And now also the Axe is laid to the root of the trees <span
id="fr_1154"></span>[1156](#fn_1154) ”—is he not a weighty and credible
witness to the truth of our words?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p162"></span>And Moses, seeing God in the light,
and John calling Him the true Light <span
id="fr_1155"></span>[1157](#fn_1155) , and in the same way Paul, when
our Lord first appeared to him, and a Light shone round about him, and
afterwards when he heard the words of the Light saying, “I am Jesus,
Whom thou persecutest <span id="fr_1156"></span>[1158](#fn_1156) ,”—is
he not a competent witness? And as regards the name “Bread,” let him
read the Gospel and see how the bread given by Moses, and supplied to
Israel from heaven, was taken by our Lord as a type of Himself: “For
Moses gave you not that Bread, but My Father giveth you the true Bread
(meaning Himself) which cometh down from heaven and giveth life unto the
world <span id="fr_1157"></span>[1159](#fn_1157) .” But this genuine
hearer of the law says that none of the Prophets or Apostles has applied
these names to Christ. What shall we say, then, of what follows? “Even
if our Lord Himself adopts them, yet, since in the Saviour’s names there
is no first or second, none more minute or accurate than another, for He
knows them all at once with equal accuracy, it is not possible to
accommodate his (Basil’s) account of the operation of conception to any
of His names.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p166"></span>I have deluged my discourse with much
nonsense of his, but I trust my hearers will pardon me for not leaving
unnoticed even the most glaring of his inanities; not that we take
pleasure in our author’s indecorum, (for what advantage can we derive
from the refutation of our adversaries’ folly?) but that truth may be
advanced by confirmation from whatever quarter. “Since,” says he, “our
Lord applies these appellations to Himself, not deeming any one of them
first, or second, or more minute and accurate than the rest, you cannot
say that these names are the result of conception.” Why, he has
forgotten his own object! How comes he by the knowledge of the words
against which he declares war? Our master and guide had made mention of
an example familiar to all, in illustration of the doctrine of
conception, and having explained his meaning by lower illustrations, he
lifts the consideration of the question to higher things. He had said
that the word “corn,” regarded by itself, is one thing only as to
substance, but that, as to the various properties we see in it, it
varies its appellations, being called seed, and fruit, and food, and the
like. Similarly, says he, our Lord is in respect to Himself what He is
essentially, but when named according to the differences of His
operations, He has not one appellation in all cases, but takes a
different name according to each notion produced in us from the
operation. How, then, does what he says disprove our theory that it is
possible for many appellations to be attached with propriety, according
to the diversity of His operations, and His relation to their effects,
to the Son of God, though one in respect of the underlying force, even
as corn, though one, has various names apportioned to it, according to
the point of view from which we regard it? How, then, can what is said
be overthrown by our saying that Christ used all these names of Himself?
For the question was not, who ascribed them, but about the meaning of
the names, whether they denote essence, or whether they are derived from
His operations by the process of conception. But <span
id="page_CCLXXXVI">p. CCLXXXVI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXVI"></span>our shrewd and strong-minded
opponent, overturning our theory of conception, which declares that it
is possible to find many appellations for one and the same subject,
according to the significances of its operations, attacks us vigorously,
asserting that such names were not given to our Lord by another. But
what has this to do with the case in point? Since these names are used
by our Lord, will he not allow that they are names, or appellations, or
words expressive of ideas? For if he will not admit them to be names,
then, in doing away with the appellations, he does away at the same time
with the conception. But if he does not deny that these words are names,
what harm can he do to our doctrine of conception by showing that such
titles were given to our Lord, not by some one else, but by Himself? For
what was said was this, that, as in the instance of corn, our Lord,
though substantively One, bears epithets suitable to His operations. And
as it is admitted that corn has its names by virtue of our conception of
its associations, it was shown that these terms significative of our
Lord are not of His essence, but are formed by the method of conception
in our minds respecting Him. But our antagonist studiously avoids
attacking these positions, and maintains that our Lord received these
names from Himself, in the same way as, if one sought for the true
interpretation of the name “Isaac,” whether it means laughter <span
id="fr_1158"></span>[1160](#fn_1158) , as some say, or something else,
one of Eunomius’ way of thinking should confidently reply that the name
was given to him as a child by his mother: but that, one might say, was
not the question, *i.e.* by whom the name was given, but what does it
mean when translated into our language? And this being the point of the
inquiry, whether our Lord’s various appellations were the result of
conception, instead of being indicative of His essence, he who thus
seeks to demonstrate that they are not so derived because they are used
by our Lord Himself,—how can he be numbered among men of sense, warring
as he does against the truth, and equipping himself with such alliances
for the war as serve to show the superior strength of his enemy?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p168"></span>Then going farther, as if his object
were thus far attained, he takes up other charges against us, more
difficult, as he thinks, to deal with than the former, and with many
preliminary groans and attempts to prejudice his hearers against us, and
to whet their appetite for his address, accusing us withal of seeking to
establish doctrines savouring of blasphemy, and of ascribing to our own
conception names assigned by God (though he nowhere mentions what
assignment he refers to, nor when and where it took place), and,
further, of throwing everything into confusion, and identifying the
essence of the Only-begotten with his operation, without arguing the
matter, or showing how we prove the identity of the essence and the
operation, he winds up with the same list of charges, as follows: “And
now, passing beyond this, he (Basil) asperses even the Most High with
the vilest blasphemies, using at the same time broken language, and
illustrations wide of the mark.” Now prior to inquiry, I should like to
be told what our language is “broken” from, and what mark it is “wide
of”; not that I want to know, except to show the confusion and obscurity
of his address, which he dins into the ears of the old wives among our
men, pluming himself on his nice phrases, which he mouths out to the
admirers of such things, ignorant, as it would seem, that in the
judgment of educated men this address of his will serve only as a
memorial of his own infamy.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p169"></span>But all this is beside our purpose.
Would that our charges against him were limited to this, and that he
could be thought to err only in his delivery, and not in matters of
faith; since it would have been of comparatively little importance to
him to be praised or blamed for expressing himself in one style or
another. But however that may be, the sequel of his charges against us
contains this in addition: “Considering the case of corn (he says), and
of our Lord, after exercising his conceptions in various ways upon them,
he <span id="fr_1159"></span>[1161](#fn_1159) declares that even in like
manner the most holy essence of God admits of the same variety of
conception.” This is the gravest of his accusations, and it is in
prosecuting this that he rehearses those heavy invectives of his,
charging what we have said with blasphemy, absurdity, and so forth.
What, then, is the proof of our blasphemy? “He <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1162](#fn_1160) has mentioned” (says Eunomius)
“certain well-known facts about corn,—perceiving how it grows, and how
when ripe it affords food, growing, multiplying, and being dispensed by
certain forces of nature—and, having mentioned these, he adds that it is
only reasonable to suppose that the Only-begotten Son also admits of
different modes of being conceived of <span
id="fr_1161"></span>[1163](#fn_1161) , by reason of certain differences
of operation, certain analogies, proportions, and relations. For he uses
these terms respecting Him to satiety. And is it not absurd, or rather
blasphemous, to compare the Ungenerate with such objects <span
id="page_CCLXXXVII">p. CCLXXXVII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXVII"></span>as these?”—What objects? Why,
corn, and God the Only-begotten! You see his artfulness. He would show
that insignificant corn and God the Only-begotten are equally removed
from the dignity of the Ungenerate. And to show that we are not treating
his words unfairly, we may learn his meaning from the very words he has
written. “For,” he asks, “is it not absurd, or rather blasphemous, to
compare the Ungenerate with these?” And in thus speaking, he instances
the case of corn and of our Lord as on a level in point of dignity,
thinking it equally absurd to compare God with either. Now every one
knows that things equally distant from a given object are possessed of
equality as regards each other, so that according to our wise theologian
the Maker of the worlds, Who holds all nature in His hand, is shown to
be on a par with the most insignificant seed, since He and corn to the
same degree fall short of comparison with God. To such a pitch of
blasphemy has *he* come!

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p173"></span>But it is time to examine the argument
that leads to this profanity, and see how, as regards itself, it is
logically connected with his whole discourse. For after saying that it
is absurd to compare God with corn and with Christ, he says of God that
He is not, like them, subject to change; but in respect to the
Only-begotten, keeping silence on the question whether He too is not
subject to change, and thereby clearly suggesting that He is of lower
dignity, in that we cannot compare Him, any more than we can compare
corn, with God, he breaks off his discourse without using any argument
to prove that the Son of God cannot be compared with the Father, as
though our knowledge of the grain were sufficient to establish the
inferiority of the Son in comparison with the Father. But he discourses
of the indestructibility of the Father, as not in actuality attaching to
the Son. But if the True Life is an actuality, actuating itself, and if
to live everlastingly means the same thing as never to be dissolved in
destruction, I for myself do not as yet assent to his argument, but will
reserve myself for a more proper occasion. That, however, there is but
one single notion in indestructibility <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1164](#fn_1162) , considered in reference to the
Father and to the Son alike, and that the indestructibility of the
Father differs in no respect from that of the Son, no difference as to
indestructibility being observable either in remission and intension, or
in any other phase of the process of destruction, this, I say, it is
seasonable both now and at all times to assert, so as to preclude the
doctrine that in respect of indestructibility the Son has no communion
with the Father. For as this indestructibility is understood in respect
of the Father, so also it is not to be disputed in respect of the Son.
For to be incapable of dissolution means nearly, or rather precisely,
the same thing in regard to whatever subject it is attributed to. What,
then, induces him to assert, that only to the Ungenerate Deity does it
belong to have this indestructibility not attaching to Him by reason of
any energy, as though he would thereby show a difference between the
Father and the Son? For if he supposes his own created God destructible,
he well shows the essential divergence of natures by the difference
between the destructible and the indestructible. But if neither is
subject to destruction,—and no degrees are to be found in pure
indestructibility,—how does he show that the Father cannot be compared
with the Only-begotten Son, or what is meant by saying that
indestructibility is not witnessed in the Father by reason of any
energy? But he reveals his purpose in what follows. It is not because of
His operations or energies, he says, that He is ungenerate and
indestructible, but because He is Father and Creator. And here I must
ask my hearers to give me their closest attention. How can he think the
creative power of God and His Fatherhood identical in meaning? For he
defines each alike as an energy, plainly and expressly affirming, “God
is not indestructible by reason of His energy, though He is called
Father and Creator by reason of energies.” If, then, it is the same
thing to call Him Father and Creator of the world because either name is
due to an energy as its cause, the results of His energies must be
homogeneous, inasmuch as it is through an energy, that they both exist.
But to what blasphemy this logically tends is clear to every one who can
draw a conclusion. For myself, I should like to add my own deductions to
my disquisition. It is impossible that an energy or operation productive
of a result should subsist of itself without there being something to
set the energy in motion; as we say that a smith operates or works, but
that the material on which his art is exercised is operated upon, or
wrought. These faculties, therefore, that of operating, and that of
being operated upon, must needs stand in a certain relation to each
other, so that if one be removed, the remaining one cannot subsist of
itself. For where there is nothing operated upon there can be nothing
operating. What, then, does this prove? If the energy which is
productive of anything does not subsist of itself, <span
id="page_CCLXXXVIII">p. CCLXXXVIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXVIII"></span>there being nothing for it to
operate upon, and if the Father, as they affirm, is nothing but an
energy, the Only-begotten Son is thereby shown to be capable of being
acted upon, in other words, moulded in accordance with the motive energy
that gives Him His subsistence. For as we say that the Creator of the
world, by laying down some yielding material, capable of being acted
upon, gave His creative being a field for its exercise, in the case of
things sensible skilfully investing the subject with various and
multiform qualities for production, but in the case of intellectual
essences giving shape to the subject in another way, not by qualities,
but by impulses of choice, so, if any one define the Fatherhood of God
as an energy, he cannot otherwise indicate the subsistence of the Son
than by comparing it with some material acted upon and wrought to
completion. For if it could not be operated upon, it would of necessity
offer resistance to the operator: whose energy being thus hindered, no
result would be produced. Either, then, they must make the essence of
the Only-begotten subject to be acted upon, that the energy may have
something to work upon, or, if they shrink from this conclusion, on
account of its manifest impiety, they are driven to the conclusion that
it has no existence at all. For what is naturally incapable of being
acted upon, cannot itself admit the creative energy. He, then, who
defines the Son as the effect of an energy, defines Him as one of those
things which are subject to be acted upon, and which are produced by an
energy. Or, if he deny such susceptibility, he must at the same time
deny His existence. But since impiety is involved in either alternative
of the dilemma, that of asserting His non-existence, and that of
regarding Him as capable of being acted upon, the truth is made
manifest, being brought to light by the removal of these absurdities.
For if He verily exists, and is not subject to be acted upon, it is
plain that He is not the result of an energy, but is proved to be very
God of very God the Father, without liability to be acted upon, beaming
from Him and shining forth from everlasting.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p175"></span>But in His very essence, he says, God
is indestructible. Well, what other conceivable attribute of God does
not attach to the very essence of the Son, as justice, goodness,
eternity, incapacity for evil, infinite perfection in all conceivable
goodness? Is there one who will venture to say that any of the virtues
in the Divine nature are acquired, or to deny that all good whatsoever
springs from and is seen in it? “For whatsoever is good is from Him, and
whatsoever is lovely is from Him <span
id="fr_1163"></span>[1165](#fn_1163) .” But he appends to this, that He
is in His very essence ungenerate too. Well, if he means by this that
the Father’s essence is ungenerate, I agree with what is said, and do
not oppose his doctrine: for not one of the orthodox maintains that the
Father of the Only-begotten is Himself begotten. But if, while the form
of his expression indicates only this, he maintains that the ungeneracy
itself is the essence, I say that we ought not to leave such a position
unexamined, but expose his attempt to gain the assent of the unwary to
his blasphemy.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p177"></span>Now that the idea <span
id="fr_1164"></span>[1166](#fn_1164) of ungeneracy and the belief in the
Divine essence are quite different things may be seen by what he himself
has put forward. God, he says, is indestructible and ungenerate by His
very essence, as being unmixed and pure from all diversity and
difference. This he says of God, Whose essence he declares to be
indestructibility and ungeneracy. There are three names, then, that he
applies to God, being, indestructibility, ungeneracy. If the idea of
these three words in respect of God is one, it follows that the Godhead
and these three are identical. Just as if any one, wanting to describe a
man, should say that he was a rational, risible, and broad-nailed
creature; whereupon, because there is no essential variation from these
in the individuals, we say that the terms are equivalent to each other,
and that the three things seen in the subject are one thing, viz. the
humanity described by these names. If, then, Godhead means this,
ungeneracy, indestructibility, being, by doing away with one of these he
necessarily does away with the Godhead. For just as we should say that a
creature which was neither rational nor risible was not man either, so
in the case of these three terms (ungeneracy, indestructibility, being),
if the Godhead is described by these, should one of the three be absent,
its absence destroys the definition of Godhead. Let him tell us, then,
in reply, what opinion he holds of God the Only-begotten. Does he think
Him generate or ungenerate? Of course he must say generate, unless he is
to contradict himself. If, then, being and indestructibility are
equivalent to ungeneracy, and by all of these Godhead is denoted, to
Whom ungeneracy is wanting, to Him being and indestructibility must
needs be wanting also, and in that case the Godhead also must
necessarily be taken away. And thus his blasphemous logic brings him to
a twofold conclusion. For if being, and indestructibility, and
ungeneracy are applied to God in the same sense, our new God-maker is
clearly convicted of regarding the <span id="page_CCLXXXIX">p.
CCLXXXIX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCLXXXIX"></span>Son created
by Him as destructible, by his not regarding Him as ungenerate, and not
only so, but altogether without being, through his inability to see Him
in the Godhead, as one in whom ungeneracy and indestructibility are not
found, since he takes the ungeneracy and indestructibility to be
identical with the being. But since in this there is manifest perdition,
let some one counsel these unhappy folk to turn to the only course which
is left them, and, instead of setting themselves in open opposition to
the truth, to allow that each of these terms has its own proper
signification, such as may be seen still better from their contraries.
For we find ungenerate set against generate, and we understand the
indestructible by its opposition to the destructible, and being by
contrast with that which has no subsistence. For as that which was not
generated is called ungenerate, and that which is not destructible is
called indestructible, so that which is not non-existent we call being,
and, conversely, as we do not call the generate ungenerate, nor the
destructible indestructible, so that which is non-existent we do not
call being. Being, then, is discernible in the being this or that,
goodness or indestructibility in the being of this or of that kind,
generacy or ungeneracy in the manner of the being. And thus the ideas of
being, manner, and quality are distinct from each other.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p179"></span>But it will be well, I think, to pass
over his nauseating observations (for such we must term his senseless
attacks on the method of conception), and dwell more pleasurably on the
subject matter of our thought. For all the venom that our disputant has
disgorged with the view of overthrowing our Master’s speculations in
regard to conception, is not of such a kind as to be dangerous to those
who come in its way, however stupid they may be and liable to be imposed
on. For who is so devoid of understanding as to think that there is
anything in what Eunomius says, or to see any ingenuity in his artifices
against the truth when he takes our Master’s reference to corn (which he
meant simply by way of illustration, thereby providing his hearers with
a sort of method and introduction to the study of higher instances), and
applies it literally to the Lord of all? To think of his assertion that
the most becoming cause for God’s begetting the Son was His sovereign
authority and power, which may be said not only in regard to the
universe and its elements, but in regard to beasts and creeping things;
and of our reverend theologian teaching that the same is becoming in our
conception of God the Only-begotten—or again, of his saying that God was
called ungenerate, or Father, or any other name, even before the
existence of creatures to call Him such, as being afraid lest, His name
not being uttered among creatures as yet unborn, He should be ignorant
or forgetful of Himself, through ignorance of His own nature because of
His name being unspoken! To think, again, of the insolence of his attack
upon our teaching; what acrimony, what subtlety does he display, while
attempting to establish the absurdity of what he (Basil) said, namely
that He Who was in a manner the Father before all worlds and time, and
all sensitive and intellectual nature, must somehow wait for man’s
creation in order to be named by means of man’s conception, not having
been so named, either by the Son or by any of the intelligent beings of
His creation! Why no one, I imagine, can be so densely stupid as to be
ignorant that God the Only-begotten, Who is in the Father <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1167](#fn_1165) , and Who seeth the Father in
Himself, is in no need of any name or title to make Him known, nor is
the mystery of the Holy Spirit, Who searcheth out the deep things of
God <span id="fr_1166"></span>[1168](#fn_1166) , brought to our
knowledge by a nominal appellation, nor can the incorporeal nature of
supramundane powers name God by voice and tongue. For, in the case of
immaterial intellectual nature, the mental energy is speech which has no
need of material instruments of communication. For even in the case of
human beings, we should have no need of using words and names if we
could otherwise inform each other of our pure mental feelings and
impulses. But (as things are), inasmuch as the thoughts which arise in
us are incapable of being so revealed, because our nature is encumbered
with its fleshly surrounding, we are obliged to express to each other
what goes on in our minds by giving things their respective names, as
signs of their meaning.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p182"></span>But if it were in any way possible by
some other means to lay bare the movements of thought, abandoning the
formal instrumentality of words, we should converse with one another
more lucidly and clearly, revealing by the mere action of thought the
essential nature of the things which are under consideration. But now,
by reason of our inability to do so, we have given things their special
names, calling one Heaven, another Earth, and so on, and as each is
related to each, and acts or suffers, we have marked them by distinctive
names, so that our thoughts in regard to them may not remain
uncommunicated and unknown. But supramundane and immaterial nature being
free and independent of bodily envelopment, requires no words or names
either for itself or for that which is above it, but whatever utterance
on the part of such intellectual nature is recorded in <span
id="page_CCXC">p. CCXC</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXC"></span>Holy Writ is given for the sake of the
hearers, who would be unable otherwise to learn what is to be set forth,
if it were not communicated to them by voice and word. And if David in
the spirit speaks of something being said by the Lord to the Lord <span
id="fr_1167"></span>[1169](#fn_1167) , it is David himself who is the
speaker, being unable otherwise to make known to us the teaching of what
is meant except by interpreting by voice and word his own knowledge of
the mysteries given him by Divine inspiration.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p184"></span>All his argument, then, in opposition
to the doctrine of conception I think it best to pass over, though he
charge with madness those who think that the name of God, as used by
mankind to indicate the Supreme Being, is the result of this conception.
For what he is thinking of when he considers himself bound to revile
that doctrine, all who will may learn from his own words. What opinion
we ourselves hold on the use of words we have already stated, viz. that,
things being as they are in regard to their nature, the rational faculty
implanted in our nature by God invented words indicative of those actual
things. And if any one ascribe their origin to the Giver of the faculty,
we would not contradict him, for we too maintain that motion, and sight,
and the rest of the operations carried on by the senses are effected by
Him Who endowed us with such faculties. So, then, the cause of our
naming God, Who is by His nature what He is, is referable by common
consent to Himself, but the liberty of naming all things that we
conceive of in one way or another lies in that thing in our nature,
which, whether a man wish to call it conception or something else, we
are quite indifferent. And there is this one sure evidence in our
favour, that the Divine Being is not named alike by all, but that each
interprets his idea as he thinks best. Passing over, then, in silence
his rubbishy twaddle about conception, let us hold to our tenets, and
simply note by the way some of the observations that occur in the midst
of his empty speeches, where he pretends that God, seating Himself by
our first parents, like some pedagogue or grammarian, gave them a lesson
in words and names; wherein he says that they who were first formed by
God, or those who were born from them in continuous succession, unless
they had been taught how each several thing should be called and named,
would have lived together in dumbness and silence, and would have been
unequal to the discharge of any of the serviceable functions of life,
the meaning of each being uncertain through lack of interpreters,—verbs
forsooth, and nouns. Such is the infatuation of this writer; he thinks
the faculty implanted in our nature by God insufficient for any method
of reasoning, and that unless it be taught each thing severally, like
those who are taught Hebrew or Latin word by word, one must be ignorant
of the nature of the things, having no discernment of fire, or water, or
air, or anything else, unless one have acquired the knowledge of them by
the names that they bear. But we maintain that He Who made all things in
His wisdom, and Who moulded this living rational creature, by the simple
fact of His implanting reason in his nature, endowed him with all his
rational faculties. And as naturally possessing our faculties of
perception by the gift of Him Who fashioned the eye and planted the ear,
we can of ourselves employ them for their natural objects, and have no
need of any one to name the colours, for instance, of which the eye
takes cognizance, for the eye is competent to inform itself in such
matters; nor do we need another to make us acquainted with the things
which we perceive by hearing, or taste, or touch, possessing as we do in
ourselves the means of discerning all of which our perception informs
us. And so, again, we maintain that the intellectual faculty, made as it
was originally by God, acts thenceforward by itself when it looks out
upon realities, and that there be no confusion in its knowledge, affixes
some verbal note to each several thing as a stamp to indicate its
meaning. Great Moses himself confirms this doctrine when he says <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1170](#fn_1168) that names were assigned by Adam to
the brute creation, recording the fact in these words: “And out of the
ground God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air,
and brought them unto Adam to see what he would call them, and
whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name thereof.
And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to all the beasts of the field.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p186"></span>But, like some viscous and sticky
clay, the nonsense he has concocted in contravention of our teaching of
conception seems to hold us back, and prevent us from applying ourselves
to more important matters. For how can one pass over his solemn and
profound philosophy, as when he says that God’s greatness is seen not
only in the works of His hands, but that His wisdom is displayed in
their names also, adapted as they are with such peculiar fitness to the
nature of each work of His creation <span
id="fr_1169"></span>[1171](#fn_1169) ? <span id="page_CCXCI">p.
CCXCI</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCI"></span>Having perchance
fallen in with Plato’s Cratylus, or hearing from some one who had met
with it, by reason, I suppose, of his own poverty of ideas, he attached
that nonsense patchwise to his own, acting like those who get their
bread by begging. For just as they, receiving some trifle from each who
bestows it on them, collect their bread from many and various sources,
so the discourse of Eunomius, by reason of his scanty store of the true
bread, assiduously collects scraps of phrases and notions from all
quarters. And thus, being struck by the beauty of the Platonic style, he
thinks it not unseemly to make Plato’s theory a doctrine of the Church.
For by how many appellations, say, is the created firmament called
according to the varieties of language? For we call it Heaven, the
Hebrew calls it Samaim, the Roman cœlum, other names are given to it by
the Syrian, the Mede, the Cappadocian, the African, the Scythian, the
Thracian the Egyptian: nor would it be easy to enumerate the
multiplicity of names which are applied to Heaven and other objects by
the different nations that employ them. Which of these, then, tell me,
is the appropriate word wherein the great wisdom of God is manifested?
If you prefer the Greek to the rest, the Egyptian haply will confront
you with his own. And if you give the first place to the Hebrew, there
is the Syrian to claim precedence for his own word, nor will the Roman
yield the supremacy, nor the Mede allow himself to be outdone; while of
the other nations each will claim the prize. What, then, will be the
fate of his dogma when torn to pieces by the claimants for so many
different languages? But by these, says he, as by laws publicly
promulgated, it is shown that God made names exactly suited to the
nature of the things which they represent. What a grand doctrine! What
grand views our theologian allows to the Divine teachings, such indeed
as men do not grudge even to bathing-attendants! For we allow them to
give names to the operations they engage in, and yet no one invests them
with Divine honours for the invention of such names as foot-baths,
depilatories, towels, and the like—words which appropriately designate
the articles in question.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p188"></span>But I will pass over both this and
their reading of Epicurus’ nature-system, which he says is equivalent to
our conception, maintaining that the doctrine of atoms and empty space,
and the fortuitous generation of things, is akin to what we mean by
conception. What an understanding of Epicurus! If we ascribe words
expressive of things to the logical faculty in our nature, we thereby
stand convicted of holding the Epicurean doctrine of indivisible bodies,
and combinations of atoms, and the collision and rebound of particles,
and so on. I say nothing of Aristotle, whom he takes as his own patron,
and the ally of his system, whose opinion, he says, in his subsequent
remarks, coincides with our views about conception. For he says that
that philosopher taught that Providence does not extend through all
nature, nor penetrate into the region of terrestrial things, and this,
Eunomius contends, corresponds to our discoveries in the field of
conception. Such is his idea of determining a doctrine with accuracy!
But he goes on to say that we must either deny the creation of things to
God, or, if we concede it, we must not deprive Him of the imposition of
names. And yet even in respect to the brute creation, as we have said
already, we are taught the very opposite (of both these alternatives) by
Holy Scripture—that neither did Adam make the animals, nor did God name
them, but the creation was the work of God, and the naming of the things
created was the work of man, as Moses has recorded. Then in his own
speech he gives us an encomium of speech in general (as though some one
wished to disparage it), and after his eminently abusive and bombastic
conglomeration of words, he says that, by a law and rule of His
providence, God has combined the transmission of words with our
knowledge and use of things necessary for our service; and after pouring
forth twaddle of this kind in the profundity of his slumbers, he passes
on in his discourse to his irresistible and unanswerable argument. I
will not state it in so many words, but simply give the drift of it. We
are not, he says, to ascribe the invention of words to poets, who are
much mistaken in their notions of God. What a generous concession does
he make to God in investing Him with the inventions of the poetic
faculty, so that <span id="page_CCXCII">p. CCXCII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCII"></span>God may thereby seem to men more
sublime and august, when the disciples of Eunomius believe that such
expressions as those used by Homer for “side-ways,” “rang out,” “aside,”
“mix <span id="fr_1170"></span>[1172](#fn_1170) ,” “clung to his hand,”
“hissed,” “thumped,” “rattled,” “clashed,” “rang terribly,” “twanged,”
“shouted,” “pondered,” and many others, are not used by poets by a
certain arbitrary licence, but that they introduce them into their poems
by some mysterious initiation from God! Let this, too, be passed over,
and withal that clever and irresistible attempt, that it is not in our
power to quote Scriptural instances of holy men who have invented new
terms. Now if human nature had been imperfect up to the time of such
men’s appearance, and not as yet completed by the gift of reason, it
would have been well for them to seek that the deficiency might be
supplied. But if from the very first man’s nature existed self-sufficing
and complete for all purposes of reason and thought, why should any one,
in order to establish this doctrine of conception, humour them so far as
to seek for instances where holy men initiated sounds or names? Or, if
we cannot adduce any instances, why should any one regard it as a
sufficient proof that such and such syllables and words were appointed
by God Himself?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p190"></span>But, says he, since God condescends to
commune with His servants, we may consequently suppose that from the
very beginning He enacted words appropriate to things. What, then, is
our answer? We account for God’s willingness to admit men to communion
with Himself by His love towards mankind. But since that which is by
nature finite cannot rise above its prescribed limits, or lay hold of
the superior nature of the Most High, on this account He, bringing His
power, so full of love for humanity, down to the level of human
weakness, so far as it was possible for us to receive it, bestowed on us
this helpful gift of grace. For as by Divine dispensation the sun,
tempering the intensity of his full beams with the intervening air,
pours down light as well as heat on those who receive his rays, being
himself unapproachable by reason of the weakness of our nature, so the
Divine power, after the manner of the illustration I have used, though
exalted far above our nature and inaccessible to all approach, like a
tender mother who joins in the inarticulate utterances of her babe,
gives to our human nature what it is capable of receiving; and thus in
the various manifestations of God to man He both adapts Himself to man
and speaks in human language, and assumes wrath, and pity, and such-like
emotions, so that through feelings corresponding to our own our
infantile life might be led as by hand, and lay hold of the Divine
nature by means of the words which His foresight has given. For that it
is irreverent to imagine that God is subject to any passion such as we
see in respect to pleasure, or pity, or anger, no one will deny who has
thought at all about the truth of things. And yet the Lord is said to
take pleasure in His servants, and to be angry with the backsliding
people, and, again, to have mercy on whom He will have mercy, and to
show compassion—the word teaching us in each of these expressions that
God’s providence helps our infirmity by using our own idioms of speech,
so that such as are inclined to sin may be restrained from committing it
by fear of punishment, and that those who are overtaken by it may not
despair of return by the way of repentance when they see God’s mercy,
while those who are walking uprightly and strictly may yet more adorn
their life with virtue, as knowing that by their own life they rejoice
Him Whose eyes are over the righteous. But just as we cannot call a man
deaf who converses with a deaf man by means of signs,—his only way of
hearing,—so we must not suppose speech in God because of His employing
it by way of accommodation in addressing man. For we ourselves are
accustomed to direct brute beasts by clucking and whistling and the
like, and yet this, by which we reach their ears, is not our language,
but we use our natural speech in talking to one another, while, in
regard to cattle, some suitable noise or sound accompanied with gesture
is sufficient for all purposes of communication.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p191"></span>But our pious opponent will not allow
of God’s using our language, because of our proneness to evil, shutting
his eyes (good man!) to the fact that for our sakes He did not refuse to
be made sin and a curse. Such is the superabundance of His love for man,
that He voluntarily came to prove not only our good, but our evil. And
if He was partaker in our evil, why should He refuse to be partaker in
speech, the noblest of our gifts? But he advances David in his support,
and declares that he said that names were imposed on things by God,
because it is thus written, “He telleth the number of the stars; He
calleth them all by their names <span
id="fr_1171"></span>[1173](#fn_1171) .” But I think it must be obvious
to every man of sense that what is thus said of the stars has nothing
whatever to do with the subject. Since, however, it is not improbable
that some may unwarily give their assent to his statement, I will
briefly discuss the point. Holy Scripture often<span
id="page_CCXCIII">p. CCXCIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCIII"></span>times is wont to attribute
expressions to God such that they seem quite accordant with our own,
*e.g.* “The Lord was wroth, and it repented Him because of their
sins <span id="fr_1172"></span>[1174](#fn_1172) ”; and again, “He
repented that He had anointed Saul king <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1175](#fn_1173) ”; and again, “The Lord awaked as
one out of sleep <span id="fr_1174"></span>[1176](#fn_1174) ”; and
besides this, it makes mention of His sitting, and standing, and moving,
and the like, which are not as a fact connected with God, but are not
without their use as an accommodation to those who are under teaching.
For in the case of the too unbridled, a show of anger restrains them by
fear. And to those who need the medicine of repentance, it says that the
Lord repenteth along with them of the evil, and those who grow insolent
through prosperity it warns, by God’s repentance in respect to Saul,
that their good fortune is no certain possession, though it seem to come
from God. To those who are not engulfed by their sinful fall, but who
have risen from a life of vanity as from sleep, it says that God arises
out of sleep. To those who steadfastly take their stand upon
righteousness,—that He stands. To those who are seated in
righteousness,—that He sits. And again, in the case of those who have
moved from their steadfastness in righteousness,—that He moves or walks;
as, in the case of Adam, the sacred history records God’s walking in the
garden in the cool of the day <span id="fr_1175"></span>[1177](#fn_1175)
, signifying thereby the fall of the first man into darkness, and, by
the moving, his weakness and instability in regard to righteousness.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p197"></span>But most people, perhaps, will think
this too far removed from the scope of our present inquiry. This,
however, no one will regard as out of keeping with our subject; the fact
that many think that what is incomprehensible to themselves is equally
incomprehensible to God, and that whatever escapes their own cognizance
is also beyond the power of His. Now since we make number the measure of
quantity, and number is nothing else than a combination of units growing
into multitude in a complex way (for the decad is a unit brought to that
value by the composition of units, and again the hundred is a unit
composed of decads, and in like manner the thousand is another unit, and
so in due proportion the myriad is another by a multiplication, the one
being made up to its value by thousands, the other by hundreds, by
assigning all which to their underlying class we make signs of the
quantity of the things numbered), accordingly, in order that we may be
taught by Holy Scripture that nothing is unknown to God, it tells us
that the multitude of the stars is numbered by Him, not that their
numbering takes place as I have described, (for who is so simple as to
think that God takes knowledge of things by odd and even, and that by
putting units together He makes up the total of the collective
quantity?) but, since in our own case the exact knowledge of quantity is
obtained by number, in order, I say, that we might be taught in respect
to God that all things are comprehended by the knowledge of His wisdom,
and that nothing escapes His minute cognizance, on this account it
represents God as “numbering the stars,” counselling us by these words
to understand this, viz. that we must not imagine God to take note of
things by the measure of human knowledge, but that all things, however
incomprehensible and above human understanding, are embraced by the
knowledge of the wisdom of God. For as the stars on account of their
multitude escape numbering, as far as our human conception is concerned,
Holy Scripture, teaching the whole from the part, in saying that they
are numbered by God attests that not one of the things unknown to us
escapes the knowledge of God. And therefore it says, “Who telleth the
multitude of the stars,” of course not meaning that He did not know
their number beforehand; for how should He be ignorant of what He
Himself created, seeing that the Ruler of the Universe could not be
ignorant of that which is comprehended in His power; which includes the
worlds in its embrace? Why, then, should He number what He knows? For to
measure quantity by number is the part of those who want information.
But He Who knew all things before they were created needs not number as
His informant. But when David says that He “numbers the stars,” it is
evident that the Scripture descends to such language in accordance with
our understanding, to teach us emblematically that the things which we
know not are accurately known to God. As, then, He is said to number,
though needing no arithmetical process to arrive at the knowledge of
things created, so also the Prophet tells us that He calleth them all by
their names, not meaning, I imagine, that He does so by any vocal
utterance. For verily such language would result in a conception
strangely unworthy of God, if it meant that these names in common use
among ourselves were applied to the stars by God. For, should any one
allow that these were so applied by God, it must follow that the names
of the idol gods of Greece were applied by Him also to the stars, and we
must regard as true all the tales from mythological history that are
told about those starry names, as though God Himself sanctioned their
utterance. Thus the distribution among the Greek idols of the seven
planets contained in the heavens will exempt from blame those who have
erred <span id="page_CCXCIV">p. CCXCIV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCIV"></span>in respect to them, if men be
persuaded that such an arrangement was God’s. Thus the fables of Orion
and the Scorpion will be believed, and the legends respecting the ship
Argo, and the Swan, and the Eagle, and the Dog, and the mythical story
of Ariadne’s crown. Moreover it will pave the way for supposing God to
be the inventor of the names in the zodiacal circle, devised after some
fancied resemblance in the constellations, if Eunomius is right in
supposing that David said that these names were given them by God.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p198"></span>Since, then, it is monstrous to regard
God as the inventor of such names, lest the names even of these idol
gods should seem to have had their origin from God, it will be well not
to receive what has been said without inquiry, but to get to the meaning
in this case also after the analogy of those things of which number
informs us. Well, since it attests the accuracy of our knowledge, when
we call one familiar to us by his name, we are here taught that He Who
embraces the Universe in His knowledge not only comprehends the total of
the aggregate quantity, but has an exact knowledge of the units also
that compose it. And therefore the Scripture says not only that He
“telleth the number of the stars,” but that “He calleth them all by
their names,” which means that His accurate knowledge extends to the
minutest of them, and that He knows each particular respecting them,
just as a man knows one who is familiar to him by name. And if any one
say that the names given to the stars by God are different ones, unknown
to human language, he wanders far away from the truth. For if there were
other names of stars, Holy Scripture would not have made mention of
those which are in common use among the Greeks, Esaias saying <span
id="fr_1176"></span>[1178](#fn_1176) , “Which maketh the Pleiads, and
Hesperus, and Arcturus, and the Chambers of the South,” and Job making
mention of Orion and Aseroth <span id="fr_1177"></span>[1179](#fn_1177)
; so that from this it is clear that Holy Scripture employs for our
instruction such words as are in common use. Thus we hear in Job of
Amalthea’s horn <span id="fr_1178"></span>[1180](#fn_1178) , and in
Esaias of the Sirens <span id="fr_1179"></span>[1181](#fn_1179) , the
former thus naming plenty after the conceit of the Greeks, the latter
representing the pleasure derived from hearing, by the figure of the
Sirens. As, then, in these cases the inspired word has made use of names
drawn from mythological fables, with a view to the advantage of the
hearers, so here it freely makes use of the appellations given to the
stars by human fancy, teaching us that all things whatsoever that are
named among men have their origin from God—the things, not their names.
For it does not say Who nameth, but “Who maketh Pleiad, and Hesperus,
and Arcturus.” I think, then, it has been sufficiently shown in what I
have said that David supports our opinion, in teaching us by this
utterance, not that God gives the stars their names, but that He has an
exact knowledge of them, after the fashion of men, who have the most
certain knowledge of those whom they are able, through long familiarity,
to call by their names.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p207"></span>And if we set forth the opinion of
most commentators on these words of the Psalmist, that of Eunomius
regarding them will be still more convicted of foolishness. For those
who have most carefully searched out the sense of the inspired
Scripture, declare that not all the works of creation are worthy of the
Divine reckoning. For in the Gospel narratives of feeding the multitudes
in the wilderness, women and children are not thought worthy of
enumeration. And in the account of the Exodus of the children of Israel,
those only are enumerated in the roll who were of age to bear arms
against their enemies, and to do deeds of valour. For not all names of
things are fit to be pronounced by the Divine lips, but the enumeration
is only for that which is pure and heavenly, which, by the loftiness of
its state remaining pure from all admixture with darkness, is called a
star, and the naming is only for that which, for the same reason, is
worthy to be registered in the Divine tablets. For of His adversaries He
says, “I will not take up their names into my lips <span
id="fr_1180"></span>[1182](#fn_1180) .”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p209"></span>But the names which the Lord gives to
such stars we may plainly learn from the prophecy of Esaias, which says,
“I have called thee by thy name; thou art Mine <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1183](#fn_1181) .” So that if a man makes himself
God’s possession, his act becomes <span id="page_CCXCV">p. CCXCV</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCV"></span>his name. But be this as the
reader pleases. Eunomius, however, adds to his previous statement that
the beginnings of creation testify to the fact, that names were given by
God to the things which He created; but I think that it would be
superfluous to repeat what I have already sufficiently set forth as the
result of my investigations; and he may put his own arbitrary
interpretation on the word Adam, which, the Apostle tells us, points
prophetically to Christ <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1184](#fn_1182) . For
no one can be so infatuated, when Paul, by the power of the Spirit, has
revealed to us the hidden mysteries, as to count Eunomius a more
trustworthy interpreter of Divine things—a man who openly impugns the
words of the inspired testimony, and who by his false interpretation of
the word would fain prove that the various kinds of animals were not
named by Adam. We shall do well, also, to pass over his insolent
expressions, and tasteless vulgarity, and foul and disgusting tongue,
with its accustomed fluency going on about our Master as “a sower of
tares,” and about “a deceptive show <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1185](#fn_1183) of grain, and the blight of
Valentinus, and his grain piled in our Master’s mind”: and we will veil
in silence the rest of his unsavoury talk as we veil putrefying corpses
in the ground, that the stench may not prove injurious to many. Rather
let us proceed to what remains for us to say. For once more he adduces a
dictum of our Master <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1186](#fn_1184) , to
this effect. “We call God indestructible and ungenerate, applying these
words from different points of view. For when we look to the ages that
are past, finding the life of God transcending all limitation, we call
Him ungenerate. But when we turn our thoughts to the ages that are yet
to come, Him Who is infinite, illimitable, and without end, we call
indestructible. As, then, that which has no end of life is
indestructible, so that which has no beginning we call ungenerate,
representing things so by the faculty of conception.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p214"></span>I will pass over, then, the abuse with
which he has prefaced his discussion of these matters, as when he uses
such terms as “alteration of seed,” and “teacher of sowing,” and
“illogical censure,” and whatever other aspersions he ventures on with
his foul tongue. Let us rather turn to the point which he tries to
establish by his calumnious accusation. He promises to convict us of
saying that God is not by His nature indestructible. But we hold only
such things foreign to His nature as may be added to or subtracted from
it. But, in the case of things without which the subject is incapable of
being conceived by the mind, how can any one be open to the charge of
separating His nature from itself? If, then, the indestructibility which
we ascribe to God were adventitious, and did not always belong to Him,
or might cease to belong to Him, he might be justified in his calumnious
attack. But if it is always the same, and our contention is, that God is
always what He is, and that He receives nothing by way of increase or
addition of properties, but continues always in whatsoever is conceived
and called good, why should we be slanderously accused of not ascribing
indestructibility to Him as of His essential nature? But he pretends
that he grounds his accusation on the words of Basil which I have
already quoted, as though we *bestowed* indestructibility on God by
reference to the ages. Now if our statement were put forward by
ourselves, our defence might perhaps seem open to suspicion, as if we
now wanted to amend or justify any questionable expressions of ours. But
since our statements are taken from the lips of an adversary, what
stronger demonstration could we have of their truth than the evidence of
our opponents themselves? How is it, then, with the statement which
Eunomius lays hold of with a view to our prejudice? When, he says, we
turn our thoughts to the ages that are yet to be, we speak of the
infinite, and illimitable, and unending, as indestructible. Does
Eunomius count such ascription as identical with bestowing? Yet who is
such a stranger to existing usage as to be ignorant of the proper
meaning of these expressions? For that man *bestows* who possesses
something which another has not, while that man *ascribes* who
designates with a name what another has. How is it, then, that our
instructor in truth is not ashamed of his plainly calumnious
impeachment? But as those who, from some disease, are bereft of sight,
are unseemly in their behaviour before the eyes of the seeing, supposing
that what is not seen by themselves is a thing unobserved also by those
whose sight is unimpaired, just such is the case of our sharp-sighted
and quick-witted opponent, who supposes his hearers to be afflicted with
the same blindness to the truth as himself. And who is so foolish as not
to compare the words which he calumniously assails with his charge
itself, and by reading them side by side to detect the malice of the
writer? Our statement ascribes indestructibility; he charges it with
bestowing indestructibility. What has this to do with our statement?
Every man has a right to be judged by his own deeds, not to be blamed
<span id="page_CCXCVI">p. CCXCVI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCVI"></span>for those of others; and in this
present case, while he accuses us, and points his bitterness at us, in
truth he is condemning no one but himself. For if it is reprehensible to
bestow indestructibility on God, and this is done by no one but himself,
is not our slanderer his own accuser, assailing his own statements and
not ours? And with regard to the term indestructibility, we assert that
as the life which is endless is rightly called indestructible, so that
which is without beginning is rightly called ungenerate. And yet
Eunomius says that we lend Him the primacy over all created things
simply by reference to the ages.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p215"></span>I pass in silence his blasphemy in
reducing God the Only-begotten to a level with all created things, and,
in a word, allowing to the Son of God no higher honour than theirs.
Still, for the sake of my more intelligent hearers, I will here give an
instance of his insensate malice. Basil, he says, lends God the primacy
over all things by reference to the ages. What unintelligible nonsense
is this! Man is made God’s patron, and gives to God a primacy owing to
the ages! What is this vain flourish of baseless expressions, seeing
that our Master simply says that whatever in the Divine essence
transcends the measurable distances of the ages in either direction is
called by certain distinctive names, in the case of Him Who, as saith
the Apostle, hath neither beginning of days nor end of life <span
id="fr_1185"></span>[1187](#fn_1185) , in order that the distinction of
the conception might be marked by distinction in the names. And yet on
this account Eunomius has the effrontery to write, that to call that
which is anterior to all beginning ungenerate, and again that which is
circumscribed by no limit, immortal and indestructible, is a bestowing
or lending on our part, and other nonsense of the kind. Moreover, he
says that we divide the ages into two parts, as if he had not read the
words he quoted, or as if he were addressing those who had forgotten his
own previous statements. For what says our Master? “If we look at the
time before the Creation, and if passing in thought through the ages we
reflect on the infinitude of the Eternal Life, we signify the thought by
the term ungenerate. And if we turn our thoughts to what follows, and
consider the being of God as extending beyond all ages, we interpret the
thought by the word endless or indestructible.” Well, how does such an
account sever the ages in twain, if by such possible words and names we
signify that eternity of God which is equally observable from every
point of view, in all things the same, unbroken in continuity? For
seeing that human life, moving from stage to stage, advances in its
progress from a beginning to an end, and our life here is divided
between that which is past and that which is expected, so that the one
is the subject of hope, the other of memory; on this account, as, in
relation to ourselves, we apprehend a past and a future in this
measurable extent, so also we apply the thought, though incorrectly, to
the transcendent nature of God; not of course that God in His own
existence leaves any interval behind, or passes on afresh to something
that lies before, but because our intellect can only conceive things
according to our nature, and measures the eternal by a past and a
future, where neither the past precludes the march of thought to the
illimitable and infinite, nor the future tells us of any pause or limit
of His endless life. If, then, it is thus that we think and speak, why
does he keep taunting us with dividing the ages? Unless, indeed,
Eunomius would maintain that Holy Scripture does so too, signifying as
it does by the same idea the infinity of the Divine existence; David,
for example, making mention of the “kingdom from everlasting,” and
Moses, speaking of the kingdom of God as “extending beyond all ages,” so
that we are taught by both that every duration conceivable is environed
by the Divine nature, bounded on all sides by the infinity of Him Who
holds the universe in His embrace. For Moses, looking to the future,
says that “He reigneth from generation to generation for evermore.” And
great David, turning his thought backward to the past, says, “God is our
King before the ages <span id="fr_1186"></span>[1188](#fn_1186) ,” and
again, “God, Who was before the ages, shall hear us.” But Eunomius, in
his cleverness taking leave of such guides as these, says that we talk
of the life that is without beginning as one, and of that which is
without end as quite another, and again, of diversities of sundry ages,
effecting by their own diversity a separation in our idea of God. But
that our controversy may not grow to a tedious length, we will add,
without criticism or comment, the outcome of Eunomius’ labours on the
subject, well fitted as they are by his industry displayed in the cause
of error to render the truth yet more evident to the eyes of the
discerning.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p218"></span>For, proceeding with his discourse, he
asks us what we mean by the ages. And yet we ourselves might more
reasonably put such questions to him. For it is he who professes to know
the essence of God, defining on his own authority what is unapproachable
and incomprehensible by man. Let him, then, give us a scientific lecture
on the nature of the ages, boasting as he does of his familiarity with
tran<span id="page_CCXCVII">p. CCXCVII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCVII"></span>scendental things, and let him not
so fiercely brandish over us, poor ignorant individuals, the double
danger of the dilemma involved in our reply, telling us that, whether we
hold this or that view of the ages, the result must be in either case an
absurdity. For if (says he) you say that they are eternal, you will be
Greeks, and Valentinians <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1189](#fn_1187) ,
and uninstructed <span id="fr_1188"></span>[1190](#fn_1188) : and if you
say that they are generate, you will no longer be able to ascribe
ungeneracy to God. What a terribly unanswerable attack! If, O Eunomius,
something is held to be generate, we no longer hold the doctrine of the
Divine ungeneracy! And pray what has become of your subtle distinctions
between generacy and ungeneracy, by which you sought to establish the
dissimilarity of the essence of the Son from that of the Father? For it
seems from what we are now being taught that the Father is not
dissimilar in essence when contemplated in respect of generacy, but
that, in fact, if we hold His ungeneracy, we reduce Him to
non-existence; since “if we speak of the ages as generate, we are driven
to relinquish the Ungenerate.” But let us examine the force of the
argument, by which he would compel us to allow this absurdity. When,
says he, those things by comparison with which God is without beginning
are non-existent, He Who is compared with them must be non-existent
also. What a sturdy and overpowering grip is this! How tightly has this
wrestler got us by the waist in his inextricable grasp! He says that
God’s ungeneracy is added to Him through comparison with the ages. By
whom is it so added? Who is there that says that to Him Who hath no
beginning ungeneracy is added as an acquisition through comparison with
something else? Neither such a word nor such a sense will be found in
any writings of ours. Our words indeed carry their own justification,
and contain nothing like what is alleged against us; and of the meaning
of what is said, who can be a more trustworthy interpreter than he who
said it? Have not we, then, the better title to say what we mean when we
speak of the life of God as extending beyond the ages? And what we say
is what we have said already in our previous writings. But, says he,
comparison with the ages being impossible, it is impossible that any
addition should accrue from it to God, meaning of course that ungeneracy
is an addition. Let him tell us by whom such an addition has been made.
If by himself, he becomes simply ridiculous in laying his own folly to
our charge: if by us, let him quote our words, and then we will admit
the force of his accusation.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p221"></span>But I think we must pass over this and
all that follows. For it is the mere trifling of children who amuse
themselves with beginning to build houses in sand. For having composed a
portion of a paragraph, and not yet brought it to a conclusion, he shows
that the same life is without beginning and without end, thus in his
eagerness working out our own conclusion. For this is just what we say;
that the Divine life is one and continuous in itself, infinite and
eternal, in no wise bounded by any limit to its infinity. Thus far our
opponent devotes his labours and exertions to the truth as we represent
it, showing that the same life is on no side limited, whether we look at
that part of it which was before the ages, or at that which succeeds
them. But in his next remarks he returns to his old confusion. For after
saying that the same life is without beginning and without end, leaving
the subject of life, and ranging all the ideas we entertain about the
Divine life under one head, he unifies everything. If, says he, the life
is without beginning and without end, ungenerate and indestructible,
then indestructibility and ungeneracy will be the same thing, as will
also the being without beginning and without end. And to this he adds
the aid of arguments. It is not possible, he says, for the life to be
one, unless indestructibility and ungeneracy are identical terms. An
admirable “addition” on the part of our friend. It would seem, then,
that we may hold the same language in regard to righteousness, wisdom,
power, goodness, and all such attributes of God. Let, then, no word have
a meaning peculiar to itself, but let one signification underlie every
word in a list, and one form of description serve for the definition of
all. If you are asked to define the word judge, answer with the
interpretation of “ungeneracy”; if to define justice, be ready with “the
incorporeal” as your answer. If asked to define incorruptibility, say
that it has the same meaning as mercy or judgment. Thus let all God’s
attributes be convertible terms, there being no special signification to
distinguish one from another. But if Eunomius thus prescribes, why do
the Scriptures vainly assign various names to the Divine nature, calling
God a Judge, righteous, powerful, long-suffering, true, merciful and so
on? For if none of these titles is to be understood in any special or
peculiar sense, but, owing to this confusion in their meaning, they are
all mixed up together, it would be useless to employ so <span
id="page_CCXCVIII">p. CCXCVIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCVIII"></span>many words for the same thing,
there being no difference of meaning to distinguish them from one
another. But who is so much out of his wits as not to know that, while
the Divine nature, whatever it is in its essence, is simple, uniform,
and incomposite, and that it cannot be viewed under any form of complex
formation, the human mind, grovelling on earth, and buried in this life
on earth, in its inability to behold clearly the object of its search,
feels after the unutterable Being in divers and many-sided ways, and
never chases the mystery in the light of one idea alone. Our grasping of
Him would indeed be easy, if there lay before us one single assigned
path to the knowledge of God: but as it is, from the skill apparent in
the Universe, we get the idea of skill in the Ruler of that Universe,
from the large scale of the wonders worked we get the impression of His
Power; and from our belief that this Universe depends on Him, we get an
indication that there is no cause whatever of His existence; and again,
when we see the execrable character of evil, we grasp His own
unalterable pureness as regards this: when we consider death’s
dissolution to be the worst of ills, we give the name of Immortal and
Indissoluble at once to Him Who is removed from every conception of that
kind: not that we split up the subject of such attributes along with
them, but believing that this thing we think of, whatever it be in
substance, is One, we still conceive that it has something in common
with all these ideas. For these terms are not set against each other in
the way of opposites, as if, the one existing there, the other could not
co-exist in the same subject (as, for instance, it is impossible that
life and death should be thought of in the same subject); but the force
of each of the terms used in connection with the Divine Being is such
that, even though it has a peculiar significance of its own, it implies
no opposition to the term associated with it. What opposition, for
instance, is there between “incorporeal” and “just,” even though the
words do not coincide in meaning: and what hostility is there between
goodness and invisibility? So, too, the eternity of the Divine Life,
though represented under the double name and idea of “the unending” and
“the unbeginning,” is not cut in two by this difference of name; nor yet
is the one name the same in meaning as the other; the one points to the
absence of beginning, the other to the absence of end, and yet there is
no division produced in the subject by this difference in the actual
terms applied to it.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p222"></span>Such is our position; our adversary’s,
with regard to the precise meaning of this term <span
id="fr_1189"></span>[1191](#fn_1189) , is such as can derive no help
from any reasonings; he only spits forth at random about it these
strangely unmeaning and bombastic expressions <span
id="fr_1190"></span>[1192](#fn_1190) , in the framework of his sentences
and periods. But the upshot of all he says is this; that there is no
difference in the meaning of the most varied names. But we must most
certainly, as it seems to me, quote this passage of his word for word,
lest we be thought to be calumniously charging him with something that
does not belong to him. “True expressions,” he says, “derive their
precision from the subject realities which they indicate; different
expressions are applied to different realities, the same to the same:
and so one or other of these two things must of necessity be held:
either that the reality indicated is different (if the expressions are),
or else that the indicating expressions are not different.” With these
and many other such-like words, he proceeds to effect the object he has
before him, excluding from the expression certain relations and
affinities <span id="fr_1191"></span>[1193](#fn_1191) , such as species,
proportion, part, time, manner: in order that by the withdrawal of all
these “Ungeneracy” may become indicative of the substance of God. His
process of proof is in the following manner (I will express his idea in
my own words). The life, he says, is not a different thing from the
substance; no addition may be thought of in connection with a simple
being, by dividing our conception of him into a communicating and
communicated side; but whatever the life may be, that very thing, he
insists, is the substance. Here his philosophy is excellent; no thinking
person would gainsay this. But how does he arrive at his contemplated
conclusion, when he says, “when we mean the unbeginning, we mean the
life, and truth compels us by this last to mean the substance”? The
ungenerate, then, according to him is expressive of the very substance
of God. We, on the other hand, while we agree that the life of God was
not given by another, which is the meaning of “unbeginning,” think that
the belief that the idea expressed by the words “not generated” is the
substance of God is a madman’s only. Who indeed can be so beside himself
as to declare the absence of any generation to be the definition of that
substance (for as generation is involved in the generate, so is the
absence of generation in the ungenerate)? Ungeneracy indicates that
which is not in the Father; so how shall we allow the indication of that
which is absent to be His substance? Helping himself to that which
neither we nor any logical conclusion from the premises allows <span
id="page_CCXCIX">p. CCXCIX</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCXCIX"></span>him, he lays it down that God’s
Ungeneracy is expressive of God’s life. But to make quite plain his
delusion upon this subject, let us look at it in the following way; I
mean, let us examine whether, by employing the same method by which he,
in the case of the Father, has brought the definition of the substance
to ungeneracy, we may not equally bring the substance of the Son to
ungeneracy.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p226"></span>He says, “The Life that is the same,
and thoroughly single, must have one and the same outward expression for
it, even though in mere names, and manner, and order it may seem to
vary. For true expressions derive their precision from the subject
realities which they indicate; different expressions are applied to
different realities, the same to the same; and so one or other of these
two things must of necessity be held; either that the reality indicated
is quite different (if the expressions are), or else that the indicating
expressions are not different;” and there is in this case no other
subject reality besides the life of the Son, “for one either to rest an
idea upon, or to cast a different expression upon.” Is there, I may ask,
any unfitness in the words quoted, which would prevent them being
rightly spoken or written about the Only-begotten? Is not the Son
Himself also a “Life thoroughly single”? Is there not for Him also “one
and the same” befitting “expression,” “though in mere names, and manner,
and order He may seem to vary”? Must not, for Him also, “one or other of
these two things be held” fixed, “either that the reality indicated is
quite different, or else that the indicating expressions are not
different,” there being no other subject reality, besides his life, “for
one either to rest an idea upon, or to cast a different expression
upon”? We mix up nothing here with what Eunomius has said about the
Father; we have only passed from the same accepted premise to the same
conclusion as he did, merely inserting the Son’s name instead. If, then,
the Son too is a single life, unadulterated, removed from every sort of
compositeness or complication, and there is no subject reality besides
this life of the Son (for how in that which is simple can the mixture of
anything foreign be suspected? what we have to think of along with
something else is no longer simple), and if the Father’s substance also
is a single life, and of this single life, by virtue of its very life
and its very singleness, there are no differences, no increase or
decrease in quantity or quality in it creating any variation, it needs
must be that things thus coinciding in idea should be called by the same
appellation also. If, that is, the thing that is detected both in the
Father and the Son, I mean the singleness of life, is one, the very idea
of singleness excluding, as we have said, any variation, it needs must
be that the name befitting the one should be attached to the other also.
For as that which reasons, and is mortal, and is capable of thought and
knowledge, is called “man” equally in the case of Adam and of Abel, and
this name of the nature is not altered either by the fact that Abel
passed into existence by generation, or by the fact that Adam did so
without generation, so, if the simplicity <span
id="fr_1192"></span>[1194](#fn_1192) and incompositeness of the Father’s
life has ungeneracy for its name, in like manner for the Son’s life the
same idea will necessarily have to be attached to the same utterance,
if, as Eunomius says, “one or other of these two things must of
necessity be held; either that the reality indicated is quite different,
or else that the indicating expressions are not different.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p228"></span>But why do we linger over these
follies, when we ought rather to put Eunomius’ book itself into the
hands of the studious, and so, apart from any examination of it, to
prove at once to the discerning, not only the blasphemy of his opinion,
but also the nervelessness of his style <span
id="fr_1193"></span>[1195](#fn_1193) ? While in various ways, not going
upon our apprehension of it, but following his own fancy, he
misinterprets the word Conception, just as in a night-battle nobody can
distinguish friend and foe, he does not understand that he is stabbing
his own doctrine with the very weapons he thinks he is turning upon us.
For the point in which he thinks he is most removed from the church of
the orthodox is this; that he attempts to prove that God became Father
at some later time, and that the appellation of Fatherhood is later than
all those other names which attach to Him; for that He was called Father
from that moment in which He purposed in Himself to become, and did
become, Father. Well, then, since in this treatise he is for proving
that all the names applied to the Divine Nature coincide with each
other, and that there is no difference whatever between them, and since
one amongst these applied names is Father (for as God is indestructible
and eternal, so also He is Father), we must either sanction, in the case
of this term also, the opinion he holds about the rest, and so
contravene his former position, seeing that the idea of Fatherhood is
found to be involved in any of these other terms (for it is plain that
if the meaning of indestructible and Father is exactly the same, He will
be believed to be, just as He is always indestructible, so likewise
always Father, there being one single signification, he says, in all
these names): or else, if he fears thus to testify to the eternal <span
id="page_CCC">p. CCC</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCC"></span>Fatherhood of God, he must perforce
abandon his whole argument, and own that each of these names has a
meaning peculiar to itself; and thus all this nonsense of his about the
Divine names bursts like a bubble, and vanishes like smoke.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p230"></span>But if he should still answer with
regard to this opposition (of the Divine names), that it is only the
term Father, and the term Creator, that are applied to God as expressing
production, both words being so applied, as he says, because of an
operation, then he will cut short our long discussion of this subject,
by thus conceding what it would have required a laborious argument on
our part to prove. For if the word Father and the word Creator have the
same meaning (for both arise from an operation), one of the things
signified is exactly equivalent to the other, since if the signification
is the same, the subjects cannot be different. If, then, He is called
both Father and Creator because of an operation, it is quite allowable
to interchange the names, and to turn one into the other and say that
God is Creator of the Son, and Father of a stone, seeing that the term
Father is to be devoid of any meaning of essential relation <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[1196](#fn_1194) . Well, the monstrous conclusion
that is hereby proved cannot remain doubtful to those who reflect. For
as it is absurd to deem a stone, or anything else that exists by
creation, Divine, it must be agreed that there is no Divinity to be
recognized in the Only-begotten either, when that one identical meaning
of an operation, by which God is called both Father and Creator,
assigns, according to Eunomius, both these terms to Him. But let us hold
to the question before us. He abuses our assertion that our knowledge of
God is formed by contributions of terms applied to different ideas, and
says that the proof of His simplicity is destroyed by us so, since He
must partake of the elements signified by each term, and only by virtue
of a share in them can completely fill out His essence. Here I write in
my own language, curtailing his wearisome prolixity; and in answer to
his foolish and nerveless redundancy no sensible person, I think, would
make any reply, except as regards his charging us with “senselessness.”
Now if anything of that description had been said by us, we ought of
course to retract it if it was foolishly worded, or, if there was any
doubt as to its meaning, to put an irreproachable interpretation upon
it. But we have not said anything of the kind, any more than the
consequences of our words lead the mind to any such necessity. Why,
then, linger on that to which all assent, and weary the reader by
prolonging the argument? Who is really so devoid of reflection as to
imagine, when he hears that our orthodox conceptions of the Deity are
gathered from various ways of thinking of Him, that the Deity is
composed of these various elements, or completes His actual fulness by
participating in anything at all? A man, say, has made discoveries in
geometry, and this same man, let us suppose, has made discoveries also
in astronomy, and in medicine as well, and grammar, and agriculture, and
sciences of that kind. Will it follow, because there are these various
names of sciences viewed in connection with one single soul, that that
single soul is to be considered a composite soul? Yet there is a very
great difference in meaning between medicine and astronomy; and grammar
means nothing in common with geometry, or seamanship with agriculture.
Nevertheless it is within the bounds of possibility that the idea of
each of these sciences should be associated with one soul, without that
soul thereby becoming composite, or, on the other hand, without all
those terms for sciences blending into one meaning. If, then, the human
mind, with all such terms applied to it, is not injured as regards its
simplicity, how can any one imagine that the Deity, when He is called
wise, and just, and good, and eternal, and all the other Divine names,
must, unless all these names are made to mean one thing, become of many
parts, or take a share of all these to make up the perfection of His
nature?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p232"></span>But let us examine a still more
vehement charge of his against us; it is this: “If one must proceed to
say something harsher still, he does not even keep the Divine substance
pure and unadulterated from inferior and contradictory elements.” This
is the charge, but the proof of it is,—what? Observe the strong
professional attack! “If He is imperishable only by reason of the
unending in His Life, and ungenerate only by reason of the unbeginning,
then wherein He is not imperishable He is perishable, and wherein He is
not ungenerate He is generated.” Then returning to the charge, he
repeats, “He will then be, as unbeginning, at once ungenerate and
perishable, and, as unending, at once imperishable and generated.” Such
is his “harsher” statement, which, according to his threat, he has
discharged against us, to prove that we say that the Divine substance is
mingled with contradictory and even inferior elements. However, I think
it is plain to all who keep unimpaired within themselves the power of
judging the truth, that our Master has given no handle at all, in what
he has said, to this calumniator, but that the latter has garbled it at
will, and then, playing at arguing, has drawn out this childish
sophistry. But that <span id="page_CCCI">p. CCCI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCI"></span>it may be plainer still to all my
readers, I will repeat that statement of the Master word for word, and
then confront Eunomius’ words with it. “We call the Universal Deity” (he
says) “imperishable and ungenerate, using these words with different
applications <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1197](#fn_1195) of thought; for
when we concentrate our view upon the ages behind us, we find the life
of the Deity transcending every limit, and so name Him ‘ungenerate’; but
when we turn our thoughts upon the ages to come, we call the infinite in
Him, the boundless, the absence of all end to His living,
‘imperishability.’ As, then, this endlessness is called imperishable, so
too this beginninglessness is called ungenerate; and we arrive at these
names by Conception.” Such are the Master’s words, and by them he
teaches us this: that the Divine Life is essentially single and
continuous with Itself, starting from no beginning, circumscribed by no
end; and that the intuitions which we possess regarding this Life it is
possible to make clear by words. That is, we express the never having
come from any cause by the term unbeginning or ungenerate; and we
express the not being circumscribed by any limit, and not being
destroyed by any death, by the term imperishable, or unending; and this
absence of cause, he defines, makes it right for us to speak of the
Divine life as existing ungenerately; and this being without end we are
to denote as imperishable, since anything that has ceased to exist is
necessarily in a state of annihilation, and when we hear of anything
annihilated, we at once think of the destruction of its substance. He
says then, that One Who never ceases to exist, and is a stranger to all
destruction and dissolution, is to be called imperishable.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p234"></span>What, then, does Eunomius say to this?
“If He is imperishable only by reason of the unending in His Life, and
ungenerate only by reason of the unbeginning, then wherein He is not
imperishable He is perishable, and wherein He is not ungenerate He is
generated.” Who conceded to you this, Eunomius, that the imperishability
is not to be associated with the whole life of God? Who ever divided
that Life into two parts, and then put particular names to each half of
the Life, so that to the division which the one name fitted the other
could not be said to apply? This is the result of your dialectic
sharpness; to say that the Life which has no beginning is perishable,
and that what is imperishable cannot be associated with what is
unbeginning! It is just as if, when one had said that man was rational,
as well as capable of speculation and knowledge, attaching each phrase
to the subject of them according to a different application and idea,
some one was to jeer, and to go on in the same strain, “If man is
capable of speculation and knowledge, he cannot, as regards this, be
rational, but wherein he is capable of such knowledge, he is this and
this only, and his nature does not admit of his being the other”; and
reversely, if rational were made the definition of man, he were to deny
in this case his being capable of this speculation and knowledge; for
“wherein he is rational, he is proved devoid of mind.” But if the
ridiculousness and absurdity in this case is plain to any one, neither
in that former case is it at all doubtful. When you have read the
passage from the Master, you will find that his childish sophistry will
vanish like a shadow. In our case of the definition of man, the
capability of knowledge is not hindered by the possession of reason, nor
the reason by the capability of knowledge: no more is the eternity of
the Divine Life deprived of imperishability, if it be unbeginning, or of
beginninglessness, if we recognize its imperishability. This would-be
seeker after truth, with the artifices of his dialectic shrewdness,
inserts in our argument what comes from his own repertoire; and so he
fights with himself and overthrows himself, without ever touching
anything of ours. For our position was nothing but this; that the Life
as existing without beginning is styled, by means of a fresh Conception,
as ungenerate: is styled, I say, not, is made such; and that we mark the
Life as going on into infinity with the appellation of imperishable;
mark it, I say, as such, not, make it such; and that the result is, that
while it is a property of the Divine Life, inherent in the subject, to
be infinite in both views, the thoughts associated with that subject are
expressed in this way or in that only as regards that particular term
which indicates the thought expressed. One thought associated with that
life is, that it does not exist from any cause; this is indicated by the
term “ungenerate.” Another thought about it is, that it is limitless and
endless; this is represented by the word imperishable. Thus, while the
subject remains what it is, above everything, whether name or thought,
the not being from any cause, and the not changing into the
non-existent, are signified by means of the Conception implied in the
aforesaid words.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p235"></span>What, then, out of all that we have
said, has stirred him up to this piece of childish folly, in which he
returns to the charge and repeats himself in these words: “He will,
then, be, as unbeginning, at once ungenerate and perishable, and, as
unending, at once imperishable and generated.” It is plain to any
possessing the least reflection, without our testing this logically, how
absurdly foolish it is, or rather, how con<span id="page_CCCII">p.
CCCII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCII"></span>demnably
blasphemous. By the same argument as that whereby he establishes this
union of the perishable and the unbeginning, he can make sport of any
proper and worthily conceived name for the Deity. For it is not these
two ideas only that we associate with the Divine Life, I mean, the being
without beginning, and the not admitting of dissolution; but It is
called as well immaterial and without anger, immutable and incorporeal,
invisible and formless, true and just; and there are numberless other
ways of thinking about the Divine Life, each one of which is announced
by an expressive sound with a peculiar meaning of its own. Well, to any
name—any name, I mean, expressive of some proper conception of the
Deity—it is open for us to apply this method of unnatural union devised
by Eunomius. For instance, immateriality and absence of anger are both
predicated of the Divine Life; but not with the same thought in both
cases; for by the term immaterial we convey the idea of purity from any
mixture with matter, and by the term “without anger” the strangeness to
any emotion of anger. Now in all probability Eunomius will run
trippingly over all this, and have his dance, just as before, upon our
words. Stringing together his absurdities in the same way, he will say:
“If wherein He is separated from all mixture with matter He is called
immaterial, in this respect He will not be without anger; and if by
reason of His not indulging in anger He is without anger, it is
impossible to attribute to him immateriality, but logic will compel us
to admit that, in so far as He is exempt from matter, He is both
immaterial and wrathful;” and so you will find the same to be the case
in respect to his other attributes. And if you like we will propound
another pairing of the same, *i.e.* His immutability and His
incorporeality. For both these terms being used of the Divine Life in a
distinct sense, in their case also Eunomius’ skill will embellish the
same absurdity. For if His being always as He is is signified by the
term immutable, and if the term incorporeal represents the spirituality
of His essence, Eunomius will certainly say the same here also, that the
terms are irreconcilable, and alien to each other, and that the notions
which our minds attach to them have no point of contact one with the
other; for insofar as God is always the same He is immutable, but not
incorporeal; and in regard to the spirituality and formlessness of His
essence, while He possesses attributes of incorporeality, He is not
immutable; so that it happens that when immutability is considered with
respect to the Divine Life, along with that immutability it is
established that It is corporeal; but if spirituality is the object of
search, you prove that It is at once incorporeal and mutable.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p236"></span>Such are the clever discoveries of
Eunomius against the truth. For what need is there to go through all his
argument with trifling prolixity? For in every instance you may see an
attempt to establish the same futility. For instance, by an implication
such as that above, what is true and what is just will be found opposed
to each other; for there is a difference in meaning between truth and
justice. So that by a parity of reasoning Eunomius will say about these
also, that truth is not injustice, and that justice is absent from
truth; and it will happen that, when in respect of God we think of His
being alien to injustice, the Divine Being will be shown to be at once
just and untrue, while if we regard His being alien to untruth, we prove
Him to be at once true and unjust. So, too, of His being invisible and
formless. For according to a wise reasoning similar to that which we
have adduced, it will not be permissible to say either that the
invisible exists in that which is formless, or to say that that which is
formless exists in that which is invisible; but he will comprise form in
that which is invisible, and so again, conversely, he will prove that
that which is formless is visible, using the same language in respect of
these as he devised in respect to that which is imperishable and
unbeginning, to the effect that when we regard the incomposite nature of
the Divine Life, we confess that it is formless, yet not invisible; and
that when we reflect that we cannot see God with our bodily eyes, while
thus admitting His invisibility, we cannot admit His being formless. Now
if these instances seem ridiculous and foolish, much more will every
sensible man condemn the absurdity of the statements, starting from
which his argument has logically brought him to such a pitch of
absurdity. Yet he carps at the Master’s words, as wrong in seeing that
which is imperishable in that which is unending, and that which is
unending in that which is imperishable. Well, then, let us also have our
sport, in a manner something like this cleverness of Eunomius. Let us
examine his opinion about these two names aforesaid, and see what it is.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p237"></span>Either, he says, that which is endless
is distinct in meaning from that which is imperishable, or else the two
must make one. But if he call both one, he will be supporting our
argument. But if he say that the meaning of the imperishable is one
thing, and that that of being unending is another, then of necessity, in
the case of things differing from each other, the force of the one
cannot be equivalent to the force of the other. If, then, the idea of
the imperishable is one, and that of being endless is another, and each
of these is what the <span id="page_CCCIII">p. CCCIII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCIII"></span>other is not, neither will he grant
that the imperishable is unending, nor that the unending is
imperishable, but the unending will be perishable, and the imperishable
will be terminable. But I must beg my readers not to turn a ridiculous
method of condemnation against us. We have been compelled to adopt such
a sportive vein against the mockeries of our opponent, that we might
thereby break through the puerile toil of his sophistries. But if it
would not be too wearisome to my readers, it would not be out of place
again to set forth what Eunomius says in his own words. “If,” says he,
“God is imperishable only by reason of the unending in His Life, and
ungenerate only by reason of the unbeginning, then wherein He is not
imperishable He is perishable, and wherein He is not ungenerate He is
generated.” Then returning to the charge, he repeats, “He will then be,
as unbeginning, at once ungenerate and perishable: and, as unending, at
once imperishable and generated;” for I pass over the superfluous and
unseasonable remarks which he has interspersed here, as in no way
contributing to the proving of his point. Now I think it is easy for any
one to see, by his own words, that the drift of our argument has no
connection whatever with the accusation which he lays against us. “For
we call the God of the universe imperishable and ungenerate,” says the
Master, “using these words with different applications.” “His
transcending,” he continues, “every limit of the ages, and every
distance in temporal extension, whether we consider the previous or the
subsequent, this absence of limit or circumscription on either hand in
the Eternal Life we mark in the one case with the name of
imperishability, and in the other case with the name of ungeneracy.” But
Eunomius would make out that we say that the being without beginning is
His essence, and again that the being without end is His essence, as
though we brought forward two contradictory segments of essence; and in
this way he establishes an absurdity, and while laying down, and then
fighting against, positions of his own, and reducing notions of his own
concoction to an absurdity, he lays no hold on our argument in any
single point. For that God is imperishable only wherein His Life is
unending, is his statement, not ours. In like manner, that the
imperishable is not without beginning, is an invention of that same
subtle cleverness which would constitute a negative attribute an
essence; whereas we do not define any such negative attribute as an
essence. Now it is a negative attribute of God, that neither does the
Life cease in dissolution, nor did It have a commencement in generation;
and this we express by these two words, imperishability and ungeneracy.
But Eunomius, mixing up his own folly with our teaching, does not seem
to understand that he is publishing his own disgrace by his calumnious
accusations. For, in defining ungeneracy as an essence, he will
logically arrive at the same pitch of absurdity which he ascribes to our
teaching. For as beginning means <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[1198](#fn_1196) one thing, and end means another,
by virtue of an intervening extension, if any one allow the privation of
the first of these to be essence, he must suppose His Life to be only
half subsisting in this being without beginning, and not to extend
further, by virtue of His nature, to the being without end, if
ungeneracy be regarded as itself His nature. But if any one insist that
both are essence, then, according to the definition put forward by
Eunomius, each of these terms must necessarily, by virtue of its
inherent meaning, be counted as essence, being just as much as, and no
more than, is indicated by the meaning of the term; and thus the
argument of Eunomius will not be without force, inasmuch as that which
is without beginning does not involve the notion of being without end,
and vice versa, since according to his account each of the things
mentioned is an essence, and there is no confusion between the two in
their relation to each other, the notion of beginning being different to
that of ending, while the words which express privation of these also
differ in their significations.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p239"></span>But that he himself also may be
brought to the knowledge of his own trifling, we will convict him from
his own statements. For in the course of his argument he says that God,
in that He is without end, is ungenerate, and that, in that He is
ungenerate, He is without end, as if the meanings of the two terms were
identical. If, then, by reason of His being without end He is
ungenerate, and the being without end and ungenerate are convertible
terms, and he admits that the Son also is without end, by a parity of
reasoning he must necessarily admit that the Son is ungenerate, if (as
he has said) His being without end and His being without beginning are
identical in meaning. For just as in the ungenerate he sees that which
is without beginning, so he allows that in that which is without end
also he sees that which is without beginning. For otherwise he would not
have made the terms wholly convertible. But God, he says, is ungenerate
by nature, and not by contrast with the ages. Well, who is there that
contends that God is not by nature all that He is said to be? For we do
not say that God is just, and <span id="page_CCCIV">p. CCCIV</span>
<span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCIV"></span>almighty, and Father, and
imperishable, by contrast with the ages, nor by His relation to any
other thing that exists. But in connection with the subject itself,
whatever He may be in His nature, we entertain every idea that is a
reverent idea; so that supposing neither ages, nor any other created
thing, had been made, God would no less be what we believe Him to be,
being in no need of the ages to constitute Him what He is. “But,” says
Eunomius, “He has a Life that is not extraneous, nor composite, nor
admitting of differences; for He Himself is Life eternal by virtue of
that Life itself immortal, by virtue of that immortality imperishable.”
This we are taught respecting the Only-begotten as well; nor can any one
impugn this teaching without openly opposing the declaration of S. John.
For life was not brought in from without upon the Son either (for He
says, “I am the Life <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1199](#fn_1197) ”), nor
is His Life either composite, nor does it admit difference, but by
virtue of that life itself He is immortal (for in what else but in life
can we see immortality?), and by virtue of that immortality He is
imperishable. For that which is stronger than death must naturally be
incapable of corruption.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p241"></span>Thus far our argument goes with him.
But the riddle with which he accompanies his words we must leave to
those trained in the wisdom of Prunicus <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1200](#fn_1198) to interpret: for he seems to have
produced what he has said from that system. “Being incorruptible without
beginning, He is ungenerate without end, being so called absolutely, and
independently of aught beside Himself.” Now whoever has purged ears and
an enlightened understanding knows, even without my saying it, that
beyond the jingle of words produced by their extraordinary combination,
there is no trace of sense in what he says; and if any shadow of an idea
could be found in such a din of words, it would prove to be either
profane or ridiculous. For what do you mean when you say that He is
without beginning as being without end, and without end as being without
beginning? Do you think beginning identical with end, and that the two
words are employed in the same sense, just as the appellations Simon and
Peter represent one and the same subject, and on this account, in
accordance with your thinking beginning and end the same, did you,
combining under one signification these two words which denote privation
of each other,—end, I mean, and beginning,—and taking the being without
end as convertible with the being without end, blend and confound one
word with the other; and is this the meaning of such a mixing up of
words, when you say that He is ungenerate as being without end, and that
He is without end as being ungenerate? Yet how is it that you did not
see the profanity as well as the ridiculous folly of your words? For if
by this novel confusion of the words they are made convertible, so that
ungenerate means ungenerate without end, and that which is without end
is such ungenerately, it follows by necessity that that which is without
end must needs be so as being ungenerate: and thus it comes to pass, my
good friend, that your much-talked-of ungeneracy, which you say is the
only characteristic of the Father’s essence, will be found to be shared
with whatever is immortal, and to be making all things consubstantial
with the Father, because it is alike apparent in all things whose life,
by reason of their immortality, goes on to infinity, archangels, that
is, angels, human souls, and, it may be also, in the Apostate host, the
Devil and his dæmons. For if that which is without end, and
imperishable, must also by your argument be ungenerately imperishable,
then in whatsoever is without end and imperishable there must be
connoted ungeneracy. These are the absurdities into which those men fall
who, before they have learnt what it is fitting for them to learn, only
publish their own ignorance by what they attempt to teach. For if he had
any faculty of discernment, he would not be ignorant of the peculiar
sense inherent in his terms, “without beginning,” and “without end,” and
that the term without end is common to all things whose life we believe
capable of extension to infinity, while the term without beginning
belongs to Him alone Who is without originating cause. How, then, is it
possible for us to regard that which is common to them all, as
equivalent to that which is believed by all to be a special attribute of
the Deity alone, so that we thereby either extend ungeneracy to
everything that shares in immortality, or else must not allow
immortality to any one of them, seeing that the being without end is to
belong only to the ungenerate, and vice versa, the being ungenerate is
to belong only to that which is without end? Thus everything without end
would have to be regarded as ungenerate.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p243"></span>But let us leave this, and along with
it the usual foul deluge of calumny in his words; and let us go on to
his subsequent quotations (of Basil). But I think it would perhaps be
well to pass without examination over most of these subsequent words.
For in all of them he shows himself the same, not grappling with that
which we have really said, but only inventing for himself points for
refutation which he pretends are taken from our statement. To go
carefully through these would be pronounced useless by any one <span
id="page_CCCV">p. CCCV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCV"></span>possessed of judgment; for any
understanding reader of his book can from his very words perceive his
scurrility. He says that God’s Glory is prior to our leader’s
“conception.” We too do not deny that. For God’s glory, whatever we are
to think of it, is prior not only to this present generation of ours,
but to all creation; it transcends the ages. What, then, is gained for
his argument from this fact, that God’s glory is conceded to be superior
not only to Basil, but to all the ages? “Yes, but this name *is* His
glory,” he says. But pray tell us, in order that we may assent to this
statement, who has proved that the appellation is identical with the
glory? “A law of our nature,” he replies, “teaches us that, in naming
realities, the dignity of the names does not depend on the will of those
who give them.” What is this law of nature? And how is it that it is not
in force amongst all? If nature had really enacted such a law, it ought
to have authority amongst all who share the common nature, just as the
other things peculiar to that nature have. If, in fine, it was the law
of nature that caused the appellations to spring up for us from the
objects, just as her plants spring up from seeds and roots, and she did
not entrust the significant naming of each of the subjects to the choice
of those who had to indicate the objects, then all mankind would be of
one tongue. For if the names imposed upon these objects did not vary, we
should not differ from one another in the department of speech. He says
it is “a holy thing, and most closely connected with the designs of
Providence, that their sounds should be imposed upon realities from a
source above us.” How is it, then, that the Prophets were ignorant of
this holy thing, and were not instructed in this design of Providence,
who according to your account did not make God at all of this
Ungeneracy? How, too, is it that the Deity Himself never knew of this
kind of holiness, when He did not give names from above to the animals
which He had formed, but gave away this power of name-giving to Adam? If
it is closely connected with the designs of Providence, as Eunomius
says, and a holy thing, that their sounds should be imposed from above
upon realities, it is certainly an unholy thing, and an unfitting thing,
that these names should have been fitted to the things that are by any
here below. “But the universal Guardian,” he says, “thought it right to
engraft these names in our minds by a law of His creation.” And how was
it, then, if these were engrafted in the minds of men, that from Adam
onward to your transgression no fruits of this folly were produced,
grafted as they were, according to you, in those minds, so that
ungeneracy should be the name of the Father’s essence? Adam and all in
succession after him would have pronounced this word, if such had been
grafted by God in his nature. For as all that now grows upon the earth
continues always, owing to a transmission of its seed from the first
creation, and not one single seed at the present time innovates upon the
natural form, so this word, if it had been, as you say, grafted by God
in our nature, would have sprung up along with the first utterances of
the first-formed human beings, and would have accompanied the line of
their posterity. But seeing that this word did not exist at the first
(for no one in former generations and up to the present ever uttered
such a word, except this man), it is plain that it is a bastard
invention, that has sprung up from the seed of tares, not from that good
seed which God has sown, to use evangelic words, in the field of our
nature. For all the things that characterize our common nature do not
have their beginning now, but appeared with that nature at its first
formation; such, for instance, as the operation of the senses, the
appetitive, or contrary, instinct of the man with regard to anything,
and other generally acknowledged accompaniments of his nature, none of
which a particular epoch has introduced amongst those born in it; but
our humanity is preserved continually, from first to last, within the
same circle of qualities, losing none which it had at the beginning, any
more than it acquires any which it had not then. But just as, while
sight is a faculty common to our nature, scientific observation comes by
training to those who have devoted themselves to some science (it is not
every one, for instance, who can observe with the theodolite, or prove a
theorem by means of lines in geometry, or do anything else, where art
has introduced, not mere sight, but a special use of sight), so too,
while one might pronounce the possession of reason to be a common
property of humanity united to the very essence of our nature from
above, the invention of terms significative of realities is the work of
men who, possessing from above the power of reason, are continually
finding out, according as they wish for them towards the elucidation of
that which they plainly see, certain words expressive of these things.
“But if these views are to prevail,” says he, “one of two things is
proved; either that conception is anterior to those who conceive, or
that the names naturally befitting the Deity, and pre-existent to
everything, are posterior to the beginning of man.” Ought we to continue
the fight against such assertions, and join issue with such manifest
absurdity?

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p244"></span>But who, pray, is so simple as to be
harmed by such arguments, and to imagine that if <span
id="page_CCCVI">p. CCCVI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCVI"></span>names are once believed to be an
outcome of the reasoning faculty, he must allow that the utterance of
names is anterior to those who utter them, or else that he must think he
is sinning against the Deity, in that every man continues to name the
Deity, according as each after birth is capable of conceiving Him? As to
this last supposition, it has been already explained that the Supreme
Being has no need Himself of words as delivered by a voice and a tongue;
and it would be superfluous to repeat what would only encumber the
argument. In fine, a Being Whose nature is neither lacking nor
redundant, but simply perfect, neither fails to possess anything that is
necessary, nor possesses what is not necessary. Since, then, we have
proved previously, and all thinking men unanimously agree, that the
calling by names is not a necessity of the Deity, no one can deny the
extreme profanity of thus assigning to Him what is not a necessity.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p245"></span>But I do not think that we need linger
on this, nor minutely examine that which follows. To the more attentive
reader, the argument elaborated by our opponent will itself appear in
the light of a special pleader on the side of orthodoxy. He says, for
instance, that imperishability and immortality are the very essence of
the Deity. For my part I see no need to contend with him, no matter
whether these qualities aforesaid only *accrue* to the Deity, or whether
they are, by virtue of their signification, His essence; whichever of
these two views is adopted, it will completely support our argument. For
if the being imperishable only accrues to the essence, the not being
generated will also most certainly only accrue to it; and so the idea of
ungeneracy will be ejected from being the mark of the essence. If, on
the other hand, because God is not subject to destruction, one affirms
imperishability to be His essence, and, because He is stronger than
death, one therefore defines immortality to be His very essence, and if
the Son is imperishable and immortal (as He is), imperishability and
immortality will also be the essence of the Only-begotten. If, then, the
Father is imperishability, and the Son imperishability, and each of
these imperishabilities is the essence, and no difference exists between
them as regards the idea of imperishability, one essence will differ
from the other essence in no way at all, seeing that in both equally the
nature is a stranger to any corruption. Even if he should resume the
same method as before, and place us on the horns of his dilemma from
which, as he thinks, there is no escape, saying that, if we distinguish
that which accrues from that which is, we make the Deity composite,
whereas if we acknowledge His simplicity, then the imperishability and
the ungeneracy are seen at once to be significative of His very
essence—even then again we can show that he is fighting for our side.
For if he will have it that God is made composite by our saying that
anything accrues to Him, then he certainly cannot eject the Fatherhood
either from the essence, but must confess that He is Father by His
nature as much as He is imperishable and immortal; and so without
intending it he must admit the Son also to partake of that intimate
nature; for it will not be possible, if God is essentially Father, to
exclude the Son from a relationship to Him thus essential. But if he
says that the Fatherhood accrues to God, but is outside the circle of
the substance, then he must concede to us that we may say anything we
like accrues to the Deity, since the Divine simplicity is in no way
marred, if His quality of ungeneracy is made to mean something outside
the essence. If, however, he declares that the imperishability and the
ungeneracy do mean the essence, and if he insists that these two words
are equivalent, since, by reason of the same meaning lying in each,
there is no difference between them, and if he thus assert that the very
idea of imperishability and ungeneracy is one and the same, the One who
is the first of these must necessarily be the second too. But that the
Son is imperishable, let us observe, even these men entertain no doubt;
therefore, by Eunomius’ argument, the Son also is ungenerate, if
imperishability and ungeneracy are to mean the same thing. So that he
must accept one of two alternatives; either he must agree with us that
ungeneracy is other than imperishability, or, if he abides by his
assertions, he must in various ways speak blasphemy about the
Only-begotten, making Him, for instance, perishable, in order that he
may not have to say that He is ungenerate; or ungenerate, in order that
he may not prove Him perishable.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p246"></span>But now I do not know which it is best
to do; to pursue step by step this subject, or to put an end here to our
contest with such folly. Well, as in the case of those who are selling
destructive drugs, a very slight experiment guarantees to the purchasers
the destructive power latent in all the drug, and no one doubts, after
he has found out by an experiment its partial deadliness, that the drug
sold is entirely of this deadly character, so I think it can be no
longer doubtful to reflecting persons that this poisonous dose of
argument, of which a specimen has been shown in what we have already
examined, will continue throughout to be such as that which we have just
refuted. For this reason I think it better not to prolong this detailed
dwelling upon his absurdities. Nevertheless, seeing that the champions
of this <span id="page_CCCVII">p. CCCVII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCVII"></span>error discover plausibility for it
from many quarters, and there is reason to fear lest to have overlooked
any of their efforts will be made a specious pretext for misrepresenting
us as having shirked their strongest point, I beg for this reason those
who follow us out in this work to accompany our argument still, without
charging us with prolixity, while it expands itself to meet the attacks
of error along the whole line. Observe, then, that he has scarcely
ceased weaving in the depths of his slumber this dream about conception
before he arms himself again from his storehouse with those monstrous
and senseless methods, and turns his argument into another dream much
more meaningless than his previous illusion. But we may best know how
absurd his efforts are by observing his treatment of “privation”; though
to grapple with his nonsense in all its range would require a Eunomius,
or one of his school, men who have never spent a thought on serious
realities. We will, however, in a concise way run over the heads of it,
that while none of his charges is omitted, no meaningless item may help
to prolong the discussion to an absurd length.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p247"></span>When, then, he is on the point of
introducing this treatment of terms of “privation,” he takes upon
himself to show “the incurable absurdity,” as he calls it, of our
teaching, and its “simulated and culpable caution <span
id="fr_1199"></span>[1201](#fn_1199) .” Such is his promise; but the
proof of these accusations is, what? “Some have said that the Deity is
ungenerate by virtue only of the privation of generation; but we say, in
refutation of these, that neither this word nor this idea is in any way
whatever applicable to the Deity.” Let him point out the maintainer of
such a statement, if any from the first creation of man to the present
day, whether in foreign or in Greek lands, has ever committed himself to
such an utterance; and we will be silent. But no one in the whole
history of mankind will be found to have said such a thing, except some
madman. For who was ever so reeling from intoxication, who was ever so
beside himself with madness or delirium, as to say, in so many words,
that generation belongs naturally to the ungenerate God, but that,
deprived of this natural condition, He becomes ungenerate instead of
generated? But these are the shifts of rhetoric; namely, to escape when
they are refuted from the shame of their refutation by means of some
supposititious characters. It was in this way that he has apologized for
that celebrated “Apology” of his, transferring as he did the blame for
that title to jurymen and accusers <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1202](#fn_1200) , though unable to show that there
were any accusers, any trial, or any court at all. Now, too, with the
air of one who would correct another’s folly, he pretends that he is
driven by necessity to speak in this way. This is what his proof of our
“incurable absurdity,” and our “simulated and culpable caution,” amounts
to. But he goes on to say that we do not know what to do in our present
position, and that to cover our perplexity we take to abusing him for
his worldly learning, while we ourselves claim a monopoly of the
teaching of the Holy Spirit. Here is his other dream, namely, that he
has got so much of the heathen learning, that he appears by means of it
a formidable antagonist to Basil. Just so there have been some men who
have imagined themselves enthroned with basilicals, and of an exalted
rank, because the deluded vision of their dreams, born of their waking
longings, puts such fancies into their hearts. He says that Basil, not
knowing what to do after what has been said, abuses him for his worldly
learning. He would indeed have set a high value on such abuse, that is,
on being thought formidable because of the abundance of his words even
by any ordinary hearer, not to mention by Basil, and by men like him (if
any are entirely like him, or ever have been). But, as for his
intervening argument, if such low scurrility, and such tasteless
buffoonery, can be called argument, by which he thinks he impugns our
cause, I pass it all over, for I deem it an abominable and ungracious
thing to soil our treatise with such pollutions; and I loathe them as
men loathe some swollen and noisome ulcer, or turn from the spectacle
presented by those whose skin is bloated by excess of humours, and
disfigured with tuberous warts. And for a while our argument shall be
allowed to expand itself freely, without having to turn to defend itself
against men who are ready to scoff at and to tear to pieces everything
that is said.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p250"></span>Every term—every term, that is, which
is really such—is an utterance expressing some movement of thought. But
every operation and movement of sound thinking is directed as far as it
is possible to the knowledge and the contemplation of some reality. But
then the whole world of realities is divided into two parts; that is,
into the intelligible and the sensible. With regard to sensible
phænomena, knowledge, on account of the perception of them being so near
at hand, is open for all to acquire; the judgment of the senses gives
occasion to no doubt about the subject before them. The differences in
colour, and the differences in all the other qualities which we judge of
by means of the sense of hearing, or smell, or touch, or taste, can be
known and named by all possessing our common humanity; and so it is with
all the other things which appear to be more <span id="page_CCCVIII">p.
CCCVIII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCVIII"></span>obvious to our
apprehension, the things, that is, pertaining to the age in which we
live, designed for political and moral ends. But in the contemplation of
the intelligible world, on account of that world transcending the grasp
of the senses, we move, some in one way, some in another, around the
object of our search; and then, according to the idea arising in each of
us about it, we announce the result as best we can, striving to get as
near as possible to the full meaning of the thing thought about through
the medium of expressive phrases. In this, though it is often possible
to have achieved the task in both ways, when thought does not fail to
hit the mark, and utterance interprets the notion with the appropriate
word, yet it may happen that we may fail even in both, or in one, at
least, of the two, when either the comprehending faculty or the
interpreting capacity is carried beside the proper mark. There being,
then, two factors by which every term is made a correct term, the mental
exactitude and the verbal utterance, the result which commands approval
in both ways, will certainly be the preferable; but it will not be a
lesser gain, not to have missed the right conception, even though the
word itself may happen to be inadequate to that thought. Whenever then,
our thought is intent upon those high and unseen things which sense
cannot reach (I mean, upon that divine and unspeakable world with regard
to which it is an audacious thing to grasp in thought anything in it at
random and more audacious still to trust to any chance word the
representing of the conception arising from it), then, I say, turning
from the mere sound of phrases, uttered well or ill according to the
mental faculty of the speaker, we search for the thought, and that
alone, which is found within the phrases, to see whether that itself be
sound, or otherwise; and we leave the minutiæ of phrase and name to be
dealt with by the artificialities of grammarians. Now, seeing that we
mark with an appellation only those things which we know, and those
things which are above our knowledge it is not possible to seize by any
distinctive terms (for how can one put a mark upon a thing we know
nothing about?), therefore, because in such cases there is no
appropriate term to be found to mark the subject adequately, we are
compelled by many and differing names, as there may be opportunity, to
divulge our surmises as they arise within us with regard to the Deity.
But, on the other hand, all that actually comes within our comprehension
is such that it must be of one of these four kinds: either contemplated
as existing in an extension of distance, or suggesting the idea of a
capacity in space within which its details are detected, or it comes
within our field of vision by being circumscribed by a beginning or an
end where the non-existent bounds it in each direction (for everything
that has a beginning and an end of its existence, begins from the
non-existent, and ends in the non-existent), or, lastly, we grasp the
phænomenon by means of an association of qualities wherein dying, and
sufferance, and change, and alteration, and such-like are combined.
Considering this, in order that the Supreme Being may not appear to have
any connection whatever with things below, we use, with regard to His
nature, ideas and phrases expressive of separation from all such
conditions; we call, for instance, that which is above all times
pre-temporal, that which is above beginning unbeginning, that which is
not brought to an end unending, that which has a personality removed
from body incorporeal, that which is never destroyed imperishable, that
which is unreceptive of change, or sufferance, or alteration,
passionless, changeless, and unalterable. Such a class of appellations
can be reduced to any system that they like by those who wish for one;
and they can fix on these actual appellations other appellations
“privative,” for instance, or “negative,” or whatever they like. We
yield the teaching and the learning of such things to those who are
ambitious for it; and we will investigate the thoughts alone, whether
they are within or beyond the circle of a religious and adequate
conception of the Deity.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p251"></span>Well, then, if God did not exist
formerly, or if there be a time when He will not exist, He cannot be
called either unending or without beginning; and so also neither
inalterable, nor incorporeal, nor imperishable, if there is any
suspicion of body, or destruction, or alteration with regard to Him. But
if it be part of our religion to attribute to Him none of these things,
then it is a sacred duty to use of Him names privative of the things
abhorrent to His Nature, and to say all that we have so often enumerated
already, viz. that He is imperishable, and unending, and ungenerate, and
the other terms of that class, where the sense inherent in each only
informs us of the privation of that which is obvious to our perception,
but does not interpret the actual nature of that which is thus removed
from those abhorrent conditions. What the Deity is not, the
signification of these names does point out; but what that further
thing, which is not these things, is essentially, remains undivulged.
Moreover, even the rest of these names, the sense of which does indicate
some position or some state, do not afford that indication of the Divine
nature itself, but only of the results of our reverent speculations
about it. For when we have concluded gener<span id="page_CCCIX">p.
CCCIX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCIX"></span>ally that no single
thing existing, whether an object of sense or of thought, is formed
spontaneously or fortuitously, but that everything discoverable in the
world is linked to the Being Who transcends all existences, and
possesses there the source of its continuance, and we then perceive the
beauty and the majesty of the wonderful sights in creation, we thus get
from these and such-like marks a new range of thoughts about the Deity,
and interpret each one of the thoughts thus arising within us by a
special name, following the advice of Wisdom, who says that “by the
greatness and beauty of the creatures proportionately the Maker of them
is seen <span id="fr_1201"></span>[1203](#fn_1201) .” We address
therefore as Creator Him Who has made all mortal things, and as Almighty
Him Who has compassed so vast a creation, Whose might has been able to
realize His wish. When too we perceive the good that is in our own life,
we give in accordance with this the name of Good to Him Who is our
life’s first cause. Then also having learnt from the Divine writings the
incorruptibility of the judgment to come, we therefore call Him Judge
and Just, and to sum up in one word, we transfer the thoughts that arise
within us about the Divine Being into the mould of a corresponding name;
so that there is no appellation given to the Divine Being apart from
some distinct intuition about Him. Even the word God (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p252.3"></span>Θεὸς</span>) we
understand to have come into usage from the activity of His seeing; for
our faith tells us that the Deity is everywhere, and sees (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p252.4"></span>θεασθαι</span>) all
things, and penetrates all things, and then we stamp this thought with
this name (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p252.5"></span>Θεὸς</span>), guided to it by the Holy
Voice. For he who says, “O God, attend unto me <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[1204](#fn_1202) ,” and, “Look, O God <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1205](#fn_1203) ,” and, “God knoweth the secrets of
the heart plainly <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1206](#fn_1204) ,” reveals
the latent meaning of this word, viz. that <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p255.2"></span>Θεὸς</span> is so called from <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p255.3"></span>θεασθαι</span>. For
there is no difference between saying “Attend unto,” “Look,” and “See.”
Since, then, the seer must look towards some sight, God is rightly
called the Seer of that which is to be seen. We are taught, then, by
this word one sectional operation of the Divine Being, though we do not
grasp in thought by means of it His substance itself, believing
nevertheless that the Divine glory suffers no loss because of our being
at a loss for a naturally appropriate name. For this inability to give
expression to such unutterable things, while it reflects upon the
poverty of our own nature, affords an evidence of God’s glory, teaching
us as it does, in the words of the Apostle, that the only name naturally
appropriate to God is to believe Him to be “above every name <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1207](#fn_1205) .” That he transcends every effort
of thought, and is far beyond any circumscribing by a name, constitutes
a proof to man of His ineffable majesty <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1208](#fn_1206) .

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p258"></span>Thus much, then, is known to us about
the names uttered in any form whatever in reference to the Deity. We
have given a simple explanation of them, unencumbered with argument, for
the benefit of our candid hearers; as for Eunomius’ nerveless
contentions about these names, we judge it a thing disgraceful and
unbecoming to us seriously to confute them. For what could one say in
answer to a man who declares that we “attach more weight to the outward
form of the name than to the value of the thing named, giving to names
the prerogative over realities, and equality to things unequal”? Such
are the words that *he* gives utterance to. Well, let any one who can do
so considerately, judge whether this calumnious charge of his against us
has anything in it dangerous enough to make it worth our while to defend
ourselves as to our “giving to names the prerogative over realities”;
for it is plain to every one that there is no single name that has in
itself any substantial reality, but that every name is but a recognizing
mark placed on some reality or some idea, having of itself no existence
either as a fact or a thought.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p259"></span>How it is possible, then, to assign
one’s gratuities to the non-subsistent, let this man, who claims to be
using words and phrases in their natural force, explain to the followers
of his error. I would not, however, have mentioned this at all, if it
had not placed a necessity upon me of proving our author’s weakness both
in thought and expression. As for all the passages from the inspired
writings which he drags in, though quite unconnected with his object,
formulating thereby a difference of immortality <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[1209](#fn_1207) in angels and in men, I do not know
what he has in his eye, or what he hopes to <span id="page_CCCX">p.
CCCX</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCX"></span>prove by them, and I
pass them by. The immortal, as long as it is immortal, admits of no
degrees of more and less arising from comparison. For if the one member
of the comparison is, by the force of contrast, to suffer a diminution
or privation as regards its immortality, it must needs be that such a
member is not to be called immortal at all; for how can that be called
absolutely immortal in which mortality is detected by this juxtaposition
and comparison? And to think of that fine hair-splitting of his, in not
allowing the idea of privation to be unvarying and general, but in
asserting, on the contrary, that while separation from good things is
privation, the absence of bad things is not to be marked by that term!
If he is to get his way here, he will take the truth from the Apostle’s
words, which say that He “only hath immortality <span
id="fr_1208"></span>[1210](#fn_1208) ,” which He gives to others. What
this newly-imported dictum of his has to do with his preceding argument,
neither we nor any one else amongst reflecting people are able to
understand. Yet because we have not the mental strength to take in these
scientific subtleties, he calls us “unscientific both in our judgment as
to objects, and in our use of terms”; those are his very words. But all
this, as having no power to shake the truth, I pass over without further
notice; and also how he misrepresents the view we have expounded of the
imperishable, and of the unembodied, namely, that of these terms the
latter signifies the undimensional, where the threefold extension
belonging to all bodies is not to be found, and the former signifies
that which is not receptive of destruction: and also how he says, that
“we do not think it right to let the shape of these words be lost by
extending them to ideas inapplicable to them, or to imagine that each of
them is indicative of something not present or not accruing; but rather
we think they are indicative of the actual essence”; all this I deem
worthy only of silence and deep oblivion, and leave to the reader to
detect for himself their mingled folly and blasphemy. He actually
asserts that the perishable is not opposed to the imperishable, and that
the privative sign does not mark the absence of the bad, but that the
word which is the subject of our inquiry means the essence itself!

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p262"></span>Well, if the term imperishable or
indestructible is not considered by this maker of an empty system to be
privative of destruction, then by a stern necessity it must follow that
this shape given to the word indicates the very reverse (of the
privation of destruction). If, that is, indestructibility is not the
negation of destruction, it must be the assertion of something
incongruous with itself; for it is the very nature of opposites that,
when you take away the one, you admit the other to come in in its place.
But as for the bitter task which he necessitates of proving that the
Deity is unreceptive of death, as if there existed any one who held the
contrary opinion, we leave it to take care of itself. For we hold that
in the case of opposites, it makes no difference at all whether we say
that something is A, or that it is not the opposite of A; for instance,
in the present discussion, when we have said that God is Life, we
implicitly forbid by this assertion the thought of death in connection
with Him, even though we do not express this in speech; and when we
assert that He is unreceptive of death, we in the same breath show Him
to be Life.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p263"></span>“But I do not see,” he rejoins, “how
God can be above His own works simply by virtue of such things as do not
belong to Him <span id="fr_1209"></span>[1211](#fn_1209) .” And on the
strength of this clever sally he calls it a union of folly and
profanity, that our great Basil has ventured on such terms. But I would
counsel him not to indulge his ribaldry too freely against those who use
these terms, lest he should be unconsciously at the same moment heaping
insults on himself. For I think that he himself would not gainsay that
the very grandeur of the Divine Nature is recognized in this, viz. in
the absence of all participation in those things which the lower natures
are shown to possess. For if God were involved in any of these
peculiarities, He would not possess His superiority, but would be quite
identified with any single individual amongst the beings who share that
peculiarity. But if He is above such things, by reason, in fact, of His
not possessing them, then He stands also above those who do possess
them; just as we say that the Sinless is superior to those in sin. The
fact of being removed from evil is an evidence of abounding in the best.
But let him heap these insults on us to his heart’s content. We will
only remark, in passing, on a single one of the points mentioned under
this head, and will then return to the discussion of the main question.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p265"></span>He declares that God surpasses mortal
beings as immortal, destructible beings as indestructible, generated
beings as ungenerate, just in the same degree. Is it not, then, plain to
all <span id="page_CCCXI">p. CCCXI</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCXI"></span>what this blasphemy of a fighter
against God would prove? or must we by verbal demonstration unveil the
profanity? Well, who does not know the axiom, that things which are
distanced to the same amount (by something else) are level with one
another? If, then, the destructible and the generated are surpassed in
the same degree by the Deity, and if our Lord is generated, it will be
for Eunomius to draw the blasphemous conclusion resulting from these
data. For it is clear that he regards generation as the same thing as
destruction and death, just as in his previous discussions he declares
the ungenerate to be the same thing as the indestructible. If, then, he
looks upon destruction and generation as upon the same level, and
asserts that the Deity is equally removed from both of them, and if our
Lord is generated, let no one demand from ourselves that we should apply
the logical conclusion, but let him draw it for himself; if indeed it is
true, as he says, that from the generated and from the destructible God
is equally removed. “But,” he proceeds, “it is not allowable for us to
call Him indestructible and immortal by virtue of any absence of death
and destruction.” Let those who are led by the nose, and turn in any
direction that each successive teacher pleases, believe this, and let
them declare that destruction and death do belong to God, to make it
possible for Him to be called immortal and indestructible! For if these
terms of privation, as Eunomius says, “do not indicate the absence of
death and destruction,” then the presence in Him of the things opposite
to, and estranged from, these is most certainly proved by this treatment
of terms. Each one amongst conceivable things is either absent from
something else, or it is not absent: for instance, light, darkness;
life, death; health, disease, and so on. In all these cases, if one
asserts that the one conception is absent, he will necessarily
demonstrate that the other is present. If, then, Eunomius denies that
God can be called immortal by reason of the absence of death, he will
plainly prove the presence of death in Him, and so deny any immortality
in the case of the universal Deity. But perhaps some one will say that
we fix unfairly on his words; for that no one is so mad as to affirm
that God is not immortal. But then, when none of mankind possess any
knowledge of that which certain people secretly imagine, it is by their
words that we have to make our guess about those secret things.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p266"></span>Therefore let us again handle this
dictum of his: “God is not called immortal by virtue of the absence of
death.” How are we to accept this statement, that death is not absent
from the Deity though He be called immortal? If he really commands us to
think like this, Eunomius’ God will be certainly mortal, and subject to
destruction; for he from whom death is not absent is not in his essence
immortal. But again; if these terms signify the absence neither of death
nor of destruction, either they are applied falsely to the God overall,
or else they comprise within themselves some different meaning. What
this meaning is, our system-maker must explain to us. Whereas we, the
people who according to Eunomius are unscientific in our judgment of
objects and in our use of terms, have been taught to call sound (for
instance), not the man from whom strength is absent, but the man from
whom disease is absent; and unmutilated, not the man who keeps away from
drinking-parties, but the man who has no mutilation upon him; and other
qualities in the same way we name from the presence or the absence of
something; manly, for instance, and unmanly; sleepy and sleepless; and
all the other terms like that, which custom sanctions.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p267"></span>Still I cannot see what profit there
is in deigning to examine such nonsense. For a man like myself, who has
lived to gray hairs <span id="fr_1210"></span>[1212](#fn_1210) , and
whose eyes are fixed on truth alone, to take upon his lips the absurd
and flippant utterances of a contentious foe, incurs no slight danger of
bringing condemnation on himself. I will therefore pass over both those
words and the adjoining passage; this, for instance, “Truth gives no
evidence of any union of natures with God.” Well, if these words had not
been spoken, who ever was there (except yourself) who mentioned a double
nature in the Deity at all? You, however, unite each idea of each name
with the essence of the Father, and deny that anything externally
accrues to Him, centering every one of His names in that essence. Again,
“Neither does she write in the statute-book of our religion any idea
that is external and fabricated by ourselves.” With regard to these
words again I shall deprecate the idea that I have quoted them with a
view of amusing the reader with their absurdity; rather I have done so
with a view to show with what a slender equipment of arguments this man,
after rating us for our want of system, advances to take these audacious
liberties with the name of Truth. What is he in reasoning, and what is
he in speech, that he should thus revel in showing himself off before
his hidebound readers, who applaud him as victorious over everybody by
force of argument when he has brought these disjointed utterances <span
id="page_CCCXII">p. CCCXII</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCXII"></span>of his dry bombastic jargon to an
end <span id="fr_1211"></span>[1213](#fn_1211) . “Immortality,” he says,
“is the essence itself.” But what, then, do you assert to be the essence
of the Only-begotten? I ask you that: is it immortality, or is it not?
For remember that in His essence also the singleness admits, as you say,
of no complexity of nature. If, then Eunomius denies that immortality is
the essence of the Son, it is clear what he is aiming at; for it does
not require an exceedingly penetrating understanding to discover what is
the direct opposite to the immortal. Just as the logic of dichotomy
exhibits the destructible instead of the indestructible, and the mutable
instead of the immutable, so it exhibits the mortal instead of the
immortal. What, therefore, will this setter forth of new doctrine do?
What proper name will he give us for the essence of the Only-begotten?
Again I put this question to our author. He must either grant that it is
immortality, or deny it. If, then, he will not assent to its being
immortality, he must assent to the contradictory proposition; by
negativing the superior term he proves that it is death. If, on the
other hand, he shrinks from anything so monstrous, and names the essence
of the Only-begotten also as immortality, he must perforce agree with us
that there is in consequence no difference whatever, as to essence,
between them. If the nature of the Father and the nature of the Son are
equally immortality, and if immortality does not divide itself by any
manner of difference, then it is confessed by our foes themselves, that
on the score of essence no manner of difference is discoverable between
the Father and the Son.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p270"></span>But it is time now to expose that
angry accusation which he brings against us at the close of his
treatise, saying that we affirm the Father to be from what is absolutely
non-existent. Stealing an expression from its context, from which he
drags it, as from its surrounding body, into a naked isolation, he tries
to carp at it by worrying the word, or rather covering it with the
slaver of his maddened teeth. I will therefore first give the meaning of
the passage in which our Master explained this point to us; then I will
quote it word for word: by so doing the man who intrudes upon <span
id="fr_1212"></span>[1214](#fn_1212) the expository work of orthodox
writers, only to undermine the truth itself, will be revealed in his
true colours. Our Master, in introducing us in his own treatise to the
true meaning of ungenerate, suggested a way to arrive at a real
knowledge of the term in dispute somewhat as follows, pointing out at
the same time that it had a meaning very far removed from any idea of
essence. He says that the Evangelist <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[1215](#fn_1213) , in beginning our Lord’s lineage
according to the flesh from Joseph, and then going back to the
generation continually preceding, and then ending the genealogy in Adam,
and, because there was no earthly father anterior to this first-formed
creature, saying that he was “the son of God,” makes it obvious to every
reader’s intelligence with regard to the Deity, that He, from Whom Adam
was, has not Himself His subsistence from another, after the likeness of
the human lives just given. When, having passed through the whole of it,
we at last grasp the thought of the Deity, we perceive at the same
moment the First Cause of it all. But if any such cause be found
dependent on something else, then it is not a first cause. Therefore, if
God is the First Cause of the Universe, there will be nothing whatever
transcending this cause of all things. Such was our Master’s exposition
of the meaning of ungenerate; and in order that our testimony about it
may not go beyond the exact truth, I will quote the passage.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p273"></span>“The evangelist Luke, when giving the
genealogy according to the flesh of our God and Saviour Jesus Christ,
and stepping up from the last to the first, begins with Joseph, saying
that he was ‘the son of Heli, which was the son of Matthat,’ and so by
ascending brings his enumeration up to Adam; but when he has come to the
top and said, that Seth ‘was the son of Adam, which was the son of God,’
then he stops this process. As, then, he has said that Adam was the son
of God, we will ask these men, ‘But God, who is He the son of?’ Is it
not obvious to every one’s intelligence that God is the son of no one?
But to be the son of no one is to be without a cause, plainly; and to be
without a cause is to be ungenerate. Now in the case of men, the being
son of somebody is not the essence <span
id="fr_1214"></span>[1216](#fn_1214) ; no more, in the case of the Deity
Who rules the world, is it possible to say that the being ungenerate is
the essence.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p275"></span>With what eyes will you now dare to
gaze upon your guide? I speak to you, O flock <span
id="fr_1215"></span>[1217](#fn_1215) <span id="page_CCCXIII">p.
CCCXIII</span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCXIII"></span>of perishing
souls! How can you still turn to listen to this man who has reared such
a monument as this of his shamelessness in argument? Are ye not ashamed
now, at least, if not before, to take the hand of a man like this to
lead you to the truth? Do ye not regard it as a sign of his madness as
to doctrine, that he thus shamelessly stands out against the truth
contained in Scripture? Is this the way to play the champion of the
truth of doctrine—namely, to accuse Basil of deriving the God over all
from that which has absolutely no existence? Am I to tell the way he
phrases it? Am I to transcribe the very words of his shamelessness? I
let the insolence of them pass; I do not blame their invective, for I do
not censure one whose breath is of bad odour, because it is of bad
odour; or one who has bodily mutilation, because he is mutilated. Things
such as that are the misfortunes of nature; they escape blame from those
who can reflect. This strength of vituperation, then, is infirmity in
reasoning; it is an affliction of a soul whose powers of sound argument
are marred. No word from me, then, about his invectives. But as to that
syllogism, with its stout irrefragable folds, in whose conclusion, to
effect his darling object, he arrives at this accusation against us, I
will write it out in its own precise words. “We will allow him to say
that the Son exists by participation in the self-existent <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1218](#fn_1216) ; but (instead of this), he has
unconsciously affirmed that the God over all comes from absolute
nonentity. For if the idea of the absence of everything amounts to that
of absolute nonentity <span id="fr_1217"></span>[1219](#fn_1217) , and
the transposition of equivalents is perfectly legitimate, then the man
who says that God comes from nothing says that He comes from nonentity.”
To which of these statements shall we first direct our attention? Shall
we criticize his opinion about the Son “existing by participation” in
the Deity, and his bespattering those who will not acquiesce in it with
the foulness of his tongue; or shall we examine the sophism so frigidly
constructed from the stuff of dreams? However, every one who possesses a
spark of practical sagacity is not unaware that it is only poets and
moulders of mythology who father sons “by participation” upon the Divine
Being. Those, that is, who string together the myths in their poems,
fabricate a Dionysus, or a Hercules, or a Minos, and such-like, out of
the combination of the superhuman with human bodies; and they exalt such
personages above the rest of mankind, representing them as of greater
estimation because of their participation in a superior nature.
Therefore, with regard to this opinion of his, carrying as it does
within itself the evidence of its own folly and profanity, it is best to
be silent; and to repeat instead that irrefragable syllogism of his, in
order that every poor ignoramus on our side may understand what and how
many are the advantages which those who are not trained in his technical
methods are deprived of. He says, “If the idea of the absence of
everything amounts to that of absolute nonentity, and the transposition
of equivalents is perfectly legitimate, then the man who says that God
comes from nothing, says that He comes from nonentity.” He brandishes
over us this Aristotelian weapon, but who has yet conceded to him, that
to say that any one has no father amounts to saying that he has been
generated from absolute nonentity? He who enumerates those persons whose
line is recorded in Scripture is plainly thinking of a father preceding
each person mentioned. For what relation is Heli to Joseph? What
relation is Matthat to Heli? And what relation is Adam to Seth? Is it
not plain to a mere child that this catalogue of names is a list of
fathers? For if Seth is the son of Adam, Adam must be the father of one
thus born from him; and so tell me, who is the father of the Deity Who
is over all? Come, answer this question, open your lips and speak, exert
all your skill in expression to meet such an inquiry. Can you discover
any expression that will elude the grasp of your own syllogism? Who *is*
the father of the Ungenerate? Can you say? If you can, then He is not
ungenerate. Pressed thus, you will say, what indeed necessity compels
you to say,—No one is. Well, my dear sir, do you not yet find the weak
seams of your sophism giving way? Do you not perceive that you have
slavered upon your own lap? What says our great Basil? That the
Ungenerate One is from no *father*. For the conclusion to be drawn from
the mention of fathers in the preceding genealogy permits the word
father, even in the silence of the evangelist, to be added to this
confession of faith. Whereas, you have transformed “no one” into
“nothing at all,” and again “nothing at all” into “absolute nonentity,”
thereby concocting that fallacious syllogism of yours. Accordingly this
clever result of professional shrewdness shall be turned against
yourself. I ask, Who *is* <span id="page_CCCXIV">p. CCCXIV</span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-Page_CCCXIV"></span>the father of the Ungenerate One? “No
one,” you will be obliged to answer; for the Ungenerate One cannot have
a father. Then, if no one is the father of the Ungenerate, and you have
changed “no one” into “nothing at all,” and “nothing at all” is,
according to your argument, the same as “absolute nonentity,” and the
transposition of equivalents is, as you say, perfectly legitimate, then
the man (*i.e.* you) who says that no one is the father of the
Ungenerate One, says that the Deity Who is over all comes from absolute
nonentity!

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p279"></span>Such, to use your own words, is the
“evil,” as one might expect, not indeed “of valuing the character for
being clever before one is really such” (for perhaps this does not
amount to a very great misfortune), but of not knowing oneself, and how
great the distance is between the soaring Basil and a grovelling
reptile. For if those eyes of his, with their divine penetration, still
looked on this world, if he still swept over mankind now living on the
pinions of his wisdom, he would have shown you with the swooping rush of
his words, how frail is that native shell of folly in which you are
encased, how great is he whom you oppose with your errors, while, with
insults and invectives hurled at him, you are hunting for a reputation
amongst decrepit and despicable creatures. Still you need not give up
all hope of feeling that great man’s talons <span
id="fr_1218"></span>[1220](#fn_1218) . For this work of ours, while, as
compared with his, it will be a great thing for it to be judged the
fraction of one such talon, has, as regards yours, ability enough to
have broken asunder the outside crust of your heresy, and to have
detected the deformity that hides within.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1064"></span>[CCL:1066](2050140.htm#fr_1064) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p2"></span> This Book is entitled in the Munich and
Venice <span class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>mss.</span>
“an Antirrhetic against Eunomius’ second Essay (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p2.2"></span>λόγον</span>)”: in the
Paris Editions as “Essay XII. (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p2.3"></span>λόγος</span> I B) of our Father among the
Saints, Gregory of Nyssa against Eunomius (1615), against Eunomius’
second Essay (1638).” The discrepance of number seems to have arisen
from the absence of any title to Book VI. in the Munich and Venice <span
class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p2.4"></span>mss.</span> But the Book
preceding this, *i.e.* Book XII., is named as such by the Paris Editt.
of 1638: and cited elsewhere as such. Photius, after saying that Gregory
far excelled, in these books, Theodore (of Mopsuestia), and Sophronius,
who also wrote against Eunomius, particularly praises this last book.

<span id="fn_1065"></span>[CCL:1067](2050140.htm#fr_1065) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p5"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Deut. xxxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p5.2"></span>;
[Joshua xxiii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p5.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1066"></span>[CCL:1068](2050140.htm#fr_1066) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p5.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p6"></span> [1 Cor. xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1067"></span>[CCL:1069](2050140.htm#fr_1067) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p8"></span> <span id="viii.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>[1
Cor. iii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#014)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p8.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1068"></span>[CCLI:1070](2050140.htm#fr_1068) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p9"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Psalm cxliv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p9.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1069"></span>[CCLI:1071](2050140.htm#fr_1069) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p11"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>εὐσεβείας</span>. That this is the
predominant idea in the word will be seen from the following
definitions: “Piety is a devout life joined with *a right faith*”
(Œcumenius on [1 Tim. iv.](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#000)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p11.2"></span> p. 754). “Piety is the looking up to the
one only God, Who is believed to be and is the true God, and the life in
accordance with this” (Eusebius, P. E. i. p. 3). “Piety is the *science*
of adoration” (Suidas).

<span id="fn_1070"></span>[CCLI:1072](2050140.htm#fr_1070) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p12"></span> [Wisdom of Solomon xiii.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p12.1"></span>.
“For by the greatness and beauty of the creatures proportionately (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p12.2"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p12.3"></span>ναλόγως</span>) the
maker of them is seen.” Compare [Romans i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p12.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_1071"></span>[CCLIII:1073](2050140.htm#fr_1071) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p15"></span> Essence, substance, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p15.1"></span>οὐσία</span>. Most of
this controversy might have been avoided by agreeing to banish the word
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p15.2"></span>οὐσία</span>
entirely from this sort of connection with the Deity. Even Celsus the
Neo-platonist had said, “God does not partake of substance” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p15.3"></span>οὐσίας</span>).
“Exactly,” Origen replies, “God is partaken of, viz., by those who have
His spirit, rather than partakes of anything Himself. Indeed, the
subject of substance involves questions complicated and difficult to
decide; most especially on this point. Supposing, that is, an absolute
Substance, motionless, incorporeal, is God beyond this Substance in rank
and power, granting a share of it to those to whom according to His Word
He chooses to communicate it? Or is He Himself this Substance, though
described as invisible in that passage about the Saviour ([Coloss. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p15.4"></span>)
‘Who is the image of the invisible God,’ where invisible means
incorporeal? Another point is this: is the Only-Begotten and First-Born
of all Creatures to be pronounced the Substance of substances, the
Original Idea of all ideas, while the Father God Himself is beyond all
these?” (c. Cels. vi. 64). (Such a question as this last, however, could
not have been asked a century later, when Athanasius had dispelled all
traces of Neo-platonic subordination from the Christian Faith. Uncreated
Spirit, not Invisible First Substance, is the mark of all in the
Triune-God. But the effort of Neo-platonism to rise above every term
that might seem to *include* the Deity had not been thrown away. Even
“God is Spirit” is only a *conception,* not a definition, of the Deity;
while “God is substance” ought to be regarded as an actual contradiction
in terms.)

<span id="fn_1072"></span>[CCLIV:1074](2050140.htm#fr_1072) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p15.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p16"></span> *i.e.*who hold the Father and the Son
to be one and the same Person, *i.e.* Sabellians. “He here overthrows
the heresy of Sabellius, by marking the persons of the Father and the
Son: for the Church does not imagine a Son-Fatherhood (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p16.1"></span>υἰοπατορίαν</span>),
such as the figment of that African” (Ammonius caten. ad Joh. I. i. p.
14).

<span id="fn_1073"></span>[CCLV:1075](2050140.htm#fr_1073) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p20"></span> S. [John x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#037)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1074"></span>[CCLVI:1076](2050140.htm#fr_1074) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p22"></span> Eunomius arrived at the same
conclusions as Arius, but by a different path. “The true name of God is
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p22.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p22.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>, and
*this* name is incommunicable to other essences.” He attacked both the
Arians and the orthodox. The former he reproached for saying that we can
know God only in part: the latter for saying that we know God only
through the Universe, and the Son, the Author of the Universe. He
maintained, on the contrary, that it was unworthy of a Christian to
profess the impossibility of knowing the Divine Nature, and the manner
in which the Son is generated. Rather, the mind of the believer rises
above every sensible and intelligible essence, and does not stop even at
the generation of the Son, but mounts above, aspiring to possess the
First Cause. Is this bold assertion, Denys (*De la Philosophie
d’Origène,* p. 446) asks, so contrary as it is to the teaching of the
Fathers, a reminiscence of Origen, or a direct borrowing from Plato or
the Neoplatonists? The language in which it is expressed certainly
belongs to the latter (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p22.3"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p22.4"></span>ποκύψας, ἐπέκεινα, πόθος, τὸ πρῶτον,
γλιχόμενος</span>): but Origen himself, less wise in this matter than
Clement, was not far from believing that there was a Way above Him Whom
S. John calls the Way, a Light above the Light that “lighteth every man
that cometh into the world,” an “Eternal Gospel” above the present
Gospel; and that these were not inaccessible at once to human creatures.
Only they could not be reached in themselves, and *without a Mediator,*
until Christ, having vanquished His enemies, had given back the kingdom
to the Father, and God was “all in all.”—This doctrine of the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p22.5"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p22.6"></span>Αγέννητος</span>, then,
made it necessary for Basil and Gregory to throw their whole weight
against Eunomius, rather than against Macedonius, who, as inconsequent
through not dealing alike with the Second and Third Person, could not be
so dangerous an enemy.

<span id="fn_1075"></span>[CCLVI:1077](2050140.htm#fr_1075) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p24"></span> *As being another.* Oehler reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.1"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.2"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.3"></span>ἕτερον</span>: the
Paris editt. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p24.4"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p24.5"></span>στιν ἕτερον</span>, due to the correction
of John the Franciscan, whose <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p24.6"></span>ms.</span>, however, (the Pithœan) had
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.7"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.8"></span>στε</span> (<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.9"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.10"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.11"></span>τι</span>?). These
words of Eunomius are found in Basil lib. i c. Eunomium, tom. i. p. 711
(Paris 1638), even more fully quoted than here: and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.12"></span>ὡ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.13"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p24.14"></span>ἕτερον</span> is found
there.

<span id="fn_1076"></span>[CCLVII:1078](2050140.htm#fr_1076) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p27"></span> Gregory here refers to the apparent
“retrograde” motion of the planets, *i.e.* that, while passing through
part of their orbits, they appear to us to move in a direction contrary
to the order of the Zodiac. In what follows he represents the views of
the ancient astronomy, imagining a series of concentric spheres,
allotted to the several planets, the planetary motions being
accomplished by the rotation of the spheres. Beyond the planetary
spheres is the sphere allotted to the fixed stars, within which the
others revolve. See Gale, *Opusc. Mythol.* (1688), p 550; and
Introduction to Colet’s *Lectures on Corinthians,* pp. xl–xliii.

<span id="fn_1077"></span>[CCLVIII:1079](2050140.htm#fr_1077) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p28"></span> [Heb. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[CCLVIII:1080](2050140.htm#fr_1078) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p30"></span> The thought is found in <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p30.1"></span>[Psalm xxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p30.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1079"></span>[CCLVIII:1081](2050140.htm#fr_1079) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p30.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p31"></span> [1 Tim. i.
7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p31.1"></span>.
S. Gregory quotes from memory, viz., <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p31.2"></span>περὶ ὧν διατείνονται</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p31.3"></span>περὶ τίνων
διαβεβαιοῦνται</span>

<span id="fn_1080"></span>[CCLIX:1082](2050140.htm#fr_1080) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p33"></span> [Heb. xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[CCLIX:1083](2050140.htm#fr_1081) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p35"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Psalm lxxxiv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p35.2"></span>,
“in whose heart are thy ways;” but LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p35.3"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p35.4"></span>ναβάσεις ἐν τῇ καρδί& 139· αὐτοῦ
διέθετο</span>.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[CCLIX:1084](2050140.htm#fr_1082) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p35.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p36"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p36.1"></span>[Gen. xviii.
27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p36.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[CCLIX:1085](2050140.htm#fr_1083) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p36.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p37"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p37.1"></span>[Gen. xv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p37.2"></span>;
[Rom. iv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#022)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p37.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[CCLIX:1086](2050140.htm#fr_1084) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p37.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p38"></span> [Rom. viii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[CCLIX:1087](2050140.htm#fr_1085) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p39"></span> [Heb. xi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[CCLX:1088](2050140.htm#fr_1086) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p40"></span> [Ps. lxxxix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[CCLX:1089](2050140.htm#fr_1087) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p41"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p41.1"></span>[Ecclesiastes v.
2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p41.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[CCLX:1090](2050140.htm#fr_1088) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p45"></span> [Heb. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[CCLX:1091](2050140.htm#fr_1089) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p46"></span> [Heb. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[CCLXII:1092](2050140.htm#fr_1090) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p48"></span> S. [John xxi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#025)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[CCLXII:1093](2050140.htm#fr_1091) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p48.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p49"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[CCLXII:1094](2050140.htm#fr_1092) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p50"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p50.1"></span>.
LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p50.2"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p50.3"></span>πόστασίς μου</span> (not <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p50.4"></span>αἰ& 240·ν</span>, which
would be the exact equivalent to the Heb.).

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[CCLXIV:1095](2050140.htm#fr_1093) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p55"></span> Oehler notices that the Paris editt.
have not these words, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.2"></span>ϋ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.3"></span>πνον, ἄνοσον</span>: but that John the
Franciscan is a witness that they were in his codex (the Pithœan): for
he says, “after this follows <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.4"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.5"></span>ϋ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.6"></span>πνος ἄνθρωπος</span>, which have crept in
from the oversight of a not <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.7"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.8"></span>ϋ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.9"></span>πνος</span> copyist, and therefore ought to
be expurged:” not being aware that very ancient copies write <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p55.10"></span>ἄ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p55.11"></span>νθρωπος ανος</span>,
so that <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.12"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p55.13"></span>νοσον</span> is the true reading, having
been changed, but not introduced, by the error of a copyist.

<span id="fn_1094"></span>[CCLXV:1096](2050140.htm#fr_1094) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p60"></span> [Ps. ciii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1095"></span>[CCLXV:1097](2050140.htm#fr_1095) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p60.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p61"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p61.1"></span>[Wisdom xiii.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p61.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1096"></span>[CCLXV:1098](2050140.htm#fr_1096) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p62.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p63"></span> [Ps. xvi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p63.1"></span>.
S. Gregory quotes the LXX. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p63.2"></span>τῶν ἀγαθῶν μου οὐ χρείαν ἔχεις</span>,
which is closely followed by the Vulgate “bonorum meorum non eges,” and
the Arab. “Thou needest not my good actions.” Heb. “I have no good
beyond thee.”

<span id="fn_1097"></span>[CCLXVII:1099](2050140.htm#fr_1097) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p67.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p68"></span> Oehler’s reading and stopping are both
faulty here, viz., <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p68.1"></span>οὐκ οἶδα περὶ τίνος λεγόμενον τί κοινὸν
ἔχει κ.τ.λ</span>. Manifestly the stop should be at <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p68.2"></span>λεγόμενον</span>, and
the reading of the editt. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p68.3"></span>παρὰ τίνος</span> is right.

<span id="fn_1098"></span>[CCLXVII:1100](2050140.htm#fr_1098) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p68.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p69"></span> It is not necessary to change the
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p69.1"></span>τὸ</span> here to
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p69.2"></span>τῷ</span> as
Oehler suggests. The Munich Cod. omits it altogether. But he has done
good service to the text, by supplying from his Codices all that
follows, down to “the same sort of argument” (except that the first
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p69.3"></span>διαγωνίζεσθαι</span> is probably a gloss).

<span id="fn_1099"></span>[CCLXVIII:1101](2050140.htm#fr_1099) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p71.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p72"></span> The definition of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p72.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p72.2"></span>πίνοια</span>, *i.e.*
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p72.3"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p72.4"></span>φοδος εὑρετικὴ τῶν
ἀγνοουμένων, διὰ τῶν προσεχῶν τε καὶ ἀκολούθων</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p72.5"></span>τὸ ἐφέξῆς
ἐξευρίσκουσα</span>

<span id="fn_1100"></span>[CCLXVIII:1102](2050140.htm#fr_1100) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p73.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p74"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p74.1"></span>[Job xxxviii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#036)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p74.2"></span>.
LXX. <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p74.3"></span>Τίς δὲ ἔδωκε
γυναιξὶν ὑφάσματος σοφίαν, ἢ ποικιλτικὴν ἐπιστήμην</span>

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[CCLXIX:1103](2050140.htm#fr_1101) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p80"></span> Cf. Origen c. Celsum, vi. 65. Celsus
had said, “God cannot be named.” “This requires a distinction to be
made. If Celsus means that there is nothing in the signification of
words that can express the qualities of God, what he says is true,
seeing that there are many other qualities that cannot be named. Who,
for instance, can express in words the difference of quality between the
sweetness of a date and that of a fig? Peculiar individual qualities
cannot be expressed in a word. No wonder, then, that in this absolute
sense God cannot be named. But if by ‘name’ we only mean the possible
expression of some one thing about God, by way of leading on the
listener, and producing in him such a notion *about* God as human
faculties can reach to, then there is nothing strange in saying, that
God can have a name.”

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[CCLXIX:1104](2050140.htm#fr_1102) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p80.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p81"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.1"></span>τῃ ἔξωθεν φιλοσοφί& 139·</span>. Eunomius,
in this accusation, must have been thinking, in the <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p81.2"></span>θέσει</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p81.3"></span>φύσει</span>
controversy on the origin of language, of Democritus, who called words
“statues in sound,” *i.e.* ascribed to them a certain amount of
artificiality. But it is doubtful whether the opinion of the purely
human origin of language can be ascribed to him, when we consider
another expression of his, that “words were statues in sound, but
statues not made by the hands of men, but by the gods themselves.”
Language with him was conventional, but it was not arbitrary. Again,
Plato defines a word, an imitation in sound of that which it imitates
(Cratylus, 423 B), and Aristotle calls words imitations (Rhet. iii. 1).
But both of them were very far indeed from tracing language back to mere
*onamatopœia*, i.e. ascribing it to <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.4"></span>θέσις</span> (agreement), as opposed to
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p81.5"></span>φύσις</span> in
the sense of the earlier Greek philosophy, the “essence” of the thing
named, rather than the “nature” of the names. Long before them
Pythagoras had said, “the wisest of all things is Number, and next to
Number, that which gives names.” These oracular words do not countenance
the idea that the origin of language was purely human. Perhaps Epicurus
more definitely than any taught that in the first formation of language
men acted unconsciously, moved by nature (in the modern sense), and that
then as a second stage there was an agreement or understanding to use a
certain sound for a certain conception. Against this Heraclitus (<span
class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p81.6"></span>b.c.</span> 503) had
taught that words exist <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.7"></span>φύσει</span>. “Words are like the shadows
of things, like the pictures of trees and mountains reflected in the
river, like our own images when we look into a mirror.” We know at all
events here what he did *not* mean, viz., that man imposed what names he
pleased on the objects round him. Heraclitus’ “nature” is a very
different thing from the Darwinian Nature; it is the inherent fitness
between the object and name. Eunomius, then, was hardly justified in
calling the Greek philosophy, as a whole, atheistical in this matter,
and “against Providence.” This <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.8"></span>φύσις</span>, the impalpable force in the
things named, could still be represented as the will of the Deity.
Eunomius outdoes Origen even, or any Christian writer, in contending for
the sacredness of names. He makes the Deity the name-giver, but with the
sole object of deifying his “Ungenerate.” Perhaps Basil’s teaching of
the human faculty of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.9"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p81.10"></span>Επίνοια</span> working under God as the
name-giver is the truest statement of all, and harmonizes most with
modern thought.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[CCLXX:1105](2050140.htm#fr_1103) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p82.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p83"></span> [2 Cor. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1104"></span>[CCLXXII:1106](2050140.htm#fr_1104) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p86.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p87"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p87.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1105"></span>[CCLXXII:1107](2050140.htm#fr_1105) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p88.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p89"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p89.1"></span>[Ps. xix.
1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p89.2"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1106"></span>[CCLXXII:1108](2050140.htm#fr_1106) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p90.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p91"></span> [Rom. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p91.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1107"></span>[CCLXXIII:1109](2050140.htm#fr_1107) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p91.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p92"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.1"></span>῎</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.2"></span>Η</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.3"></span>γαρ</span>. Both Codd. & editt. read so; as
Oehler testifies, though he has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.4"></span>῏</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.5"></span>Η</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p92.6"></span>γὰρ</span>.

<span id="fn_1108"></span>[CCLXXIII:1110](2050140.htm#fr_1108) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p93.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p94"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p94.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p94.2"></span>ποφαίνων</span> as referring to Moses, with
Oehler, instead of the conjecture of John the Franciscan <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p94.3"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p94.4"></span>ποφαίνουσα</span>, in
the Paris edit. Even the Pithœan has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p94.5"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p94.6"></span>ποφαίνων</span>

<span id="fn_1109"></span>[CCLXXIV:1111](2050140.htm#fr_1109) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p97"></span> [Ps.
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010), [Gen.
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p97.1"></span>[Ps. xxx.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p97.2"></span>
(LXX.). [Gen. viii. 21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p97.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1110"></span>[CCLXXIV:1112](2050140.htm#fr_1110) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p97.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p98"></span> [Ps. xxxix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1111"></span>[CCLXXIV:1113](2050140.htm#fr_1111) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p98.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p99"></span> Or. Cat. c. 1. “For since our nature
is liable to corruption, and weak, therefore is our life short, our
strength unsubstantial, our word unstable (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p99.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p99.2"></span>παγὴς</span>);” and see note.

<span id="fn_1112"></span>[CCLXXIV:1114](2050140.htm#fr_1112) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p99.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p100"></span> [Lev. ii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p100.1"></span>,
seqq.

<span id="fn_1113"></span>[CCLXXIV:1115](2050140.htm#fr_1113) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p100.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p101"></span> Nebel is defined by Epiphanius de
pond. et mens. c. 24, as follows, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p101.1"></span>Νέβελ οἴνου, ὅπερ ἐστὶ μέτρον ξεστῶν
ρ'ν'</span> (150 pints). The word is merely a transcription of the
Hebrew for a skin, *i.e.* wine-skin, “bottle.” Cf. [Hosea iii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p101.2"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p101.3"></span>νέβελ
οἴνου</span> (LXX.): Symmachus has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p101.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p101.5"></span>σκος</span>.

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[CCLXXV:1116](2050140.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p101.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p102"></span> Here is the answer to Eunomius’
contention above (p. 270), that “in the earliest of the sacred records
before the creation of man, the naming of fruit and seed are mentioned
in Holy Writ.” He calls Basil, for not observing this, a pagan and
atheist. So below he calls him a follower of Valentinus, “a sower of
tares,” for making the human faculty (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p102.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p102.2"></span>πίνοια</span>) the maker of names, even of
those of the Only-begotten; apparently, as Valentinus multiplied the
names of Christ.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[CCLXXV:1117](2050140.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p102.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p103"></span> [1 Tim. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[CCLXXV:1118](2050140.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p104"></span> S. [John xii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p104.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[CCLXXVI:1119](2050140.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p107"></span> [Gen. xi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1118"></span>[CCLXXVI:1120](2050140.htm#fr_1118) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p107.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p108"></span> A hit at Eunomius.

<span id="fn_1119"></span>[CCLXXVI:1121](2050140.htm#fr_1119) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p109.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p110"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p110.1"></span>μηδὲ ἀρχαίζειν</span>: therefore, if they
are not the Divine language, *a fortiori* this is not. The word cannot
possibly mean here “to grow obsolete.”

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[CCLXXVI:1122](2050140.htm#fr_1120) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p110.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p111"></span> *hastily improvised.* But Origen, c.
Celsum iii. 6, says—“Celsus has not shewn himself a just critic of the
differing accounts of the Egyptians and the Jews.…He does not see that
it was not possible for so large a number of rebellious Egyptians, after
starting off in this way, to have changed their language at the very
moment of their insurrection, and so become a separate nation, so that
those who one day spoke Egyptian suddenly spoke a complete Hebrew
dialect. Allow for a moment that when they left Egypt they rejected also
their mother tongue; how was it that, thereupon, they did not adopt the
Syrian or Phœnician, but the Hebrew which was so different from both
these?…For the Hebrew had been their national language before they went
down into Egypt:” And, i. 16—“I wonder how Celsus can admit the
Odrysians amongst the most ancient as well as the wisest peoples, but
will admit the Jews into neither, notwithstanding that there are many
books in Egypt and Phœnicia and Greece which testify to their antiquity.
Any one who likes can read Flavius Josephus’ two books on the antiquity
of the Jews, where he makes a large collection of writers who witness to
this.” And yet, iii. 7, he goes on to say (what Gregory is here alluding
to) that while any way the Hebrew language was never Egyptian, “yet if
we look deeper, we might find it possible to say in the case of the
Exodus that there was a miracle: viz. the whole mass of the Hebrew
people receiving a language; that such language was the gift of God, as
one of their own prophets has expressed it, ‘when he came out of Egypt,
he heard a strange language.’”

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[CCLXXVI:1123](2050140.htm#fr_1121) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p111.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p112"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p112.1"></span>καί τις</span>. This reading (and not the
interrogative <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p112.2"></span>τίς</span>, as Oehler) is required by the
context, where Gregory actually favours this theory of the lateness of
the Hebrew tongue: and is confirmed by Gretser’s Latin, “Et nescio quis
Prophetæ sermo.”

<span id="fn_1122"></span>[CCLXXVI:1124](2050140.htm#fr_1122) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p112.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p113"></span> [Ps. lxxxi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1123"></span>[CCLXXVI:1125](2050140.htm#fr_1123) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p114.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p115"></span> [Heb. v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1124"></span>[CCLXXVII:1126](2050140.htm#fr_1124) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p116.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p117"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.2"></span>ποδράντες</span>. So also the Paris editt.
The Munich <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.3"></span>ms.</span> has <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.4"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.5"></span>ποδράσαντες</span>, which form of the
aorist is not found at all in classic Greek, and is only used as Oehler
notices by Epiphanius (*e.g.* Panar. liv. 1; lxviii. 4) and a few other
writers of a debased style.

<span id="fn_1125"></span>[CCLXXVII:1127](2050140.htm#fr_1125) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p117.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p118"></span> [Exod. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1126"></span>[CCLXXVII:1128](2050140.htm#fr_1126) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p119"></span> [Rom. viii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1127"></span>[CCLXXVII:1129](2050140.htm#fr_1127) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p119.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p120"></span> [Gen. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p120.1"></span>,
sqq.

<span id="fn_1128"></span>[CCLXXVII:1130](2050140.htm#fr_1128) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p121.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p122"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p122.1"></span>τὰ παρατέθεντα παρ᾽ ἐκείνων
ἀνθυποίσω</span>. He does this below. “And we will return to his
argument that even thence we may muster reinforcements for the Truth.”
Gregory there goes on to show that Eunomius, who attacks the doctrine
that the names of God are the result of Conception, and makes their
Scriptural use a proof that they are God’s own direct teaching, himself
seeks to overthrow this doctrine by means of the term Ungenerate, which
is *not* in Scripture: hence, by his own showing, this theory about the
Scripture names is not true. The above is the reading of the Munich
<span class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p122.2"></span>ms.</span>: Oehler
has the vox nihili <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p122.3"></span>παρεθέντα</span>

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[CCLXXVIII:1131](2050140.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p123.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p124"></span> [Job xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[CCLXXIX:1132](2050140.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p124.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p125"></span> [Exod. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1131"></span>[CCLXXIX:1133](2050140.htm#fr_1131) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p126.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p127"></span> [Gen. xxv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1132"></span>[CCLXXIX:1134](2050140.htm#fr_1132) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p128"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p128.1"></span>[Gen. xxxviii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p128.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1133"></span>[CCLXXIX:1135](2050140.htm#fr_1133) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p128.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p129"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p129.1"></span>[Gen. xxix.
32-35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#032)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p129.2"></span>

<span id="fn_1134"></span>[CCLXXX:1136](2050140.htm#fr_1134) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p131"></span> [Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1135"></span>[CCLXXX:1137](2050140.htm#fr_1135) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p131.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p132"></span> [Job xiv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p132.1"></span>.
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p132.2"></span>βροτὸς γὰρ
γεννητὸς γυναικὸς, ὀλιγόβιος καὶ πλήρής ὀργῆς</span>.

<span id="fn_1136"></span>[CCLXXX:1138](2050140.htm#fr_1136) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p133.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p134"></span> [Gal. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1137"></span>[CCLXXX:1139](2050140.htm#fr_1137) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p134.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p135"></span> [Heb. ix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p135.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1138"></span>[CCLXXX:1140](2050140.htm#fr_1138) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p135.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p136"></span> [Gen. xlix.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p136.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1139"></span>[CCLXXX:1141](2050140.htm#fr_1139) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p136.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p137"></span> [Hosea xiii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1140"></span>[CCLXXX:1142](2050140.htm#fr_1140) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p137.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p138"></span> [Hosea xiii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1141"></span>[CCLXXXI:1143](2050140.htm#fr_1141) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p138.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p139"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p139.1"></span>διαβέβληται</span>. The Latin, “vulgo
usurpata sunt,” misses the force of the Greek. Or “are disliked because
of their obvious meaning.” Cf. above “even though these words…*seem not
above suspicion* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p139.2"></span>διαβεβλῆοθαι δοκεῖ</span>).” For this use
of <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p139.3"></span>διαβάλλεσθαι</span> (to be brought into
suspicion or odium), cf. Origen c. Cels. iii. 58, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p139.4"></span>διαβεβλημενῳ πρὸς
ἀρετὴν καὶ καλοκἀγαθίαν</span>, *i.e.* “who has quite broken with virtue
and decency?” and vi. 42, where Celsus blasphemously says, that “the Son
of God ought to have himself punished the Devil, rather than frighten
with his threats that mankind which had been dragged into the quarrel by
himself” (<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p139.5"></span>τοῖς
ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ διαβεβλημένοις ἀνθρώποις</span>): a passage quite missed in
the Latin.

<span id="fn_1142"></span>[CCLXXXI:1144](2050140.htm#fr_1142) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p140.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p141"></span> S. [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p141.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1143"></span>[CCLXXXI:1145](2050140.htm#fr_1143) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p142.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p143"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p143.1"></span>῏</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p143.2"></span>Η</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p143.3"></span>μικροψύχων κ.τ.λ</span>. Oehler’s stopping
here (and accent) is better than that of the Codices. *i.e.* <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p143.4"></span>ὑ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p143.5"></span>ποκινήσειεν, ἢ
κ.τ.λ</span>.

<span id="fn_1144"></span>[CCLXXXI:1146](2050140.htm#fr_1144) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p143.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p144"></span> In other words, analogy implies
thought (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p144.1"></span>λόγος</span>).

<span id="fn_1145"></span>[CCLXXXII:1147](2050140.htm#fr_1145) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p144.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p145"></span> *i.e.*no other name. See note on
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p145.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p145.2"></span>Αγέννητος</span>, p.
100.

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[CCLXXXII:1148](2050140.htm#fr_1146) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p146.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p147"></span> [Is. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[CCLXXXIII:1149](2050140.htm#fr_1147) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p148.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p149"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p149.1"></span>[Ps. lxxxvi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p149.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1148"></span>[CCLXXXIII:1150](2050140.htm#fr_1148) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p149.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p150"></span> [Ps. xcii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#015)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1149"></span>[CCLXXXIII:1151](2050140.htm#fr_1149) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p150.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p151"></span> Oehler has restored <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p151.1"></span>γνωστικῶν</span> from
his Codices, and notices that Cotelerius, Eccl. Gr. Monum. tom. ii. p.
622, had made the same change. Gulonius translates Gnosticorum. But the
Editt. have <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p151.2"></span>γνωριστικῶν</span>

<span id="fn_1150"></span>[CCLXXXIII:1152](2050140.htm#fr_1150) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p151.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p152"></span> S. [Matt. xxv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1151"></span>[CCLXXXV:1153](2050140.htm#fr_1151) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p157.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p158"></span> [Ps.
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001), [Ps.
80:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#001), [John
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p158.1"></span>[Ps. xxiii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p158.2"></span>;
lxxx. 1. Cf. S. [John 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p158.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1152"></span>[CCLXXXV:1154](2050140.htm#fr_1152) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p158.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p159"></span> [Ps. xxxvi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p159.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1153"></span>[CCLXXXV:1155](2050140.htm#fr_1153) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p159.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p160"></span> S. [Matt. xxi.
42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1154"></span>[CCLXXXV:1156](2050140.htm#fr_1154) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p160.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p161"></span> S. [Matt. iii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1155"></span>[CCLXXXV:1157](2050140.htm#fr_1155) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p162.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p163"></span> S. [John i.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p163.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1156"></span>[CCLXXXV:1158](2050140.htm#fr_1156) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p163.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p164"></span> [Acts ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p164.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1157"></span>[CCLXXXV:1159](2050140.htm#fr_1157) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p164.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p165"></span> S. [John vi.
32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p165.1"></span>, sqq.

<span id="fn_1158"></span>[CCLXXXVI:1160](2050140.htm#fr_1158) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p166.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p167"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p167.1"></span>[Gen. xviii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p167.2"></span>; xxi. 6.

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[CCLXXXVI:1161](2050140.htm#fr_1159) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p169.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p170"></span> *he,*i.e. Basil. “God’s nature can be
looked at in as many aspects as corn can (*i.e.* in its growth,
fructification, distribution, &c.).”

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[CCLXXXVI:1162](2050140.htm#fr_1160) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p170.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p171"></span> *He,*i.e. Basil. The words <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p171.1"></span>ὁ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p171.2"></span>Εὐνόμιος</span>, here
are the additions of a copyist who did not understand that <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p171.3"></span>εἶπεν</span> referred
to Basil, or else <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p171.4"></span>φησὶν</span> must be read with them.
Certainly <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p171.5"></span>ταῦτα
εἰπὼν</span> below must refer to the same subject as <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p171.6"></span>εἶπεν</span>.

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[CCLXXXVI:1163](2050140.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p171.7"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p172"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p172.1"></span>διαφόρους δέχεσθαι ἐπινοίας</span>. Oehler
has rightly omitted the words that follow (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p172.2"></span>διά τε τὰς ἐννοίας</span>), both because
of their irrelevancy, and from the authority of his <span
class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p172.3"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[CCLXXXVII:1164](2050140.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p173.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p174"></span> Indestructibility. Such terms
(“not-composite,” “indivisible,” “imperishable”) were the inheritance
which Christian controversy received from the former struggle with
Stoicism. In the hands of Origen, they had been aimed at the Stoic
doctrine of the Deity as that of *corporeal* Spirit, which does not
perish, only because there is no cause sufficient. “If one does not see
the consequences of such an assertion, one ought to blush” (in Johann.
xiii. 21). The consequences of course are that God, the Word, and our
souls, made in His image, are all perishable; for all body, in that it
is matter, is by the Stoic assumption, liable to change.

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[CCLXXXVIII:1165](2050140.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p175.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p176"></span> [Zech. ix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p176.1"></span>
(LXX.).

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[CCLXXXVIII:1166](2050140.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p177.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p178"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p178.1"></span>τὸ νόημα</span>. There is a lacuna in the
Paris Editt., beginning here, and extending to “ungenerate,” just below.
Oehler’s Codices have supplied it.

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[CCLXXXIX:1167](2050140.htm#fr_1165) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p179.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p180"></span> S. [John xiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p180.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[CCLXXXIX:1168](2050140.htm#fr_1166) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p180.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p181"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p181.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[CCXC:1169](2050140.htm#fr_1167) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p182.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p183"></span> [Ps. cx.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[CCXC:1170](2050140.htm#fr_1168) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p184.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p185"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p185.1"></span>[Gen.
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#020)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p185.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[CCXC:1171](2050140.htm#fr_1169) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p186.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p187"></span> Compare with this view of Eunomius on
the sacredness of names, this striking passage from Origen (c. Cels. v.
43). “We hold, then, that the origin of names is not to be found in any
formal agreements on the part of those who gave them, as Aristotle
thinks. Human language, in fact, did not have its beginning from man.
Any one can see this who reflects upon the real nature of the
incantations which in the different languages are associated with the
patriarchal names of those languages. The names which have their native
power in such and such a language cease to have this influence of their
peculiar sound when they are changed into another language. This has
been often observed in the names given even to living men: one who from
his birth has been called so and so in Greek will never, if we change
his name into Egyptian or Roman, be made to feel or act as he can when
called by the first name given.…If this is true in the case of names
given to men, what are we to think of the names connected in some way or
other with the Deity? For instance, there must be some change in
translating Abraham’s name into Greek: some new expression given to
‘Isaac,’ and ‘Jacob’: and, while he who repeats the incantation or the
oath names the ‘God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob,’ he produces
those particular effects by the mere force and working of those names:
because the dæmons are mustered by him who utters them: but if on the
other hand he says, ‘God of the chosen Father of the Crowd,’ ‘of the
Laughter,’ ‘of the Supplanter,’ he can do nothing with the names so
expressed, any more than with any other powerless instrument.…We can say
the same of ‘Sabaoth,’ which is used in many exorcisms: if we change it
to ‘Lord of Powers,’ or, ‘Lord of Hosts,’ or, ‘Almighty,’ we can do
nothing …”—and (46), “This, too, is the reason why we ourselves prefer
any degradation to that of owning Zeus to be Deity. We cannot conceive
of Zeus as the same as Sabaoth: or as Divine in any of all possible
meanings.…If the Egyptians offer us ‘Ammon,’ or death, we shall take the
latter, rather than pronounce the divinity of ‘Ammon.’ The Scythians may
tell us that their Papœus is the God of the Universe, we shall not
listen: we firmly believe in the God of the Universe, but we must not
call him Papœus, making that a name for absolute Deity, as the Being who
occupies the desert, the nation, and the language of the Scythians would
desire: although, indeed, it cannot be sin for any to use the
appellation of the Deity in his own mother tongue, whether it be the
Scythian way or the Egyptian.”

<span id="fn_1170"></span>[CCXCII:1172](2050140.htm#fr_1170) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p188.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p189"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p189.1"></span>κέραιρε</span>, according to Oehler’s
conjecture, from Iliad ix. 203. All the Codd. and Editt., read <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p189.2"></span>κέκαιρε</span>,
however. The Editt., in the Homeric words which follow, show a strange
ignorance, which Gulonius has reproduced, viz. Phocheiri, Poudese,
Ische! (for <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p189.3"></span>φῦ
χειρὶ, Δούπησε, ῎Ιαχε</span>)

<span id="fn_1171"></span>[CCXCII:1173](2050140.htm#fr_1171) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p191.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p192"></span> [Ps. cxlvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1172"></span>[CCXCIII:1174](2050140.htm#fr_1172) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p192.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p193"></span> [Ps. cvi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#040)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[CCXCIII:1175](2050140.htm#fr_1173) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p193.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p194"></span> [1 Sam. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#035)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1174"></span>[CCXCIII:1176](2050140.htm#fr_1174) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p194.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p195"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p195.1"></span>[Ps. lxxviii.
65](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p195.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1175"></span>[CCXCIII:1177](2050140.htm#fr_1175) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p195.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p196"></span> [Gen. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p196.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[CCXCIV:1178](2050140.htm#fr_1176) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p198.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p199"></span> The words here attributed to Isaiah
are found in [Job ix. 9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p199.1"></span> (LXX.): and Orion in [Isaiah xiii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p199.2"></span>
(LXX.), with “the stars of heaven;” and in [Amos v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p199.3"></span>
with “the seven stars.”

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[CCXCIV:1179](2050140.htm#fr_1177) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p199.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p200"></span> For Aseroth perhaps Mazaroth should
be read. Cf. <span id="viii.ii.ii-p200.1"></span>[Job xxxviii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#032)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p200.2"></span>, “Canst thou lead forth the Mazaroth in
their season?” (R.V.) and [2 Kings xxiii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p200.3"></span>,
“to the planets (<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p200.4"></span>τοῖς μαζουρῶθ</span>),” *i.e.* the twelve
signs of the Zodiac.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[CCXCIV:1180](2050140.htm#fr_1178) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p200.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p201"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p201.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p201.2"></span>Αμαλθείας κέρας</span>. So LXX. for the
name of Job’s third daughter, Keren-happuch, for which Symmachus and
Aquila have <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p201.3"></span>Καρναφούκ</span>, *i.e.* Horn of purple
(fucus). The LXX. translator of Job was rather fond of classical
allusions, and so brought in the Greek horn (of plenty). Amalthea’s
goat, that suckled Jupiter, broke its horn.

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p202"></span>“Sustulit hoc Nymphe, cinctumque
recentibus herbis

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p203"></span>Et plenum pomis ad Jovis ora
tulit.”—Ovid, *Fasti,* v. 123.

<span id="fn_1179"></span>[CCXCIV:1181](2050140.htm#fr_1179) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p203.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p204"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.1"></span>[Isaiah xiii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.2"></span>. <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.3"></span>καὶ ἀναπαύσονται ἐκεῖ σειρῆνες, καὶ
δαιμόνια ἐκεῖ ὀρχήσονται</span>, “and ostriches shall dwell there, and
satyrs shall dance there” (R.V.). The LXX. render the Hebrew
(bath-jaana) by <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.4"></span>σειρῆνες</span> also in [Isa.
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013), [Isa.
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#020), [Mic.
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008), [Jer.
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#039)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.5"></span>[Isaiah xxxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.6"></span>, xliii. 20: and in [Micah i.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p204.7"></span>:
[Jeremiah i. 39](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#039)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p204.8"></span>. Cyril of Alexandria has on the first
passage, “Birds that have a sweet note: or, according to the Jewish
interpretation, the owl.” And this is followed by the majority of
commentators. Cf. Gray—

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p205"></span>“The moping owl doth to the moon
complain.”

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p206"></span>But Bochart has many and strong
arguments to prove that the ostrich, *i.e.* the <span
class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p206.1"></span>στρουθο-κάμηλος</span>, or “large sparrow
with the long neck,” is meant by bath-jaana: it has a high sharp
unpleasant note. Cf. <span id="viii.ii.ii-p206.2"></span>[Job xxx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p206.3"></span>, “I am a companion to ostriches” (R.V.),
speaking of his bitter cry.—Jerome also translates “habitabunt ibi
struthiones;” and the LXX. elsewhere than above by <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p206.4"></span>στρουθία</span>.
Gregory follows the traditional interpretation, of some *pleasant* note;
and somehow identifies the Greek word with the Hebrew.

<span id="fn_1180"></span>[CCXCIV:1182](2050140.htm#fr_1180) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p207.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p208"></span> [Ps. xvi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[CCXCIV:1183](2050140.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p209.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p210"></span> [Is. xliii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p210.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[CCXCV:1184](2050140.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p210.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p211"></span> [Rom. xvi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p211.1"></span>.—On Eunomius’ knowledge of Scripture, see
Socrates iv. 7. “He had a very slender knowledge of the letter of
Scripture: he was wholly unable to enter into the spirit of it. Yet he
abounded in words, and was accustomed to repeat the same thoughts in
different terms without ever arriving at a clear explanation of what he
had proposed to himself. Of this his seven books on the Apostle’s
Epistle to the Romans, on which he expended a quantity of vain labour,
is a remarkable proof.” But see c. Eunom. II. p. 107.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[CCXCV:1185](2050140.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p211.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p212"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p212.1"></span>πρόσοψιν</span>, the reading of Oehler’s
<span class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p212.2"></span>mss.</span>: also
of Pithœus’ <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p212.3"></span>ms.</span>, which John the Franciscan
changed into the vox nihili <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p212.4"></span>προσῆψιν</span> (putredinem), which
appears in the Paris Editt. of 1638.

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[CCXCV:1186](2050140.htm#fr_1184) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p212.5"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p213"></span> These words are in S. Basil’s first
Book against Eunomius.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[CCXCVI:1187](2050140.htm#fr_1185) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p215.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p216"></span> [Heb. vii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#003)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p216.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[CCXCVI:1188](2050140.htm#fr_1186) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p216.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p217"></span> Cf. [Ps.
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004), [Ps.
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014), [Ps.
74:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#012)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p217.1"></span>[Ps. xliv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p217.2"></span>,
and xlviii. 14, with lxxiv. 12.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[CCXCVII:1189](2050140.htm#fr_1187) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p218.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p219"></span> Valentinus “placed in the *pleroma*
(so the Gnostics called the habitation of the Deity) thirty *æons*
(ages), of which one half were male, and the other female” (Mosheim),
*i.e.* these æons were co-eternal with the Deity.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[CCXCVII:1190](2050140.htm#fr_1188) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p219.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p220"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p220.1"></span>βάρβαροι</span> here being not opposed to
“Greeks” must imply mere *inability to speak aright:* amongst those who
claimed to use Catholic language another “barbarism,” or “jargon,” had
arisen (*i.e.* that of heresy, whether Platonist or Gnostic), different
from that which separated the Greeks from the Jews, Africans, Romans
alike. Hesychius; <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p220.2"></span>βάρβαροι οἱ ἀπαίδευτοι</span>. So to S.
Paul “the people” of Malta (<span id="viii.ii.ii-p220.3"></span>[Acts
xxviii. 2-4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#002)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p220.4"></span>), as to others the Apostles, were
barbarian.

<span id="fn_1189"></span>[CCXCVIII:1191](2050140.htm#fr_1189) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p222.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p223"></span> *i.e.* <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p223.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p223.2"></span>γέννητος</span>

<span id="fn_1190"></span>[CCXCVIII:1192](2050140.htm#fr_1190) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p223.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p224"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p224.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p224.2"></span>λλοκότως αὐτοῦ τὰς τοιαύτας στομφώδεις καὶ
ἀδιανοήτους φωνὰς</span>…<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p224.3"></span>πρὸς τὸ συμβὰν ἀποπτύοντος</span>

<span id="fn_1191"></span>[CCXCVIII:1193](2050140.htm#fr_1191) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p224.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p225"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p225.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p225.2"></span>κβαλὼν τοῦ λόγου σχέσεις τινὰς καὶ
παραθέσεις</span>. Gulonius’ Latin is wrong; “protulit in medium.”

<span id="fn_1192"></span>[CCXCIX:1194](2050140.htm#fr_1192) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p226.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p227"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p227.1"></span>εἴπερ τὸ ἁπλοῦν</span> with the editt.,
which is manifestly required by the sense.

<span id="fn_1193"></span>[CCXCIX:1195](2050140.htm#fr_1193) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p228.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p229"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p229.1"></span>συνηθείας</span>, lit. usage of language.
Cf. Plato, Theæt. 168 B, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p229.2"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p229.3"></span>κ συνηθείας ῥημάτων τε καὶ
ὀνομάτων</span>. It is used absolutely, by the Grammarians, for the
“Vulgar dialect.”

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[CCC:1196](2050140.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p230.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p231"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p231.1"></span>τῆς κατα φύσιν σχετικῆς σημασίας</span>.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[CCCI:1197](2050140.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p232.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p233"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p233.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p233.2"></span>πιβολὰς</span>.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[CCCIII:1198](2050140.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p237.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p238"></span> The Latin is wrong here, “secundum
rerum intellectarum distinctricem significationem;” for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p238.1"></span>νοουμένων</span>
without the article must be the gen. absol. Besides this the <span
class="c22"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p238.2"></span>mss.</span> read <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p238.3"></span>παράτασιν</span> (not
<span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p238.4"></span>παράστασιν</span>).

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[CCCIV:1199](2050140.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p239.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p240"></span> S. [John xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#025)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p240.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[CCCIV:1200](2050140.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p241.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p242"></span> This may mean “short-hand” *i.e.*
something difficult to decipher. See Book I. vi. note 10.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[CCCVII:1201](2050140.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p247.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p248"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p248.1"></span>εὐλαβείαν τινὰ προσποίητον καὶ
ἐπίληπτον</span>

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[CCCVII:1202](2050140.htm#fr_1200) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p248.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p249"></span> See Book I. vii., ix., xi.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[CCCIX:1203](2050140.htm#fr_1201) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p251.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p252"></span> <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p252.1"></span>[Wisdom xiii.
5](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#005)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p252.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[CCCIX:1204](2050140.htm#fr_1202) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p252.6"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p253"></span> [Ps. lv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#002)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p253.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[CCCIX:1205](2050140.htm#fr_1203) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p253.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p254"></span> [Ps. cxix.
132](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#132)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p254.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[CCCIX:1206](2050140.htm#fr_1204) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p254.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p255"></span> [Ps. xliv.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#021)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p255.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[CCCIX:1207](2050140.htm#fr_1205) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p255.4"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p256"></span> [Philip. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009)<span id="viii.ii.ii-p256.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[CCCIX:1208](2050140.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p256.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p257"></span> The theology of Gregory and his
master Origen rises above the unconscious Stoicism of Tertullian, and
even that of Clement, which has an air of materialistic pantheism about
it, owing to his attempt, like that of Eunomius, to base our knowledge
of God upon abstractions and analogies drawn from nature. The result,
indeed, of the “abstraction process” of Clement is only a multiplication
of negative terms, “immensity,” “simplicity,” “eternity,” &c. But they
will lead to nothing, if there is not already behind them all some
positive idea which we have received from *a different source.* Faith is
this source; it is described by Origen as “an ineffable grace of the
soul which comes from God in a kind of enthusiasm;” which formula
expresses the primary fact of religious consciousness such as Leibnitz
demonstrated it: and the positive idea supplied by this faculty is with
Origen *Goodness* (rather than the Good). He would put Will as well as
Mind into the Central Idea of Metaphysics, and would have the heart
governed as well as the reason. All that he says about the
“incomprehensibility” of God does not militate against this: for we must
have some idea of that which is incomprehensible to us: and the Goodness
of the Deity is the side on which we gain this idea.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[CCCIX:1209](2050140.htm#fr_1207) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p259.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p260"></span> But there are two meanings of <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p260.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p260.2"></span>θάνατος</span>,—and of
these perhaps Eunomius was thinking,—*i.e.* 1. Not dead; 2. Immortal. In
Plato’s *Phædo* there is an argument for the immortality of the soul,
certainly not the strongest one, drawn from this. It is assumed there
that the thing, whose nature is such that *so long as it exists* it
neither is nor can be dead, can never cease to exist *i.e.* the soul by
virtue of not actually dying, though capable of death, is immortal.
Perhaps this accounts for Eunomius saying (lower down) that “the
perishable is not opposed to the imperishable.”

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[CCCX:1210](2050140.htm#fr_1208) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p260.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p261"></span> [1 Tim. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#016)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p261.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[CCCX:1211](2050140.htm#fr_1209) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p263.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p264"></span> The reasoning, which precedes and
follows, amounts to this. Basil had said that the terms ungenerate,
imperishable, immortal, are privative, *i.e.* express the absence of a
quality. Eunomius objects that—No term expressive of the absence of a
quality can be God’s Name: the Ungenerate (which includes the others) is
God’s Name, therefore It does not express a privation. You mean to say,
Gregory replies, that Ungenerate, &c. does *not* mean not-generated, &c.
But what is *not* not-generated is generated (by your own law of
dichotomy); therefore, Ungenerate means generated; and you prove God
perishable and mortal. Here, the fallacy arises from Gregory’s assuming
more than Eunomius’ conclusion: *i.e.* “the Ungenerate means *not only*
the not-generated,” changes into “the Ungenerate does *not* mean,” &c.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[CCCXI:1212](2050140.htm#fr_1210) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p267.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p268"></span> This cannot have been written earlier
than 384. The preceding twelve books, of which an instalment only was
read to Gregory the Nazianzene and others during the Council of
Constantinople, 381, must have occupied him a considerable time: and
there may have been an interval after that before this essay was
composed.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[CCCXII:1213](2050140.htm#fr_1211) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p268.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p269"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p269.1"></span>τὰς στομφώδεις</span>…<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p269.2"></span>ξηροστομίας
κακοσυνθέτως διαπεραίνοντα</span>. The editt. have <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p269.3"></span>διαπεραίνοντες</span>,
which Gulonius’ Latin follows, “arrogantes has sicci oris voces malâ
compositione trajicientes,” *i.e.* his hearers get through them with bad
pronunciation.

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[CCCXII:1214](2050140.htm#fr_1212) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p270.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p271"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p271.1"></span>εἰσφθειρόμενος</span>

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[CCCXII:1215](2050140.htm#fr_1213) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p271.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p272"></span> S. [Luke iii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023)<span
id="viii.ii.ii-p272.1"></span>, sqq.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[CCCXII:1216](2050140.htm#fr_1214) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p273.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p274"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p274.1"></span>οὐκ ἦν οὐσία τὸ ἔκ τινος</span>. This is
Oehler’s reading from the <span class="c22"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p274.2"></span>mss.</span>

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[CCCXII:1217](2050140.htm#fr_1215) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p275.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p276"></span> *O flock.* This could not have been
written earlier than 384, and there is abundant testimony that Eunomius
still had his “flock.” Long before this, even soon after he had left his
see of Cyzicus, and had taken up his abode with Eudoxius, he separated
himself from that champion of the Homœan party, and held assemblies
apart because he had repeatedly entreated that his preceptor Aetius
might be received into communion (Socrates iv. 13). This must have been
about 366, before his banishment by Valens for favouring the rebellion
of Procopius. Sozomen says (vi. 29), “The heresy of Eunomius was spread
from Cilicia and the Mountains of Taurus as far as the Hellespont and
Constantinople.” In 380 at Bithynia near Constantinople “multitudes
resorted to him, some also gathered from other quarters, a few with the
design of testing his principles, and others merely from the desire of
listening to his discourses. His reputation reached the ears of the
Emperor, who would gladly have had a conference with him. But the
Empress Flacilla studiously prevented an interview taking place between
them; for she was the most faithful guard of the Nicene doctrines” (vii.
17). At the convention, however, of all the sects at Theodosius’ palace
in 382, Eunomius was present (Socrates v. 10). His <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p276.1"></span>ἔ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p276.2"></span>κθεσις τῆς
πίστεως</span> (to which he added learned notes) was laid before
Theodosius in 383. It was not till 391 that the Emperor condemned him to
banishment—the sole exception to Theodosius’ toleration. “This heretic,”
says Sozomen again, “had fixed his residence in the suburbs of
Constantinople and held frequent assemblies in private houses, where he
read his own writings. He induced many to embrace his sentiments, so
that the sectarians who were named after him became very numerous. He
died not long after his banishment, and was interred at Dacora, his
birthplace, a village of Cappadocia.”

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[CCCXIII:1218](2050140.htm#fr_1216) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p276.3"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p277"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p277.1"></span>τοῦ ὄντος</span>

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[CCCXIII:1219](2050140.htm#fr_1217) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p277.2"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p278"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p278.1"></span>τὸ μηδὲν τῷ πάντη μὴ ὄντι ταὐτὸν</span>.

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[CCCXIV:1220](2050140.htm#fr_1218) <span
id="viii.ii.ii-p279.1"></span>

<span id="viii.ii.ii-p280"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p280.1"></span>Πλὴν ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἀνελπιστέον σοι καὶ τῶν
ὀνύχων ἐκείνου</span>. Viger (De Idiotismis, p. 474), “<span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.ii.ii-p280.2"></span>Πλὴν ἀλλὰ</span>
interdum repellentis est, interdum *concedentis,*” as here ironically
and in Book I. p. 83, <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.ii.ii-p280.3"></span>πλὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐστὶν ἐν θηρίοις
κρίσις</span>, “still there is some distinction between animals.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Holy Spirit.](2050141)
