[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2050142)  [Next](2050144) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="viii.v"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p1"></span> <span id="page_CCCXXXI">p. CCCXXXI</span>
<span id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXI"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="viii.v-p1.1"></span>On “Not Three Gods.”</span>

<span id="viii.v-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="viii.v-p2.1"></span>To Ablabius.</span>

<span id="viii.v-p3"></span>————————————

<span id="viii.v-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="viii.v-p4.1"></span>Ye</span> that are strong with all might in the
inner man ought by rights to carry on the struggle against the enemies
of the truth, and not to shrink from the task, that we fathers may be
gladdened by the noble toil of our sons; for this is the prompting of
the law of nature: but as you turn your ranks, and send against us the
assaults of those darts which are hurled by the opponents of the truth,
and demand that their “hot burning coals” <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1299](#fn_1297) and their shafts sharpened by
knowledge falsely so called should be quenched with the shield of faith
by us old men, we accept your command, and make ourselves an example of
obedience <span id="fr_1298"></span>[1300](#fn_1298) , in order that you
may yourself give us the just requital on like commands, Ablabius, noble
soldier of Christ, if we should ever summon you to such a contest.

<span id="viii.v-p7"></span>In truth, the question you propound to us is
no small one, nor such that but small harm will follow if it meets with
insufficient treatment. For by the force of the question, we are at
first sight compelled to accept one or other of two erroneous opinions,
and either to say “there are three Gods,” which is unlawful, or not to
acknowledge the Godhead of the Son and the Holy Spirit, which is impious
and absurd.

<span id="viii.v-p8"></span>The argument which you state is something
like this:—Peter, James, and John, being in one human nature, are called
three men: and there is no absurdity in describing those who are united
in nature, if they are more than one, by the plural number of the name
derived from their nature. If, then, in the above case, custom admits
this, and no one forbids us to speak of those who are two as two, or
those who are more than two as three, how is it that in the case of our
statements of the mysteries of the Faith, though confessing the Three
Persons, and acknowledging no difference of nature between them, we are
in some sense at variance with our confession, when we say that the
Godhead of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost is one, and
yet forbid men to say “there are three Gods”? The question is, as I
said, very difficult to deal with: yet, if we should be able to find
anything that may give support to the uncertainty of our mind, so that
it may no longer totter and waver in this monstrous dilemma, it would be
well: on the other hand, even if our reasoning be found unequal to the
problem, we must keep for ever, firm and unmoved, the tradition which we
received by succession from the fathers, and seek from the Lord the
reason which is the advocate of our faith: and if this be found by any
of those endowed with grace, we must give thanks to Him who bestowed the
grace; but if not, we shall none the less, on those points which have
been determined, hold our faith unchangeably.

<span id="viii.v-p9"></span>What, then, is the reason that when we count
one by one those who are exhibited to us in one nature, we ordinarily
name them in the plural and speak of “so many men,” instead of calling
them all one: while in the case of the Divine nature our doctrinal
definition rejects the plurality of Gods, at once enumerating the
Persons, and at the same time not admitting the plural signification?
Perhaps one might seem to touch the point if he were to say (speaking
offhand to straightforward people), that the definition refused to
reckon Gods in any number to avoid any resemblance to the polytheism of
the heathen, lest, if we too were to enumerate the Deity, not in the
singular, but in the plural, as they are accustomed to do, there might
be supposed to be also some community of doctrine. This answer, I say,
if made to people of a more guileless spirit, might seem to be of some
weight: but in the case of the others who require that one of the
alternatives they propose should be established (either that we should
not acknowledge the Godhead in Three Persons, or that, if we do, we
should speak of those who share in the same Godhead as three), this
answer is not such as to furnish any solution of the difficulty. And
hence we must needs make our reply at greater length, tracing out the
truth as best we may; for the question is no ordinary one.

<span id="viii.v-p10"></span><span id="page_CCCXXXII">p. CCCXXXII</span>
<span id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXII"></span>We say, then, to begin with, that
the practice of calling those who are not divided <span
id="fr_1299"></span>[1301](#fn_1299) in nature by the very name of their
common nature in the plural, and saying they are “many men,” is a
customary abuse of language, and that it would be much the same thing to
say they are “many human natures.” And the truth of this we may see from
the following instance. When we address any one, we do not call him by
the name of his nature, in order that no confusion may result from the
community of the name, as would happen if every one of those who hear it
were to think that he himself was the person addressed, because the call
is made not by the proper appellation but by the common name of their
nature: but we separate him from the multitude by using that name which
belongs to him as his own;—that, I mean, which signifies the particular
subject. Thus there are many who have shared in the nature—many
disciples, say, or apostles, or martyrs—but the man in them all is one;
since, as has been said, the term “man” does not belong to the nature of
the individual as such, but to that which is common. For Luke is a man,
or Stephen is a man; but it does not follow that if any one is a man he
is therefore Luke or Stephen: but the idea of the persons admits of that
separation which is made by the peculiar attributes considered in each
severally, and when they are combined is presented to us by means of
number; yet their nature is one, at union in itself, and an absolutely
indivisible unit, not capable of increase by addition or of diminution
by subtraction, but in its essence being and continually remaining one,
inseparable even though it appear in plurality, continuous, complete,
and not divided with the individuals who participate in it. And as we
speak of a people, or a mob, or an army, or an assembly in the singular
in every case, while each of these is conceived as being in plurality,
so according to the more accurate expression, “man” would be said to be
one, even though those who are exhibited to us in the same nature make
up a plurality. Thus it would be much better to correct our erroneous
habit, so as no longer to extend to a plurality the name of the nature,
than by our bondage to habit to transfer <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1302](#fn_1300) to our statements concerning God
the error which exists in the above case. But since the correction of
the habit is impracticable (for how could you persuade any one not to
speak of those who are exhibited in the same nature as “many
men”?—indeed, in every case habit is a thing hard to change), we are not
so far wrong in not going contrary to the prevailing habit in the case
of the lower nature, since no harm results from the mistaken use of the
name: but in the case of the statement concerning the Divine nature the
various use <span id="fr_1301"></span>[1303](#fn_1301) of terms is no
longer so free from danger: for that which is of small account is in
these subjects no longer a small matter. Therefore we must confess one
God, according to the testimony of Scripture, “Hear, O Israel, the Lord
thy God is one Lord,” even though the name of Godhead extends through
the Holy Trinity. This I say according to the account we have given in
the case of human nature, in which we have learnt that it is improper to
extend the name of the nature by the mark of plurality. We must,
however, more carefully examine the name of “Godhead,” in order to
obtain, by means of the significance involved in the word, some help
towards clearing up the question before us.

<span id="viii.v-p14"></span>Most men think that the word “Godhead” is
used in a peculiar degree in respect of nature: and just as the heaven,
or the sun, or any other of the constituent parts of the universe are
denoted by proper names which are significant of the subjects, so they
say that in the case of the Supreme and Divine nature, the word
“Godhead” is fitly adapted to that which it represents to us, as a kind
of special name. We, on the other hand, following the suggestions of
Scripture, have learnt that that nature is unnameable and unspeakable,
and we say that every term either invented by the custom <span
id="fr_1302"></span>[1304](#fn_1302) of men, or handed down to us by the
Scriptures, is indeed explanatory of our conceptions of the Divine
Nature <span id="fr_1303"></span>[1305](#fn_1303) , but does not include
the signification of that nature itself. And it may be shown without
much difficulty that this is the case. For all other terms which are
used of the creation may be found, even without analysis of their
origin, to be applied to the subjects accidentally, because we are
content to denote the things in any way by the word applied to them so
as to avoid confusion in our knowledge of the things signified. But all
the terms that are employed to lead us to the knowledge of God have
comprehended in them each its own meaning, and you cannot find any word
among the terms especially applied to God which is without a distinct
sense. Hence it is clear that by any of the terms we use the Divine
nature itself is not signified, but some one of its surroundings is made
known. For we say, it may be, that the Deity is incorruptible, or
powerful, or whatever else we are <span id="page_CCCXXXIII">p.
CCCXXXIII</span> <span id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXIII"></span>accustomed to
say of Him. But in each of these terms we find a peculiar sense, fit to
be understood or asserted of the Divine nature, yet not expressing that
which that nature is in its essence. For the subject, whatever it may
be, is incorruptible: but our conception of incorruptibility is
this,—that that which is, is not resolved into decay: so, when we say
that He is incorruptible, we declare what His nature does not suffer,
but we do not express what that is which does not suffer corruption.
Thus, again, if we say that He is the Giver of life, though we show by
that appellation what He gives, we do not by that word declare what that
is which gives it. And by the same reasoning we find that all else which
results from the significance involved in the names expressing the
Divine attributes either forbids us to conceive what we ought not to
conceive of the Divine nature, or teaches us that which we ought to
conceive of it, but does not include an explanation of the nature
itself. Since, then, as we perceive the varied operations of the power
above us, we fashion our appellations from the several operations that
are known to us, and as we recognize as one of these that operation of
surveying and inspection, or, as one might call it, beholding, whereby
He surveys all things and overlooks them all, discerning our thoughts,
and even entering by His power of contemplation into those things which
are not visible, we suppose that Godhead, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p16.3"></span>θεότης</span>, is so called from <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p16.4"></span>θέα</span>, or beholding,
and that He who is our <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p16.5"></span>θεατής</span> or beholder, by customary use and
by the instruction of the Scriptures, is called <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p16.6"></span>θεός</span>, or God. Now if
any one admits that to behold and to discern are the same thing, and
that the God Who superintends all things, both is and is called the
superintender of the universe, let him consider this operation, and
judge whether it belongs to one of the Persons whom we believe in the
Holy Trinity, or whether the power extends <span
id="fr_1304"></span>[1306](#fn_1304) throughout the Three Persons. For
if our interpretation of the term Godhead, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p17.3"></span>θεότης</span>, is a true one, and the things
which are seen are said to be beheld, or <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p17.4"></span>θεατά</span>, and that which beholds them is
called <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p17.5"></span>θεός</span>,
or God, no one of the Persons in the Trinity could reasonably be
excluded from such an appellation on the ground of the sense involved in
the word. For Scripture attributes the act of seeing equally to Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit. David says, “See, O God our defender <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1307](#fn_1305) ”: and from this we learn that
sight is a proper operation of the idea <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1308](#fn_1306) of God, so far as God is conceived,
since he says, “See, O God.” But Jesus also sees the thoughts of those
who condemn Him, and questions why by His own power He pardons the sins
of men? for it says, “Jesus, seeing their thoughts <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1309](#fn_1307) .” And of the Holy Spirit also,
Peter says to Ananias, “Why hath Satan filled thine heart, to lie to the
Holy Ghost? <span id="fr_1308"></span>[1310](#fn_1308) ” showing that
the Holy Spirit was a true witness, aware of what Ananias had dared to
do in secret, and by Whom the manifestation of the secret was made to
Peter. For Ananias became a thief of his own goods, secretly, as he
thought, from all men, and concealing his sin: but the Holy Spirit at
the same moment was in Peter, and detected his intent, dragged down as
it was to avarice, and gave to Peter from Himself <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1311](#fn_1309) the power of seeing the secret,
while it is clear that He could not have done this had He not been able
to behold hidden things.

<span id="viii.v-p23"></span>But some one will say that the proof of our
argument does not yet regard the question. For even if it were granted
that the name of “Godhead” is a common name of the nature, it would not
be established that we should not speak of “Gods”: but by these
arguments, on the contrary, we are compelled to speak of “Gods”: for we
find in the custom of mankind that not only those who are
partakers <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1312](#fn_1310) in the same nature,
but even any who may be of the same business, are not, when they are
many, spoken of in the singular; as we speak of “many orators,” or
“surveyors,” or “farmers,” or “shoemakers,” and so in all other cases.
If, indeed, Godhead were an appellation of nature, it would be more
proper, according to the argument laid down, to include the Three
Persons in the singular number, and to speak of “One God,” by reason of
the inseparability and indivisibility of the nature: but since it has
been established by what has been said, that the term “Godhead” is
significant of operation, and not of nature, the argument from what has
been advanced seems to turn to the contrary conclusion, that we ought
therefore all the more to call those “three Gods” who are contemplated
in the same operation, as they say that one would speak of “three
philosophers” or “orators,” or any other name derived from a business
when those who take part in the same business are more than one.

<span id="viii.v-p25"></span>I have taken some pains, in setting forth
this view, to bring forward the reasoning on behalf of the adversaries,
that our decision may be the more firmly fixed, being strengthened by
the more elaborate contradictions. Let us now resume our argument.

<span id="viii.v-p26"></span>As we have to a certain extent shown by our
<span id="page_CCCXXXIV">p. CCCXXXIV</span> <span
id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXIV"></span>statement that the word “Godhead” is
not significant of nature but of operation, perhaps one might reasonably
allege as a cause why, in the case of men, those who share with one
another in the same pursuits are enumerated and spoken of in the plural,
while on the other hand the Deity is spoken of in the singular as one
God and one Godhead, even though the Three Persons are not separated
from the significance expressed by the term “Godhead,”—one might allege,
I say, the fact that men, even if several are engaged in the same form
of action, work separately each by himself at the task he has
undertaken, having no participation in his individual action with others
who are engaged in the same occupation. For instance, supposing the case
of several rhetoricians, their pursuit, being one, has the same name in
the numerous cases: but each of those who follow it works by himself,
this one pleading on his own account, and that on his own account. Thus,
since among men the action of each in the same pursuits is
discriminated, they are properly called many, since each of them is
separated from the others within his own environment, according to the
special character of his operation. But in the case of the Divine nature
we do not similarly learn that the Father does anything by Himself in
which the Son does not work conjointly, or again that the Son has any
special operation apart from the Holy Spirit; but every operation which
extends from God to the Creation, and is named according to our variable
conceptions of it, has its origin from the Father, and proceeds through
the Son, and is perfected in the Holy Spirit. For this reason the name
derived from the operation is not divided with regard to the number of
those who fulfil it, because the action of each concerning anything is
not separate and peculiar, but whatever comes to pass, in reference
either to the acts of His providence for us, or to the government and
constitution of the universe, comes to pass by the action of the Three,
yet what does come to pass is not three things. We may understand the
meaning of this from one single instance. From Him, I say, Who is the
chief source of gifts, all things which have shared in this grace have
obtained their life. When we inquire, then, whence this good gift came
to us, we find by the guidance of the Scriptures that it was from the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Yet although we set forth Three Persons
and three names, we do not consider that we have had bestowed upon us
three lives, one from each Person separately; but the same life is
wrought in us by the Father, and prepared by the Son, and depends on the
will of the Holy Spirit. Since then the Holy Trinity fulfils every
operation in a manner similar to that of which I have spoken, not by
separate action according to the number of the Persons, but so that
there is one motion and disposition of the good will which is
communicated from the Father through the Son to the Spirit (for as we do
not call those whose operation gives one life three Givers of life,
neither do we call those who are contemplated in one goodness three Good
beings, nor speak of them in the plural by any of their other
attributes); so neither can we call those who exercise this Divine and
superintending power and operation towards ourselves and all creation,
conjointly and inseparably, by their mutual action, three Gods. For as
when we learn concerning the God of the universe, from the words of
Scripture, that He judges all the earth <span
id="fr_1311"></span>[1313](#fn_1311) , we say that He is the Judge of
all things through the Son: and again, when we hear that the Father
judgeth no man <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1314](#fn_1312) , we do not
think that the Scripture is at variance with itself,—(for He Who judges
all the earth does this by His Son to Whom He has committed all
judgment; and everything which is done by the Only-begotten has its
reference to the Father, so that He Himself is at once the Judge of all
things and judges no man, by reason of His having, as we said, committed
all judgment to the Son, while all the judgment of the Son is
conformable to the will of the Father; and one could not properly say
either that They are two judges, or that one of Them is excluded from
the authority and power implied in judgment);—so also in the case of the
word “Godhead,” Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God, and
that very power of superintendence and beholding which we call Godhead,
the Father exercises through the Only-begotten, while the Son perfects
every power by the Holy Spirit, judging, as Isaiah says, by the Spirit
of judgment and the Spirit of burning <span
id="fr_1313"></span>[1315](#fn_1313) , and acting by Him also, according
to the saying in the Gospel which was spoken to the Jews. For He says,
“If I by the Spirit of God cast out devils <span
id="fr_1314"></span>[1316](#fn_1314) ”; where He includes every form of
doing good in a partial description, by reason of the unity of action:
for the name derived from operation cannot be divided among many where
the result of their mutual operation is one.

<span id="viii.v-p31"></span>Since, then, the character of the
superintending and beholding power is one, in Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, as has been said in our previous argument, issuing from the
Father as from a spring, brought into operation by the Son, and
perfecting its grace by the power of the Spirit; and since no operation
is separated in respect of the Persons, being fulfilled by each
individually apart from that which is joined with <span
id="page_CCCXXXV">p. CCCXXXV</span> <span
id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXV"></span>Him in our contemplation, but all
providence, care, and superintendence of all, alike of things in the
sensible creation and of those of supramundane nature, and that power
which preserves the things which are, and corrects those which are
amiss, and instructs those which are ordered aright, is one, and not
three, being, indeed, directed by the Holy Trinity, yet not severed by a
threefold division according to the number of the Persons contemplated
in the Faith, so that each of the acts, contemplated by itself, should
be the work of the Father alone, or of the Son peculiarly, or of the
Holy Spirit <span id="fr_1315"></span>[1317](#fn_1315) separately, but
while, as the Apostle says, the one and the selfsame Spirit divides His
good gifts to every man severally <span
id="fr_1316"></span>[1318](#fn_1316) , the motion of good proceeding
from the Spirit is not without beginning;—we find that the power which
we conceive as preceding this motion, which is the Only-begotten God, is
the maker of all things; without Him no existent thing attains to the
beginning of its being: and, again, this same source of good issues from
the will of the Father.

<span id="viii.v-p34"></span>If, then, every good thing and every good
name, depending on that power and purpose which is without beginning, is
brought to perfection in the power of the Spirit through the
Only-begotten God, without mark of time or distinction (since there is
no delay, existent or conceived, in the motion of the Divine will from
the Father, through the Son, to the Spirit): and if Godhead also is one
of the good names and concepts, it would not be proper to divide the
name into a plurality, since the unity existing in the action prevents
plural enumeration. And as the Saviour of all men, specially of them
that believe <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1319](#fn_1317) , is spoken of
by the Apostle as one, and no one from this phrase argues either that
the Son does not save them who believe, or that salvation is given to
those who receive it without the intervention of the Spirit; but God who
is over all, is the Saviour of all, while the Son works salvation by
means of the grace of the Spirit, and yet they are not on this account
called in Scripture three Saviours (although salvation is confessed to
proceed from the Holy Trinity): so neither are they called three Gods,
according to the signification assigned to the term “Godhead,” even
though the aforesaid appellation attaches to the Holy Trinity.

<span id="viii.v-p36"></span>It does not seem to me absolutely
necessary, with a view to the present proof of our argument, to contend
against those who oppose us with the assertion that we are not to
conceive “Godhead” as an operation. For we, believing the Divine nature
to be unlimited and incomprehensible, conceive no comprehension of it,
but declare that the nature is to be conceived in all respects as
infinite: and that which is absolutely infinite is not limited in one
respect while it is left unlimited in another, but infinity is free from
limitation altogether. That therefore which is without limit is surely
not limited even by name. In order then to mark the constancy of our
conception of infinity in the case of the Divine nature, we say that the
Deity is above every name: and “Godhead” is a name. Now it cannot be
that the same thing should at once be a name and be accounted as above
every name.

<span id="viii.v-p37"></span>But if it pleases our adversaries to say
that the significance of the term is not operation, but nature, we shall
fall back upon our original argument, that custom applies the name of a
nature to denote multitude erroneously: since according to true
reasoning neither diminution nor increase attaches to any nature, when
it is contemplated in a larger or smaller number. For it is only those
things which are contemplated in their individual circumscription which
are enumerated by way of addition. Now this circumscription is noted by
bodily appearance, and size, and place, and difference figure and
colour, and that which is contemplated apart from these conditions is
free from the circumscription which is formed by such categories. That
which is not thus circumscribed is not enumerated, and that which is not
enumerated cannot be contemplated in multitude. For we say that gold,
even though it be cut into many figures, is one, and is so spoken of,
but we speak of many coins or many staters, without finding any
multiplication of the nature of gold by the number of staters; and for
this reason we speak of gold, when it is contemplated in greater bulk,
either in plate or in coin, as “much,” but we do not speak of it as
“many golds” on account of the multitude of the material,—except when
one says there are “many gold pieces” (Darics, for instance, or
staters), in which case it is not the material, but the pieces of money
to which the significance of number applies: indeed, properly, we should
not call them “gold” but “golden.”

<span id="viii.v-p38"></span>As, then, the golden staters are many, but
the gold is one, so too those who are exhibited to us severally in the
nature of man, as Peter, James, and John, are many, yet the man in them
is one. And although Scripture extends the word according to the plural
significance, where it says “men swear by the greater <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1320](#fn_1318) ,” and “sons of men,” and in other
phrases of the like sort, we must recognize that in using the custom of
the prevailing form of speech, it does not lay down a law as to the
propriety of using the <span id="page_CCCXXXVI">p. CCCXXXVI</span> <span
id="viii.v-Page_CCCXXXVI"></span>words in one way or another, nor does
it say these things by way of giving us instruction about phrases, but
uses the word according to the prevailing custom, with a view only to
this, that the word may be profitable to those who receive it, taking no
minute care in its manner of speech about points where no harm can
result from the phrases in respect of the way they are understood.

<span id="viii.v-p40"></span>Indeed, it would be a lengthy task to set
out in detail from the Scriptures those constructions which are
inexactly expressed, in order to prove the statement I have made; where,
however, there is a risk of injury to any part of the truth, we no
longer find in Scriptural phrases any indiscriminate or indifferent use
of words. For this reason Scripture admits the naming of “men” in the
plural, because no one is by such a figure of speech led astray in his
conceptions to imagine a multitude of humanities, or supposes that many
human natures are indicated by the fact that the name expressive of that
nature is used in the plural. But the word “God” it employs studiously
in the singular form only, guarding against introducing the idea of
different natures in the Divine essence by the plural signification of
“Gods.” This is the cause why it says, “the Lord our God is one
Lord <span id="fr_1319"></span>[1321](#fn_1319) ,” and also proclaims
the Only-begotten God by the name of Godhead, without dividing the Unity
into a dual signification, so as to call the Father and the Son two
Gods, although each is proclaimed by the holy writers as God. The Father
is God: the Son is God: and yet by the same proclamation God is One,
because no difference either of nature or of operation is contemplated
in the Godhead. For if (according to the idea of those who have been led
astray) the nature of the Holy Trinity were diverse, the number would by
consequence be extended to a plurality of Gods, being divided according
to the diversity of essence in the subjects. But since the Divine,
single, and unchanging nature, that it may be one, rejects all diversity
in essence, it does not admit in its own case the signification of
multitude; but as it is called one nature, so it is called in the
singular by all its other names, “God,” “Good,” “Holy,” “Saviour,”
“Just,” “Judge,” and every other Divine name conceivable: whether one
says that the names refer to nature or to operation, we shall not
dispute the point.

<span id="viii.v-p42"></span>If, however, any one cavils at our
argument, on the ground that by not admitting the difference of nature
it leads to a mixture and confusion of the Persons, we shall make to
such a charge this answer;—that while we confess the invariable
character of the nature, we do not deny the difference in respect of
cause, and that which is caused, by which alone we apprehend that one
Person is distinguished from another;—by our belief, that is, that one
is the Cause, and another is of the Cause; and again in that which is of
the Cause we recognize another distinction. For one is directly from the
first Cause, and another by that which is directly from the first Cause;
so that the attribute of being Only-begotten abides without doubt in the
Son, and the interposition of the Son, while it guards His attribute of
being Only-begotten, does not shut out the Spirit from His relation by
way of nature to the Father.

<span id="viii.v-p43"></span>But in speaking of “cause,” and “of the
cause,” we do not by these words denote nature (for no one would give
the same definition of “cause” and of “nature”), but we indicate the
difference in manner of existence. For when we say that one is “caused,”
and that the other is “without cause,” we do not divide the nature by
the word “cause <span id="fr_1320"></span>[1322](#fn_1320) ”, but only
indicate the fact that the Son does not exist without generation, nor
the Father by generation: but we must needs in the first place believe
that something exists, and then scrutinize the manner of existence of
the object of our belief: thus the question of existence is one, and
that of the mode of existence is another. To say that anything exists
without generation sets forth the mode of its existence, but what exists
is not indicated by this phrase. If one were to ask a husbandman about a
tree, whether it were planted or had grown of itself, and he were to
answer either that the tree had not been planted or that it was the
result of planting, would he by that answer declare the nature of the
tree? Surely not; but while saying how it exists he would leave the
question of its nature obscure and unexplained. So, in the other case,
when we learn that He is unbegotten, we are taught in what mode He
exists, and how it is fit that we should conceive Him as existing, but
*what* He is we do not hear in that phrase. When, therefore, we
acknowledge such a distinction in the case of the Holy Trinity, as to
believe that one Person is the Cause, and another is of the Cause, we
can no longer be accused of confounding the definition of the Persons by
the community of nature.

<span id="viii.v-p45"></span>Thus, since on the one hand the idea of
cause differentiates the Persons of the Holy Trinity, declaring that one
exists without a Cause, and another is of the Cause; and since on the
one hand the Divine nature is apprehended by every conception as
unchangeable and undivided, for these reasons we properly declare the
Godhead to be one, and God to be one, and employ in the singular all
other names which express Divine attributes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[CCCXXXI:1299](2050143.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="viii.v-p4.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p5"></span> [Ps. cxx.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003)<span id="viii.v-p5.1"></span>; the
phrase is rendered in A.V. by “coals of juniper,” in the Vulg. by
“carbonibus desolatoriis.”

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[CCCXXXI:1300](2050143.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="viii.v-p5.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p6"></span> Reading, with Oehler, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p6.1"></span>εὐπειθείας</span>

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[CCCXXXII:1301](2050143.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="viii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p11"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p11.1"></span>τοὺς μὴ διηρημένούς</span>, as Sifanus seems to
have read. The Paris Edit. of 1615 reads <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p11.2"></span>τοὺς διηρημένους</span>, which Oehler leaves
uncorrected.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[CCCXXXII:1302](2050143.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="viii.v-p11.3"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p12"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p12.1"></span>μεταβιβάζειν</span>, for
the <span class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p12.2"></span>μὴ
μεταβιβάζειν</span> of the Paris Edit.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[CCCXXXII:1303](2050143.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="viii.v-p12.3"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p13"></span> Sifanus seems to have read <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p13.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p13.2"></span>ἀδιάφορος χρῆσις</span>, as
he translates “promiscuus et indifferens nominum usus.”

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[CCCXXXII:1304](2050143.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="viii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p15"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p15.1"></span>συνηθείας</span> for the
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p15.2"></span>οὐσίας</span> of the
Paris Edit.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[CCCXXXII:1305](2050143.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="viii.v-p15.3"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p16"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p16.1"></span>τῶν περὶ τὴν θείαν φύσιν
νοουμένων</span>, for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p16.2"></span>τῶν τι περὶ τὴν θ. φ. νοουμένων</span> in the
Paris Edit.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1306](2050143.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="viii.v-p16.7"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p17"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p17.1"></span>διήκει</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p17.2"></span>προσήκει</span>

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1307](2050143.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="viii.v-p17.6"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p18"></span> [Ps. lxxxiv.
9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009)<span id="viii.v-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1308](2050143.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="viii.v-p18.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p19"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p19.1"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p19.2"></span>δέας</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p19.3"></span>ἰ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p19.4"></span>δέαν</span>.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1309](2050143.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="viii.v-p19.5"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p20"></span> S. [Matt. ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#004)<span id="viii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1310](2050143.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="viii.v-p20.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p21"></span> [Acts v.
3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003)<span id="viii.v-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1311](2050143.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="viii.v-p21.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p22"></span> Reading with Oehler <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p22.1"></span>παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ</span> for
<span class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p22.2"></span>δι᾽ ἑαυτοῦ</span>.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[CCCXXXIII:1312](2050143.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="viii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p24"></span> Reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p24.1"></span>κοινωνοὺς</span> for <span class="Greek"><span
id="viii.v-p24.2"></span>κοινωνίας</span>, with Oehler.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[CCCXXXIV:1313](2050143.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="viii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p27"></span> [Rom. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006)<span id="viii.v-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[CCCXXXIV:1314](2050143.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="viii.v-p27.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p28"></span> S. [John v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span id="viii.v-p28.1"></span>

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[CCCXXXIV:1315](2050143.htm#fr_1313) <span
id="viii.v-p28.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p29"></span> [Is. iv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)<span id="viii.v-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[CCCXXXIV:1316](2050143.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="viii.v-p29.2"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p30"></span> S. [Matt. xii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028)<span id="viii.v-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[CCCXXXV:1317](2050143.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="viii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p32"></span> Reading with Oehler, <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p32.1"></span>ἤ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p32.2"></span>τοῦ ἁγίου</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p32.3"></span>Πνεύματος</span> for <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p32.4"></span>ἢ</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p32.5"></span>διὰ τ. ἁγ. Πν</span>.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[CCCXXXV:1318](2050143.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="viii.v-p32.6"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p33"></span> <span id="viii.v-p33.1"></span>[1 Cor.
xii. 11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#011)<span
id="viii.v-p33.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[CCCXXXV:1319](2050143.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="viii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p35"></span> [1 Tim. iv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010)<span id="viii.v-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[CCCXXXV:1320](2050143.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="viii.v-p38.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p39"></span> [Heb. vi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016)<span id="viii.v-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[CCCXXXVI:1321](2050143.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="viii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p41"></span> [Deut. vi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)<span id="viii.v-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[CCCXXXVI:1322](2050143.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="viii.v-p43.1"></span>

<span id="viii.v-p44"></span> The Paris Edit. omits <span
class="Greek"><span id="viii.v-p44.1"></span>αιτιον</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Faith.](2050144)
