## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

## X. The Key

&lt;This longer tractate presents itself explicitly as a summary or
abridgement of the General Sermons (CH II-IX), and discusses the
Hermetic view of knowledge and its role in the lives and afterlives of
human beings. The attentive reader will notice certain contradictions
between the afterlife-teachings of this and previous tractates.

&lt;One of the central concepts of *The* *Key*, and of Hermetic thought
generally, is the distinction between ordinary discursive knowledge
which can be expressed in words (in Greek, *episteme*, which Mead
translates somewhat clumsily as "science") and transcendent, unitive
knowledge which cannot be communicated (in Greek, *gnosis*, which Mead
simply and sensibly leaves untranslated). The same distinction can be
found in many systems of mystical thought. Unlike most of these, though,
the Hermetic teachings place value on both.

&lt;Readers without much experience in the jargon of Classical
philosophy will want to remember that "hylic" means "material",
"passible" means "subject to outside forces or to suffering", and
"intelligible" means "belonging to the realm of the Mind", and "motion"
includes all kinds of change. The special implications of "good" in
Greek thought - of self-sufficiency and desirability - should also be
kept in mind.

&lt;The delightful irony of the Zen moment early in section 9, when
Hermes - in the middle of this very substantial lecture - defines the
good and pious man as "he who doth not say much or lend his ear to much"
and thus rules out both himself and his audience, seems to have been
lost on subsequent commentators. - JMG&gt;

1\. Hermes: My yesterday's discourse (logos) I did devote to thee,
Asclepius, and so 'tis \[only\] right I should devote toafy's to Tat;
and this the more because 'tis the abridgement of the General Sermons
(Logoi) which he has had addressed to him.

"God, Father and the Good", then, Tat, hath the same nature, or more
exactly, energy.

For nature is a predicate of growth, and used of things that change,
both mobile and immobile, that is to say, both human and divine, each
one of which He willeth into being.

But energy consists in something else, as we have shown in treating of
the rest, both things divine and human things; which thing we ought to
have in mind when treating of the Good.

2\. God's energy is then His Will; further His essence is to will the
being of all things. For what is "God and Father and the Good" but the
"to be" of all that are not yet? Nay, subsistence self of everything
that is; this, then, is God, this Father, this the Good; to Him is added
naught of all the rest.

And though the Cosmos, that is to say the Sun, is also sire himself to
them that share in him; yet so far is he not the cause of good unto the
lives, he is not even of their living.

So that e'en if he be a sire, he is entirely so by compulsion of the
Good's Good-will, apart from which nor being nor becoming could e'er be.

3\. Again, the parent is the children's cause, both on the father's and
the mother's side, only by sharing in the Good's desire \[that doth
pour\] through the Sun. It is the Good which doeth the creating.

And such a power can be possessed by no one else than Him alone who
taketh naught, but wills all things to be; I will not, Tat, say "makes".

For that the maker is defective for long periods (in which he sometimes
makes, and sometimes doth not make) both in the quality and in the
quantity \[of what he makes\]; in that he sometimes maketh them so many
and such like, and sometimes the reverse.

But "God and Father and the Good" is \[cause\] for all to be. So are at
least these things for those who can see.

4\. For It doth will to be, and It is both Itself and most of all by
reason of Itself. Indeed, all other things beside are just bacause of
It; for the distinctive feature of the Good is "that it should be
known". Such is the Good, O Tat.

Tat: Thou hast, O father, filled us so full of this so good and fairest
sight, that thereby my mind's eye hath now become for me almost a thing
to worship.

For that the vision of the Good doth not, like the sun's beam, firelike
blaze on the eyes and make them close; nay, on the contrary, it shineth
forth and maketh to increase the seeing of the eye, as far as e'er a man
hath the capacity to hold the inflow of the radiance that the mind alone
can see.

Not only does it come more swiftly down to us, but it does us no harm,
and is instinct with all immortal life.

5\. They who are able to drink in a somewhat more than others of this
Sight, ofttimes from out the body fall asleep in this fairest Spectacle,
as was the case with Uranus and Cronus, our forebears. may this be out
lot too, O father mine!

Hermes: Yea, may it be, my son! But as it is, we are not yet strung to
the Vision, and not as yet have we the power our mind's eye to unfold
and gaze upon the Beauty of the Good - Beauty that naught can e'er
corrupt or any comprehend.

For only then wilt thou upon It gaze when thou canst say no word
concerning It. For Gnosis of the Good is holy silence and a giving
holiday to every sense.

6\. For neither can he who perceiveth It, perceive aught else; nor he
who gazeth on It, gaze on aught else; nor hear aught else, nor stir his
body any way. Staying his body's every sense and every motion he stayeth
still.

And shining then all round his mond, It shines through his whole soul,
and draws it out of body, transforming all of him to essence.

For it is possible, my son, that a man's soul should be made like to
God, e'en while it still is in a body, if it doth contemplate the Beauty
of the Good.

7\. Tat: Made like to God? What dost thou, father, mean?

Hermes: Of every soul apart are transformations, son.

Tat: What meanest thou? Apart?

Hermes: Didst thou not, in the General Sermons, hear that from one Soul
- the All-soul - come all these souls which are made to revovlve in all
the cosmos, as though divided off?

Of these souls, then, it is that there are many changes, some to a
happier lot and some to \[just\] the contrary of this.

Thus some that were creeping things change into things that in the water
dwell, the souls of water things change to earth-dwellers, those that
live on earth change to things with wings, and souls that live in air
change to men, while human souls reach the first step of deathlessness
changed into daimones.

And so they circle to the choir of the Inerrant Gods; for of the Gods
there are two choirs, the one Inerrant, and the other Errant. And this
is the most perfect glory of the soul.

8\. But if a soul on entering the body of a man persisteth in its vice,
it neither tasteth deathlessness nor shareth in the Good; but speeding
back again it turns into the path that leads to creeping things. This is
the sentence of the vicious soul.

And the soul's vice is ignorance. For that the soul who hath no
knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge of their nature, or of
Good, is blinded by the body's passions and tossed about.

This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the slave of bodies
of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the body as a load; not as the
ruler, but the ruled. This \[ignorance\] is the soul's vice.

9\. But on the other hand the virtue of the soul is Gnosis. For he who
knows, he good and pious is, and still while on the earth divine.

Tat: But who is such an one, O father mine?

Hermes: He who doth not say much or lend his ear to much. For he who
spendeth time in arguing and hearing arguments, doth shadow-fight. For
"God, the Father and the Good", is not to be obtained by speech or
hearing.

And yet though this is so, there are in all the beings senses, in that
they cannot without senses be.

But Gnosis is far different from sense. For sense is brought about by
that which hath the mastery o'er us, while Gnosis is the end &lt;i.e.,
goal&gt; of science, and science is God's gift.

10\. All science is incorporeal, the instrument it uses being the mind,
just as the mind employs the body.

Both then come into bodies, \[I mean\] both things that are cognizable
by mond alone and things material. For all things must consist out of
antithesis and contrariety; and this can otherwise not be.

Tat: Who then is this material God of whom thou speakest?

Hermes: Cosmos is beautiful, but is not good - for that it is material
and freely passible; and though it is the first of all things passible,
yet is it in the second rank of being and wanting in itself.

And though it never hath itself its birth in time, but ever is, yet is
its being in becoming, becoming for all time the genesis of qualities
and quantities; for it is mobile and all material motion's genesis.

11\. It is intelligible rest that moves material motion in this way,
since Cosmos is a sphere - that is to say, a head. And naught of head
above's material, as naught of feet below's intelligible, but all
material.

And head itself is moved in a sphere-like way - that is to say, as head
should move, is mind.

All then that are united to the "tissue" of this "head" (in which is
soul) are in their nature free from death - just as when body hath been
made in soul, are things that hath more soul than body.

Whereas those things which are at greater distance from this "tissue" -
there, where are things which have a greater share of body than of soul
- are by their nature subject unto death.

The whole, however, is a life; so that the universe consists of both the
hylic and of the intelligible.

12\. Again, the Cosmos is the first of living things, while man is
second after it, though first of things subject to death.

Man hath the same ensouling power in him as all the rest of living
things; yet is he not only not good, but even evil, for that he's
subject unto death.

For though the Cosmos also is not good in that it suffers motion, it is
not evil, in that it is not subject to death. But man, in that he's
subject both to motion and to death, is evil.

13\. Now then the principles of man are this-wise vehicled: mind in the
reason (logos), the reason in the soul, soul in the spirit &lt;or,
rather, vital spirits&gt;, and spirit in the body.

Spirit pervading \[body\] by means of veins and arteries and blood,
bestows upon the living creature motion, and as it were doth bear it in
a way.

For this cause some do think the soul is blood, in that they do mistake
its nature, not knowing that \[at death\] it is iteh spirit that must
first withdraw into the soul, whereon the blood congeals and veins and
arteries are emptied, and then the living creature &lt;or life&gt; is
withdrawn; and this is body's death.

14\. Now from one Source all things depend; while Source \[dependeth\]
from the One and Only \[One\]. Source is, moreover, moved to become
Source again; whereas the One standeth perpetually and is not moved.

Three then are they: "God, the Father and the Good", Cosmos and man.

God doth contain Cosmos; Cosmos \[containeth\] man. Cosmos is e'er God's
Son, man as it were Cosmos' child.

15\. Not that, however, God ignoreth man; nay, right well doth He know
him, and willeth to be known.

This is the sole salvation for a man - God's Gnosis. This is the Way Up
to the Mount.

By Him alone the soul becometh good, not whiles is good, whiles evil,
but \[good\] out of necessity.

Tat: What dost thou mean, Thrice-greatest one?

Hermes: Behold an infant's soul, my son, that is not yet cut off,
because its body is still small and not as yet come unto its full bulk.

Tat: How?

Hermes: A thing of beauty altogether is \[such a soul\] to see, not yet
befouled by body's passions, still all but hanging from the Cosmic Soul!

But when the body grows in bulk and draweth down the soul into its mass,
then doth the soul cut off itself and bring upon itself forgetfulness,
and no more shareth in the Beautiful and the Good. And this
forgetfulness becometh vice.

16\. It is the same for them who go out from the body.

For when the soul withdraws into itself, the spirit doth contract itself
within the blood, and the soul within the spirit. And then the mind,
stripped of its wrappings, and naturally divine, taking unto itself a
fiery body, doth traverse every space, after abandoning the soul unto
its judgement and whatever chastisement it hath deserved.

Tat: What dost thou, father, mean by this? The mind is parted from soul
and soul from spirit? Whereas thou said'st the soul was the mind's
vesture, and the soul's the spirit.

17\. Hermes: The hearer, son, should think with him who speaks and
breathe with him; nay, he should have a hearing subtler than the voice
of him who speaks.

It is, son, in a body made of earth that this arrangement of the
vestures comes to pass. For in a body made of earth it is impossible the
mind should take its seat itself by its own self in nakedness.

For neither is it possible on the one hand the earthly body should
contain so much immortality, nor on the other that so great a virtue
should endure a body passible in such close contact with it. It taketh,
then, the soul for as it were an envelope.

And soul itself, being too and thing divine, doth use the spirit as its
envelope, while spirit doth pervade the living creature.

18\. When then the mind doth free itself from the earth-body, it
straightway putteth on its proper robe of fire, with which it could not
dwell in an earth-body.

For earth doth not bear fire; for it is all set in a blaze even by a
small spark. And for this cause is water poured around earth, to be a
guard and wall, to keep the blazing of the fire away.

But mind, the swiftest thing of all divine outthinkings, and swifter
than all elements, hath for its body fire.

For mind being builder doth use the fire as tool for the construction of
all things - the Mind of all \[for the construction\] of all things, but
that of man only for things on earth.

Stript of its fire the mind on earth cannot make things divine, for it
is human in its dispensation.

19\. The soul in man, however - not every soul, but one that pious is -
is a daimonic something and divine.

And such a soul when from the body freed, if it have fought the fight of
piety - the fight of piety is to know God and to do wrong to no man -
such a soul becomes entirely mind.

Whereas the impious soul remains in its own essence, chastised by its
own self, and seeking for an earthly body where to enter, if only it be
human.

For that no other body can contain a human soul; nor is it right that
any human soul should fall into the body of a thing that doth possess no
reason. For that the law of God is this: to guard the human soul from
such tremendous outrage.

20\. Tat: How father, then, is a man's soul chastised?

Hermes: What greater chastisement of any human soul can there be, son,
than lack of piety? What fire has so fierce a flame as lack of piety?
What ravenous beast so mauls the body as lack of piety the very soul?

Dost thou not see what hosts of ills the impious soul doth bear?

It shrieks and screams: I burn; I am ablaze; I know not what to cry or
do; ah, wretched me, I am devoured by all the ills that compass me
about; alack, poor me, I neither see nor hear!

Such are the cries wrung from a soul chastised; not, as the many think,
and thou, son, dost suppose, that a \[man's\] soul, passing from body,
is changed into a beast.

Such is a very grave mistake, for that the way a soul doth suffer
chastisement is this:

21\. When mind becomes a daimon, the law requires that it should take a
fiery body to execute the services of God; and entering in the soul most
impious it scourgeth it with whips made of its sins.

And then the impious soul, scourged with its sins, is plunged in
murders, outrage, blasphemy, in violence of all kinds, and all the other
things whereby mankind is wronged.

But on the pious soul the mind doth mount and guide it to the Gnosis'
Light. And such a soul doth never tire in songs of praise \[to God\] and
pouring blessing on all men, and doing good in word and deed to all, in
imitation of its Sire.

22\. Wherefore, my son, thou shouldst give praise to God and pray that
thou mayst have thy mind Good Mind. It is, then, to a better state the
soul doth pass; it cannot to a worse.

Further there is an intercourse of souls; those of the gods have
intercourse with those of men, and those of men with souls of creatures
which possess no reason.

The higher, further, have in charge the lower; the gods look after men,
men after animals irrational, while God hath charge of all; for He is
higher than them all and all are less than He.

Cosmos is subject, then, to God, man to the Cosmos, and irrationals to
man. But God is o'er them all, and God contains them all.

God's rays, to use a figure, are His energies; the Cosmos's are natures,
the arts and sciences are man's.

The energies act through the Cosmos, thence through the nature-rays of
Cosmos upon man; the nature-rays \[act\] through the elements, man
\[acteth\] through the sciences and arts.

23\. This is the dispensation of the universe, depending from the nature
of the One, pervading \[all things\] through the Mind, than which is
naught diviner nor of greater energy; and naught a greater means for the
at-oning men to gods and gods to men.

He, \[Mind,\] is the Good Daimon. Blessed the soul that is most filled
with Him, and wretched is the soul that's empty of the Mind.

Tat: Father, what dost thou mean, again?

Hermes: Dost think then, son, that every soul hath the Good \[Mind\]?
For 'tis of Him we speak, not of the mind in service of which we were
just speaking, the mind sent down for \[the soul's\] chastisement.

24\. For soul without the mind "can neither speak nor act". For
oftentimes the mind doth leave the soul, and at that time the soul
neither sees nor understands, but is just like a thing that hath no
reason. Such is the power of mind.

Yet doth it not endure a sluggish soul, but leaveth such a soul tied to
the body and bound tight down by it. Such soul, my son, doth not have
Mind; and therefore such an one should not be called a man. For that man
is a thing-of-life &lt;or animal&gt; divine; man is not measured with
the rest of lives of things upon the earth, but with the lives above in
heaven, who are called gods.

Nay more, if we must boldly speak the truth, the true "man" is e'en
higher than the gods, or at the \[very\] least the gods and men are very
whit in power each with the other equal.

25\. For no one of the gods in heaven shall come down to the earth,
o'er-stepping heaven's limit; whereas man doth mount up to heaven and
measure it; he knows what things of it are high, what things are low,
and learns precisely all things else besides. And greater thing than
all; without e'en quitting earth, he doth ascend above. So vast a sweep
doth he possess of ecstasy.

For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth is god subject to
death, while god in heaven is man from death immune.

Wherefore the dispensation of all things is brought about by means of
there, the twain - Cosmos and Man - but by the One.
