## The Corpus Hermeticum

### translated by G.R.S. Mead

## III. The Sacred Sermon

&lt;This brief and apparently somewhat garbled text recounts the
creation and nature of the world in terms much like those of the
*Poemandres*. The major theme is the renewal of all things in a cyclic
universe, with the seven planetary rulers again playing a major role. -
JMG&gt;

1\. The Glory of all things is God, Godhead and Godly Nature. Source of
the things that are is God, who is both Mind and Nature - yea Matter,
the Wisdom that reveals all things. Source \[too\] is Godhead - yea
Nature, Energy, Necessity, and End, and Making-new-again.

Darkness that knew no bounds was in Abyss, and Water \[too\] and subtle
Breath intelligent; these were by Power of God in Chaos.

Then Holy Light arose; and there collected 'neath Dry Space
&lt;literally: "sand"&gt; from out Moist Essence Elements; and all the
Gods do separate things out from fecund Nature.

2\. All things being undefined and yet unwrought, the light things were
assigned unto the height, the heavy ones had their foundations laid down
underneath the moist part of Dry Space, the universal things being
bounded off by Fire and hanged in Breath to keep them up.

And Heaven was seen in seven circles; its Gods were visible in forms of
stars with all their signs; while Nature had her members made articulate
together with the Gods in her. And \[Heaven's\] periphery revolved in
cyclic course, borne on by Breath of God.

3\. And every God by his own proper power brought forth what was
appointed him. Thus there arose four-footed beasts, and creeping things,
and those that in the water dwell, and things with wings, and everything
that beareth seed, and grass, and shoot of every flower, all having in
themselves seed of again-becoming.

And they selected out the births of men for gnosis of the works of God
and attestation of the energy of Nature; the multitude of men for
lordship over all beneath the heaven and gnosis of its blessings, that
they might increase in increasing and multiply in multitude, and every
soul infleshed by revolution of the Cyclic Gods, for observation of the
marvels of Heaven and Heaven's Gods' revolution, and of the works of God
and energy of Nature, for tokens of its blessings, for gnosis of the
power of God, that they might know the fates that follow good and evil
\[deeds\] and learn the cunning work of all good arts.

4\. \[Thus\] there begins their living and their growing wise, according
to the fate appointed by the revolution of the Cyclic Gods, and their
deceasing for this end.

And there shall be memorials mighty of their handiworks upon the earth,
leaving dim trace behind when cycles are renewed.

For every birth of flesh ensouled, and of the fruit of seed, and every
handiwork, though it decay, shall of necessity renew itself, both by the
renovation of the Gods and by the turning-round of Nature's rhythmic
wheel.

For that whereas the Godhead is Nature's ever-making-new-again the
cosmic mixture, Nature herself is also co-established in that Godhead.
