[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Paganism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](boh12)  [Next](boh14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XI

### IN BRITTANY AND FRANCE

THE Celts had been taught by their priests that the soul is immortal.
When the body died the spirit passed instantly into another existence in
a country close at hand. We remember that the Otherworld of the British
Isles, peopled by the banished Tuatha and all superhuman beings, was
either in caves in the earth, as in Ireland, or in an island like the
English Avalon. By giving a mortal one of their magic apples to eat,
fairies could entice him whither they would, and at last away into their
country.

In the Irish story of Nera (q.v.), the corpse of the criminal is the
cause of Nera's being lured into the cave. So the dead have the same
power as fairies, and live in the same place. On May Eve and November
Eve the dead and the fairies hold their revels together and make
excursions together. If a young person died, he was said to be called
away by the fairies. The Tuatha may not have been a race of gods, but
merely the early Celts, who grew to godlike proportions as the years
raised a mound of lore and legends for their pedestal. So they might
really be only the dead, and not of superhuman nature.

In the fourth century A.D., the men of England were hard pressed by the
Picts and Scots from the northern border, and were helped in their need
by the Teutons. When this tribe saw the fair country of the Britons they
decided to hold it for themselves. After they had driven out the
northern tribes, in the fifth century, when King Arthur was reigning in
Cornwall, they drove out those whose cause they had fought. So the
Britons were scattered to the mountains of Wales, to Cornwall, and
across the Channel to Armorica, a part of France, which they named
Brittany after their home-land. In lower Brittany, out of the zone of
French influence, a language something like Welsh or old British is
still spoken, and many of the Celtic beliefs were retained more
untouched than in Britain, not clear of paganism till the seventeenth
century. Here especially did Christianity have to adapt the old belief
to her own ends.

Gaul, as we have seen from Caesar's account, had been one of the chief
seats of Druidical belief. The religious center was Carnutes, now
Chartrain. The rites of sacrifice survived in the same forms as in the
British Isles. In the fields of Deux-Sevres fires were built of stubble,
ferns, leaves, and thorns, and the people danced about them and burned
nuts in them. On St. John's Day animals were burned in the fires to
secure the cattle from disease. This was continued down into the
seventeenth century.

The pagan belief that lasted the longest in Brittany, and is by no means
dead yet, was the cult of the dead. Caesar said that the Celts of Gaul
traced their ancestry from the god of death, whom he called Dispater.
Now figures of l'Ankou, a skeleton armed with a spear, can be seen in
most villages of Brittany.

This mindfulness of death was strengthened by the sight of the
prehistoric cairns of stones on hilltops, the ancient altars of the
Druids, and dolmens, formed of one flat rock resting like a roof on two
others set up on end with a space between them, ancient tombs; and by
the Bretons being cut off from the rest of France by the nature of the
country, and shut in among the uplands, black and misty in November, and
blown over by chill Atlantic winds. Under a seeming dull indifference
and melancholy the Bretons conceal a lively imagination, and no place
has a greater wealth of legendary literature.

What fairies, dwarfs, pixies, and the like are to the Celts of other
places, the spirits of the dead are to the Celts of Brittany. They
possess the earth on Christmas, St. John's Day, and All Saints'. In
Finistere, that western point of France, there is a saying that on the
Eve of All Souls' "There are more dead in every house than sands on the
shore." The dead have the power to charm mortals and take them away, and
to foretell the future. They must not be spoken of directly, any more
than the fairies of the Scottish border, or met with, for fear of evil
results.

By the Bretons of the sixth century the near-by island of Britain, which
they could just see on clear days, was called the Otherworld. An
historian, Procopius, tells how the people nearest Britain were exempted
from paying tribute to the Franks, because they were subject to nightly
summons to ferry the souls of the dead across in their boats, and
deliver them into the hands of the keeper of souls. Farther inland a
black bog seemed to be the entrance to an otherworld underground. One
location which combined the ideas of an island and a cave was a city
buried in the sea. The people imagined they could hear the bells of
Ker-Is ringing, and joyous music sounding, for though this was a city of
the dead, it resembled the fairy palaces of Ireland, and was ruled by
King Grallon and his daughter Dahut, who could lure mortals away by her
beauty and enchantments.

The approach of winter is believed to drive like the flocks, the souls
of the dead from their cold cheerless graves to the food and warmth of
home. This is why November Eve, the night before the first day of
winter, was made sacred to them.

"When comes the harvest of the year  
Before the scythe the wheat will fall."

--BOTREL: Songs of Brittany.

The harvest-time reminded the Bretons of the garnering by that reaper,
Death. On November Eve milk is poured on graves, feasts and candles set
out on the tables, and fires lighted on the hearths to welcome the
spirits of departed kinsfolk and friends.

In France from the twelfth to the fourteenth century stone buildings
like lighthouses were erected in cemeteries. They were twenty or thirty
feet high, with lanterns on top. On Hallowe'en they were kept burning to
safe-guard the people from the fear of night-wandering spirits and the
dead, so they were called "lanternes des morts."

The cemetery is the social center of the Breton village. It is at once
meeting-place, playground, park, and church. The tombs that outline the
hills make the place seem one vast cemetery. On All Souls' Eve in the
mid-nineteenth century the "procession of tombs" was held. All formed a
line and walked about the cemetery, calling the names of those who were
dead, as they approached their resting-places. The record was carefully
remembered, so that not one should seem to be forgotten.

"We live with our dead," Say the Bretons. First on the Eve of All Souls'
comes the religious service, "black vespers." The blessedness of death
is praised, the sorrows and shortness of life dwelt upon. After a common
prayer all go out to the cemetery to pray separately, each by the graves
of his kin, or to the "place of bones," where the remains of those long
dead are thrown all together in one tomb. They can be seen behind
gratings, by the people as they pass, and rows of skulls at the sides of
the entrance can be touched.

In these tombs are Latin inscriptions meaning: "Remember thou must die,"
"To-day to me, and to-morrow to thee," and others reminding the reader
of his coming death.

From the cemetery the people go to a house or an inn which is the
gathering-place for the night, singing or taking loudly on the road to
warn the dead who are hastening home, lest they may meet. Reunions of
families take place on this night, in the spirit of the Roman feast of
the dead, the Feralia, of which Ovid wrote:

"After the visit to the tombs and to the ancestors who are no longer
with us, it is pleasant to turn towards the living; after the loss of so
many, it is pleasant to behold those who remain of our blood, and to
reckon up the generations of our descendants."

--Fasti.

A toast is drunk to the memory of the departed. The men sit about the
fireplace smoking or weaving baskets; the women apart, knitting or
spinning by the light of the fire and one candle. The children play with
their gifts of apples and nuts. As the hour grows later, and mysterious
noises begin to be heard about the house, and a curtain sways in a
draught, the thoughts of the company already centred upon the dead find
expression in words, and each has a tale to tell of an adventure with
some friend or enemy who has died.

The dead are thought to take up existence where they left it off,
working at the same trades, remembering their old debts, likes and
dislikes, even wearing the same clothes they wore in life. Most of them
stay not in some distant, definite Otherworld, but frequent the scenes
of their former life. They never trespass upon daylight, and it is
dangerous to meet them at night, because they are very ready to punish
any slight to their memory, such as selling their possessions or
forgetting the hospitality due them. L'Ankou will come to get a supply
of shavings if the coffins are not lined with them to make a softer
resting-place for the dead bodies.

The lively Celtic imagination turns the merest coincidence into an
encounter with a spirit, and the poetic temperament of the narrators
clothes the stories with vividness and mystery. They tell how the
presence of a ghost made the midsummer air so cold that even wood did
not burn, and of groans and footsteps underground as long as the ghost
is displeased with what his relatives are doing.

Just before midnight a bell-man goes about the streets to give warning
of the hour when the spirits will arrive.

"They will sit where we sat, and will talk of us as we talked of them:
in the gray of the morning only will they go away."

--LE BRAZ: Night of the Dead.

The supper for the souls is then set out. The poor who live on the
mountains have only black corn, milk, and smoked bacon to offer, but it
is given freely. Those who can afford it spread on a white cloth dishes
of clotted milk, hot pancakes, and mugs of cider.

After all have retired to lie with both eyes shut tight lest they see
one of the guests, death-singers make their rounds, chanting under the
windows:

"You are comfortably lying in your bed,  
But with the poor dead it is otherwise;  
You are stretched softly in your bed  
While the poor souls are wandering abroad.

"A white sheet and five planks,  
A bundle of straw beneath the head,  
Five feet of earth above  
Are all the worldly goods we own."

--LE BRAZ: Night of the Dead.

The tears of their deserted friends disturb the comfort of the dead, and
sometimes they appear to tell those in sorrow that their shrouds are
always wet from the tears shed on their graves.

Wakened by the dirge of the death-singers the people rise and pray for
the souls of the departed.

Divination has little part in the annals of the evening, but one in
Finistere is recorded. Twenty-five new needles are laid in a dish, and
named, and water is poured upon them. Those who cross are enemies.

In France is held a typical Continental celebration of All Saints' and
All Souls'. On October 31st the children go asking for flowers to
decorate the graves, and to adorn the church. At night bells ring to
usher in All Saints'. On the day itself the churches are decorated gaily
with flowers, candles, and banners, and a special service is held. On
the second day of November the light and color give way to black
drapings, funeral songs, and prayers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII: The Teutonic Religion. Witches.](boh14)
