[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia22)  [Next](teia24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

### XX

### BIMINI AND THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTH

When Juan Ponce de Leon set forth from Porto Rico, March 13, 1512, to
seek the island of Bimini and its Fountain of Youth, he was moved by the
love of adventure more than by that of juvenility, for he was then but
about fifty, a time when a cavalier of his day thought himself but in
his prime. He looked indeed with perpetual sorrow--as much of it as a
Spaniard of those days could feel--upon his kinsman Luis Ponce, once a
renowned warrior, but on whom age had already, at sixty-five, laid its
hand in earnest. There was little in this slowly moving veteran to
recall one who had shot through the lists at the tournament, and had
advanced with his short sword at the bull fight,--who had ruled his
vassals, and won the love of high-born women. It was a vain hope of
restored youth

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

which had brought Don Luis from Spain to Porto Rico four years before;
and, when Ponce de Leon had subdued that island, his older kinsman was
forever beseeching him to carry his flag farther, and not stop till he
had reached Bimini, and sought the Fountain of Youth.

"For what end," he said, "should you stay here longer and lord it over
these miserable natives? Let us go where we can bathe in those enchanted
waters and be young once more. I need it, and you will need it ere
long."

"How know we," said his kinsman, "that there is any such place?"

"All know it," said Luis. "Peter Martyr saith that there is in Bimini a
continual spring of running water of such marvellous virtue that the
water thereof, being drunk, perhaps with some diet, maketh old men
young." And he adds that an Indian grievously oppressed with old age,
moved with the fame of that fountain, and allured through the love of
longer life, went to an island, near unto the country of Florida, to
drink of the desired fountain, . . . and having well drunk and washed
himself for many

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

days with the appointed remedies, by them who kept the bath, he is
reported to have brought home a manly strength, and to have used all
manly exercises. "Let us therefore go thither," he cried, "and be like
him."

They set sail with three brigantines and found without difficulty the
island of Bimini among the Lucayos (or Bahamas) islands; but when they
searched for the Fountain of Youth they were pointed farther westward to
Florida, where there was said to be a river of the same magic powers,
called the Jordan. Touching at many a fair island green with trees, and
occupied by a gentle population till then undisturbed, it was not
strange if, nearing the coast of Florida, both Juan Ponce de Leon and
his more impatient cousin expected to find the Fountain of Youth.

They came at last to an inlet which led invitingly up among wooded banks
and flowery valleys, and here the older knight said, "Let us disembark
here and strike inland. My heart tells me that here at last will be
found the Fountain of Youth." "Nonsense," said Juan, "our way lies by
water."

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

"Then leave me here with my men," said Luis. He had brought with him
five servants, mostly veterans, from his own estate in Spain.

A fierce discussion ended in Luis obtaining his wish, and being left for
a fortnight of exploration; his kinsman promising to come for him again
at the mouth of the river St. John. The men left on shore were
themselves past middle age, and the more eager for their quest. They
climbed a hill and watched the brigantines disappear in the distance;
then set up a cross, which they had brought with them, and prayed before
it bareheaded.

Sending the youngest of his men up to the top of a tree, Luis learned
from him that they were on an island, after all, and this cheered him
much, as making it more likely that they should find the Fountain of
Youth. He saw that the ground was pawed up, as if in a cattle-range and
that there was a path leading to huts. Taking this path, they met fifty
Indian bowmen, who, whether large or not, seemed to them like giants.
The Spaniards gave them beads and hawk-bells, and each received in
return an arrow, as a token

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

of friendship. The Indians promised them food in the morning, and
brought fish, roots, and pure water; and finding them chilly from the
coldness of the night, carried them in their arms to their homes, first
making four or five large fires on the way. At the houses there were
many fires, and the Spaniards would have been wholly comfortable, had
they not thought it just possible that they were to be offered as a
sacrifice. Still fearing this, they left their Indian friends after a
few days and traversed the country, stopping at every spring or fountain
to test its quality. Alas! they all grew older and more worn in look, as
time went on, and farther from the Fountain of Youth.

After a time they came upon new tribes of Indians, and as they went
farther from the coast these people seemed more and more friendly. They
treated the white men as if come from heaven,--brought them food, made
them houses, carried every burden for them. Some had bows, and went upon
the hills for deer, and brought half a dozen every night for their
guests; others killed hares and rabbits by arranging themselves in a
circle and striking down the game with billets of wood as

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

it ran from one to another through the woods. All this game was brought
to the visitors to be breathed upon and blessed, and when this had to be
done for several hundred people it became troublesome. The women also
brought wild fruit, and would eat nothing till the guests had seen and
touched it. If the visitors seemed offended, the natives were terrified,
and apparently thought that they should die unless they had the favor of
these wise and good men. Farther on, people did not come out into the
paths to gather round them, as the first had done, but stayed meekly in
their houses, sitting with their faces turned to the wall, and with
their property heaped in the middle of the room. From these people the
travellers received many valuable skins, and other gifts. Wherever there
was a fountain, the natives readily showed it, but apparently knew
nothing of any miraculous gift; yet they themselves were in such fine
physical condition, and seemed so young and so active, that it was as if
they had already bathed in some magic spring. They had wonderful
endurance of heat and cold, and

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

such health that, when their bodies were pierced through and through by
arrows, they would recover rapidly from their wounds. These things
convinced the Spaniards that, even if the Indians would not disclose the
source of all their bodily freshness, it must, at any rate, lie
somewhere in the neighborhood. Yet a little while, no doubt, and their
visitors would reach it.

It was a strange journey for these gray and careworn men as they passed
up the defiles and valleys along the St. John's River, beyond the spot
where now spreads the city of Jacksonville, and even up to the woods and
springs about Magnolia and Green Cove. Yellow jasmines trailed their
festoons above their heads; wild roses grew at their feet; the air was
filled with the aromatic odors of pine or sweet bay; the long gray moss
hung from the live-oak branches; birds and butterflies of wonderful hues
fluttered around them; and strange lizards crossed their paths, or
looked with dull and blinking eyes from the branches. They came, at
last, to one spring which widened into a natural basin, and which was so
deliciously aromatic that Luis Ponce

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

said, on emerging: "It is enough. I have bathed in the Fountain of
Youth, and henceforth I am young." His companions tried it, and said the
same: "The Fountain of Youth is found."

No time must now be lost in proclaiming the great discovery. They
obtained a boat from the natives, who wept at parting with the white
strangers whom they had so loved. In this boat they proposed to reach
the mouth of the St. John, meet Juan Ponce de Leon, and carry back the
news to Spain. But one native, whose wife and children they had cured,
and who had grown angry at their refusal to stay longer, went down to
the water's edge and, sending an arrow from his bow, transfixed Don
Luis, so that even his foretaste of the Fountain could not save him, and
he died ere reaching the mouth of the river. If Don Luis ever reached
what he sought, it was in another world. But those who have ever bathed
in Green Cove Spring, near Magnolia, on the St. John's River, will be
ready to testify that, had he but stayed there longer, he would have
found something to recall his visions of the Fountain of Youth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](teia24)
