[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia18)  [Next](teia20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

### XVI

### HARALD THE VIKING

Erik the Red, the most famous of all Vikings, had three sons, and once
when they were children the king came to visit Erik and passed through
the playground where the boys were playing. Leif and Biorn, the two
oldest, were building little houses and barns and were making believe
that they were full of cattle and sheep, while Harald, who was only four
years old, was sailing chips of wood in a pool. The king asked Harald
what they were, and he said, "Ships of war." King Olaf laughed and said,
"The time may come when you will command ships, my little friend." Then
he asked Biorn what he would like best to have. "Corn-land," he said;
"ten farms." "That would yield much corn," the king replied. Then he
asked Leif the same question, and he answered, "Cows." "How many?" "So
many that

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

when they went to the lake to be watered, they would stand close round
the edge, so that not another could pass." "That would be a large
housekeeping," said the king, and he asked the same question of Harald.
"What would you like best to have?" "Servants and followers," said the
child, stoutly. "How many would you like?" "Enough," said the child, "to
eat up all the cows and crops of my brothers at a single meal." Then the
king laughed, and said to the mother of the children, "You are bringing
up a king."

As the boys grew, Leif and Harald were ever fond of roaming, while Biorn
wished to live on the farm at peace. Their sister Freydis went with the
older boys and urged them on. She was not gentle and amiable, but full
of energy and courage: she was also quarrelsome and vindictive. People
said of her that even if her brothers were all killed, yet the race of
Erik the Red would not end while she lived; that "she practised more of
shooting and the handling of sword and shield than of sewing or
embroidering, and that as she was able, she did evil oftener

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

than good; and that when she was hindered she ran into the woods and
slew men to get their property." She was always urging her brothers to
deeds of daring and adventure. One day they had been hawking, and when
they let slip the falcons, Harald's falcon killed two blackcocks in one
flight and three in another. The dogs ran and brought the birds, and he
said proudly to the others, "It will be long before most of you have any
such success," and they all agreed to this. He rode home in high spirits
and showed his birds to his sister Freydis. "Did any king," he asked,
"ever make so great a capture in so short a time?" "It is, indeed," she
said, "a good morning's hunting to have got five blackcocks, but it was
still better when in one morning a king of Norway took five kings and
subdued all their kingdoms." Then Harald went away very humble and
besought his father to let him go and serve on the Varangian Guard of
King Otho at Constantinople, that he might learn to be a warrior.

So Harald was brought from his Norwegian home by his father Erik the
Red, in his galley

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

called the *Sea-serpent*, and sailed with him through the Mediterranean
Sea, and was at last made a member of the Emperor Otho's Varangian Guard
at Constantinople. This guard will be well remembered by the readers of
Scott's novel, "Count Robert of Paris," and was maintained by successive
emperors and drawn largely from the Scandinavian races. Erik the Red had
no hesitation in leaving his son among them, as the young man was stout
and strong, very self-willed, and quite able to defend himself. The
father knew also that the Varangian Guard, though hated by the people,
held to one another like a band of brothers; and that any one brought up
among them would be sure of plenty of fighting and plenty of gold,--the
two things most prized by early Norsemen. For ordinary life, Harald's
chief duties would be to lounge about the palace, keeping guard, wearing
helmet and buckler and bearskin, with purple underclothes and golden
clasped hose; and bearing as armor a mighty battle-axe and a small
scimitar. Such was the life led by Harald, till one day he had a message
from his father, through a new

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

recruit, calling him home to join an expedition to the western seas. "I
hear, my son," the message said, "that your good emperor, whom may the
gods preserve, is sorely ill and may die any day. When he is dead, be
prompt in getting your share of the plunder of the palace and come back
to me."

The emperor died, and the order was fulfilled. It was the custom of the
Varangians to reward themselves in this way for their faithful services
of protection; and the result is that, to this day, Greek and Arabic
gold crosses and chains are to be found in the houses of Norwegian
peasants and may be seen in the museums of Christiania and Copenhagen.
No one was esteemed the less for this love of spoil, if he was only
generous in giving. The Norsemen spoke contemptuously of gold as "the
serpent's bed," and called a generous man "a hater of the serpent's
bed," because such a man parts with gold as with a thing he hates.

When the youth came to his father, he found Erik the Red directing the
building of one of the great Norse galleys, nearly eighty feet long

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

and seventeen wide and only six feet deep. The boat had twenty ribs, and
the frame was fastened together by withes made of roots, while the oaken
planks were held by iron rivets. The oars were twenty feet long, and
were put through oar holes, and the rudder, shaped like a large oar, was
not at the end, but was attached to a projecting beam on the starboard
(originally steer-board) side. The ship was to be called a Dragon, and
was to be painted so as to look like one, having a gilded dragon's head
at the bow and a gilded tail on the stern; while the moving oars would
look like legs, and the row of red and white shields, hung along the
side of the boat, would resemble the scales of a dragon, and the great
square sails, red and blue, would look like wings. This was the vessel
which young Harald was to command.

He had already made trips in just such vessels with his father; had
learned to attack the enemy with arrow and spear; also with stones
thrown down from above, and with grappling-irons to clutch opposing
boats. He had learned to swim, from early childhood, even in the icy
northern

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

waters, and he had been trained in swimming to hide his head beneath his
floating shield, so that it could not be seen. He had learned also to
carry tinder in a walnut shell, enclosed in wax, so that no matter how
long he had been in the water he could strike a light on reaching shore.
He had also learned from his father acts of escape as well as attack.
Thus he had once sailed on a return trip from Denmark after plundering a
town; the ships had been lying at anchor all night in a fog, and at
sunlight in the morning lights seemed burning on the sea. But Erik the
Red said, "It is a fleet of Danish ships, and the sun strikes on the
gilded dragon crests; furl the sail and take to the oars." They rowed
their best, yet the Danish ships were overtaking them, when Erik the Red
ordered his men to throw wood overboard and cover it with Danish
plunder. This made some delay, as the Danes stopped to pick it up, and
in the same way Erik the Red dropped his provisions, and finally his
prisoners; and in the delay thus caused he got away with his own men.

But now Harald was not to go to Denmark,

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

but to the new western world, the Wonderstrands which Leif had sought
and had left without sufficient exploration. First, however, he was to
call at Greenland, which his father had first discovered. It was the
custom of the Viking explorers, when they reached a new country, to
throw overboard their "seat posts," or *setstokka*,--the curved part of
their doorways,--and then to land where they floated ashore. But Erik
the Red had lent his to a friend and could not get them back, so that he
sailed in search of them, and came to a new land which he called
Greenland, because, as he said, people would be attracted thither if it
had a good name. Then he established a colony there, and then Leif the
Lucky, as he was called, sailed still farther, and came to the
Wonderstrand, or Magic Shores. These he called Vinland or Wine-land, and
now a rich man named Karlsefne was to send a colony thither from
Greenland, and the young Harald was to go with it and take command of
it.

Now as Harald was to be presented to the rich Karlsefne, he thought he
must be gorgeously arrayed. So he wore a helmet on his head, a red

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

shield richly inlaid with gold and iron, and a sharp sword with an ivory
handle wound with golden thread. He had also a short spear, and wore
over his coat a red silk short cloak on which was embroidered, both
before and behind, a yellow lion. We may well believe that the sixty men
and five women who composed the expedition were ready to look on him
with admiration, especially as one of the women was his own sister,
Freydis, now left to his peculiar care, since Erik the Red had died. The
sturdy old hero had died still a heathen, and it was only just after his
death that Christianity was introduced into Greenland, and those
numerous churches were built there whose ruins yet remain, even in
regions from which all population has gone.

So the party of colonists sailed for Vinland, and Freydis, with the four
older women, came in Harald's boat, and Freydis took easily the lead
among them for strength, though not always, it must be admitted, for
amiability.

The boats of the expedition having left Greenland soon after the year
1000, coasted the shore as far as they could, rarely venturing into open

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

sea. At last, amidst fog and chilly weather, they made land at a point
where a river ran through a lake into the sea, and they could not enter
from the sea except at high tide. It was once believed that this was
Narragansett Bay in Rhode Island, but this is no longer believed. Here
they landed and called the place Hóp, from the Icelandic word *hópa*,
meaning an inlet from the ocean. Here they found grape-vines growing and
fields of wild wheat; there were fish in the lake and wild animals in
the woods. Here they landed the cattle and the provisions which they had
brought with them; and here they built their huts. They went in the
spring, and during that summer the natives came in boats of skin to
trade with them--men described as black, and ill favored, with large
eyes and broad cheeks and with coarse hair on their heads. These, it is
thought, may have been the Esquimaux. The first time they came, these
visitors held up a white shield as a sign of peace, and were so
frightened by the bellowing of the bull that they ran away. Then
returning, they brought

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

furs to sell and wished to buy weapons, but Harald tried another plan:
he bade the women bring out milk, butter, and cheese from their dairies,
and when the Skrælings saw that, they wished for nothing else, and, the
legend says, "the Skrælings carried away their wares in their stomachs,
but the Norsemen had the skins they had purchased." This happened yet
again, but at the second visit one of the Skrælings was accidentally
killed or injured.

The next time the Skrælings came they were armed with slings, and raised
upon a pole a great blue ball and attacked the Norsemen so furiously
that they were running away when Erik's sister, Freydis, came out before
them with bare arms, and took up a sword, saying, "Why do you run,
strong men as you are, from these miserable dwarfs whom I thought you
would knock down like cattle? Give me weapons, and I will fight better
than any of you." Then the rest took courage and began to fight, and the
Skrælings were driven back. Once more the strangers came, and one of
them took up an axe, a thing which he had

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

not before seen, and struck at one of his companions, killing him. Then
the leader took the axe and threw it into the water, after which the
Skrælings retreated, and were not seen again.

The winter was a mild one, and while it lasted, the Norsemen worked
busily at felling wood and house-building. They had also many
amusements, in most of which Harald excelled. They used to swim in all
weathers. One of their feats was to catch seals and sit on them while
swimming; another was to pull one another down and remain as long as
possible under water. Harald could swim for a mile or more with his
armor on, or with a companion on his shoulder. In-doors they used to
play the tug of war, dragging each other by a walrus hide across the
fire. Harald was good at this, and was also the best archer, sometimes
aiming at something placed on a boy's head, the boy having a cloth tied
around his head, and held by two men, that he might not move at all on
hearing the whistling of the arrow. In this way Harald could even shoot
an

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

arrow under a nut placed on the head, so that the nut would roll down
and the head not be hurt. He could plant a spear in the ground and then
shoot an arrow upward so skilfully that it would turn in the air and
fall with the point in the end of the spear-shaft. He could also shoot a
blunt arrow through the thickest ox-hide from a cross-bow. He could
change weapons from one hand to the other during a fencing match, or
fence with either hand, or throw two spears at the same time, or catch a
spear in motion. He could run so fast that no horse could overtake him,
and play the rough games with bat and ball, using a ball of the hardest
wood. He could race on snowshoes, or wrestle when bound by a belt to his
antagonist. Then when he and his companions wished a rest, they amused
themselves with harp-playing or riddles or chess. The Norsemen even
played chess on board their vessels, and there are still to be seen, on
some of these, the little holes that were formerly used for the sharp
ends of the chessmen, so that they should not be displaced.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

They could not find that any European had ever visited this place; but
some of the Skrælings told them of a place farther south, which they
called "the Land of the Whiteman," or "Great Ireland." They said that in
that place there were white men who clothed themselves in long white
garments, carried before them poles to which white cloths were hung, and
called with a loud voice. These, it was thought by the Norsemen, must be
Christian processions, in which banners were borne and hymns were
chanted. It has been thought from this that some expedition from
Ireland--that of St. Brandan, for instance--may have left a settlement
there, long before, but this has never been confirmed. The Skrælings and
the Northmen were good friends for a time; until at last one of Erik's
own warriors killed a Skræling by accident, and then all harmony was at
an end.

They saw no hope of making a lasting settlement there, and, moreover,
Freydis who was very grasping, tried to deceive the other settlers and
get more than her share of everything, so that Harald himself lost
patience with her and threatened

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

her. It happened that one of the men of the party, Olaf, was Harald's
foster-brother. They had once had a fight, and after the battle had
agreed that they would be friends for life and always share the same
danger. For this vow they were to walk under the turf; that is, a strip
of turf was cut and held above their heads, and they stood beneath and
let their blood flow upon the ground whence the turf had been cut. After
this they were to own everything by halves and either must avenge the
other's death. This was their brotherhood; but Freydis did not like it;
so she threatened Olaf, and tried to induce men to kill him, for she did
not wish to bring upon herself the revenge that must come if she slew
him.

This was the reason why the whole enterprise failed, and why Olaf
persuaded Harald, for the sake of peace, to return to Greenland in the
spring and take a load of valuable timber to sell there, including one
stick of what was called massur-wood, which was as valuable as mahogany,
and may have been at some time borne by ocean currents to the beach. It
is hardly possible that, as some have thought, the colonists

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

established a regular trade in this wood for no such wood grows on the
northern Atlantic shores. However this may be, the party soon returned,
after one winter in Vinland the Good; and on the way back Harald did one
thing which made him especially dear to his men.

A favorite feat of the Norsemen was to toss three swords in the air and
catch each by the handle as it came down. This was called the *handsax*
game. The young men used also to try the feat of running along the
oar-blades of the rowers as they were in motion, passing around the bow
of the vessel with a spring and coming round to the stern over the oars
on the other side. Few could accomplish this, but no one but Harald
could do it and play the *handsax* game as he ran; and when he did it,
they all said that he was the most skilful man at *idrottie* ever seen.
That was their word for an athletic feat. But presently came a time when
not only his courage but his fairness and justice were to be tried.

It happened in this way. There was nothing of which the Norsemen were
more afraid than of the *teredo*, or shipworm, which gnaws the wood

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

of ships. It was observed in Greenland and Iceland that pieces of wood
often floated on shore which were filled with holes made by this animal,
and they thought that in certain places the seas were full of this worm,
so that a ship would be bored and sunk in a little while. It is said
that on this return voyage Harald's vessel entered a worm-sea and
presently began to sink. They had, however, provided a smaller boat
smeared with sea-oil, which the worms would not attack. They went into
the boat, but found that it would not hold more than half of them all.
Then Harald said, "We will divide by lots, without regard to the rank;
each taking his chance with the rest." This they thought, the Norse
legend says, "a high-minded offer." They drew lots, and Harald was among
those assigned to the safer boat. He stepped in, and when he was there a
man called from the other boat and said, "Dost thou intend, Harald, to
separate from me here?" Harald answered, "So it turns out," and the man
said, "Very different was thy promise to my father when we came from
Greenland, for the promise was that we should share the same fate."

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then Harald said,
"It shall not be thus. Go into the boat, and I will go back into the
ship, since thou art so anxious to live." Then Harald went back to the
ship, while the man took his place in the boat, and after that Harald
was never heard of more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVII. The Search For Norumbega](teia20)
