[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](teia09)  [Next](teia11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1589636589/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

### VII

### MERLIN THE ENCHANTER

In one of the old books called Welsh Triads, in which all things are
classed by threes, there is a description of three men called "The Three
Generous Heroes of the Isle of Britain." One of these--named Nud or
Nodens, and later called Merlin--was first brought from the sea, it is
stated, with a herd of cattle consisting of 21,000 milch cows, which are
supposed to mean those waves of the sea that the poets often describe as
White Horses. He grew up to be a king and warrior, a magician and
prophet, and on the whole the most important figure in the Celtic
traditions. He came from the sea and at last returned to it, but
meanwhile he did great works on land, one of which is said to have been
the building of Stonehenge.

This is the way, as the old legends tell, in which the vast stones of
Stonehenge came to

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

be placed on Salisbury Plain. It is a thing which has always been a
puzzle to every one, inasmuch as their size and weight are enormous, and
there is no stone of the same description to be found within hundreds of
miles of Salisbury Plain, where they now stand.

The legend is that Pendragon, king of England, was led to fight a great
battle by seeing a dragon in the air. The battle was won, but Pendragon
was killed and was buried on Salisbury Plain, where the fight had taken
place. When his brother Uther took his place, Merlin the enchanter
advised him to paint a dragon on a flag and bear it always before him to
bring good fortune, and this he always did. Then Merlin said to him,
"Wilt thou do nothing more on the Plain of Salisbury, to honor thy
brother?" The King said, "What shall be done?" Then Merlin said, "I will
cause a thing to be done that will endure to the world's end." Then he
bade Utherpendragon, as he called the new king, to send many ships and
men to Ireland, and he showed him stones such as seemed far too large
and heavy to

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

bring, but he placed them by his magic art upon the boats and bore them
to England; and he devised means to transport them and to set them on
end, "for they shall seem fairer so than if they were lying." And there
they are to this day.

This was the way in which Merlin would sometimes obtain the favor and
admiration of young ladies. There was a maiden of twelve named Nimiane
or Vivian, the daughter of King Dionas, and Merlin changed himself into
the appearance of "a fair young squire," that he might talk with her
beside a fountain, described in the legends as "a well, whereof the
springs were fair and the water clear and the gravel so fair that it
seemed of fine silver." By degrees he made acquaintance with the child,
who told him who she was, adding, "And what are you, fair, sweet
friend?" "Damsel," said Merlin, "I am a travelling squire, seeking for
my master, who has taught me wonderful things." "And what master is
that?" she asked. "It is one," he said, "who has taught me so much that
I could here erect for you a castle,

 

<span id="img_05000"></span>

[![''Merlin, changed into the appearance of a fair young squire, by
degrees made acquaintance with Vivian, who told him who she was.''--p.
50](tn/05000.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/05000.jpg)  
''Merlin, changed into the appearance of a fair young squire, by degrees
made acquaintance with Vivian, who told him who she was.''--p. 50  

 

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

and I could make many people outside to attack it and inside to defend
it; nay, I could go upon this water and not wet my feet, and I could
make a river where water had never been."

"These are strange feats," said the maiden, "and I wish that I could
thus disport myself." "I can do yet greater things," said Merlin, "and
no one can devise anything which I cannot do, and I can also make it to
endure forever." "Indeed," said the girl, "I would always love you if
you could show me some such wonders." "For your love," he answered, "I
will show you some of these wondrous plays, and I will ask no more of
you." Then Merlin turned and described a circle with a wand and then
came and sat by her again at the fountain. At noon she saw coming out of
the forest many ladies and knights and squires, holding each other by
the hand and singing in the greatest joy; then came men with timbrels
and tabours and dancing, so that one could not tell one-fourth part of
the sports that went on. Then Merlin caused an orchard to grow, with all
manner of fruit and

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

flowers; and the maiden cared for nothing but to listen to their
singing, "Truly love begins in joy, but ends in grief." The festival
continued from mid-day to even-song; and King Dionas and his courtiers
came out to see it, and marvelled whence these strange people came. Then
when the carols were ended, the ladies and maidens sat down on the green
grass and fresh flowers, and the squires set up a game of tilting called
quintain upon the meadows and played till even-song; and then Merlin
came to the damsel and asked if he had done what he promised for her.
"Fair, sweet friend," said she, "you have done so much that I am all
yours." "Let me teach you," he answered, "and I will show you many
wonders that no woman ever learned so many."

Merlin and this young damsel always remained friends, and he taught her
many wonderful arts, one of which was (this we must regret) a spell by
which she might put her parents to sleep whenever he visited her; while
another lesson was (this being more unexceptionable) in the use of three
words, by saying which she

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

might at any time keep at a distance any men who tried to molest her. He
stayed eight days near her, and in those days taught her many of the
most "wonderful things that any mortal heart could think of, things past
and things that were done and said, and a part of what was to come; and
she put them in writing, and then Merlin departed from her and came to
Benoyk, where the king, Arthur, rested, so that glad were they when they
saw Merlin."

The relations between Merlin and Arthur are unlike those ever held
towards a king even by an enchanter in any legend. Even in Homer there
is no one described, except the gods, as having such authority over a
ruler. Merlin came and went as he pleased and under any form he might
please. He foretold the result of a battle, ordered up troops, brought
aid from a distance. He rebuked the bravest knights for cowardice; as
when Ban, Bors, and Gawain had concealed themselves behind some bushes
during a fight. "Is this," he said to King Arthur and Sir Bors, "the war
and the help that you do to your friends who have put

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

themselves in adventure of death in many a need, and ye come hither to
hide for cowardice." Then the legend says, "When the king understood the
words of Merlin, he bowed his head for shame," and the other knights
acknowledged their fault. Then Merlin took the dragon banner which he
had given them and said that he would bear it himself; "for the banner
of a king," he said, "should not be hid in battle,--but borne in the
foremost front." Then Merlin rode forth and cried with a loud voice,
"Now shall be shown who is a knight." And the knights, seeing Merlin,
exclaimed that he was "a full noble man"; and "without fail," says the
legend, "he was full of marvellous powers and strength of body and great
and long stature; but brown he was and lean and rough of hair." Then he
rode in among the enemy on a great black horse; and the golden dragon
which he had made and had attached to the banner gave out from its
throat such a flaming fire that the air was black with its smoke; and
all King Arthur's men began to fight again more stoutly, and Arthur
himself held the bridle reins in his

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

left hand, and so wielded his sword with his right as to slay two
hundred men.

There was no end to Merlin's disguises--sometimes as an old man,
sometimes as a boy or a dwarf, then as a woman, then as an ignorant
clown;--but the legends always give him some object to accomplish, some
work to do, and there was always a certain dignity about him, even when
helping King Arthur, as he sometimes did, to do wrong things. His fame
extended over all Britain, and also through Brittany, now a part of
France, where the same poetic legends extended. This, for instance, is a
very old Breton song about him:--

    MERLIN THE DIVINER

Merlin! Merlin! where art thou going  
So early in the day, with thy black dog?  
Oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi! oi!  
Oi! oi! oi! oi! oi!

I have come here to search the way,  
To find the red egg;  
The red egg of the marine serpent,  
By the seaside, in the hollow of the stone. <span id="page_56">p.
56</span>

I am going to seek in the valley  
The green water-cress, and the golden grass,  
And the top branch of the oak,  
In the wood by the side of the fountain.

Merlin! Merlin! retrace your steps;  
Leave the branch on the oak,  
And the green water-cress in the valley,  
As well as the golden grass;  
And leave the red egg of the marine serpent  
In the foam by the hollow of the stone.  
Merlin! Merlin! retrace thy steps;  
There is no diviner but God.

Merlin was supposed to know the past, the present, and the future, and
to be able to assume the form of any animal, and even that of a
*menhir*, or huge standing stone. Before history began he ruled in
Britain, then a delightful island of flowery meadows. His subjects were
"small people" (fairies), and their lives were a continued festival of
singing, playing, and enjoyment. The sage ruled them as a father, his
familiar servant being a tame wolf. He also possessed a kingdom, beneath
the waves, where everything was beautiful, the

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

inhabitants being charming little beings, with waves of long, fair hair
falling on their shoulders in curls. Fruits and milk composed the food
of all, meat and fish being held in abhorrence. The only want felt was
of the full light of the sun, which, coming to them through the water,
was but faint, and cast no shadow.

Here was the famous workshop where Merlin forged the enchanted sword so
celebrated by the bards, and where the stones were found by which alone
the sword could be sharpened. Three British heroes were fated to wield
this blade in turn; viz., Lemenisk the leaper (*Leim*, meaning leap),
Utherpendragon, and his son King Arthur. By orders of this last hero,
when mortally wounded, it was flung into the sea, where it will remain
till he returns to restore the rule of his country to the faithful
British race.

The bard once amused and puzzled the court by entering the hall as a
blind boy led by a greyhound, playing on his harp, and demanding as
recompense to be allowed to carry the king's banner in an approaching
battle. Being

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

refused on account of his blindness he vanished, and the king of
Brittany mentioned his suspicions that this was one of Merlin's elfin
tricks. Arthur was disturbed, for he had promised to give the child
anything except his honor, his kingdom, his wife, and his sword.
However, while he continued to fret, there entered the hall a poor child
about eight years old, with shaved head, features of livid tint, eyes of
light gray, barefooted, barelegged, and a whip knotted over his
shoulders in the manner affected by horse-boys. Speaking and looking
like an idiot, he asked the king's permission to bear the royal ensign
in the approaching battle with the giant Rion. The courtiers laughed,
but Arthur, suspecting a new joke on Merlin's part, granted the demand,
and then Merlin stood in his own proper person before the company.

He also seems to have taught people many things in real science,
especially the women, who were in those days more studious than the men,
or at least had less leisure. For instance, the legend says of Morgan le
fay (or la fée), King Arthur's sister, "she was a noble clergesse

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (meaning that she
could read and write, like the clergy), and of astronomy could she
enough, for Merlin had her taught, and she learned much of egromancy
(magic or necromancy); and the best work-woman she was with her hands
that any man knew in any land, and she had the fairest head and the
fairest hands under heaven, and shoulders well-shapen; and she had fair
eloquence and full debonair she was, as long as she was in her right
wit; and when she was wroth with any man, she was evil to meet." This
lady was one of Merlin's pupils, but the one whom he loved most and
instructed the most was Nimiane or Vivian, already mentioned, who seems
to have been to him rather a beloved younger sister than anything else,
and he taught her so much that "at last he might hold himself a fool,"
the legend says, "and ever she inquired of his cunning and his
mysteries, each thing by itself, and he let her know all, and she wrote
all that he said, as she was well learned in clergie (reading and
writing), and learned lightly all that Merlin taught her; and when they
parted, each of them commended the other to God full tenderly."

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

The form of the enchanter Merlin disappeared from view, at last--for the
legends do not admit that his life ever ended--across the sea whence he
came.

The poet Tennyson, to be sure, describes Nimiane or Vivian--the Lady of
the Lake--as a wicked enchantress who persuaded Merlin to betray his
secrets to her, and then shut him up in an oak tree forever. But other
legends seem to show that Tennyson does great injustice to the Lady of
the Lake, that she really loved Merlin even in his age, and therefore
persuaded him to show her how to make a tower without walls,--that they
might dwell there together in peace, and address each other only as
Brother and Sister. When he had told her, he fell asleep with his head
in her lap, and she wove a spell nine times around his head, and the
tower became the strongest in the world. Some of the many legends place
this tower in the forest of Broceliande; while others transport it afar
to a magic island, where Merlin dwells with his nine bards, and where
Vivian alone can come or go through the magic walls. Some legends
describe

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

it as an enclosure "neither of iron nor steel nor timber nor of stone,
but of the air, without any other thing but enchantment, so strong that
it may never be undone while the world endureth." Here dwells Merlin, it
is said, with nine favorite bards who took with them the thirteen
treasures of England. These treasures are said to have been:--

1\. A sword; if any man drew it except the owner, it burst into a flame
from the cross to the point. All who asked it received it; but because
of this peculiarity all shunned it.

2\. A basket; if food for one man were put into it, when opened it would
be found to contain food for one hundred.

3\. A horn; what liquor soever was desired was found therein.

4\. A chariot; whoever sat in it would be immediately wheresoever he
wished.

5\. A halter, which was in a staple below the feet of a bed; and
whatever horse one wished for in it, he would find it there.

6\. A knife, which would serve four-and twenty men at meat all at once.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

7\. A caldron; if meat were put into it to boil for a coward, it would
never be boiled; but if meat were put in it for a brave man, it would be
boiled forthwith.

8\. A whetstone; if the sword of a brave man were sharpened thereon, and
any one were wounded therewith, he would be sure to die; but if it were
that of a coward that was sharpened on it, he would be none the worse.

9\. A garment; if a man of gentle birth put it on, it suited him well;
but if a churl, it would not fit him.

10, 11. A pan and a platter; whatever food was required was found
therein.

12\. A chessboard; when the men were placed upon it, they would play of
themselves. The chessboard was of gold, and the men of silver.

13\. The mantle of Arthur; whosoever was beneath it could see
everything, while no one could see him.

It is towards this tower, some legends say, that Merlin was last seen by
some Irish monks, sailing away westward, with a maiden, in a boat of
crystal, beneath a sunset sky.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. Sir Lancelot of the Lake](teia11)
