[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20228) 
[Next](rp20230) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### THE STANDARD INSCRIPTION OF ASSUR-NATSIR-PAL

<span class="smallcaps">By the Editor</span>

<span class="smallcaps">This</span> long inscription of
Assur-natsir-pal, inscribed in various forms across the bas-reliefs of
his palace, ranks next in geographical importance to the annals of
Tiglath-Pileser I. Assur-natsir-pal reigned from B.C. 883 to B.C. 858,
more than 200 years after his illustrious predecessor. But this interval
of 200 years was almost a blank in the history of Assyria. It witnessed
the rise of no great king or conqueror; indeed it would seem that the
feeble successors of Tiglath-Pileser lost territory rather than gained
it. With Assur-natsir-pal, however, a new era commenced. Once more the
armies of Nineveh went forth to conquer, and once more it was towards
the north and the west that their marches were usually directed. The
Armenian kingdoms on the north, Carchemish and Syria to the west, were
the main objects of attack.

Tiglath-Pileser had been unable to penetrate beyond the Hittite fortress
of Carchemish, and force the fords of the Euphrates which it protected.
If he made his way further to the west it was along the

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

northern range of mountains which led him into Kilikia or to the fertile
plain of Malatiyeh. But Assur-natsir-pal was attended with better
fortune. The merchant princes of Carchemish had in his day lost their
ancient prowess and military spirit, and they were glad to buy off the
threatened attack of the Assyrians with a rich bribe. Assur-natsir-pal
left Carchemish in his rear and pressed onward towards Phœnicia and the
Mediterranean coast. In the time of his son and successor Shalmaneser
II, Assyria has already entered within the horizon of the western
nations, and has come into contact, not only with the kings of Damascus,
but with the kings of Israel as well.

The annals of Assur-natsir-pal present us with an invaluable picture of
Western Asia in the ninth century before our era, before Assyrian
conquest had as yet changed the political map of the country. It is
interesting to compare it with the picture presented by the annals of
Tiglath-Pileser two centuries earlier. It is chiefly in the Armenian
highlands that a change has taken place, or, it may be, is in process of
taking place. The land of Nahri or "the rivers" of Tiglath-Pileser has
shifted its position and has passed from the districts at the sources of
the Tigris and Euphrates to the southern shores of Lake Van. <span
id="fr_331"></span>[1](#fn_329) The rise of the kingdom of Ararat or
Van, which was destined to play a considerable part in the future
history of Western Asia, was, it would appear, the immediate

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

consequence of the campaigns of Assur-natsir-pal in the north. The
cuneiform inscriptions of Armenia begin with Sari-duris I, the
antagonist of Shalmaneser II, the son and successor of Assur-natsir-pal,
and are not only written in the syllabary of Nineveh, but are modelled
on the inscriptions of the Assyrian king. As the city of Dhuspas or Van
was founded by Sari-duris, while his father Lutipri is never given the
title of king, it is probable that he was the founder of a new dynasty
as well as of a new kingdom. At all events Arrame, who appears in the
annals of Shalmaneser as the predecessor of Sari-duris, had his capital
at Arzaskun, to the west of Lake Van and at a long distance from what
was afterwards the central point of the kingdom of Ararat. The wars of
Assur-natsir-pal and Shalmaneser not only introduced Assyrian
civilisation into the north, but also resulted in the union of a number
of small principalities into a single monarchy, which, under the varying
names of Ararat and Armenia, long continued to fill an important place
in Asiatic history.

On the whole, however, when the veil which lies for two centuries over
the map of Western Asia is lifted, we see that few changes have taken
place in it. On the east the Kurdish mountains are still held by wild
and independent tribes, who form a barrier between the inhabitants of
the valley of the Tigris and the Aryan population of Media. South of
them comes the ancient and cultured kingdom of Elam, stretching from its
capital of Susa to the shores of

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

the Persian Gulf. The valley of the Euphrates is occupied by the
Babylonian monarchy, whose history and civilisation mount back into the
night of time, and whose armies had penetrated to the shores of the
Mediterranean, and even to the distant island of Cyprus, ages before the
very name of Assyria had been known. The western bank of the Euphrates
is the home of the Bedouin ’Sukhi or Shuhites, who extend from the
vicinity of Carchemish to the frontiers of Babylonia; and the
intervening district of Mesopotamia is filled with flourishing cities,
each governed by a prince who claims jurisdiction over a small tract of
surrounding country. They all belong to the Semitic family, and to the
north press hard upon the Hittites, who are already in full retreat
towards their old homes in the Taurus mountains. Carchemish, however,
now Jerablûs, with its command of the caravan trade from east to west,
is still in their hands.

Westward of them are the Patinians, a tribe of Hittite origin, whose
territory stretches from Khazaz (now Azaz), near Aleppo, across the
Afrin to Mount Amanus, with its forests of cedars, and to the shores of
the Gulf of Antioch. But south of the Patinians we are again among the
Semites. The sea coast is held by the wealthy trading cities of the
Phœnicians, foremost among them being Arvad and Gebal, Sidon and Tyre;
while Syria proper is divided into two kingdoms, that of Hamath, which
has ceased to be Hittite, and that of Damascus. Damascus had risen upon
the ruins of David's empire, which for a brief

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

space had extended from the Gulf of Aqabah to the banks of the
Euphrates. With Damascus, Samaria was brought into close relation,
sometimes friendly, but more usually hostile. Its first mention on the
Assyrian monuments, however, is in connection with the battle of Qarqar
in B.C. 853, when "Ahab of Israel" sent a contingent to the help of
Hadadezer or Ben-hadad against his Assyrian assailants.

The wars of Assur-natsir-pal, like most of those of the first Assyrian
empire, did not lead to permanent conquest or annexation. They were
little more than raids, carried on partly for the sake of plunder,
partly in order to exalt the glory and power of the great god Assur,
partly to open a road to the west for the merchants of Nineveh. It is
possible also that the wars against the hardy mountaineers of Kurdistan
or Armenia were intended to prevent the latter from descending into the
fields of Assyria and disturbing their more peaceful neighbours. It was
not until the rise of the second Assyrian empire, until the age of
Tiglath-Pileser III, of Sargon and of Sennacherib, that Assyrian
conquest meant absorption into a single great organised power.

Assur-natsir-pal, whose name signifies "Assur has defended the son," was
the son and successor of Tiglath-Uras II, and was himself succeeded by
his son Shalmaneser after a reign of twenty-five years. His "Standard
Inscription" proved of high value in the early days of cuneiform
decipherment, on account of the numerous variants presented by the
different

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

copies of it which we possess. It has been partly published in Layard's
*Inscriptions in the Cuneiform Character*, pll. 1–11, and more fully and
accurately in the *Cuneiform Inscriptions of Western Asia*, vol. i. pll.
17–26.

The translation of it given in the first series of *Records of the Past*
(vol. iii. pp. 37–80) belongs to the earlier days of Assyrian study, and
it has therefore become necessary to replace it by one more accurate and
trustworthy. Not only is it now possible to identify the chief
localities mentioned in the text, but the progress of Assyrian philology
has also made it possible to translate the text with a precision which
fifteen years ago was unattainable. Like most of the historical
inscriptions, it now offers but few words the rendering of which is
doubtful. And its geographical importance and historical interest alike
make it desirable that the student who is not an Assyriologist should
possess the text in a trustworthy form. A translation of the
introductory lines has been published by Lhotzky, *Die Annalen
Assurnazirpal's* (Munich, 1884), and the whole inscription has been
translated by Dr. Peiser in Schrader's *Keilinschriftliche Bibliothek*
(1889), vol. i. pp. 51–129.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[129:1](rp20229.htm#fr_331) See the Records of
the Past, new series, vol. i. p. 106, note 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20230)
