[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Ancient Near
East](../../index)  [Records of the Past](../index) 
[Egypt](../../../egy/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](rp20236) 
[Next](rp20238) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Records of the Past, 2nd series, Vol. II*, ed. by A. H. Sayce,
\[1888\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

### THE MOABITE STONE

<span class="smallcaps">Translated by Dr. A. Neubauer</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Moabite stone was discovered by the
Rev. F. Klein, on the site of Dibon (now Dhibān), on the 19th of August
1868. When on his way to the Bekka his attention was drawn by a friendly
sheikh to a black basalt stone in the vicinity of his tent. This stone,
about 3 ft. 10 in. high, 2 ft. in breadth, and 14i in. in thickness, and
rounded both at the top and the bottom to nearly the shape of a
semicircle, contained an inscription on one side consisting of
thirty-four lines. The discoverer, although he did not immediately
recognise the importance of his find, had good sense enough to try to
acquire it for the museum at Berlin. As soon as the natives learned that
the infidels were in search of the monument, they began to interest all
persons they could get hold of in it. Captain Warren (of the Palestine
Exploration Fund) was informed of its existence some weeks after Klein's
discovery, but knowing that the Berlin Museum was already concerned in
the matter, he took no steps towards its acquisition till 1869. However,
whilst the negotiations of the Prussian Government were

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

making only slow progress, everything in the East moving but slowly, M.
Clermont-Ganneau, then dragoman of the French Consulate in Jerusalem,
wisely took at once the necessary steps for procuring squeezes and
copies of the inscription, and finally endeavoured to buy the monument
itself. Fortunately he was successful in his attempt to obtain a squeeze
of the inscription while the stone was still in its entirety, for it
soon became too late. After the Turkish authorities had begun to
interfere, the Bedouins of the country of Dhibān, rather than give up
the monument for the benefit of the Pasha and Mûdir, broke the stone by
first making a fire under it, and then pouring cold water on it, and
subsequently distributed the pieces among themselves to be used as
amulets and charms. Thus, through the zeal of those who acted in the
name of two European countries, one of the earliest Semitic monuments
written in alphabetical characters was irretrievably ruined.

For a detailed history of the vicissitudes undergone by the stone, I
must refer to Dr. Ginsburg's second edition of his work on the Moabite
inscription, and to M. Héron de Villefosse's notice (see full title
below, [p. 196](#page_196)), who does not, however, even mention the
name of Klein. Happily more than half of the inscription remained
intact, and M. Clermont-Ganneau's squeezes and copies supply in large
measure the lacunæ in the text, as may be seen from an inspection of the
original monument, which now adorns the museum of the Louvre. It stands
there

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

in its original shape, the lacunæ being supplied from the squeezes and
copies. And from this monument, as reproduced in 1886 by Professors
Rudolf Smend and Albert Socin, I shall give the translation which
follows.

It would be superfluous to mention in detail all the literature that
bears upon the stone. The reader will find it given up to 1875 in M.
Héron de Villefosse's monograph under the title of *Notice des monuments
provenant de la Palestine*, Paris, 1876, arranged according to the
countries to which the authors belong. It is seldom that such a number
of names can be found contributing to a subject of Oriental study, as
was the case with the Moabite inscription. I shall mention them in
alphabetical order, the names being taken from M. Héron de Villefosse's
work. They are—Auerbach (J.); Ballagi; Beke (D.); Bensly; Bonelly;
Burton (A. F. and Ch.); \*Clermont-Ganneau; Colenso (Bishop); Derenbourg
(J.); Deutsch (E.); Fabiani; Geiger (A.); \*Ginsburg (Ch. D.);
Goldziher; Grove (G.); Halévy (Abraham); Harkavy; Haug; Hayes Ward;
\*Héron de Villefosse; Himpel; \*Hitzig; Howard Crosby; Jenkins (G.);
\*Kaempf; Levi (M.A.); Merx; Neubauer (A.); \*Noeldeke; Oppert (J.);
Palmer (E. H.); Petermann; Rawlinson (G. and Sir H.); Renan; Rougé
(Vicomte de); Sabatier; Sachs (S.); \*Schlottmann; Schrader (E.);
Schroeder; Smend; Socin; Testa; \*Vogüé (Comte de); Warren (Sir Ch.);
Weier; Wright (W.). The names to which

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

an asterisk is prefixed are those of authors who have published separate
works on the subject; the contributions of the others are scattered
through periodicals and daily and weekly papers, in many languages,
viz., English, French, Italian, German, Hebrew, and Greek (Schroeder). I
shall not supply here the titles of the periodicals nor of the separate
monographs; this I hope will be done either by M. Clermont-Ganneau when
he gives us his final commentary on the inscription, or in a second
edition of the pamphlet published by Professors Smend and Socin.

Our bibliographical list will not be complete without a notice of the
Rev. A. Löwy's article on "The apocryphal character of the Moabite
Stone" in the *Scottish Review* for April 1887. Mr. Lowy's article was
ingenious, but, as was pointed out in the *Athenæum*, *Academy*, and
*Guardian*, was destitute of palæographical support, and his conclusions
have not been accepted by any other Semitic scholar.

M. Clermont-Ganneau promised as far back as 1875 a final publication of
this important inscription according to all the materials at his
disposal. But of this edition nothing exists except a bookseller's
advertisement. In a catalogue of M. Ernest Leroux, 1878, M.
Clermont-Ganneau's final publication was announced under the following
title:—"La stèle de Mésa, roi de Moab (ix<sup>e</sup> siècle avant J.
C.). Edition définitive, avec les photographies du monument et de
l’estampage, le plan du pays où la stèle fut découverte, plusieurs
planches d’inscriptions, facsimile,

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

vignette, etc. (sous presse), 20 fr." Up to the present date nothing
more has been heard of this authoritative edition.

In 1885 two German professors, Dr. Rudolf Smend of Bâle and Dr. Albert
Socin of Tübingen, seeing that the long-expected edition of M.
Clermont-Ganneau had been postponed indefinitely, and feeling the
necessity of such an edition for the purposes of instruction in the
university, decided to make one with the help of the original in the
Louvre, and of the squeeze made by the Arab for M. Clermont-Ganneau, as
well as of another squeeze in the library of Bâle. The edition, which is
the result of hard, minute, and skilful labour on the part of the two
professors, is now the final and authoritative edition of the
inscription, although contested on many points by M. Clermont-Ganneau in
an article (not always impartially written) in the, *Journal Asiatique*
for 1887, tôme ix. p. 72 *sqq*., and by M. Renan in the *Journal des
Savants*, 1887. In my translation I shall notice the differences between
M. Clermont-Ganneau's readings and those of the two professors, adding a
few remarks of my own.

Let me say at once that the last four lines of the inscription are
hopelessly inexplicable owing to the lacunæ found in them.

The object of the inscription is to commemorate the victory of Mesha
over his Israelitish enemy. Chemosh was once angry with Moab and caused
them to lose territory and even to be conquered by

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel. Chemosh
then showed favour to his nation and Moab was victorious. The Moabites
not only recaptured the towns they had lost, but added others to them
which they took from Israel. Mesha captured the priests (?) of the god
or goddess Dodo and Jahweh, and hewed them in pieces before Chemosh,
just as Samuel hewed Agag before Jahweh. Mesha took great pains to
construct cisterns in some of the towns belonging to Moab. The Moabite
dialect is tinged with non-biblical words and forms, but the
construction remains biblical. The characters are Phœnician, and form a
link between those of the Baal Lebanon inscription (of the tenth century
B.C.), and those of the Siloam text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Text](rp20238)
