[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Prophecy](../../../pro/index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pbs07)  [Next](pbs09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766136337/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Prophecies of the Brahan Seer*, by Alexander Mackenzie, \[1899\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

<span id="img_06100"></span> ![](img/06100.jpg)

### SKETCH OF THE FAMILY OF SEAFORTH.

<span id="img_06101"></span>

|                     |
|---------------------|
| ![T](img/06101.jpg) |

HE most popularly-received theory regarding the Mackenzies is that they
are descended from an Irishman of the name of Colinas Fitzgerald, son of
the Earl of Kildare or Desmond, who distinguished himself by his bravery
at the battle of Largs, in 1263. It is said that his courage and valour
were so singularly distinguished that King Alexander the Third took him
under his special protection, and granted him a charter of the lands of
Kintail, in Wester Ross, bearing date from Kincardine, January the 9th,
1263.

According to the fragmentary "Record of Icolmkill," upon which the claim
of the Irish origin of the clan is founded, a personage, described as
"Peregrinus et Hibernus nobilis ex familia Geraldinorum"--that is "a
noble stranger and Hibernian, of the family of the Geraldines"--being
driven from Ireland with a considerable number of his followers was,
about 1261, very graciously received by the King, and afterwards
remained at his court. Having given powerful aid to the Scots at the
Battle of Largs, two years afterwards he was rewarded by a grant of the
lands of Kintail, which were erected into a free barony by royal
charter, dated as above mentioned. Mr. Skene, however,

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

says that no such document as this Icolmkill Fragment was ever known to
exist, as nobody has ever seen it; and as for Alexander's charter, he
declares (Highlanders, vol. ii., p. 235) that it "bears the most
palpable marks of having been a forgery of a later date, and one by no
means happy in the execution". Besides, the words "Colino Hiberno"
contained in it do not prove this Colin to have been an Irishman, as
Hiberni was at that period a common appellation for the Gael of
Scotland. Burke, in the "Peerage" has adopted the Irish origin of the
clan, and the chiefs themselves seem to have adopted this theory,
without having made any particular inquiry as to whether it was well
founded or not. The Mackenzie chiefs were thus not exempt from the
almost universal, but most unpatriotic, fondness exhibited by many other
Highland chiefs for a foreign origin. In examining the traditions of our
country, we are forcibly struck with this peculiarity of taste.
Highlanders despising a Caledonian source trace their ancestors from
Ireland, Norway, Sweden, or Normandy. The progenitors of the Mackenzies
can be traced with greater certainty, and with no less claim to
antiquity, from a native ancestor, Gillean (Cailean) Og, or Colin the
Younger, a son of Cailean na h’Airde, ancestor of the Earls of Ross;
and, from the MS. of 1450, their Gaelic descent may now be considered
beyond dispute. <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4)

Until the forfeiture of the Lords of the Isles, the Mackenzies always
held their lands from the Earls of Ross, and followed their banner in
the field, but after the forfeiture of that great and powerful earldom,
the Mackenzies rapidly rose on the ruins of the Macdonalds to the great
power, extent of territorial possession, and almost regal magnificence

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

for which they were afterwards distinguished among the other great clans
of the north. They, in the reign of James the First, acquired a very
powerful influence in the Highlands, and became independent of any
superior but the Crown. Mackenzie and his followers were, in fact, about
the most potent chief and clan in the whole Highlands.

Kenneth, son of Angus, is supposed to have commenced his rule in Kintail
about 1278, and was succeeded by his son, John, in 1304, who was in his
turn succeeded by his son, Kenneth. John, Kenneth's son, was called Iain
MacChoinnich, John MacKenneth, or John son of Kenneth, hence the family
name Mackenny or Mackenzie. The name Kenneth in course of time became
softened down to Kenny or Kenzie. It is well known that, not so very
long ago, *z* in this and all other names continued to be of the same
value as the letter *y*, just as we still find it in Menzies,
MacFadzean, and many others. There seems to be no doubt whatever that
this is the real origin of the Mackenzies, and of their name.

Murchadh, or Murdo, son of Kenneth, it is said, received a charter of
the lands of Kintail from David II.

In 1463, Alexander Mackenzie of Kintail obtained the lands of
Strathgarve, and other possessions, from John, Earl of Ross. They
afterwards strenuously and successfully opposed every attempt made by
the Macdonalds to obtain possession of the forfeited earldom. Alexander
was succeeded by his son, Kenneth, who married Lady Margaret Macdonald,
daughter of the forfeited Earl John, Lord of the Isles; but through some
cause, <span id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5) Mackenzie divorced the lady,
and sent her home in a most ignominious and

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

degrading manner. She had only one eye, and Kintail sent her home riding
a one-eyed steed, accompanied by a one-eyed servant, followed by a
one-eyed dog. All these circumstances exasperated the lady's family to
such an extent as to make them ever after the mortal and sworn enemies
of the Mackenzies.

Kenneth Og, his son by the divorced wife, became chief in 1493. Two
years afterwards, he and Farquhar Mackintosh were imprisoned by James V.
in Edinburgh Castle. In 1497, however, they both made their escape, but
were, on their way to the Highlands, seized, in a most treacherous
manner, at Torwood, by the laird of Buchanan. Kenneth Og made a stout
resistance, but he was ultimately slain, and Buchanan sent his head as a
present to the King.

Leaving no issue, Kenneth was succeeded by his brother John, whose
mother, Agnes Fraser, his father's second wife, was a daughter of Lovat.
He had several other sons, from whom have sprung other branches of the
Mackenzies. As John was very young, his uncle, Hector Roy (Eachainn
Ruadh) Mackenzie, progenitor of the house of Gairloch, assumed command
of the clan and the guardianship of the young chief. Gregory informs us,
that "under his rule the Clan Kenzie became involved in feuds with the
Munroes and other clans; and Hector Roy himself became obnoxious to the
Government as a disturber of the public peace. His intentions towards
the young chief of Kintail were considered very dubious, and the
apprehensions of the latter and his friends having been roused, Hector
was compelled by law to yield up the estate and the command of the tribe
to the proper heir." <span id="fr_6"></span>[\*](#fn_6) John, the lawful
heir, on obtaining possession, at the call of James IV., marched at the
head of his

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

clan to the fatal field of Flodden, where he was made prisoner by the
English, but afterwards escaped.

On King James the Fifth's expedition to the Western Isles in 1540, John
joined him at Kintail, and accompanied him throughout his whole journey.
He fought with his clan at the battle of Pinkie in 1547, and died in
1561, when he was succeeded by his son, Kenneth, who had two sons by a
daughter of the Earl of Athole--Colin and Roderick--the latter becoming
ancestor of the Mackenzies of Redcastle, Kincraig, Rosend, and several
other branches. This Colin, who was the eleventh chief, fought for Queen
Mary at the battle of Langside. He was twice married. By his first wife,
Barbara Grant of Grant--whose elopement with him will be found described
in a poem in the *Highland Ceilidh*, Vol. I., pp. 215-220, of the
*Celtic Magazine*--he had four sons and three daughters,
namely--Kenneth, who became his successor; Sir Roderick Mackenzie of
Tarbat, ancestor of the Earls of Cromartie; Colin, ancestor of the
Mackenzies of Kennock and Pitlundie; and Alexander, ancestor of the
Mackenzies of Kilcoy, and other families of the name. By Mary, eldest
daughter of Roderick Mackenzie of Davochmaluag, he had a natural son,
Alexander, from whom descended the Mackenzies of Applecross, Coul,
Delvin, Assynt, and others of note in history.

Kenneth, the eldest son, soon after succeeding his father, was engaged
in supporting Torquil Macleod of Lewis, surnamed the "Conanach," the
disinherited son of the Macleod of Lewis, and who was closely related to
himself. Torquil conveyed the barony of Lewis to the Chief of the
Mackenzies by formal deed, the latter causing the usurper to the estate,
and his followers, to be beheaded in 1597. He afterwards, in the
following year, joined Macleod of Harris and Macdonald of Sleat, in
opposing James the Sixth's project

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

for the colonisation of the Lewis by the well-known adventurers from the
"Kingdom of Fife ".

In 1602, the old and long-standing feud between the Mackenzies and the
Macdonalds of Glengarry, concerning their lands in Wester Ross, was
renewed with infuriated violence. Ultimately, after great bloodshed and
carnage on both sides, an arrangement was arrived at by which Glengarry
renounced for ever, in favour of Mackenzie, the Castle of Strome and all
his lands in Lochalsh, Lochcarron, and other places in the vicinity, so
long the bone of contention between these powerful and ferocious
chieftains. In 1607; a Crown charter for these lands was granted to
Kenneth, thus materially adding to his previous possessions, power, and
influence. "All the Highlands and Isles, from Ardnamurchan to
Strathnaver, were either the Mackenzies' property or under their
vassalage, some few excepted," and all around them were bound to them
"by very strict bonds of friendship". In this same year Kenneth
received, through some influence at Court, a gift, under the Great Seal,
of the Island of Lewis, in virtue of, and thus confirming, the
resignation of this valuable and extensive property previously made in
his favour by Torquil Macleod. A complaint was, however, made to his
Majesty by those of the colonists who survived, and Mackenzie was again
forced to resign it. By patent, dated the 19th of November, 1609, he was
created a peer of the realm, as Lord Mackenzie of Kintail. Soon after,
the colonists gave up all hopes of being able to colonize the Lewis, and
the remaining adventurers--Sir George Hay and Sir James Spens--were
easily prevailed upon to sell their rights to Lord Mackenzie, who at the
same time succeeded in securing a grant from the king of that part of
the island forfeited by Lord Balmerino, another of the adventurers. He
(Lord Mackenzie) now secured a

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

commission of fire and sword against the islanders, soon arrived with a
strong force, and speedily reduced them to obedience, with the exception
of Neil Macleod and a few of his followers. The struggle between these
two continued for a time, but ultimately Mackenzie managed to obtain
possession of the whole island, and it remained in the possession of the
family until it was sold by the "Last of the Seaforths".

This, the first, Lord Mackenzie of Kintail died in 1611. One of his
sons, Simon Mackenzie of Lochslin, by his second wife, Isabella,
daughter of Sir Alexander Ogilvie of Powrie, was the father of the
celebrated Sir George Mackenzie, already referred to. His eldest son,
Colin, who succeeded him as second Lord Mackenzie of Kintail, was
created first Earl of Seaforth, by patent dated the 3rd December, 1623,
to himself and his heirs male. Kenneth, Colin's grandson, and third Earl
of Seaforth, distinguished himself by his loyalty to Charles the Second
during the Commonwealth. He supported the cause of the Royalists so long
as there was an opportunity of fighting for it in the field, and when
forced to submit to the ruling powers, he was committed to prison,
where, with much firmness of mind and nobility of soul, he endured a
tedious captivity during many years, until he was ultimately released,
after the Restoration, by authority of the king. He married a lady
descended from a branch of his own family, Isabella Mackenzie, daughter
of Sir John Mackenzie of Tarbat, and sister of the first Earl of
Cromartie. To her cruel and violent conduct may undoubtedly be traced
the remarkable doom which awaited the family of Seaforth, which was
predicted in such an extraordinary manner by Coinneach Odhar, fulfilled
in its minutest details, and which we are, in the following pages, to
place before the reader.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[62:\*](pbs08.htm#fr_4) See Nos. XXVI. and XXVII.
of the *Celtic Magazine*, Vol. III., in which this question is discussed
at length.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[63:\*](pbs08.htm#fr_5) For full details of this
act, which afterwards proved the cause of such strife and bloodshed, see
Mackenzie's "History of the Clan Mackenzie".

<span id="fn_6"></span>[64:\*](pbs08.htm#fr_6) Highlands and Isles of
Scotland, p. 111.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seaforth's Dream](pbs09)
