[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omtx09)  [Next](omtx11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

# INSTALLATION CEREMONY FOR A SUBORDINATE LODGE

The Marshal presents the Master-elect to the Installing Officer, and
says:

Worshipful Master: I present you Bro. A. B., who has been duly and
constitutionally elected W. Master of .................. Lodge, No. ...,
Ancient Free and Accepted Masons, for the ensuing Masonic year. I
believe him to be well qualified to discharge the duties of that office.
He has also signified his willingness to accept the same. I therefore
ask that he be duly and constitutionally installed therein.

Wor. Sir and Bro.--I take pleasure in installing you into this honorable
office, with the usual ceremonies; but, previous to being invested with
the insignia of your office, it is necessary that you should signify
your assent to those ancient charges and regulations which point out the
duty of a Master of a Lodge, viz:

"I. You agree to be a good man and true, and strictly to obey the moral
law.

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

"II. You agree to be a peaceable citizen, and cheerfully to conform to
the laws of the country in which you reside.

"III. You promise not to be concerned in plots and conspiracies against
government, but patiently to submit to the decisions of the supreme
legislature.

"IV. You agree to pay a proper respect to the civil magistrate, to work
diligently, live creditably, and act honorably by all men.

V. You agree to hold in veneration the original rulers and patrons of
the Order of Masonry, and their regular successors, supreme and
subordinate, according to their stations; and to submit to the awards
and resolutions of your brethren, when convened, in every case
consistent with the Constitutions of the Order.

"VI. You agree to avoid private piques and quarrels, and to guard
against intemperance and excess.

"VII. You agree to be cautious in carriage and behavior, courteous to
your brethren and faithful to your Lodge.

"VIII. You promise to respect genuine brethren and to discountenance

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

imposters, and all dissenters from the original plan of Masonry.

"IX. You agree to promote the general good of society, to cultivate the
social virtues, and to propagate the knowledge of the Art.

"X. You promise to pay homage to the Grand Master for the time being,
and to his officers when duly installed; and strictly to conform to
every edict of the Grand Lodge, or General Assembly of Masons, that is
not subversive of the principles and groundwork of Masonry.

"XI. You admit that it is not in the power of any man, or body of men,
to make innovations in the body of Masonry.

"XII. You promise a regular attendance on the committees and
communications of the Grand Lodge, on receiving proper notice; and to
pay attention to all the duties of Masonry, on convenient occasions.

"XIII. You admit that no new Lodge; shall be formed without permission
of the Grand Lodge; and that no countenance be given to any irregular
Lodge, or to any person clandestinely initiated therein, being contrary
to the ancient charges of the Order.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

"XIV. You admit that no person can be regularly made a Mason in, or
admitted a member of, any regular Lodge, without previous notice, and
clue inquiry into his character.

"XV. You agree that no visitors shall be received into your Lodge
without due examination, and producing proper vouchers of their having
been initiated in a regular Lodge."

These are the regulations of Free and Accepted Masons.

The Installing Officer then addresses the Master-elect in the following
manner:

"Do you submit to these charges, and promise to support these
regulations, as Masters have done in all ages before you?"

The new Master having signified his cordial submission as before, the
Installing Officer thus addresses him:

"Brother A. B., in consequence of your cheerful conformity to the
charges and regulations of the Order, you are now to be installed Master
of this (new) Lodge, in full confidence of your care, skill and capacity
to govern the same."

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

The new Master is then regularly invested with the insignia of his
office, and the furniture and implements of his Lodge.

\[The various implements of the profession are emblematical of our
conduct in life, and upon this occasion are carefully enumerated.\]

The Holy Writings, that great light in Masonry, will guide you to all
truth; it will direct your path to the temple of happiness, and point
out to you the whole duty of man.

The Square teaches us to regulate our actions by rule and line, and to
harmonize our conduct by the principles of morality and virtue.

The Compasses teach us to limit our desires in every station, that,
rising to eminence by merit, we may live respected, and die regretted.

The Rule directs that we shall punctually observe our duty; press
forward in the path of virtue, and, neither inclining to the right nor
to the left, in all our actions have eternity in view.

The Line teaches us the criterion of moral rectitude, to avoid
dissimulation in conversation and action, and to direct our steps to the
path which leads to immortality.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

The Book of Constitutions you are to search at all times. Cause it to be
read in your Lodge, that none may pretend to ignorance of the excellent
precepts it enjoins.

You now receive in charge the Charter, by the authority of which this
Lodge is held. You are carefully to preserve and duly transmit it to
your successor in office.

Lastly, you receive in charge the By-Laws of your Lodge, which you are
to see carefully and punctually executed.

The Master is then seated with his officers on his right.

### Senior Warden

Presented by the Marshal to the Installing Officer, with the same
ceremony, only changing the name of W. Master to Senior Warden, and the
same with all the other officers. After the Warden is properly
presented, the him with his Jewel and Gavel, e and says:

The Level demonstrates that we are descended from the same stock,
partake of the same nature, and share the same hope; and though
distinctions among men are necessary to preserve subordination, yet no
eminence of station should make us forget that we

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

are brethren; for he who is placed on the lowest spoke of fortune's
wheel, may be entitled to our regard; because a time will come, and the
wisest know not how soon, when all distinction, but that of goodness,
shall cease; and Death, the grand leveler of human greatness, reduce us
to the same state.

Your regular attendance on our stated meetings is essentially necessary.
In the absence of the Master, you are to govern this Lodge; in his
presence, you are to assist him in the government of it. I firmly rely
on your knowledge of Masonry, and attachment to the Lodge, for the
faithful discharge of the duties of this important trust. "Look well to
the West!"

He is then seated to the right of the W. Master.

### The Junior Warden

Brother E. F.: You have been elected Junior Warden of ..................
Lodge, No. ..., and are now invested with the badge of your office.

The Plumb admonishes us to walk uprightly in our several stations, to
hold the scale of justice in equal poise, to observe the just medium
between

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

intemperance and pleasure, and to make our passions and prejudices
coincide with the line of our duty.

To you is committed the superintendence of the Craft during the hours of
refreshment; it is, therefore, indispensably necessary, that you should
not only be temperate and discreet, in the indulgence of your own
inclinations, but carefully observe that none of the Craft be suffered
to convert the means of refreshment into intemperance and excess.

### The Treasurer

Brother G. H.: You have been elected Treasurer of ..................
Lodge, No. ..... It is your duty to receive all moneys from the
Secretary, make due entries thereof and pay them out by order of the
Worshipful Master and consent of the Lodge.

I trust your regard for the welfare of the Order will prompt you to a
faithful discharge of your duties.

### The Secretary

Brother E. F.: You have been elected .................. Lodge, No. ....
It is your duty to carefully observe all the proceedings of the Lodge;
make

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

a correct record of all things proper to be written, receive all moneys
due the Lodge, and pay them over to the Treasurer, and take his receipt
for the same.

I trust your good wishes for the welfare of this Lodge will prompt you
to discharge the duties of your office with fidelity, and by so doing,
you will merit the esteem and applause of your brethren.

### The Chaplain

Rev. Sir and Brother: You have been appointed Chaplain of this Lodge. It
is your duty to perform those solemn services which we should constantly
render to our Creator; and which, when offered by one whose profession
is "to point to heaven and lead the way," may, by refining our souls,
strengthening our virtues, and purifying our minds, prepare us for
admission into the society of those above, where happiness will be as
endless as it is perfect.

### Senior and Junior Deacons

Brothers A. B. and C. D.: You have been appointed Deacons of
.................. Lodge, No. ..., and I invest with you the badges

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

of your office. It is your province to attend on the Master and Wardens,
and to act as their proxies in the active duties of the Lodge; such as
the reception of candidates into the different degrees of Masonry; the
introduction and accommodation of visitors, and the immediate practice
of our rites.

The Square and Compasses, as badges of your office, I entrust to your
care, not doubting your vigilance and attention.

### Stewards

Brothers O. P. and R. S.: You are appointed Stewards of this Lodge or
Masters of the Ceremonies. It is your duty to assist the Deacons and
other officers in performing their respective duties, to see that the
tables are properly furnished at refreshment, and the brethren suitably
provided for. Your regular and early attendance will afford the best
proof of your zeal and attachment to the Lodge.

### Tiler

Brother S. A.: You are elected Tiler of .................. Lodge, No.
..., and I invest you with the implement of your office. As

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

the sword is placed in the hands of the Tiler, to enable him effectually
to guard against the approach of cowans and eaves-droppers, and permit
none to pass except those who are duly qualified, so it should admonish
us to set a guard over our thoughts, a watch at our lips, post a
sentinel over our actions; thereby preventing the approach of every
unworthy thought and deed, thus preserving consciences void of offense
toward God and man.

### Charge to the W. Master

Worshipful Sir and Brother: To your care is committed the Charter of
this Lodge and the government of the brethren who compose the same and
are within the jurisdiction of said Lodge. You cannot be insensible of
the obligations which devolve on you as their head nor of your
responsibility for the faithful discharge of the important duties
annexed to said station.

The honor, reputation and usefulness of your Lodge will materially
depend on the skill and assiduity with which you manage its concerns;
whilst the happiness of its members will be generally promoted, in
proportion to

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the zeal and ability with which you propagate the genuine principles of
our Institution.

For a pattern of imitation, consider the great luminary of nature,
which, rising in the East, regularly diffuses light and lustre to all
within its circle. In like manner it is your province to spread and
communicate light and instruction to the brethren of your Lodge.
Forcibly impress upon them the dignity and high importance of Masonry;
and seriously admonish them never to disgrace it. Charge them to
practice out of the Lodge, those duties which they have been taught in
it; and by amiable, discreet and virtuous conduct, to convince mankind
of the goodness of the Institution; so that when a person is said to be
a member of it, the world may know that he is one to whom the burdened
heart may pour out its sorrows; to whom distress may prefer its suit;
whose hand is guided by justice, and whose heart is expanded by
benevolence. In short, by a diligent observance of the By-Laws of your
Lodge, the Constitution of Masonry, and, above all, the Holy Scriptures,
which are given as a rule and guide to your faith, you will be

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

enabled to acquit yourself with honor and reputation, and lay up a crown
of rejoicing, which shall continue when time shall be no more.

### Senior and Junior Wardens

You are too well acquainted with the principles of Masonry to warrant
any distrust that you will be found wanting in the discharge of your
respective duties. Suffice it to say, that what you have seen
praiseworthy in others, you should carefully imitate; and what in them
may have appeared defective, you should in yourselves amend. You should
be examples of good order and regularity; for it is only by a due regard
to the laws, in your own conduct, that you can expect obedience to them
from others. You are assiduously to assist the Master in the discharge
of his trust; diffusing light and imparting knowledge to all whom he
shall place under your care. In the absence of the Master, you will
succeed to higher duties; your acquirements must, therefore, be such as
that the Craft may never suffer for the want of proper instruction. From
the spirit which you have hitherto evinced, I entertain no doubt

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

that your future conduct will be such as to merit the applause of your
brethren, and the testimony of a good conscience.

### To the Members of the Lodge

Brethren, such is the nature of our Constitution that some must, of
necessity, rule and teach, while others must, of course, learn to submit
and obey. Humility in both is an essential duty. The officers who are
elected and appointed to govern your Lodge are sufficiently conversant
with the rules of propriety and the laws of Masonic order, to avoid
exceeding the powers with which they are entrusted; and you are of too
generous dispositions to envy their preferment.

I, therefore, trust that you will have but one aim, and that will be, to
try to please each other and unite in the grand design of being happy
and communicating happiness.

Finally, my brethren, as the business of this Lodge has been conducted
in peace and harmony, so may it long continue. May you and your
associates long enjoy every satisfaction and delight which disinterested
friendship can afford. May kindness and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

brotherly affection distinguish your conduct as men and as Masons.

Within your peaceful walls may your children's children celebrate, with
joy and gratitude, the annual recurrence of this auspicious solemnity.

And may the tenets of our profession be transmitted through your Lodge,
pure and unimpaired, from generation to generation.

The Marshal then proclaims the officers of .................. Lodge, No.
..., duly and constitutionally installed.

The following is the order of a procession for installing the officers
of a sub-ordinate Lodge publicly, viz:

### Procession of a Subordinate Lodge on Occasions of Public Installation

Tiler with drawn sword;  
Musicians (if Masons--if not, they precede the Tiler);  
Stewards, with white rods;  
Master Masons;  
Senior and Junior Deacons with black rods;  
Secretary and Treasurer;  
Senior and Junior Wardens;  
Past Masters;  
Royal Arch Masons;  
Knights Templar;  
Orator and Chaplain;  
Holy Writings;  
W. Master.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constituting A Lodge](omtx11.md)
