[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omtx06)  [Next](omtx08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

# ADDRESSES

### Address to a Brother Upon the Presentation of a Lambskin Apron by the Lodge

My brother, in behalf of the Lodge, I now present to you this white
Lambskin Apron. It may be, that in the coming years, upon your brow
shall rest the laurel leaves of victory; it may be that, pendant from
your breast, may hang jewels fit to grace the diadem of some Eastern
potentate.

Aye! more than these, for light, added to coaling light, may enable your
ambitious feet to tread round after round the ladder that leads to fame,
in our Mystic Order; and even the purple of our Fraternity may rest upon
your honored shoulders; but never again, from mortal hands, never again,
until your enfranchised spirit shall have passed upward and inward,
through the pearly gates, can a greater honor be bestowed, or one more
emblematical of purity and innocence, than that which has been conferred
upon you tonight.

This Apron, the special gift of this Lodge, is yours to wear upon all
proper occasions throughout an honorable life, and at your death, it is
to be placed upon the coffin that contains your lifeless remains and
with them shall be laid beneath the silent clods of the valley. May the
pure and spotless surface of this Apron be an ever-present reminder of
that "purity of heart and uprightness

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

of conduct so essentially necessary," thus keeping pure your thoughts,
and inspiring nobler deeds and greater achievements!

Then, when at last, your weary feet shall have come to the end of life's
toil-some journey, and, from your nerveless grasp, shall drop, forever,
the working tools of life, may the record of your life and actions be as
pure and spotless as this Apron now is; and when your soul, freed from
earth, shall stand naked and alone before the Great White Throne, may it
be your portion to hear from Him who sits thereon, the welcome plaudit:
Well done, thou good and faithful servant! Enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord!"

### Address at Initiation of a Clergyman

You, brother, are a preacher of that religion which inculcates universal
benevolence and unbounded charity. You will, therefore, be fond of the
Order, and zealous for the interests of Freemasonry, which, in the
strongest manner, inculcates the same charity and benevolence, and
which, like that religion, encourages every moral and social virtue;
which introduces peace and good-will among mankind. So that whoever is
warmed with the spirit of Christianity must esteem, must love,
Freemasonry.

Here, virtue, the grand object in view, luminous as the meridian sun,
shines [effulgent](errata.htm#1) on the mind; enlivens the heart, and
warms with sympathy and affection.

Though every man, who carefully listens to the dictates of reason, may
arrive at a clear persuasion of the beauty and

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

necessity of virtue, both private and public, yet it is a full
recommendation of a society, to have these pursuits continually in view,
as the sole object of their associations; and these are the laudable
bonds which unite us in one indissoluble Fraternity.

### Address at Initiation of a Soldier

Our institution breathes a spirit of general philanthropy. Its benefits,
considered in a social view, are extensive. It unites all mankind. It,
in every nation, opens an asylum to virtue in distress, and grants
hospitality to the necessitous and unfortunate. The sublime principles
of universal goodness and love to all mankind, which are essential to
it, cannot be lost in national distinction, prejudices and animosities.
The rage of contest it has abated, and substituted in its stead the
milder emotions of humanity. It has taught the pride of victory to give
way to the dictates of an honorable connection.

Should your country demand your services in foreign wars, and should
captivity be your portion, may you find affectionate brethren where
others would only find enemies.

In whatever nation you travel, when You meet a Mason, you will find a
brother and a friend, who will do all in his power to serve you; and who
will relieve you, should you be poor or in distress, to the utmost of
his ability, and with ready cheerfulness.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

### Address at Initiation of a Foreigner

You, brother, the native and subject of another nation, by entering into
our Order, have connected yourself, by sacred and affectionate ties,
with thousands of Masons in this and other countries. Ever recollect
that the Order you have entered into bids you always to look upon the
world as one great republic, of which every nation is a family, and
every particular person is a child. When, therefore, should you return
and settle in your own country, take care that the progress of
friendship be not confined to the narrow circle of national connections,
or particular religions; but let it be universal, and extend to every
branch of the human race. At the same time, remember that, besides the
common ties of humanity, you have at this time entered into obligations,
which engage you to kind and friendly actions to your Brother Masons, of
whatever stations, country, or religion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Recitation](omtx08)
