[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos11)  [Next](mos13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# CHAPTER 7.

We have seen the Lord rejected by Israel gradually, in virtue of His
person and rights, breaking out beyond the ancient limits, and gathering
the remnant round Himself, the new and only just object of God, the
source of a mission in grace, and the full development and
exemplification of holy love in an evil world; for whatever the
principles laid down in chapter 6 they are but the expression of God's
character in grace, as displayed in Christ here below.

### THE CENTURION'S SERVANT.

1-10.—In accordance with this, we have now **the case of the
centurion**, and a very full and striking one it is. It is not merely an
act of grace, but grace to a Gentile. Nor is this all. The principle on
which the apostle rests this question is brought out. "It is of faith,
that it might be by grace, that the promise might be sure to all the
seed" (Rom. 4. 16). Faith, as the great turning point, is introduced. It
was no mere theory. It was living faith, and such faith as had not been
seen in Israel. Neither was there presumption, but, on the contrary,
remarkable humility. He recognised the honour God had put upon His
people; he sees, holds to it, owns and acts upon it, spite of their low
and debased and in every other respect unworthy condition. Despised and
failing as they might be, he loved the Jews as God's people, and for His
sake, and he had built them a synagogue. Unfeigned lowliness was his,
though (yea, rather, for) his faith was far beyond those he honoured.
Consequently he had a very high

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

apprehension of the power and glory of the person of Christ as divine,
reaching out beyond Jewish thoughts altogether. He does not refer to the
Lord as Messiah, but recognised in Him the power of God in love. This
was blessed faith which forgets itself in the exaltation of its object.
He saw not Jesus, it would seem, but assuredly gathered from what "he
heard'' that diseases were nothing to Him but occasions wherein to
display His absolute authority and His sovereign mercy. He was a
stranger, and the Jews were God's people; must not they or their elders
be the fittest to bring this wonderful Person? For he confided in His
mercy as well as His power, and his servant, "dear unto him," was sick
and ready to die. He needed Jesus.

6.—"**Then Jesus went with them**. And when He was not far from the
house the centurion sent friends to Him, saying unto Him, Lord, trouble
not Thyself; for I am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my
roof; wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come unto Thee: but
say in a word, and my servant shall be healed." There was surely the
deepest personal respect and affection. Untaught as he might be in other
things, he strongly felt the excellency of Christ's person, and here
again with humility correspondent to the measure in which His glory was
seen. This message of the centurion's friends admirably depicts his
character and feeling. He told nothing to Jesus of his service to the
Jews, spoke of nothing personal save his unworthiness, and this so
consistently that he begged Jesus not to come to his house, as unworthy
to receive Him. There was in this soul the exact opposite of doing

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Christ an honour,
by believing on Him, and far from him was the pretence of receiving
Christ to set himself up—both, alas! found often elsewhere. The
simplicity of his heart is as apparent as his strong faith. There was
none such in Israel, and yet it was in one who loved Israel. It was a
lesson of grace in every way for the crowd that followed Jesus—for us,
too, most surely.

### THE WIDOW'S SON.

11-17.—Along with grace to the Gentiles came the evidence of power to
raise the dead, but here it was manifested in human sympathies, in
witness that God had visited His people. It was the power of
resurrection, a power which was yet to be shown more gloriously and to
be the source of that which is new for man according to God—the God who
raiseth the dead. It was another and wondrous proof that He is here
going, in the character of His action, without the sphere of the law and
its ordinances. "For the law hath dominion over a man as long as he
liveth" (Rom. 7. 1) . What can it avail for one who is dead? "But what
the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh" (Rom. 8. 3). It was grace
indeed, and divine energy, but withal displayed in One who was touched
with the feeling of our infirmities. And how astonishingly all the
details bring this out? The dead man was "**the only son of his mother,
and she was a widow**." "And when the Lord saw her, He had compassion on
her, and said unto her, Weep not. And he that was dead sat up and began
to speak. And He delivered him to

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

his mother." How exquisitely human, and withal how unmistakably divine!

It is manifest that these two cases illustrate the change which the
Spirit is attesting in this part of St. Luke. Nor is it otherwise with
the scene that follows, which brings out in fact the hinge of the
dispensation. The Lord bears witness to John Baptist, not John to the
Lord. John sends two of his disciples, on the report of the Lord's
miracles, to learn from Himself who He is. Are we surprised? He had
preached and baptised in the confession of sins and in faith of the
coming Messiah. But now all was changed. John was in prison, not
delivered, and it was no longer a people preparing for the Lord. Was it
not strange? At any rate, John sought a plain answer, and well could he
trust the word of One who did such mighty and holy works. But what a
comment upon the marvellous change was this very inquiry. It was a sort
of turning over the disciples of John to the Lord.

21-35.—"And in the same hour **He cured many of their infirmities, and
plagues, and evil spirits**; and unto many that were blind He gave sight
. Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way and tell John." At
the same time, if He receives no longer testimony from John, He bears it
to him, owned John and his work. But they were owned from a higher
ground where the Lord in grace and resurrection power had placed
Himself, and this was based on entire rejection in and by the world, so
that, though He was doing all good, still it was "Blessed is he
whosoever shall not be offended in Me." Hence in the very verse where
the Lord recognises in the

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

fullest way John the Baptist, He marks the change about to take place:
"**He that is least in the kingdom of God is greater than he**." Happy
they who justified God in being baptised of John; wretched the
self-righteous who rejected his counsel against themselves. Wisdom is
justified of all her children. They understand the ways of God, whether
in the servant or the Lord. The ways are quite different, but understood
in grace. This generation, alas! understands none, finds fault with all.
John is too righteous for them, Jesus is too gracious. The mourning of
the one and the piping of the other are utterly distasteful. Such is
man's wisdom to the ways of God. But the children of wisdom justify
wisdom notwithstanding.

### IN THE PHARISEE'S HOUSE.

36-50.—And in spite of the perverseness of men our Lord did not stop
manifesting Himself to the world. Accordingly a tale follows which shows
how God's wisdom is justified by, and in, those who own it in Jesus. It
is a tale of grace, of pure, plenary, pardoning grace, which rests not
till its object is dismissed in perfect peace. **Jesus is in the
Pharisee's house**, who failed entirely in the essential point; Simon
perceived not the glory of Christ. In this the Lord meets him, and shows
in contrast with the woman, "**which was a sinner**," the point where
this Pharisee was exercising judgment to be precisely that wherein he
failed. God's thoughts are not as our thoughts, nor His ways as our
ways. What if the despised Jesus were not a prophet only, but a Saviour
of poor, lost sinners? Ah! God was unknown, that

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

was the secret. The converted soul sees the glory of the Lord as grace
towards itself; he who is unconvinced, however interested humanly,
judges according to his own thoughts, and therefore necessarily fails to
see the glory which is not according to these thoughts. Man's judgment
of the Gospel must be wrong therefore; his reception of it, as grace, is
alone right, and alone the way of coming to the knowledge of it.

This was, then, a direct and distinct example of God's ways. It was a
forgiving of sins in grace, sovereignly and freely, to any poor sinner
manifesting and producing love in the forgiven who loves God, because
God is love, and this in respect of his sins, in Jesus the Lord. It was
proper grace, the ground on which any one, a Gentile or not, would be
received, and God manifested not in requirement from man (and so making
man in the flesh of importance), but making God all, and His character
in sovereign grace, so bringing in blessing, and its blessed effect upon
the heart, developing the fruits of grace in a heart restored to
confidence in God by the sense of His goodness. What a blessed picture!
Goodness known not only in the act, but in Him who did it . The
discernment of guilt in its gross forms by man was one thing, but the
grace of God which could blot out and forgive all was quite another. It
was not Christ there to judge and sanction Pharisees, but love to a
sinner, manifesting God in this new character of grace, producing
thankful, holy love to God, and a blessed relationship, sovereign, and
beyond the reach of man. Note how God has always to prove Himself right
in His goodness to man, so

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

hard is man's heart. But the Lord identifies Himself with the believer,
and vindicates him against the haughty world, and this gives assurance.
Perfectly regardless of comments, He applies Himself, not to unbelief,
which were useless, but to those who have faith, and having communicated
forgiveness, shows the soul His uprightness, *i.e.*, the right thoughts
of God and self, which faith has. The last word settles the question.
The soul's love was a ground of evidence and reasoning, not, of course,
the cause. "**Thy faith hath saved thee**," said the Lord to the woman,
"**go in peace**." All is discharged from the conscience, and the heart
finds itself infinitely and everlastingly a debtor to the continual
fountain of all grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 8](mos13)
