[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos15)  [Next](mos17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 11.

1.—At the beginning of this chapter we have an-other instance of our
Lord **praying**, the expression of dependence. And there the disciples
ask Him, "**Lord, teach us to pray**." They had not learned the simple
confidence in the Father that would go up naturally to Him and tell Him
all. There may not always be wisdom in asking, but there should be
confidence of communion by the Holy Ghost. Even Paul had not always
intelligence of God's mind, or he would not have asked to have the thorn
in the flesh taken away; but he was not afraid to make his request. The
disciples had not this simple-hearted confidence.

### THE DISCIPLES' PRAYER.

2.—"**Our Father**." They understood not their place as children of the
Father. He condescends to teach them when in this condition, and gives
them this prayer. The Lord teaches them to pray for things about which
His own heart was occupied. "Father, glorify Thy Name" (John 12. 28) was
expressive of the grand desire of His heart.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

2.——"**Hallowed be Thy Name**." He first tells them of Him with whom
they are brought into relationship. Not that they had the present power
of the Holy Ghost giving them the consciousness of their
relationship—*that* they did not get till the day of Pentecost—but He
teaches them to say, "Father, hallowed be Thy Name." There we have
perfection. It is the desire for Him to be glorified, though I cannot
tell what it may involve me in. There will be the desire not to sin.
This was the expression of the perfect desire that was in Christ
Himself: "Hallowed be Thy Name."

2.—"**Thy kingdom come**." There will be the removing of those things
that are made, that "those things which cannot be shaken may remain."
Are you quite sure that you would like Him to come in this kingdom that
will involve the shaking out of every-thing that may not remain? Surely
that will wrench the heart from a quantity of things that are attaching
you to that which does not belong to the kingdom to come. There may be
the desire for these things, while at the same time the consciousness
that I have not the sense of the object, but a sense of distance from it
which hinders my enjoyment, though I know Him to be "the Chiefest Among
Ten Thousand," and the "Altogether Lovely." There are often complaining
prayers, because there is not the present enjoyment of seeing Him in the
sanctuary, though the remembrance of it. We may have the hope of the
Lord's coming, being glad to get to the end of this desert, because it
is a desert; or we may long to get out because Canaan is at the end. If
it is not the latter we shall be in danger of being tired with

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

running, which is always wrong. We should be in the spirit of waiting
pilgrims, not weary ones. We ought not to be weary; I do not say we are
not, but we ought to be ever desiring His coming, because He is
precious. In Revelation 22. 17 the bride says "Come," in answer to what
He is, when He says, "I am the Bright and Morning Star." God does not
reject the cry which comes to Him as "out of the depths," but there is a
difference between the cry of distress and the cry of desire. When
Christ was on earth there was an answer in Him to God's will, for He
always did the things which pleased His Father. He did it as no angel
ever could.

3.—Then He comes down to notice our daily need, and there is dependence,
indeed, in this. "**Give us day by day our daily bread.**"

4.—"**Forgive us our sins**." This chapter does not go in to what we may
call proper Church privileges; the desires are perfect, but the place is
not known. The Lord touches upon all the circumstances down here. Man is
looking up from the earth, he is walking there, and needs his feet
washed. There are trespasses to be forgiven, and the spirit of grace is
wanted. There is no sin imputed to us now; it is all put away. But will
that make me hard when others fail? No; my seeing that Christ has
agonised on the Cross for me will give me a sense of my freedom, but not
indifference about sin. Instead of hardness it will give us tenderness
and softness of spirit .

4.—"**Lead us not into temptation**." Why should God ever lead us into
temptation? it may be asked. Sometimes the Lord has need to put us
through a certain process to make us learn our weakness.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Look at Peter. The
Lord saw he needed to be sifted, or He could have prayed for him to be
saved from that fall. A soul would always desire that he may not have
this sifting. Christ Himself, though it was a different thing for Him,
desired to be delivered from it when bearing sin. Paul prayed for the
thorn to be removed. But Paul did not get a fourth Heaven, that would
have made him worse, but a "thorn in the flesh," something to make him
despicable in preaching—otherwise people might have come to him and
said, "Paul, you must be better than any one else, for you have been to
the third Heaven"—to prevent his being puffed up, and to keep him even.
It was a gracious provision for him, though it is a right thing for the
soul to desire not to be led into temptation, but to be delivered from
the evil.

### THE IMPORTUNATE FRIEND.

5.—"**Which of you shall have a friend**?" This is another character of
prayer, earnest waiting upon God. There is majesty in God's goodness,
and yet He takes knowledge of all our wants, and we must wait His will
and pleasure. Suppose one asks his father for anything, and he says,
"You must wait five minutes," is the child to say, "No, I cannot; I must
have it directly?" Meantime, while waiting, faith is exercised, and the
spirit broken down in the sense of need. Look at Daniel, and see another
thing. God gave him a deep sense of his identification with Himself in
what he was doing, so He must make him pray three weeks before he has
his request granted. This is a great privilege, for it is to have
fellowship with God. In the case of this friend there is a depth

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

of interest excited in desire for the thing, and because of his
importunity he gains it. There is a certainty of God's answering in
blessing though He delay.

9-13.—"**Ask, Seek, Knock**." This is prayer for the Holy Spirit, which
they, *though believers*, had not then received. In one sense a man may
pray for this now, when he has not the Spirit of adoption, like the
disciples then. But now the Holy Ghost has been given, consequent upon
the Lord's ascension to the right hand of the Father (Acts 2. 22). There
could be no union with the Man Christ on earth. It is as a heavenly
people that there is union with Him. Christ was looked upon alone until
His work was done. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die,
it abideth alone" (John 12. 24) . The Holy Ghost was the seal of
Christ's work, not of John's preaching righteousness. The second time He
received the Holy Ghost was for the Church. He received it Himself
(Matt. 3) at His baptism, but for us when He ascended, having finished
the work of our salvation. The fruits of the Spirit in us are the
consequences of the grace and righteousness in Him, He being the only
righteous Man. The firstfruits of the Spirit in us are love, joy, peace,
then come the practical fruits toward men. The first named fruits are
towards God, then patience, temperance towards men. The Holy Ghost
cannot be the subject for the Church, as such, to ask for now, seeing He
has thus been given. Christ received Him for us. We pray *by* or *in*
the Holy Ghost, not *for* Him now. We should pray for more of the
working of the Spirit in us, and desire to be filled with the
Spirit—poor little hearts indeed, but they may be filled, It does

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

not at all follow that we are filled with the Spirit because sealed with
the Spirit. To be filled with the Spirit would keep out evil thoughts.
It will not take away the evil nature, which ever remains, but thereby
that will be kept down.

### GATHERING OR SCATTERING.

14-26.—See the dreadful opposition of man's heart against Him, which
brings out a very important test: "**He that is not with Me is against
Me, and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth**." When Christ is
manifested it is *for* or *against* Him that people take their stand. We
have spiritual enemies to contend with, and Joshua leading the people in
conflict was figurative of the Spirit leading the soul against our
spiritual enemies. It is not Christians but Christ who is become God's
centre. We may gather Christians together, but if it is not Christ in
one's own spirit it is scattering. God knows no centre of union but the
Lord Jesus Christ. It is Himself the object, and nothing but Christ can
be the centre. Whatever is not gathering round that centre *for* Him and
*from* Him is scattering. There may be gathering, but if not "*with Me*"
it is scattering. We are by nature so essentially sectarian that we have
need to watch against this. I cannot make Christ the centre of my
efforts if He is not the centre of my thoughts. It is a great thing for
a man to say: "I have no other object but Christ, no other activity in
my heart but for Christ, not only that He is the chief object at
bottom—every Christian has that—but there may be a quantity of middle
things in our hearts between the

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

inside and the outside." These must be judged in the soul. Besides love
to Christ, there may be love of company, and we must judge all that is
between Christ, the Root, and the Offspring.

### THE MOST BLESSED.

27.—"**Blessed is the womb that bare Thee**." They speak of the honour
of being His mother. No, we would say, that has nothing to do with it.
The closest connection with the Son of Man is not equal to keeping the
Word of God. Religionists make a great deal of natural affection, but
though blessed in its way it is nothing to the life of God in my soul.
Of course it was a blessed thing to be the mother of the Lord; yet it
was but a natural relationship, though a miracle, nor could it have been
a light thing to her heart. Still, it was not equal to the blessing of
the Word of God bringing a soul to Himself. Oh, beloved friends, if you
will only let the pure Word of God abide in your hearts you will find
that it will sweep away all the cobwebs of the flesh!

29.—They are seeking a sign, another *natural* thing, but He says,
"**There shall no sign be given**." Jonah is a sign. He preached, and
they repented. Now My Word has come to you, and that is the test to you
.

31.—"**The queen of the south**." The Word of God is so perfectly suited
to man's heart, even the natural feelings are touched by it . The Word
is sown in the heart, though it may bring forth no fruit.

### THE LESSON OF THE LIGHT.

33-36.—"The light of the body is the eye." Light is there, and the
question is about the man's

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

eye. If a man has bad eyes the light is painful. So the Word to one who
has not clear eyesight or the single eye. This is a solemn Word, but if
a person was converted only yesterday, it might be true of him; he might
be full of light. It applies as much to the babe in Christ as to the
grown man. Where God is in the soul His light is seen. "If a man walk in
the day he stumbleth not." "**If thine eye be single, thy whole body
shall be full of light, having no part dark**." When the candle is there
we see all around. It shows itself, and thus shows all around. The eye
receives the light, single or evil. It is not single or double, but
single or evil. If Christ is not the object, there is some evil object.
If the eye be single, it is all simple, though there will be
difficulties in the path, as with Paul. The light is set on a
candlestick that all who come in "may see the light." The man is forced
to the question: Do you see it or not? Christ has set up the light in
the world. God has displayed Himself in Him, and the effect of that is
to show your condition. Do you say: "Suffer me first to go and bury my
father?" (Luke 9. 59). Ah! you have something first. If my body is not
full of light there is something not single in my eye, something has not
given way before the power of Christ, something not given up. People say
I cannot see. No, of course you cannot; you have some other light.
Further, what you do see now will presently be given up if you do not
walk in the power of what you have. "**Take heed that the light that is
in thee be not darkness**." Our manner of judging may be wrong, because
the standard is not Christ, and then the light becomes darkness; we are
guided

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

wrong and mistaken in our path. If the eye be full of Christ, and we
judge everything by that light, when I see anything that would not
glorify Christ, I say that will not do for me. I may be a little vessel,
but I must be wholly for Christ. May we be walking in the power of the
Holy Ghost, and by the divine teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ content
to follow Him, and desire no other path, having the eye upon Him, and
only upon Him, so that when other objects are put before us we may be
able to say, "This one thing I do." While walking through the world may
we be occupied with Christ, not making it our business to judge evil,
but simple concerning it.

### THE SAVIOUR PRONOUNCES "WOES."

37-43.—"**Woe unto you Pharisees**." We have the sure judgment of the
Lord on the various forms which the lifeless religion of those who led
the people took up expressed in different ways, but His constant and
unmingled judgment upon it all. The first ground of condemnation is the
substitution of out-ward cleansings and services, which the flesh can
render, for purity of heart and the spirit of love; where these last are
external things are clean. Thus money occupies the heart where there is
only a religious form, for it represents the world, and pre-eminence is
another expression of the same thing.

45.—Next the **doctors of the law** are sentenced, and with them the
imposing of burdens on others, while they spared themselves from the
trouble. It might not at first appear why building the sepulchres of the
prophets showed approval of those who killed them; but the truth was
that the lawyers sought in

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

this their own honour, instead of receiving the testimony of the
prophets, which would have humbled them, for the moral and utter ruin of
the nation. But they were adorning, as if all were right, the tombs of
the righteous and good. It was the spirit of the world arrogating credit
to itself for piety to the dead, not holy fear at the prophet's rebukes.
But a clearer proof should be in the wisdom of God that they sympathised
not with the word of the prophets, but with the works of their fathers.
Prophets and apostles would be sent, and once more be slain and
persecuted. The Pharisees were hypocrites, and so judged; the expositors
of the law perverted their nearness to Scripture in their hatred of any
real testimony to their own conscience. These could least of all bear
what detected their evil. Hence in pride and fear they took to
themselves all the springs of knowledge, neither entering themselves
(for they must do that as learners, and needy, and lost), nor allowing
those to enter who would, lest they should condemn themselves, and
besides their honour and characters go for nothing. The closing verses
show us the invariable conduct of false religionists. Having no answer
of moral truth to the evidence of deceit and evil exhibited in their
ways their effort was to perplex and to entrap. Convicted of sin, and
incapable of truth, they sought to make void God's goodness in accusing
even Christ of error. It was mercy towards others to be plain as to
these false guides, and therefore the Lord denounced them unsparingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12](mos17)
