[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos14)  [Next](mos16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER 10.

The Lord pursues the subject we have been looking at in the preceding
chapter, connected with the change that has taken place in His own
position amongst them. It is no longer the Messiah on earth, but the
heavenly Christ they are to look to. There is another thing brought out
here in the amazing importance

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

attached to that moment, the last testimony being applied to them, and
those who heard it would be subject to greater judgment than Tyre and
Sidon. Any among them would have repented with the truth *you* have, but
they had it not. The blessing now was the Lord Himself being there; and
He was so glorious and excellent that to hear Him was the prime source
of blessing. All hung upon their reception or rejection of Him.

### THE SEVENTY SENT OUT.

In the sending out of the seventy we see the same patient grace at work
as when He sent out the twelve. If they were not received they were to
shake off the dust from their feet. God's love never stops, whatever the
wickedness of man, until His work is done. His grace never fails. Christ
looks at the power of grace in God more than at the wickedness of men,
and He went patiently on, and said, "The harvest is great," though
knowing what there was all around Him. The Lord was not like Elijah, who
needed to be reminded of the seven thousand who, as God knew, had not
bowed the knee to the image of Baal. He came in by the door, and went
through everything with God. Nothing stopped Him from seeking out His
sheep scattered on the dark mountains. He laid down His life to save His
sheep, and not one should be lost. To gather them He went on in the
power of grace. Paul was of this spirit when he says, "I endure all
things for the elect's sake" (2 Tim. 2. 10).

Did Christ suffer nothing in it? Look at Him, weary with His journey,
sitting at the well, and a

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

poor, wretched, vile sinner coming to meet Him, to whom He gives the
water of life. There He finds meat to eat that they know not of, and He
says, "The fields are white unto harvest" (John 4. 35). He was as fresh
and happy in His testimony while sitting at the well with this poor
woman as if all Jerusalem had received Him, because the fountain was
within. In Him was "a well of water springing up." So with us. If we are
going on with Him we shall be "troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; cast down, but not destroyed"
(2 Cor. 4. 8, 9) . The testimony is in the earthen vessel, it is true,
but the fountain is within, and they were to be perfectly dependent on
God, and independent of everything else. They were to expect to meet
enemies, wolves.

3.—"Go your ways; **behold, I send you forth as Iambs among wolves**."
You cannot turn a lamb into a wolf to defend itself. Peter was for
taking a sword to smite off the servant's right ear, but the Lord
forbids him, and says, "All they that take the sword shall perish with
the sword" (Matt. 26. 52). It is difficult to receive everything and do
nothing, to be a lamb among wolves, like Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
in prospect of the fiery furnace, saying, "We are not careful, O king,
to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is
able to deliver."

4.—"**Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes**, and salute no man by
the way." Be not uncourteous, but waste not time in useless ceremonies.
When in God's service, and among God's enemies, God must be everything.
It needs concentration of

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

heart in Him, as knowing that the world has rejected your Master, and
will reject you if you are faithful to Him. Faith knows this and goes
on, not with carnal prudence and worldly wisdom, but as knowing what to
do and going on to do it. Faith always carries to the house *peace*; it
produces enmity—two against three, and three against two—because some
will receive it and some not; but the thing brought is always *peace*.

7-9.—"**The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you**." Not merely such and
such a thing is God's will, but whatever you do, whether you receive or
reject it, "the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you." The condition of
the world now is that it has rejected it. The Son of God, the King, has
come into the world, put it to the test, and it says: "We will not have
Him." This fact has not lost its solemnity now, for we are walking
through the world that has rejected Christ; we bring the testimony of
peace to it—peace that has been made, for the sacrifice has been
offered. It is also true that the testimony has been rejected.

11.—"**Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you**." Faith carries things in its own sphere, needing
nothing but God's Word. The sight of the eyes is constantly tending to
dim the estimate which faith forms; and if faith is not nourished by the
Word it sinks down and fades away. If I am not feeding on the Word faith
is not fed, for it cannot be fed by sight of things then around. When
the Lord spoke to Jerusalem, saying, "Their house should be left unto
them desolate, and there should not be one stone

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

left upon another," they could not actually see the stones then falling,
but it was Christ's Word for them to believe. Natural reasoning is fed
by what we see, but *faith* is fed by what God has revealed to the soul.

15.—"**Thou, Capernaum, . . . shalt be thrust down to Hell**"—in God's
eye, not man's. In man's eye it might be exalted to Heaven. So with this
world. And what does that prove? That it may last as long as God
permits, but that His Word will be fulfilled. "The earth and the works
that are therein shall be burned up" (2 Peter 3. 10). There is nothing
stable here. When God comes in, where will it all be? though there are
scoffers who say, "Where is the promise of His coming? "

### NAMES WRITTEN IN HEAVEN.

16.—"**He that heareth you, heareth Me**." That is where faith has its
resource. In hearing the Word the disciples spoke: "I am hearing Christ
Himself." That is where faith walks. I know it must be true, for Christ
has said it. Everything may go wrong, the world, Jews, the Church, but
God's Word never. And it has been given. It never changes, for it has
been given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine. The
Church, as ground of confidence in testimony, is gone, though we know it
is founded upon a rock; and, as to its security, it can never be
destroyed, but God's Word will not fail. Whatever we see tends to weaken
and deface faith puts to the test what the affections of the soul are,
because it is not to be what I like, but what God says.

17-20.—"**Rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven**."
This shows the change of

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

everything. Devils may be subject to you, but the Lord says: "That is
not the portion for you to rejoice in; I am now showing My power in
another way." This word, "**I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
Heaven**," alludes to the time when Satan, the "accuser of the
brethren," will be cast down. Nov he is in Heaven, not in God's
presence, in light inaccessible, but before the throne of judgment—two
different things. "Hast thou considered My servant Job?" (Job 1. 8).
Proving that when others came before the throne Satan came also.
Contrast verses 19 and 20. The one speaks of what can be seen, the other
what could be known only to faith. The unseen thoughts of your heart are
much more important than what can be seen. The invisible is always more
important than the visible.

In this world it is not merely that man is a sinner, but there is the
introduction into it of the power of evil. Satan has got hold of this
world through man's sin. So in the case of the poor woman it is said,
"Whom Satan hath bound these eighteen years" (Luke 13. 16). But when the
Church has been caught up Satan will be cast down. There was war in
Heaven; but when he is on earth he will for three and a half years be
raising up the Man of the earth against the Lord from Heaven. When He
comes Satan's power will be put away. He is not put into the "lake of
fire" until the close of the thousand years, but into "the bottomless
pit." That is just what the devils asked to be saved from when cast out
of the man whose name was Legion (8. 30); "deep," meaning "bottomless
pit." The Lord did not cast them down to it, because the time was not
then come.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

This ability to cast out devils was a great thing. The communicating of
the power by the Lord was a power above the immediate working of the
miracles themselves. It required divine power, and none but that could
give the power to others. In the Millennium there will not be the power
of good and evil together; the latter will be cast out. "Shall the
throne of iniquity have fellowship with Thee?" (Psa. 94. 20). The pit
shall be digged for the wicked. Satan must be cast out. And when Christ
was upon earth He was presenting Himself in the power of God to bind the
strong man and spoil his goods. It was a wonderful thing to meet a man
under the power of Satan and to cast Satan out. It was an earnest of the
"powers of the world to come," the "world to come" referring not to
Heaven but to this earth being renewed. He was then putting forth the
same power that He will exercise fully in the coming kingdom.

19.—"**Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents**." And it was
at the point when He was rejected that He says this. He knew what was
really going on, and though He said peace, they did not say peace to
Him. "I give you power" over all the power of the enemy.
"Notwithstanding, in this rejoice not that the spirits are subject unto
you; but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven." That
is the Church's place. When Christ was manifested on earth it was a
blessed thing; but it is better to be His companion in Heaven, as we
shall be when He comes to take us. Far better to be with Himself, and as
Himself, in the Father's house. We have nothing to do with earth,

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

our names are not written in the earth; kings in it, indeed, but our
portion is not in it. "He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places" (Eph. 1. 3). We shall have the inheritance with Him,
but it is below us; our hope is to be with Himself above it. The
inheritance is the consequence of having this place with Him (Eph. 1).
We are children of the Father, to be "holy and with-out blame before Him
in love." Now we have our portion according to the riches of His grace,
of poor sinners whom He has saved, and we shall be to the glory of His
grace in the manifestation of it. The inheritance comes in afterwards.
"Rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven." As though He
would say to them: "Do not let your minds be filled with things down
here, but think of what you have in Me and with Me." We find two things
brought before us in God's ways: first the government of this world—that
which is still prophetic, connected with the kingdom; and then the
Church up in Heaven. When the inheritance is spoken of it is always
future, but when our place is spoken of it is always up in Heaven. The
Lord saw that the present setting up of the kingdom would all fail, and
He was bringing in a better thing than any kingdom, and He rejoiced in
that, for when He gives joy to another He cannot help having it also
Himself. When the thief on the cross asked Him to remember him in His
kingdom, He said, "This day shalt thou be with Me" (Luke 23. 43). He was
gratifying the thief and also Himself. So with these disciples. He would
have them not be rejoicing in the good down here, for it is not good
enough. Not only do

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

not be troubled with the bad, but rejoice not in the best thing in this
world.

### DISPENSATIONAL CHANGE.

21.—'**In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit; .. . even so, Father, for
so it seemed good in Thy sight**." He felt the circumstances deeply, but
His soul was up to the source, and He would say: "It is quite right that
these proud and haughty ones should see they are nothing, and that these
poor despised lambs should get the glory." "Even so, Father." He must
bow to the evil, because the time to judge it was not yet come. Evil is
going on; people are saying: "Where is the God of the earth?" We have to
bear it; the Lord did. We must get our thoughts away from the
expectation of having things better down here. The soul that enters into
God's thoughts and purposes bows to His will. "Even so, Father."

Then He, as it were, retires into the glory of His own Person. The Son
has to reveal the Father. The world rejects Him, and He submits to the
rejection of the kingdom, and brings out instead of it the blessedness
of the heavenly thing, and now speaks of Himself as the Son, and glories
in that. The present result of His coming is the Son revealing the
Father, and this is even better than the kingdom. The testimony is
brighter as to what God is about when I take things quietly and submit,
not desiring to be a wolf among the wolves. It is exceedingly difficult
for one's heart to bow, and say, "I will be nothing but a lamb;" but
that is our place, for the Lord says, "Vengeance is Mine;'' "rather give
place unto wrath" (Rom. 12); and neither "give

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

place to the devil" (Eph. 4). But if you do not give place to wrath you
will give place to the devil. Shall we lose anything by being quiet and
taking things patiently? No. "All power," He says, "is given unto *Me*
in Heaven and on earth." We must bow to what is without, and be
satisfied with what is written. If not, we shall be only wearying
ourselves in the greatness of our way. May we be satisfied to have our
"names written in Heaven."

23, 24.—"**He said to them privately**." These things could only be
enjoyed by faith. He would have them in the consciousness of present
blessing.

### THE RICH YOUNG RULER.

25.—Now that the Lord has shown out the dispensational change, He shows
the moral change. A lawyer comes and asks how he is to get eternal life.
The Lord brings him to the law—keep the law and you shall live. But he
is stopped directly with the simplicity of this, "**Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself**." He does not love his neighbour as himself! He
asks, "Who is my neighbour?" "This do, and thou shalt live." Who does
love his neighbour as himself? The good Samaritan is the one who does
not ask who the neighbour is, but arts in grace, without asking what
title the other had. Christ has the title of doing good to him that is
in need and misery. This is grace that gives without a title.

See how thoughtful this grace and love is. He went to him, did not send
some one else, but went, bound up his wounds, poured in oil and wine,
set him on his own beast, brought him to an inn, took care

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

of him, gave him in charge to the host, and said, "When I come again I
will repay thee." How beautiful are all the details of the actings of
this love which flows from what is within, and acts according to what is
working there, and not according to the claims upon it!

### MARY'S GOOD PART.

38-42.—In the closing part we see the one great thing was to hear Jesus'
Word. Hence the approval given to Mary above Martha, who in a certain
sense was doing a very good work. She received Him into her house, and
served Him; but there is something better than this: "**Mary hath chosen
that good part which shall never be taken away from her**." He wanted
His words to enter and to have power in the heart. The only thing that
endures for ever is "the Word of the Lord." The wisdom of this world is
against it, human reasoning is against it, but it is the only thing
worth waiting upon diligently; and if Christians reason about the things
of God instead of appealing to the Word they are sure to be going down.
We want to have the Word in our hearts, to sit at Christ's feet that we
may understand and treasure it up. To hear Jesus is the "one thing"
needful. No attention, even to Himself in the flesh, though it were from
one who loved Him and whom He loved could replace this. "The many
things" end only in disappointment and death instead of leading into
life eternal, as did the words of Jesus, issuing from a broken heart
that it might let forth the stream of life. The hearing ear for His Word
delighted Him. He was bringing in truth to people's souls. "Grace

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

and truth came by Jesus Christ" (John 1. 17). "Of His own will begat He
us with the Word of truth" (James 1. 18)."Now are ye clean through the
Word which I have spoken to you" (John 15. 3). Truth sets everything to
rights; it sets God and man in their place, or it is not truth. Sin, and
righteousness, and love, these never came out fully by the law, but
"grace and truth came by Jesus Christ." Every-thing was set morally in
perfect light by Him, but men saw it not because they knew Him not. The
Word now is the instrument of revealing truth. The law was perfect
because it was of God, but it did not tell what man was, much less what
God was. It told what man ought to be. Christ comes in as the light, and
says: "You are all dead, but I can give you life." His coming into the
world showed out everything exactly as it was. As the living Word He
came and revealed to those who could see God, not at first in
redemption, but in testimony. What value to Him was it that Martha
cumbered herself about serving, in comparison of a soul listening to His
Word? It is the same now to a Christian. When God's Word comes with
nothing else it has a right to have power over the soul. It makes its
way by its own authority and its attractive grace to the heart, and
where received it gives life in Christ. There is no living power in a
miracle to quicken a soul, but there is living power in the Word. It is
by the Word that any soul can get into Heaven. We are begotten by the
Word. If the Word cannot do it it will never be done. There are three
things constantly pressed in connection with the power of the Word.
First, the Word spoken will all come up against them another day (John
12);

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

second, though perilous limes come (2 Tim. 3) the Word is able to make
wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus. There is
another thing also. When a soul is quickened by the Word the moral
effect is to make it dependent and obedient, "sanctified to obedience."
Such is the character of the new man, as the old man would be
independent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11](mos16)
