[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos27)  [Next](mos29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

# CHAPTER 23.

1-25.—Religious iniquity had now only to lead on the world to finish the
wickedness in which itself had taken the lead. The civil power must give
in to the wilful evil of the apostate people of God. This is the history
of the world, and, of the two, the religious side is always nearest to
Satan. The **chief priests** manifested their enmity by their
accusation, which was calculated to arouse the jealousy of the governor,
charging on Christ what was entirely false as to Caesar, but with the
subtle groundwork of that which they knew (reckoning on His truth) He
could not deny.

### CHRIST BEFORE PILATE.

The guilt of the Jews was complete, as was also that of the Gentiles,
for **Pontius Pilate** declared Him innocent, and desired to release
Him. Cruel enough himself, the Roman governor disliked cruelty in
others, but he would not go so far as to save Christ from the malice of
His enemies. It would have cost something to do this; it threatened his
interest, and Pilate gave way. The one thing that is strong in the world
is enmity against Christ.

But there was another form of evil to be introduced, to wit, **Herod**,
the apostate king of apostate Israel; and in rejecting Jesus all are
friends, however jealous and divided. How terrible the union between the
fourth beast and God's external people? But if **the Gentiles** failed
shamefully in protecting the just, and hence fell into basely
unrighteous judgment, the activity of an evil will was with the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> **Jews**. Three
times the opportunity of a relenting voice was given; but while the
governor's indifference was as plain as the disappointed insolence of
Herod every time the cry of the people increased in ardour for the death
of the Messiah. Pilate, therefore, **released the guilty Barabbas**,
whom they desired, to appease the Jews, and "**delivered Jesus to their
will**."

26-31.—"**They led Him away**." It was a terrible time and full of
violence. It mattered little whom they met if they could only force them
to help in their iniquity. Their hour was struck, and all fell into the
same mass of rejection and insult of Christ, save that the Jews acted
with more knowledge. The forms of privilege became sorrows and
harbingers of terror, they must be laid low, for all was untrue now. The
natural feelings, touched by affecting circumstances, as we see in the
weeping daughters of Jerusalem, did not change this. They understood
neither the Cross of Christ nor the ruin which awaited themselves. One
may be affected with compassion, as if one were superior to Christ, and
fall under the judgment consequent on His rejection and death. No
humiliation of Jesus put Him out of His place of perfect capability of
dealing with all others from God. Alas! it was not only on Pilate and
Herod, nor on the chief priests that judgment was coming, but on the
women that lamented Him, unconscious of their own state, which was under
condemnation. Neither natural conscience, nor natural religiousness, nor
natural feelings will do, nothing short of the glory of God in Jesus.
And if He, the living and true Vine, who indeed bore fruit

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

to God, was thus dealt with, what must be the lot of the fruitless and
unprofitable, for such branches were they? Where shall the ungodly and
the sinner appear? Man rejects the green tree, and God rejects the dry.
Life was there in the person of Jesus, and they would not have it, and
are therefore given up. It cannot be had now but through a dead and
risen Christ.

### THE PLACE CALLED CALVARY.

32-43.—"**And when they were come to the place called Calvary, there
they crucified Him**." There is the setting aside of all they looked for
here in present deliverance, for Christ must die. But if we are also to
see how low man can go morally we learn, at the same time, that Christ
in His grace can go lower still. "Except the corn of wheat fall into the
ground and *die*, it abideth alone." Therefore, whenever you see an
attempt (and it is the attempt of man's religion) to connect a living
Christ before death and resurrection with living sinners be sure there
is error. It unites sin with the Lord from Heaven, and it denies that
its wages is death. Had Christ delivered Himself, as the rulers, with
the people, said in derision, He would not have delivered us. He must
pass through death and take a higher place, even in resurrection, and
there He takes us. *Per se* the incarnation cannot bring life and
redemption to those who are dead in trespasses and sins. We need to be
set beyond all in resurrection life in Christ.

39.—Thus, then, in spite of the grace of Jesus in intercession, Jews and
Gentiles joined in mockery of the crucified. Yet God had prepared even
here the consolation of His mercy for Jesus in a poor

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

sinner. But no sorrow, no shame, no suffering brings the heart too low
to scorn Jesus; **a gibbeted robber despising Him** (30). There is an
instinct, so to speak, in every unrenewed heart against Jesus, which was
not quelled even by that power of love in which He was going down into
the deepest humiliation to suffer the wrath due to sin. Say not that you
are one whit better than this wretched man. "There is none righteous,
no, not one; none that understandeth; none that seeketh after God. They
are *all* gone out of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable"
(Rom. 3. 10, 11). In two words, there is "no difference." You are as bad
in God's sight as the railing, impenitent thief. See now the fruit of
grace in the other. Grace works in a man who was in as low a condition
as he who, notwithstanding his own dying agony and disgrace, had
pleasure in outraging the Lord of glory; indeed, both had done it (Mark
15. 32). But what more blessed and certain than the salvation of this
thief, now that he bows to the Name of Jesus? He is going to Paradise in
companionship with the Lord whom he owned.

### THE TWO ROBBERS.

It is often said that there was *one* saved in this way, that none might
despair, and *but one*, that none might presume. The truth is that this
is the only way whereby any poor sinner can be saved. There is but one
and the same salvation for all. There was evidently no time for him to
do anything had that been the way, but all is done for him. That very
day his knees were to be broken. How could he get into Paradise? Christ
wrought his deliverance

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

through His own death, and his eye was opened in faith of what Christ
was doing.

40.—Nor was it only that Christ's work was wrought for him—the ground on
which his soul rested for salvation. There was a mighty moral work
wrought in him through the revelation of Christ to his soul by the
Spirit who convinced him of his utter sinfulness. "**Dost not thou fear
God**," is his rebuke to his railing fellow, "**seeing thou art in the
same condemnation? And we, indeed, justly**." It was not all joy.
Conscience had its place. There is a real sense of good and evil, for he
has got in spirit into God's presence, and this, making him forget
circumstances, elevates him into a preacher of righteousness. And if he
owns the rightness of his own punishment in honest confession of sin,
what a wonderful testimony he bears to Christ! "**This Man hath done
nothing amiss**." It was just as if he had known Christ all his life. He
had a divine perception of His character. And so with the Christian now.
Have you such jealousy about the spotlessness and glory of Christ that
you cannot help crying out when you hear Him slighted? He believed that
He was the Lord, the Son of God, and so could answer with assurance for
what He had been as a man. As completely a man as any other, the holy
obedience of Christ was divine. "This Man hath done nothing amiss." What
a response in the renewed heart to the delight of sinlessness! His eye
glances, as it were, over the whole life of Christ; he could answer for
Christ anywhere, because he has learned to know himself.

42.—Then he says, turning to Jesus, "**Lord**,

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

**remember me when Thou comest in Thy kingdom**." As soon as he can get
rid of what was said, when he has done with his testimony to the other
thief, his heart turns to Christ instinctively. How undistracted he was!
Was he thinking of his pain,. or of the people around the Cross? As is
always the case, where God's presence is realised, he was absorbed. In
the extremity of helplessness, as to out-ward appearance, he hears the
Shepherd's voice, and recognised Him as the Saviour and King. He wants
Christ to think of him. The judgment of men was that Christ was a
malefactor. The weeping women saw not who He was. But no degradation of
circumstances could hide the glory of His person who hung by his side.
He owned Jesus as the Lord, and knew that His kingdom will certainly
come. The other malefactor thought only, if he thought at all, of
present deliverance; but this one saw the sufferings of Christ and the
glory that should follow. His mind was set, not on being free from
bodily pain, but on the loving recognition of Christ in glory. He looks
not to earth, nor nature, but to another kingdom, where death could not
come. There was not a cloud, not a doubt, but the peaceful, settled
assurance that the Lord would come in His kingdom.

### TO-DAY IN PARADISE.

43.—And the Lord gave him more than his faith asked. There was the
answer of *present* peace. It was not only the kingdom by and by, but,
"**Verily, verily, I say unto thee, to-day shalt thou be with Me in
Paradise**." As if He said: "You shall have the kingdom when it comes,
but I am giving

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

now soul salvation; you are to be associated at once with Me in a way
far better and more than the kingdom, blessed and true as it is." For
indeed the work was accomplished on the Cross which could transport a
soul into Paradise. If the Saviour had taken the sinner's place, the
sinner is by grace entitled to take the place of the Saviour. The poor
thief might know but little of Christ's work and its effects, but the
Holy Spirit had fixed his heart on the person of Christ. The words of
the Lord (43) imply the atonement, by virtue of which we are made fit to
be His companions in the presence of God. The work of Christ is as
perfect now for us as then for him; it is as much accomplished for us as
if we were already caught up into Paradise. How distinct this is from
anything like progress of the soul to fit it for Heaven! And how
wonderful that such a soul should be a comfort to the Saviour! He had
come into the condemnation; yea, and wrath was on Him to the uttermost.
And now the converted thief was a bright witness of perfect grace and
eternal salvation through His Blood.

### THE NINTH HOUR.

44-49.—The scene was closed which let in the light beyond through the
portals of a heart now purged by faith, and the darkness proper to the
hour took now its suited course—specially over Israel, it would seem.
"**And the sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was rent in the
midst**." Thus the way into the holiest was made manifest by the act
which had its place in this darkness, and God in the grace of Christ's
sacrifice shone forth upon the world. Darkness of judgment as it was to
one, the light

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

broke through, and access was opened within the veil. All was finished,
and the Lord with no hesitating voice, but aloud cried, "**Father, into
Thy hands I commend My spirit**." This was not Jewish blessing (for the
living, the living, they shall praise thee), but it was much higher. It
was sonship, death overcome, and the occasion merely of presenting the
spirit safe, happy, confident, notwithstanding death, into the Father's
care and presence. This is an immense principle, and, short of
resurrection, of the highest possible importance. Death in the hands of
Jesus—what a fact! The centurion in the course of duty struck at least
in natural conscience glorified God, and owned a righteous Man on the
Cross . The masses were troubled and went away, auguring no good. Those
who knew Him, and the women from Galilee, were more nearly interested,
but in fear stood afar off.

50-56.—But the providence and operation of God, the righteous judge,
**took measures for the body of the Holy One**. If the more prominent
witnesses were set aside, others feeble in the faith are found active
and faithful in the post of danger, confession, and attachment to the
Lord. How often the difficulties which frighten some force others
forward! So was it with Joseph of Arimathea, for Jesus must be "with the
rich in His death." The women, too, in true but ignorant affection, make
useless preparation, awaiting the just Jewish time for a Lord who had
passed far beyond their faith. The resurrection was soon to usher in the
dawn of a bright morrow; for the honour of the grave, like the
intentions of the women from Galilee, was of a Jewish character, and all
this was now closed in death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24](mos29)
