[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mos28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002AMUDEE/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Man of Sorrows*, by John Nelson Darby, \[n.d. (prior to 1882)\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

# CHAPTER 24.

1-12.—What now occupies our evangelist is the risen Man again with His
disciples, and the testimony to the world founded on the
resurrection—this new truth and power above all the principles of
natural life. The door of the Cross is shut on all that man in the flesh
is, and the new thing is introduced in this risen Christ.

### THE RISEN MAN.

Resurrection is an entirely new condition; but even the Jew could not
have the sure mercies of David without it. Man, lawless and under law,
has had the sentence of death pronounced on him. He may pride himself on
his natural powers, but he is without God. He has rejected the One who
came to him, a Man in perfect, divine grace, and in so doing has fully
shown what he is. Therefore says the Lord, "Now is the judgment of this
world" (John 12. 31). An entirely new ground appears, and this is here
brought out in Christ Himself. Our bodies are still the same, but the
life, character, motive, means, end are altogether new in the Christian.
"Old things are passed away, and all things are become new." The women,
preoccupied with their own thoughts and affections, come with their
spices to anoint the dead body of Jesus, while He was already living in
the perfume of His work and offering before God, having effected all
which placed man anew before God the Father, the last Adam in living
acceptance. Then they were thrown into an unlooked-for difficulty at
first, for they did not find the Lord's body.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Neither did they
know He was risen. They under-stood not that there was neither judgment
nor sin remaining. There may be real and great love to Jesus without
understanding this. But soon the question was put which involved the
answer to all. "**Why seek ye the living One among the dead**?" These
women, faithful if ignorant, were not forgotten of the Lord, and He
whose ways are grace has preserved their memorial and their early
seeking of the Lord, thence to bear the message to the apostles
themselves. But to them they were as idle tales. Peter's heart, broken
and contrite, was the more affected by what he heard, and he ran to the
sepulchre, and having seen the linen clothes laid aside there, went away
wondering. Surely it was a marvellous secret, baffling and rising above
all human thought!

Luke's statements of circumstances are always *general*. In John we have
more details, especially developing Mary Magdalene's devoted affection
to His person, but showing also how little she as yet knew of the power
of God in resurrection.

### THE EMMAUS JOURNEY.

13-27.—The touchingness of this interview with the Lord on the journey
to Emmaus need not be spoken of . How the Lord draws out all their
thoughts! But He is here altogether as a Man, and presenting the truth
they speak Jewishly. How naturally their minds rested always in the same
circle! He was a prophet, and they hoped He might redeem Israel. The
fact of the resurrection occupied their attention, but it had no link
with the counsels of God. They were astonished, and, like others before
them, there

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

they rested. Christ takes up quite other ground, though it was only in
the way of intelligence and not yet the power of the Holy Ghost. "**O
fools**," says He, "**and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets
have written**." These He expounds, and opens their understanding to
them, for though viewed completely as Man, He operates divinely and
spiritually on their mind. "Ought not," said He—was it not the counsel
of God plainly revealed in His Word? What He presses is the mind of God
in the Scriptures relative to the Christ. This was an immense step; it
took them out of their. egotism and the egotistical character of
Judaism. Their thought was of the redemption of Israel by power. They
had no idea of a new and heavenly life, though, of course, they had it.
Even as to the Christ death must come in if God were to be vindicated
and man really blessed, and so Moses and all the prophets had taught.
"**Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into His
glory**?" not set up His kingdom down here, but "enter into His glory."

28-32.—Then we have a most graphic account of the scene at Emmaus. "**He
made as though He would have gone further**." Why should He, to their
eyes "a stranger," intrude? "**But they constrained Him, saying, Abide
with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent**. And it
came to pass, as they sat at meat with Him, He took bread, and blessed,
and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they knew
Him: and He vanished out of their sight." This was not celebrating the
Lord's Supper with them; yet was it taking up that part of it, the act
of breaking the

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

bread, which was the sign of His death. He was not now merely as the
living bread that came down from Heaven, but as He had said, "This is My
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world" (John 6. 51), not
which I will *take*, but *give*. He did take flesh, of course, in order
to give it; but it was His death that became the life of the world. For
Jew or Gentile there was no other way. The condition of man was such
that he could be quickened only in connection with the Cross. All that
was in man, as a child of Adam, was under sentence of death and
judgment. Christ, by grace, entered into the place of man, came where I
am, that I might be on equal terms with Him, as far as acceptance with
God; His broken body shows me that I have got that which brings me to
God. A dead sinner can find life and divine favour only in a dead
Christ. So the Lord had taught in John 6. To eat His flesh and drink His
blood must be in order to have life. It was not any longer a question of
His bodily presence merely as incarnate. Redemption was absolutely
necessary and faith in it. Christ is to be fed upon, not alone as a
living Messiah, nor only as One alive again for evermore in
resurrection; but, besides that, as He who died, His body broken and
blood shed in atonement. Thus it was the Lord was known to the disciples
at Emmaus, though it was not the Lord's Supper. Their hearts had been
opened by what encouraged them in connecting the truth of God with the
facts of human unbelief and Christ's rejection, and thus turning the
cause of their despair into joy and peace by the sight of the counsels
of God in it. But His actual revelation was by the affecting
circumstance

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

of personal association in the breaking of bread. It was Himself who
broke the bread. There could be no mistake. He was gone in a moment,
"**vanished out of their sight**." But His object was gained. They had
life through His death. And He was risen. The body was a spiritual body,
and had flesh and bones, which a spirit has not. He had shown them not
only the fact, but its necessity. Why does He not say "did," but "must
rise from the dead?" Because all the sentence must be passed on the
first Adam. All that I have now is in the last Adam. I am not only
quickened, but quickened together with Christ, having all trespasses
forgiven. Christ, by His death, puts them away for all who believe, and
for such, all that belonged to the first Adam is clean gone. This is
power over the principle of sin, which as a fact is still within. And
hence the apostle bids the believers reckon themselves dead to sin. In
the power of the Holy Ghost giving me the consciousness of new life in
Christ I am to mortify my members here below, because I have to apply
the death of Christ to my old nature. The monkish principle tries to
kill sin in order to get life, but the apostle shows that we must have
life by faith in Christ in order to treat sin as a dead thing (Rom.
6,7,8).

34.—The holding of the disciples' eyes was of importance. To have
recognised Jesus would have been, in their state, to have satisfied
their thoughts. The Lord, on the other hand, engaging their hearts by
all God said of Him, furnished them with scriptural intelligence; and
then in the act of intimate friendship, which recalled the great truth
of His

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

death, brought to mind His great deliverance. "We walk by faith, not by
sight" (2 Cor. 5. 7). Filled with the concentrating event which began a
new world, they hastened back to Jerusalem, where the eleven and others
were occupied. "**The Lord**," said the latter, "**is risen indeed, and
hath appeared to Simon**." Then the two told the tale of their wondrous
journey, and still more wondrous recognition of Jesus in breaking of
bread. The Lord was proving that there should be independent witnesses.

### JESUS IN THE MIDST.

36.—Thus their hearts were prepared. Yet in the fact of this new thing,
"the beginning, the first-born from the dead," there was that to which
earthly hearts could ill assort themselves. "**Jesus Himself stood in
the midst**." The Lord presents Himself as the very same Man all through
and in every way. In His intercourse with the two it had been just the
same; all was human, though what no man ever was, and what none but God
could be, was shown in and through it. Here also His hands, His feet,
His previous wounds are presented.

41-43.—He takes of **fish and of an honeycomb**, and eats before them.
Two sentiments had overpowering possession of the disciples—joy to see
Himself again, and astonishment. The Lord presents the truth of
resurrection, not as a doctrine, but in living reality, thus restoring
their souls and making them know Him most familiarly, risen indeed, but
yet a Man properly and truly.

44.—"**And He said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto
you, while I was yet** 

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

**with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the
law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms concerning Me. Then
opened He their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures**." This showed the standing before God in justification of
life and liberty. But another thing was wanted before men—*power*. This
is not the question before God, where the Christian stands as Christ
stands, "accepted in the Beloved" (Eph. 1. 6) . But the testimony of the
Christian here below, whether preaching or anything else, needs power to
be given. This power was promised to the disciples, but even yet they
must wait for it. We must not confound service of any kind with
standing. The power of the Spirit is requisite to live before man—power
over and above regeneration, and distinct from spiritual understanding.
This last is needed to give us the apprehension of our standing in
Christ; and when He opens our understandings to understand the
Scriptures it does not puff up. It is a revelation *of* Himself, and
leads to communion *with* Him. Yet the other want still remains. Even
this knowledge is not necessarily power. The testimony and purpose of
God in the Word has to be fulfilled. The great truth of a suffering,
risen Christ reaches out to the Gentiles. In Matthew His association
with the Jewish remnant is taken up. Consequently He meets them in
Galilee after, or before, His resurrection, and thence flows the
commission to go and disciple the Gentiles. But all this is dropped in
Luke. Jerusalem, Emmaus, and Bethany, above all, are prominent, for
thence He ascends to Heaven, where He has to do with poor

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

*sinners*. The testimony was to begin at Jerusalem expressly. The riches
of His grace must be shown first where there was the deepest guilt. The
Cross broke this link with the Jews as a Jewish Messiah, but opened the
door of repentance and remission of sins, to the Jew first, and also to
the Gentile.

### THE MASTER GLORIFIED.

45-53.—"**And ye are witnesses**." He came in the need of power. "**And,
behold, I send the promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye in the
city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high**." This
all-important index of Christ's exaltation could only be obtained for
man by the reception of Jesus in Heaven when redemption was effected.
The Holy Ghost had ever acted in creation, in providence, in revelation,
in regeneration, and in every good thing, but He had never been given
before. That hung on the glory of Jesus. To that the Holy Ghost could
become a servant in man, for it was the divine counsel and perfection of
love.

Meanwhile, before this endowment, they returned with great joy to the
city which their Lord had left. Their hearts were filled with the
influence of this great fact, that their Master was glorified, though it
was still associated with Jewish thoughts. And these two elements
reproduce themselves in the Acts, particularly in the earlier part.
