[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tpt07)  [Next](tpt09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486202496/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*A Theologico-Political Treatise*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AUTHOR'S ENDNOTES TO THE THEOLOGICO-POLITICAL TREATISE

CHAPTERS I to V

Chapter I

Endnote 1. (1) The word naw-vee', Strong:5030, is rightly interpreted by
Rabbi Salomon Jarchi, but the sense is hardly caught by Aben Ezra, who
was not so good a Hebraist. (2) We must also remark that this Hebrew
word for prophecy has a universal meaning and embraces all kinds of
prophecy. (3) Other terms are more special, and denote this or that sort
of prophecy, as I believe is well known to the learned.

Endnote 2. (1) "Although, ordinary knowledge is Divine, its professors
cannot be called prophets." That is, interpreters of God. (2) For he
alone is an interpreter of God, who interprets the decrees which God has
revealed to him, to others who have not received such revelation, and
whose belief, therefore, rests merely on the prophet's authority and the
confidence reposed in him. (3) If it were otherwise, and all who listen
to prophets became prophets themselves, as all who listen to
philosophers become philosophers, a prophet would no longer be the
interpreter of Divine decrees, inasmuch as his hearers would know the
truth, not on the, authority of the prophet, but by means of actual
Divine revelation and inward testimony. (4) Thus the sovereign powers
are the interpreters of their own rights of sway, because these are
defended only by their authority and supported by their testimony.

Endnote 3. (1) "Prophets were endowed with a peculiar and extraordinary
power." (2) Though some men enjoy gifts which nature has not bestowed on
their fellows, they are not said to surpass the bounds of human nature,
unless their special qualities are such as cannot be said to be
deducible from the definition of human nature. (3) For instance, a giant
is a rarity, but still human. (4) The gift of composing poetry extempore
is given to very few, yet it is human. (5) The same may, therefore, be
said of the faculty possessed by some of imagining things as vividly as
though they saw them before them, and this not while asleep, but while
awake. (6) But if anyone could be found who possessed other means and
other foundations for knowledge, he might be said to transcend the
limits of human nature.

CHAPTER III. Endnote 4. (1) In Gen. xv. it is written that God promised
Abraham to protect him, and to grant him ample rewards. (2) Abraham
answered that he could expect nothing which could be of any value to
him, as he was childless and well stricken in years.

Endnote 5. (1) That a keeping of the commandments of the old Testament
is not sufficient for eternal life, appears from Mark x:21.A
Theologico-Political Treatise Part 2—Chapters VI to X by Baruch Spinoza

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Table of Contents](tpt09)
