[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp24)  [Next](flwp26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CONCERNING PLACE. <span id="fr_82"></span>[\*](#fn_82)

<span class="smallcaps">Simplicius</span> having observed, that Proclus
is the only philosopher that he is acquainted with, who thought that
place was a body, adds, "he, therefore, admitting the axioms of
Aristotle concerning place, and the fourfold division of the
investigation of it, says it is necessary that place should be either
matter or form, or the boundary of the containing body, or an interval
equal to the space between the boundaries of the containing body. For,
if place is not any one of the things that are in it, nor of the things
which surround it, it cannot be locally changed, if nothing that is in
it or about it sustains any mutation. The natures, however, which are in
it are form and matter; but the natures which surround it are the
boundary of the circumambient, and that which is intermediate." Proclus
having demonstrated, therefore, that place is neither matter nor form,
through the same arguments as are used by Aristotle, and having
subverted the hypothesis that it is the boundary of the containing body,
from the absurdities with which

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the hypothesis is attended, infers that place is an interval; and thus
he adapts the demonstration to his own opinion. Since, however, he
clearly and concisely explains his hypothesis, it will perhaps be better
to hear his own words, which are as follow: "it remains, therefore, if
place is neither the form of that which is in place, nor matter, nor the
boundary of the comprehending body, that the interval which is between
the boundaries of the containing body must be conceived to be the
primary place of each body. All the mundane interval, however, of the
whole world will be different from the above-mentioned interval. This,
therefore, is either nothing, or it is a certain thing. And if, indeed,
it is nothing, local motion will be from nothing to nothing, though all
motion is according to something which ranks among beings. Places,
likewise, which are according to nature, will be nothing, though every
thing which subsists conformably to nature is necessarily something
belonging to beings. But if it is a certain thing, it is entirely either
incorporeal or corporeal. If, however, it, is incorporeal, an absurdity
will follow: for it is necessary that place should be equal to that
which is in place. But how is it possible for body, and that which is
incorporeal, to be equal? For the equal is in quantities, and in
homogeneous quantities, as in lines with lines, superficies with

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

superficies, and bodies with bodies. hence, place is a body, if it is an
interval. But if it is a body, it is either moved, or immovable. If,
however, it is in any way whatever moved, it must necessarily be moved
according to place; so that again place will be in want of place. But
this is impossible, as it also appeared to be to Theophrastus and
Aristotle. Hence Aristotle says, that a vessel is place which may be
moved, but that place is an immovable vessel; indicating by this, that
place is naturally immovable.

If, however, place is immovable, it is either incapable of being divided
by the bodies that fall into it, so that body will proceed through body,
or it may be divided by them, in the same manner as air and water are
divided by the bodies which exist in them. But if, indeed, it may be
divided, the whole being cut, the parts will be moved on each side of
the dissevered whole. And first, place will be moved, since the parts of
it are moved; but it has been demonstrated that it is immovable.
Secondly, the parts being cut, we must inquire whither that part which
is cut proceeds: for again there will be found another interval between
the parts of the dissevered whole, which is the recipient of the divided
part, and into which this part proceeding is said to be in place; and
this will be the consequence to infinity. Place, therefore,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

is an indivisible body. It; however, it is indivisible, it will either
be an immaterial or a material body. But if material, it is not
indivisible. For all material bodies, when other material bodies proceed
into them, become divided by those bodies; as when, for instance, our
bodies fall into water. But immaterial bodies alone are not adapted to
be divided by any thing; and this from necessity. For every immaterial
body is impassive; but every thing which may be divided is not
impassive, since division is a passion of bodies, destructive of their
union. For of that which is continuous, so far as continuous, you will
not find any other passion than division, which destroys its continuity.
Place, therefore,—that we may collect all that has been demonstrated,—is
a body, immovable, indivisible, immaterial. But if this be the case, it
is very evident that place is more immaterial than all bodies, both than
those that are moved, and those that are immaterial in things that are
moved. Hence, if light is the most simple of these, for fire is more
incorporeal than the other elements, arid light is more incorporeal than
fire itself, place will be the most pure and genuine light which is in
bodies. If, therefore we conceive that there are two spheres, one of
light alone, but the other consisting of many bodies, and that both
these are equal to each other in bulk, but that the one is

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

firmly established together with the centre, and that the other is
inserted in this, we shall see the whole world existing in place, and
moved in immovable light. And this light, indeed, is, according to
itself, immovable, in order that it may imitate place, but is moved
according to a part, in order that it may possess something less than
place.

"This hypothesis is rendered credible from what is asserted by Plato, in
the \[tenth book of the\] Republic. For the light which is there
mentioned, and is adapted to the rainbow, is said by him to be place. It
is also confirmed by the Chaldean oracles respecting the fontal soul;
since it is there said, that this soul 'abundantly animates light, fire,
æther, and the worlds.' For this is the light which is above the
empyrean world, and is a monad prior to the triad of the empyrean,
ethereal, and material worlds. This light, too, is the first recipient
of the eternal allotments of the gods, and unfolds self-visible
spectacles in itself to those that are worthy to behold them. For in
this light, according to the Chaldean oracle, things without figure
become figured. And perhaps it is on this account called place (τοπος),
as being a certain type (τυπος) of the whole mundane body, and as making
things which are without interval to possess interval."

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

After this, Proclus doubts, against himself, how body can proceed
through body, and whether this light is inanimate, or participates of
soul. "But," says he, "it is impossible that it should be inanimate,
both because it is more excellent than the animated natures that are in
it, and because the oracles say that this is animated prior to other
things. If, however, it is animated, how is it immovable? And he
dissolves the first doubt from the impassivity of immaterial bodies: for
an immaterial body neither resists nor is resisted, since that which is
resisted possesses a nature capable of suffering by the things which
resist. Nor, since it is impassive, can it be divided; so that neither
will it be possible to adduce that absurd consequence, that the whole
will proceed through that which is smallest; for if an immaterial body
is not adapted to be divided, neither will it be divided equally with
that which is smallest. But if this will not be the case, neither will
the whole proceed through it." Again, he solves the second doubt, by
saying, that this immaterial body is animated by the fontal soul, and
that it has a divine life, and is essentially self-motive, but not in
energy. For if we admit that in \[the rational\] soul the self-motive is
twofold, the one according to essence, but the other according to
energy, and if we assert that the one is immovable, but the other

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

moved, <span id="fr_83"></span>[\*](#fn_83) what should hinder us from
asserting that place participates of a life of this kind, and that it
lives according to an immutable essence, but the world according to an
essence self-motive in energy. "If, however," says he, "you wish to see
the motion of place according to energy, you must survey it as motive of
the bodies that are moved, and which evolve the parts of place according
to interval; because they are neither able to be in every place, nor to
be present with all the parts of place according to each of its parts.
And this is an intervening medium with reference to soul, which moves
without interval. For it seems that life, indeed, so far as life imparts
motion, but place being that which primarily participates of life,
confers motion according to the parts of itself, and thus peculiarly
unfolds local motion, causing each of the parts of that which is moved
to desire to be in the whole itself, since it is unable, through the
natural peculiarity of interval, to subsist in a divided manner in the
whole itself. For every thing which desires to be a certain thing, but
fails of becoming that which is the object of its wish through a defect
of nature, continues nevertheless to aspire after that which, through
imbecility, it

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

is tillable to obtain. For it is requisite," says he, "that the medium
between an incorporeal and intransitive life, such as is that of the
fontal soul, and a transitive and corporeal life, should be a life which
is intransitive, indeed, but corporeal." He adds, "but it appears to me,
that the centres of the whole world, considered as one thing, are fixed
in this immaterial body. For if the oracles assert that the centres of
the material world are fixed in the tether which is above it, we must
say, by ascending analogously, that the centres of the highest of the
worlds are established in the light of this world. May it not likewise
be said, that this light is the first image of the paternal
profundity, <span id="fr_84"></span>[\*](#fn_84) and on this account is
supermundane, because that profundity is also
supermundane?"[†](flwp25.htm#an_fn101)

<span id="an_fn101">†</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

In addition to the above-mentioned opinion of Proclus concerning place,
the following is the hypothesis of Damascius of Damascus, the preceptor
of Simplicius, a man most inquisitive, and who laboured much in
philosophy. His disquisitions on place appear to me to be no less
admirable than novel. From the utility of place, therefore, he wishes to
discover its essence, and he thus writes: "Every thing in generation, in
consequence of falling off from a nature impartible, and without
interval, both according to essence and energy, has a twofold
separation,—the one according to essence, but the other according to
energy, or passion.

</div>

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> That also in
generation, which is according to energy, is twofold; the one being
connascent with essence, according to which, essence is in a continual
flux; but the other proceeding from essence, according to which it
energises differently at different times, possessing extended, and not
at-once-collected energies. And the separation, indeed, of energy is
immediately in want of motion; and motion is consubsistent with it. The
separation, also, according to motion, becomes energetic or passive. But
the separation of essence becomes likewise twofold; the one being a
divulsion into multitude, but the other passing into bulk. And the
separation, according to magnitude and bulk, becomes immediately
connected with position, in consequence of the parts falling into
different situations. Position likewise is twofold; the one being
connascent with essence, as of my body, the head is upward, and the feet
downward; but the other being adventitious, as at one time I have
position in a house, and at another in the forum; and it is evident that
the former continues as long as the thing exists, but that the other
becomes different at different times. But we properly say, that those
things have position, the parts of which are extended, and are distant
from each other. Hence position appears properly to belong to
magnitudes, and the boundaries which they contain, because these are
distant according to continuity. But numbers, although they are
separated, yet, at the same time, do not appear to have position,
because they are not distant and extended, unless you should say that
these also receive magnitude and interval. For all intervals, in
consequence of destroying a subsistence collected into one, cause that
which is in them to be changed into another, in which also they are said
to be placed by position, losing, as it were, independent power; just
as, by departing from themselves in their energies, they are said to be
moved, and to change. Of these intervals, therefore, in order that they
may not be perfectly extended to the indefinite, there are collective
measures; time, indeed, being the measure of some things, according to
the energy in motion: but of others, definite multitude, which is
number, being the measure,

</div>

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

according to a distinction of essence: and of others, definite
magnitude, as a cubit, or something of this kind, according to
continuity. Of others, again, place is the measure, according to a
dispersion of position. Hence, things that are moved are said to be
moved in time; but they are said to have position of essence, and motion
itself, in place, so far as essence itself also participates of being
moved. And that place indeed subsists about position, and is something
belonging to things situated, is evident. For we say, that those things
are in place which have position; and upward and downward are the
differences of place, surveyed according to position; in the same manner
as the right hand and the left, before and behind.

"But that place bounds, measures, and orderly arranges position, you may
learn from hence: for we say, that a thing has position, though it
should be disorderly posited, in any way whatever; but a thing is then
said to have its proper convenient position, when it receives its proper
place, just as any thing, whatever it may be, proceeds into being, but
then has its proper opportune subsistence, when it exists in a becoming
time. Through place, therefore, every part of a thing has a good
position; the head of my body, indeed, upward, but the foot downward;
the liver in the right-hand parts, but the heart in the middle: and the
eyes, through which seeing, we walk, are before; but the back, by which
we carry burthens, is behind. These, indeed, are differences through
place; just as of the parts of an embryo, one is fabricated before
another, through time, and one age orderly proceeds prior to another;
nor are the Trojan confounded with the Peloponnesian transactions: for
prior and posterior are the differences of time, just as upward and
downward, and the other four divisions are the differences of place; as
also Aristotle acknowledges. The parts of the world, therefore, have
their proper position in the whole, on account of place. Hence, speaking
superficially, *place, simply so called, is, according to this
conception, that which bounds the position of bodies; but speaking of
place as having a natural subsistence, it is that which*

</div>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

*bounds the position according to corporeal parts, conformably to
nature, both with respect to each other and to the whole, and also the
position according to the whole with respect to the parts*. For, as
different parts of the earth and the heavens are arranged in different
situations, on account of place, and some parts are northern but others
southern, so the whole heaven and the whole earth, being parts of the
world, have a convenient measure of position, and an orderly
distribution on account of place; the former being allotted the
circumference of the universe, but the latter possessing the middle of
it: and it is place which imparts coincidence to the parts of the
universe. If, likewise, *place* (τοπος) is denominated from conjecture,
(εκ τουτο παζειν, lege εκ του τοπαζειν) becoming place from being
situated near to things *conjectural*, <span
id="fr_85"></span>[\*](#fn_85) as being a certain *conjecture* of
intellectual distinction, thus also what has been said of place will
accord with this etymology. For to *images*, which have a *conjectural*
subsistence, place imparts an establishment, and a similitude to their
paradigms. For unless each of the parts of things, which are separated
by interval, was situated according to its proper place, an image would
never he similar to its paradigm, but every order, convenient measure,
and elegant arrangement, would vanish. And, indeed, if you take away
place, you will see the disposition of bodies extraneous and disordered,
and tending to perfect indefiniteness. For in what position will each of
the parts stop, when they are not adapted to any? On this account,
therefore, things which are naturally moved, are moved in order that
they may obtain their proper position; and things which are permanent,
abide in a convenient measure of position through a love of place. Hence
place is the cause of something to bodies, and to all corporeal natures,
and what it is may perhaps be understood from what has been said.

"It will follow, however, from this, that such a place is neither

</div>

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

the boundary of that which contains,—for how is this the cause of order
or distinction, since it is rather defined by the things which exist in,
and are comprehended by it?—nor yet will it be body; fur, though some
one should say that it is an immaterial body, which has parts distant
and different from each other,—this also will require that which may
arrange it, and cause this part to be situated in the middle, and that
in the circumference. Nor is it possible that a thing of this kind can
be interval: for, through the same causes, interval, in consequence of
possessing difference, and having its parts differently situated, will
also require a certain convenient position. Place, therefore, appears to
be the measure of things posited, just as time is said to be the number
of the motion of things moved. Since, however, position is twofold, the
one being essential, and the other adventitious, place also will be
twofold, the one becoming the perfect element of that which has
position, but the other subsisting according to accident. There is also
a certain difference of essential position, so far as, in a certain
respect, wholes themselves have the proper position of their proper
parts, both with respect to each other, and to the universe; or so far
as parts have a proper position with reference to the whole and the
remaining parts. Hence, place also becomes twofold; the one peculiar,
belonging to individual places; but the other being defined according to
position in the whole. For, as whole is twofold, the one belonging to
each of the parts,—according to the definite and distinct subsistence of
each, according to which we say, that the earth is a certain whole, and
not the earth only, but also an animal and a plant, and each of the
parts in these; but the other being more comprehensive, as when we say
the whole world, the whole earth, and the whole air, and of each
*wholeness* <span id="fr_86"></span>[\*](#fn_86) there are proper parts;
—in like manner, of place

</div>

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

we say, that one is the convenient position of the proper parts of a
thing, as of try parts in the whole of ray body; but another the
convenient position of the whole as of a part, in the place of its more
comprehensive *wholeness*. Thus, the place of the earth, is the place of
terrestrial natures; and this so far as earth possesses the middle of
the universe. For, though the earth should be deprived of its position
about the middle of the universe, it would still retain the convenient
position of its proper parts in their proper whole; but it would not
then possess its convenient position as a part of the universe. Hence,
if the whole earth were hurled upward, it would fall again to the
middle; and the parts which it contains would preserve their formation
with respect to each other, even when it was removed from the middle.
Thus, also, a mad suspended in the air would have the convenient order
of his proper parts; but he would no longer have the convenient order as
of a part to the whole. And since parts belong more to things more
total, than wholes themselves do; for they do not so much vanquish
subordinate, as they are vanquished by more excellent natures; and this
because first are in a greater ratio to second natures, than second to
third natures; this being the case, though a clod of earth should have a
proper convenient position in the air, yet it would tend downward,
through a desire of that which is more total. For that which is peculiar
is every where dead and cold, when divulsed from that which is common,
and deprived of its appropriate connexion; just as plants, when torn up
by the roots, though they are in complete possession of all their parts,
yet immediately droop, in consequence of being divulsed from their
common wholeness. For all things live on account of the one mundane
animal. Hence, as long as every thing is rooted in the world, through
proximate wholenesses, so long it lives, and is preserved; but if it is
divulsed from its proximate, it is also torn from the common wholeness.
Thus, therefore, the natural tendencies of bodies, and their
permanencies in their proper places, are preserved, by admitting place
to be a thing of this kind. And the

</div>

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

local motion of things which are moved, is nothing else than the
assumption of different positions, at different times, till that which
is moved obtains its appropriate position; the intermediate air or water
being divided, and receiving the position which it then has, as long as
that which is stronger proceeds. The position, also, of the parts of
air, is that which a clod of earth or I receive when moved. The place to
which I change is not definitely my peculiar place, but the place of
surrounding air, in a different part of which I am also naturally
adapted to become situated at different times. Hence, it being dubious
how things which are moved are moved in place, since things in place may
be justly said to be at rest rather than to be moved, let us see how the
philosopher Syrianus states the doubt, and gives the solution of
it:—'Some one may ask,' says he, 'how things which are moved, are moved
in place, since things moved, are rather *from whence, whither*. For, in
short, things in place appear to be at rest. May we not, therefore, say,
that things which are moved, are in place and not in place? For they are
not in the first, and, as it were, proper place of themselves; since if
they were they would be at rest. But they are in place, surveyed
according to its extent; just as we say that the sun is in the
constellation called the Lion, because the extent of the Lion
comprehends the sun. We also say that a flying eagle is in the air, and
that a ship sailing with a prosperous wind is in the sea: for all these
have place considered in its extent, or assumed with a greater latitude,
but they have not a first and peculiar place, as long as they are
moved.' And most of those, indeed, who speak about place, appear to me
especially to direct their attention to this external place. For, on
being asked, what is the place of the earth? they reply, that it is the
middle of the universe; which is the peculiar place of the universe, and
of the earth as in the universe. On being also asked, what is the place
of the heavens? they say, that which surrounds; but they do not, in
their reply, adduce that place of the earth which gives convenient
position to its parts; and, in a similar manner, that

</div>

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<div style="font-size:90%">

place of the heavens through which its parts are orderly arranged.
Hence, all moll, us it seems, assert that place is separate from that
which is in place. For, in reality, that which pertains to each
particular from more total place, is separate from that which is in
place, and is not precedaneously the place of that thing. They also
consider place as immovable, looking to this more common place, and
which is considered in its extent. For the peculiar place of every
thing, and which is co-essentiallised with it, is also moved together
with it. But common place abides, being peculiar to that which is more
total and comprehensive, as body."

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[93:\*](flwp25.htm#fr_82) This fragment is
extracted from the Commentaries of Simplicius on the Physics of
Aristotle, p. 143.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[99:\*](flwp25.htm#fr_83) For the rational soul
is eternal in essence, but temporal in energy. Hence, according to the
former, it is immovable; but according to the latter, is moved.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[100:\*](flwp25.htm#fr_84) The paternal
profundity, according to the Chaldaic Theology, consists of three
triads, each of which triads contains *father*, *power*, and
*intellect*. See my collection of the Chaldean Oracles, in the Classical
Journal.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[103:\*](flwp25.htm#fr_85) Sensible objects are
conjectural, because the proper knowledge of them belongs to opinion.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[104:\*](flwp25.htm#fr_86) The world is a *whole
of wholes*, which *wholes* or *wholenesses* are the celestial and
elementary spheres. See the Introduction to my Translation of the Timæus
of Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Olympiodorus, in Aristot. Meteor.](flwp26)
