[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp14)  [Next](flwp16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Argument the Ninth.

<span class="smallcaps">Every</span> thing which is corrupted, is
corrupted by its own evil. <span id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_42) For it
is not corrupted by its

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

own proper good, or by that which is peculiar to it, and which is
neither good nor evil, but of an intermediate nature. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[\*](#fn_43) For every thing of this kind neither
injures nor benefits, so that it neither corrupts nor preserves. If,
therefore, the universe could be corrupted, it would be corrupted by its
own evil. But Plato says \[in the Timæus\], that the world is a blessed
God, and in a similar manner that all the Gods are blessed; and on this
account, every genus of Gods being unreceptive of evil, is also
unreceptive of mutation. The universe, therefore, to which nothing is
evil, will never be corrupted; because it also is a God. But if the
universe is incorruptible, because it has not any thing corruptive in
its nature, neither has it a temporal generation. For that from which
the generation of a thing is derived, is corruptive of that thing. For
if it is vanquished, indeed, it is an assistant cause of generation; but
if it vanquishes, it is an assistant cause of corruption. Hence, if
there is nothing which can corrupt the universe, neither will it have
any thing from which it can be generated. But there is nothing which can
corrupt it, since there is nothing which is an evil to it. For what can
corrupt that which bas an orderly arrangement, except that which is

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

without arrangement, or that which is adorned, except that which is
deprived of ornament? for this is an evil, to that which is adorned, and
arranged in an orderly manner. If, therefore, there is any thing which
is evil to the universe, the universe will contain in itself the
unadorned and the unarranged, into which it will be dissolved: but if
there is nothing which is evil to it, there will not be a certain
privation of order and ornament hostile to the universe, which is
arranged and adorned. If, however, it is free from all hostile privation
of ornament and order, neither was it generated from any thing deprived
of order and ornament, since neither is a thing of this kind hostile to
it. But if nothing is evil to it, neither will it have any thing from
which it can be generated; and there not being any thing from which it
can he generated, it must be un-begotten. For it is necessary that every
thing which is generated, should be generated from something, since it
is impossible that it should be generated from nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_42"></span>[49:\*](flwp15.htm#fr_42) This is asserted by
Plato, in the Tenth Book of the Republic, as follows, το ξυμφυτον αρα
κακον εκαστον και η πονηρια εχαστον απολλυσιν.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[50:\*](flwp15.htm#fr_43) For διαφορου here, it
is necessary to read αδιαφορου. The version also of Mahotius has
"*medium*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Tenth.](flwp16)
