[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp15)  [Next](flwp17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Argument the Tenth.

<span class="smallcaps">Each</span> of the elements of which the world
consists, when in its proper place, either remains in

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

that place, or is moved in a circle; <span
id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44) but when it is not in its own place, it
endeavours to arrive thither. If, therefore, the elements of the
universe either remain in their proper place, or are moved in a circle;
if they remain in the place which is natural to them, they are then in a
natural condition of being; but if they are moved in a circle, they will
neither have an end nor a beginning of their motion. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[†](#fn_45) And this being the case, it is evident
that the universe is immutable, some things in it having places adapted
to them according to nature, but others being moved without beginning
and without end. For the natures in this sublunary region are changed,
in consequence of being in a foreign place, and the things of which they
consist hastening to obtain their proper abode. If, therefore, the
elements of the universe are in their proper places, and nothing which
ranks as a whole tends to a foreign place, nor if it did, could oiler
violence to that which is in its proper place, it is necessary that the
universe should be immutable;

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

since all things always subsist in it according to nature, not only such
as rank as wholes, but those that permanently abide in it, and those
that are moved. Hence, if before the universe was adorned, the natures
which it contained were in their proper places, they either permanently
remained in it, or were moved in a circle, and thus again the universe
was adorned before it was adorned, and had no temporal beginning of its
adornment; all things subsisting in it in a similar manner, both now and
formerly. But if the several natures which the universe contains were in
foreign places, (for they were entirely in places, being bodies,) *they
would require a transposition derived from an external cause*. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46) Hence, there will be two principles, one
of that which is preternatural, but the other of that which is according
to nature; and *that which is preternatural will be prior to that which
is according to nature;* <span id="fr_47"></span>[†](#fn_47) that which
is preternatural being a

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

departure from nature. But nature having no existence whatever, (if
these things are admitted,) neither will there be that which is
preternatural; just as if art had no existence, neither would there be
that which is not conformable to art. *For that existing which is not
according or conformable to a certain thing, will be in consequence of
that existing to which it is not conformable*. So that if there were
places of these according to nature, it is immanifest whether these
places, being more ancient, subsisted naturally for an infinite time.
But if there were no other places which were the proper receptacles of
these, neither would those places be foreign in which they were
situated: for that which is foreign is referred to that which is proper
or peculiar. If, however, then also these natures were not in foreign
places, when they were in the receptacles which they then had, just as
now they are not in foreign places, it follows that they then likewise
had an existence according to nature, in the same manner as they now
have. Hence, the world will always exist; at different times different
things subsisting, either according to nature, or preternaturally, with
reference to the beings which the world contains. Hence, too, the world,
so far as it is the world, is perpetual. But a thing of this kind exists
in the world

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

alone. <span id="fr_48"></span>[\*](#fn_48) And if such a thing does not
always exist, the universe will be transformed, yet still will be
perpetual. And as that preternatural subsistence is to what now exists,
so is what is now preternatural to that. Both in that state of things
likewise, and in this, all things existed in their proper places; but
differently at different times. Empedocles, likewise, wisely supposes
the world to be made alternately, except that he supposes this to take
place frequently; but we admit it to take place only twice. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[†](#fn_49)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[52:\*](flwp16.htm#fr_44) This was an axiom of
Plotinus, and also of Ptolemy, which in the original is, παν σωμα απλουν
εν τῳ οικειῳ τοπῳ ον, ακινητον μενει, ὴ κυκλῳ κινειται. Vid. Procl. in
Tim. pp. 142 and 274.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[52:†](flwp16.htm#fr_45) This is demonstrated by
Aristotle, and by Proclus, in Lib. II. Element. Physic. Theorem. XVII.
See my Translation of Aristotle's Treatise on the Heavens, Book II.
Chap. 3.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[53:\*](flwp16.htm#fr_46) The original in the
latter part of this sentence is defective, since from the version of
Mahotius it appears, that after μεταθεσεως it is requisite to add εξωθεν
προσδεωνται. For his version of this latter part is, "Transpositione
aliunde indigebant."

<span id="fn_47"></span>[53:†](flwp16.htm#fr_47) In the original, και
προτερον το παρα φυσιν του κατα φυσιν, which is doubtless the true
reading; but Mahotius most erroneously translates this passage as
follows: "Atque id quod est secundùm naturam, prius est eo, quod est
contrà naturam."

<span id="fn_48"></span>[55:\*](flwp16.htm#fr_48) *i.e.* A thing which
at different times has either a natural or a preternatural subsistence.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[55:†](flwp16.htm#fr_49) Proclus, in asserting
that he admits the world to have been made only twice, doubtless alludes
to what is said by Plato in the Timæus, viz. "That the Demiurgus,
receiving every thing that was visible, and which was not in a state of
rest, but moved in a confused and disorderly manner, led it from
disorder into order, conceiving that the latter was in every respect
better than the former." This separation, however, of the unadorned from
the adorned never actually existed, but only exists in our conceptions,
as Proclus observes, at the end of the Fourteenth of these Arguments;
and, as Porphyry and Iamblichus very properly remark, only indicates how
the whole corporeal-formed composition subsists, when considered itself
by itself, viz. that it is then disorderly and confused. This twofold
state, therefore, of the world, *i.e.* the unadorned and adorned, is the
twofold fabrication admitted by Proclus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument the Eleventh](flwp17)
