[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flwp02)  [Next](flwp04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766127400/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_cla.jpg)](index)  
*Fragments that Remain of the Lost Writings of Proclus*, by Thomas
Taylor, \[1825\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### In Defence of the Timæus of <span class="smallcaps">Plato</span>, against the Objections made to it by <span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span>.

<span class="smallcaps">Aristotle</span> objects to the very name of
paradigm, asserting that it is metaphorical; and he is much more hostile
to the dogma which introduces ideas, and particularly to that of animal
itself, as is evident from what he says in his Metaphysics. And it
appears, that this man is not so averse to any of the dogmas of Plato as
he is to the hypothesis of ideas; not only in his Logical Treatises
calling ideas sonorous trifles, but also in his Ethics contending
against the existence of *the good itself*. In his Physics, likewise, he
does not think it proper to refer the generations of things to ideas:
for he says this in his Treatise on

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Generation and
Corruption. And this his hostility to the doctrine of ideas <span
id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_7) is much more apparent in his Metaphysics;
because the discussion there is concerning principles: for there he
adduces numerous arguments against ideas, in the beginning, middle, and
end of that treatise. In his Dialogues, also, he most manifestly
exclaims, that he cannot assent to this dogma, though some one may think
that he speaks against it for the purpose of contention.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> maker always existing, that which is
generated by him likewise always exists. For either God does not always
make; or, he indeed always makes, but the universe is not always
generated; <span id="fr_8"></span>[†](#fn_8) for, he always makes, and
the universe is always generated. But if God does not always make, he
will evidently be \[at a certain time\] an efficient in capacity, and
again an efficient in energy, and he will be an imperfect Demiurgus, and
indigent of time. I f, however, he always makes, but the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

universe is generated at a certain time, an impossibility will take
place. For when that which makes is in energy, that which is generated
will also be generated in energy. Both, therefore, exist always; the one
being generated, and the other producing perpetually.

The world is always fabricated; and as the Demiurgus fabricated always,
and still fabricates, so likewise the world is always fabricated, and
now rising into existence, was generated, and, having been made, is
always generated \[or becoming to be\]; so that the world is always
fabricated. And as the Demiurgus always did fabricate, and still
fabricates, so the world was always and is fabricated; and while it is
becoming to be, was generated, and having been generated, is always
generated.

Proclus assents to what is said by Aristotle concerning the perpetuity
of the world; but he says it was not just in him to accuse Plato. For
*to be generated*, does not signify, with Plato, *the beginning of
existence*, but a subsistence *in perpetually becoming to be*. For the
natures which are established above time, and which are eternal, have
the whole of their essence and power, and the perfection of their
energy, simultaneously present. But every thing which is in time has not
its proper life collectively and at once present. For whatever is in
time, though it should be

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

extended to an infinite time, has an existence at <span
class="smallcaps">a certain time</span>. For that portion of being which
it possesses exists in a certain time. For time is not \[wholly\]
present at once; but is generated infinitely, and was not produced at a
certain period in the past time. The universe, therefore, was thus
generated, as not having a subsistence such as that of eternal beings,
but as that which is generated, or becoming to be, through the whole of
time, and always subsisting at a certain time, according to that part of
time which is present. And again, the universe was generated, as not
being the cause to itself of its existence, but deriving its subsistence
from some other nature, which is the fourth signification of a generated
essence; I mean that which has a cause of its generation.

But if Timæus \[in Plato\] calls the world a God which will be at a
certain time (for perhaps this may give disturbance to some), and induce
them to ask whether he gives to the world a generation in a part of
time? For *the once*, or *at a certain time*, must be admitted by us to
be a certain part of time. To this we reply, that every thing which is
in time, whether in an infinite or in a finite time, will always exist
at a certain time. For whatever portion of it may be assumed, this
portion is in a certain time. For the whole of time

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

does not subsist at once, but according to a part. If, therefore, any
thing is in tine, though it should be extended to an infinite time, it
has indeed an existence at a certain time. But it is generated, or
becoming to be, to infinity, and is always passing froth an existence at
one time <span id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) to an existence at another.
And it was at a certain time, and is at a certain time, and will be at a
certain time. <span id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10) This existence too, at
a certain time, is always different. The world, however, when it exists
at a certain time, has a no less \[continued\] existence. Hence that
which has its hypostasis in a part of time, at a certain time is
becoming to be, and at a certain time is, and at a certain time will be.
But that which exists in every time \[or for ever\] *is* 

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

indeed at a certain time, but is *always generated*, or becoming to be;
and in perpetually *becoming to be*, imitates that which always *is*.

This, therefore, alone ought to be considered, whether it is necessary
to denominate a celestial body, and in a similar manner the whole world,
a thing of a generated nature. But how is it possible not to assert this
from the very arguments which Aristotle himself affords us? For he says
that no finite body has an infinite power; and this he demonstrates in
the eighth book of his Physics. If, therefore, the world is finite (for
this he demonstrates), it is necessary that it should not possess an
infinite power. But in the former part of this treatise we have shewn
that eternity is infinite power. The world, therefore, has not an
*eternal* subsistence, since it does not possess infinite power. If,
however, it has not an eternal hypostasis, (for a thing of this kind
participates of eternity, but that which participates of eternity
participates of infinite power,) it is necessary that the world should
not always *be*. <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11) For to exist
always, is, according to Aristotle himself, the peculiarity of eternity,
since, as he says, eternity

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

from this derives its appellation. For that which is true of eternal
being, is not true of that which is always generated \[or becoming to
be\], viz. the possession of infinite power, through being perpetually
generated, but this pertains to the maker of it. Hence, too, it is
always generated, acquiring perpetuity of existence through that which,
according to essence, is eternally being; but it does not possess
perpetuity, so far as pertains to itself. So that the definition of that
which is generated may also be adapted to the world. Every thing,
therefore, which is generated, is indeed itself essentially entirely
destructible; but being bound by true being, it remains in becoming to
be, and the whole of it is a generated nature. Hence \[though naturally
destructible\] it is not destroyed, in consequence of the participation
of existence which it derives from true being. For, since the universe
is finite, but that which is finite has not an infinite power, as
Aristotle demonstrates; and as that which moves with an infinite motion
moves with an infinite power, it is evident that the immovable cause of
infinite motion to the universe, possesses itself an infinite power; so
that, if you conceive the universe to be separated from its immovable
cause, it will not be moved to infinity, nor will it possess an infinite
power, but will have a cessation of its motion. It; however,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

you again conjoin this cause with the universe, it will be moved to
infinity through it. Nor is there any absurdity in separating by
conception things which are conjoined, in order that we may perceive
what will happen to the one from the other; and, in consequence of
perceiving this, may understand what the inferior nature possesses from
itself, and what it derives, from its co-arrangement, from that which is
superior to it. For, in short, since, in terrestrial natures, we see
that they are partly corrupted through imbecility, and are partly
preserved through power, much more will perpetuity and immortality <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) be inherent in things incorruptible,
through infinite power: for every finite power is corrupted.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span class="smallcaps">For</span> the celestial fire is not caustic,
but, as I should say, is vivific, in the same manner as the heat which
is naturally inherent in us. And Aristotle himself, in his Treatise on
the Generation of Animals, says, that there is a certain illumination
from which, being present, every mortal

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

nature lives. All heaven, therefore, consists of a fire of this kind;
but the stars have, for the most part, this element, yet they have also
the *summits* of the other elements. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) Moreover, if we likewise consider, that
earth darkens all illuminative natures, and produces shadow, but that
the elements which are situated between earth and fire being naturally
diaphanous, are the recipients of both darkness and light, and yet are
not the causes of either of these to bodies, but that fire alone is the
supplier of light, in the same manner as earth is of darkness, and that
these are at the greatest distance from each other,—if we consider this,
we may understand how the celestial bodies are naturally of a fiery
characteristic. For it is evident that they illuminate in the same
manner as our sublunary fire. If, however this is common to both, it is
manifest that the fire which is here, is allied to the fire of the
celestial bodies. It is not proper, therefore, to introduce to the
universe a celestial nature, as something foreign to it, but placing
there the summits of sublunary natures, we should admit that the
elements which are here, derive their generation through an alliance to
the nature of the celestial orbs.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[3:\*](flwp03.htm#fr_7) See my Dissertation on
the Philosophy of Aristotle, in which the opposition of Aristotle to
Plato's doctrine of ideas is shewn to have been employed for the purpose
of *guarding* from misapprehension, arid not of *subverting* that
doctrine.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[3:†](flwp03.htm#fr_8) Proclus here uses the word
γινεται, *generated*, because the universe, on account of the flowing
condition of its nature, is always rising into existence, or *becoming
to be*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[6:\*](flwp03.htm#fr_9) In the original, αλλ᾽
ουποτε εις αλλο αει μεθισταμενον. But the sense requires (and this is
confirmed by the version of Mahotius,) that we should read, conformably
to the above translation, αϖο του ϖοτε εις αλλο, κ.τ.λ..

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:†](flwp03.htm#fr_10) The corporeal world is
continually rising into existence, or *becoming to be*, but never
possesses *real being*. Hence, like the image of a tree in a rapid
torrent, it has the appearance of a tree without the reality, and seems
to endure perpetually the same, yet is continually renewed by the
continual renovation of the stream. The world therefore was, and is, and
will be at *a certain time*, in the same manner as it may be said of the
image of a tree in a torrent, that it was yesterday, is to-day, and will
be to-morrow, without any interruption of the continuity of its flux.
Philoponus, not perceiving this, has, with his usual stupidity, opposed
what is here said by Proclus.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[7:\*](flwp03.htm#fr_11) In the original, αναγκη
μη ειναι τον κοσμον αει. For the world is not always, αλλα γιγνεται αει,
*i.e.* but is always *becoming to be*, or, *rising into existence;*
since it has not an *eternal sameness* of being, but a perpetually
*flowing* subsistence.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[9:\*](flwp03.htm#fr_12) In the original, πολλῳ
μαλλον εν τοις αφθαρτοις η αφθαρσια δια δυναμιν δηλονοτι απειρον. But
from the version of Mahotius,—which is, "Multo magis his, quæ non
intereunt, conveniat perpetuitas, atque immortalitas, propter vires,
easque infinitas,"—it appears that, for η αφθαρσια, it is requisite to
read η αϊδιοτης και αθανασια, agreeably to the above translation.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:\*](flwp03.htm#fr_13) Viz. the sublunary
elements have, in the stars and in the heavens, a *causal* subsistence.
See more on this subject in the third book of my translation of Proclus
on the Timæus of Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extracts from the commentary of Simplicius on Aristotle](flwp04)
