[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta04)  [Next](sta06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

# The Ancient Mysteries and Secret Societies

## Part Two

THE entire history of Christian and pagan Gnosticism is shrouded in the
deepest mystery and obscurity; for, while the Gnostics were undoubtedly
prolific writers, little of their literature has survived. They brought
down upon themselves the animosity of the early Christian Church, and
when this institution reached its position of world power it destroyed
all available records of the Gnostic *cultus*. The name *Gnostic* means
*wisdom*, or *knowledge*, and is derived from the Greek *Gnosis*. The
members of the order claimed to be familiar with the secret doctrines of
early Christianity. They interpreted the Christian Mysteries according
to pagan symbolism. Their secret information and philosophic tenets they
concealed from the profane and taught to a small group only of
especially initiated persons.

Simon Magus, the magician of New Testament fame, is often supposed to
have been the founder of Gnosticism. If this be true, the sect was
formed during the century after Christ and is probably the first of the
many branches which have sprung from the main trunk of Christianity.
Everything with which the enthusiasts of the early Christian Church
might not agree they declared to be inspired by the Devil. That Simon
Magus had mysterious and supernatural powers is conceded even by his
enemies, but they maintained that these powers were lent to him by the
infernal spirits and furies which they asserted were his ever present
companions. Undoubtedly the most interesting legend concerning Simon is
that which tells of his theosophic contests with the Apostle Peter while
the two were promulgating their differing doctrines in Rome. According
to the story that the Church Fathers have preserved, Simon was to prove
his spiritual superiority by ascending to heaven in a chariot of fire.
He was actually picked up and carried many feet into the air by
invisible powers. When St. Peter saw this, he cried out in a loud voice,
ordering the demons (spirits of the air) to release their hold upon the
magician. The evil spirits, when so ordered by the great saint, were
forced to obey. Simon fell a great distance and was killed, which
decisively proved the superiority of the Christian powers. This story is
undoubtedly manufactured out of whole cloth, as it is only one out of
many accounts concerning his death, few of which agree. As more and more
evidence is being amassed to the effect that St, Peter was never in
Rome, its last possible vestige of authenticity is rapidly being
dissipated.

That Simon was a philosopher there is no doubt, for wherever his exact
words are preserved his synthetic and transcending thoughts are
beautifully expressed. The principles of Gnosticism are well described
in the following verbatim statement by him, supposed to have been
preserved by Hippolytus: "To you, therefore, I say what I say, and write
what I write. And the writing is this. Of the universal Æons \[periods,
planes, or cycles of creative and created life in substance and space,
celestial creatures\] there are two shoots, without beginning or end,
springing from one Root, which is the power invisible, inapprehensible
silence \[Bythos\]. Of these shoots one is manifested from above, which
is the Great Power, the Universal Mind ordering all things, male, and
the other, \[is manifested\] from below, the Great Thought, female,
producing all things. Hence pairing with each other, they unite and
manifest the Middle Distance, incomprehensible Air, without beginning or
end. In this is the Father Who sustains all things, and nourishes those
things which have a beginning and end." (See *Simon Magus*, by G. R. S.
Mead.) By this we are to understand that manifestation is the result of
a positive and a negative principle, one acting upon the other, and it
takes place in the middle plane, or point of equilibrium, called the
*pleroma*. This *pleroma* is a peculiar substance produced out of the
blending of the spiritual and material æons. Out of the *pleroma* was
individualized the *Demiurgus*, the immortal mortal, to whom we are
responsible for our physical existence and the suffering we must go
through in connection with it. In the Gnostic system, three pairs of
opposites, called *Syzygies*, emanated from the Eternal One. These, with
Himself, make the total of seven. The six (three pairs) Æons (living,
divine principles) were described by Simon in the *Philosophumena* in
the following manner: The first two were *Mind* (Nous) and *Thought*
(Epinoia). Then came *Voice* (Phone) and its opposite, *Name* (Onoma),
and lastly, *Reason* (Logismos) and *Reflection* (Enthumesis). From
these primordial six, united with the *Eternal Flame*, came forth the
Æons (Angels) who formed the lower worlds through the direction of the
Demiurgus. (See the works of H. P. Blavatsky.) How this first Gnosticism
of Simon Magus and Menander, his disciple, was amplified, and frequently
distorted, by later adherents to the cult must now be considered.

The School of Gnosticism was divided into two major parts, commonly
called the Syrian Cult and the Alexandrian Cult. These schools agreed in
essentials, but the latter division was more inclined to be pantheistic,
while the former was dualistic. While the Syrian cult was largely
Simonian, the Alexandrian School was the outgrowth of the philosophical
deductions of a clever Egyptian Christian, Basilides by name, who
claimed to have received his instructions from the Apostle Matthew. Like
Simon Magus, he was an emanationist, with Neo-Platonic inclinations. In
fact, the entire Gnostic Mystery is based upon the hypothesis of
emanations as being the logical connection between the irreconcilable
opposites Absolute Spirit and Absolute Substance, which the Gnostics
believed to have been coexistent in Eternity. Some assert that Basilides
was the true founder of Gnosticism, but there is much evidence to the
effect that Simon Magus laid down its fundamental principles in the
preceding century.

The Alexandrian Basilides inculcated Egyptian Hermeticism, Oriental
occultism, Chaldean astrology, and Persian philosophy in his followers,
and in his doctrines sought to unite the schools of early Christianity
with the ancient pagan Mysteries. To him is attributed the formulation
of that peculiar concept of the Deity which carries the name of Abraxas.
In discussing the original meaning of this word, Godfrey Higgins, in his
Celtic Druids, has demonstrated that the numerological powers of the
letters forming the word Abraxas when added together result in the sum
of 365. The same author also notes that the name Mithras when treated in
a similar manner has the same numerical value. Basilides caught that the

<span id="img_02500"></span>

[![THE DEATH OF SIMON THE MAGICIAN.](tn/02500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02500.jpg.md)  
THE DEATH OF SIMON THE MAGICIAN.  

From the *Nuremberg* *Chronicle*.

Simon Magus, having called upon the Spirits of the Air, is here shown
being picked up by the demons. St. Peter demands that the evil genii
release their hold upon the magician. The demons are forced to comply
and Simon Magus is killed by the fall.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

powers of the universe were divided into 365 Æons, or spiritual cycles,
and that the sum of all these together was the Supreme Father, and to
Him he gave the Qabbalistical appellation *Abraxas*, as being
symbolical, numerologically, of His divine powers, attributes, and
emanations. *Abraxas* is usually symbolized as a composite creature,
with the body of a human being and the head of a rooster, and with each
of his legs ending in a serpent. C. W. King, in his *Gnostics and Their
Remains*, gives the following concise description of the Gnostic
philosophy of Basilides, quoting from the writings of the early
Christian bishop and martyr, St. Irenæus: "He asserted that God, the
uncreated, eternal Father, had first brought forth Nous, or Mind; this
the Logos, Word; this again Phronesis, Intelligence; from Phronesis
sprung Sophia, Wisdom, and Dynamis, Strength."

In describing Abraxas, C. W. King says: "Bellermann considers the
composite image, inscribed with the actual name Abraxas, to be a Gnostic
Pantheos, representing the Supreme Being, with the Five Emanations
marked out by appropriate symbols. From the human body, the usual form
assigned to the Deity, spring the two supporters, Nous and Logos,
expressed in the serpents, symbols of the inner senses, and the
quickening understanding; on which account the Greeks had made the
serpent the attribute of Pallas. His head--that of a cock--represents
Phronesis, that bird being the emblem of foresight and of vigilance. His
two arms hold the symbols of Sophia and Dynamis: the shield of Wisdom
and the whip of Power."

The Gnostics were divided in their opinions concerning the Demiurgus, or
creator of the lower worlds. He established the terrestrial universe
with the aid of six sons, or emanations (possibly the planetary Angels)
which He formed out of, and yet within, Himself. As stated before, the
Demiurgus was individualized as the lowest creation out of the substance
called *pleroma*. One group of the Gnostics was of the opinion that the
Demiurgus was the cause of all misery and was an evil creature, who by
building this lower world had separated the souls of men from truth by
encasing them in mortal vehicles. The other sect viewed the Demiurgus as
being divinely inspired and merely fulfilling the dictates of the
invisible Lord. Some Gnostics were of the opinion that the Jewish God,
*Jehovah*, was the Demiurgus. This concept, under a slightly different
name, apparently influenced mediæval Rosicrucianism, which viewed
Jehovah as the Lord of the material universe rather than as the Supreme
Deity. Mythology abounds with the stories of gods who partook of both
celestial and terrestrial natures. Odin, of Scandinavia, is a good
example of a deity subject to mortality, bowing before the laws of
Nature and yet being, in certain senses at least, a Supreme Deity.

The Gnostic viewpoint concerning the Christ is well worthy of
consideration. This order claimed to be the only sect to have actual
pictures of the Divine Syrian. While these were, in all probability,
idealistic conceptions of the Savior based upon existing sculpturings
and paintings of the pagan sun gods, they were all Christianity had. To
the Gnostics, the Christ was the personification of *Nous*, the Divine
Mind, and emanated from the higher spiritual Æons. He descended into the
body of Jesus at the baptism and left it again before the crucifixion.
The Gnostics declared that the Christ was not crucified, as this Divine
*Nous* could not suffer death, but that Simon, the Cyrenian, offered his
life instead and that the *Nous*, by means of its power, caused Simon to
resemble Jesus. Irenæus makes the following statement concerning the
cosmic sacrifice of the Christ:

"When the uncreated, unnamed Father saw the corruption of mankind, He
sent His firstborn, Nous, into the world, in the form of Christ, for the
redemption of all who believe in Him, out of the power of those that
have fabricated the world (the Demiurgus, and his six sons, the
planetary genii). He appeared amongst men as the Man Jesus, and wrought
miracles." (See King's *Gnostics and Their Remains*.)

The Gnostics divided humanity into three parts: those who, as savages,
worshiped only the visible Nature; those who, like the Jews, worshiped
the Demiurgus; and lastly, themselves, or others of a similar cult,
including certain sects of Christians, who worshiped *Nous* (Christ) and
the true spiritual light of the higher Æons.

After the death of Basilides, Valentinus became the leading inspiration
of the Gnostic movement. He still further complicated the system of
Gnostic philosophy by adding infinitely to the details. He increased the
number of emanations from the Great One (the Abyss) to fifteen pairs and
also laid much emphasis on the *Virgin Sophia*, or Wisdom. In the *Books
of the Savior*, parts of which are commonly known as the *Pistis
Sophia*, may be found much material concerning this strange doctrine of
Æons and their strange inhabitants. James Freeman Clarke, in speaking of
the doctrines of the Gnostics, says: "These doctrines, strange as they
seem to us, had a wide influence in the Christian Church." Many of the
theories of the ancient Gnostics, especially those concerning scientific
subjects, have been substantiated by modern research. Several sects
branched off from the main stem of Gnosticism, such as the Valentinians,
the Ophites (serpent worshipers), and the Adamites. After the third
century their power waned, and the Gnostics practically vanished from
the philosophic world. An effort was made during the Middle Ages to
resurrect the principles of Gnosticism, but owing to the destruction of
their records the material necessary was not available. Even today there
are evidences of Gnostic philosophy in the modern world, but they bear
other names and their true origin is not suspected. Many of the Gnostic
concepts have actually been incorporated into the dogmas of the
Christian Church, and our newer interpretations of Christianity are
often along the lines of Gnostic emanationism.

### THE MYSTERIES OF <span id="img_02601"></span> ![](img/02601.jpg), ASAR-HAPI

The identity of the Greco-Egyptian Serapis (known to the Greeks as
*Serapis* and the Egyptians as *Asar-Hapi*) is shrouded by an
impenetrable veil of mystery. While this deity was a familiar figure
among the symbols of the secret Egyptian initiatory rites, his arcane
nature was revealed only to those who had fulfilled the requirements of
the Serapic cultus. Therefore, in all probability, excepting the
initiated priests, the Egyptians themselves were ignorant of his true
character. So far as known, there exists no authentic account of the
rites of Serapis, but an analysis of the deity and his accompanying
symbols reveals their salient points. In an oracle delivered to the King
of Cyprus, Serapis described himself thus:

''A god I am such as I show to thee,  
The Starry Heavens are my head, my trunk the sea,  
Earth forms my feet, mine ears the air supplies,  
The Sun's far-darting, brilliant rays, mine eyes."

Several unsatisfactory attempts have been made to etymologize the word
*Serapis*. Godfrey Higgins notes that *Soros* was the name given by the
Egyptians to a stone coffin, and *Apis* was Osiris incarnate in the
sacred bull. These two words combined result in *Soros-Apis* or
*Sor-Apis*, "the tomb of the bull." But it is improbable that the
Egyptians would worship a coffin in the form of a man.

Several ancient authors, including Macrobius, have affirmed that Serapis
was a name for the Sun, because his image so often had a halo of light
about its head. In his *Oration Upon the Sovereign Sun*, Julian speaks
of the deity in these words: "One Jove, one Pluto, one Sun is Serapis."
In Hebrew, Serapis is *Saraph*, meaning "to blaze out" or "to blaze up."
For this reason the Jews designated one of their hierarchies of
spiritual beings, *Seraphim*.

The most common theory, however, regarding the origin of the name
*Serapis* is that which traces its derivation from the compound
*Osiris-Apis*. At one time the Egyptians believed that the dead were
absorbed into the nature of Osiris, the god of the dead. While marked
similarity exists between Osiris-Apis and Serapis, the theory advanced
by Egyptologists that Serapis is merely a name given to the dead Apis,
or sacred bull of Egypt, is untenable in view of the transcendent wisdom
possessed by the Egyptian priestcraft, who, in all probability, used the
god to symbolize the soul of the world (*anima mundi*). The material
body of Nature was called *Apis*; the soul which escaped from the body
at death but was enmeshed with the form during physical life was
designated *Serapis*.

C. W. King believes Serapis to be a deity of Brahmanic extraction, his
name being the Grecianized form of *Ser-adah* or *Sri-pa*, two titles
ascribed to *Yama*, the Hindu god of death. This appears reasonable,
especially since there is a legend to the effect that Serapis, in the
form of a bull, was driven by Bacchus from India to Egypt. The priority
of the Hindu Mysteries would further substantiate such a theory.

Among other meanings suggested for the word *Serapis* are: "The Sacred
Bull," "The Sun in Taurus," "The Soul of Osiris," "The Sacred Serpent,"
and "The Retiring of the Bull." The last appellation has reference to
the ceremony of drowning the sacred Apis in the waters of the Nile every
twenty-five years.

<span id="img_02600"></span>

[![THE LION-FACED LIGHT-POWER.](tn/02600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02600.jpg.md)  
THE LION-FACED LIGHT-POWER.  

From *Montfaucon's Antiquities*.

This Gnostic gem represents by its serpentine body the pathway of the
Sun and by its lion head the exaltation of the solar in the
constellation of Leo.

<span id="img_02602"></span>

[![A SYMBOLIC LABYRINTH.](tn/02602.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02602.jpg.md)  
A SYMBOLIC LABYRINTH.  

From *Montfaucon's Antiquities*.

Labyrinths and mazes were favored places of initiation among many
ancient cults. Remains of these mystic mazes have been found among the
American Indians, Hindus, Persians, Egyptians, and Greeks. Some of these
mazes are merely involved pathways lined with stones; others are
literally miles of gloomy caverns under temples or hollowed from the
sides of mountains. The famous labyrinth of Crete, in which roamed the
bull-headed Minotaur, was unquestionably a place of initiation into the
Cretan Mysteries.

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

There is considerable evidence that the famous statue of Serapis in the
Serapeum at Alexandria was originally worshiped under another name at
Sinope, from which it was brought to Alexandria. There is also a legend
which tells that Serapis was a very early king of the Egyptians, to whom
they owed the foundation of their philosophical and scientific power.
After his death this king was elevated to the estate of a god.
Phylarchus declared that the word *Serapis* means "the power that
disposed the universe into its present beautiful order."

In his *Isis and Osiris*, Plutarch gives the following account of the
origin of the magnificent statue of Serapis which stood in the Serapeum
at Alexandria:

While he was Pharaoh of Egypt, Ptolemy Soter had a strange dream in
which he beheld a tremendous statue, which came to life and ordered the
Pharaoh to bring it to Alexandria with all possible speed. Ptolemy
Soter, not knowing the whereabouts of the statue, was sorely perplexed
as to how he could discover it. While the Pharaoh was relating his
dream, a great traveler by the name of Sosibius, coming forward,
declared that he had seen such an image at Sinope. The Pharaoh
immediately dispatched Soteles and Dionysius to negotiate for the
removal of the figure to Alexandria. Three years elapsed before the
image was finally obtained, the representatives of the Pharaoh finally
stealing it and concealing the theft by spreading a story that the
statue had come to life and, walking down the street leading from its
temple, had boarded the ship prepared for its transportation to
Alexandria. Upon its arrival in Egypt, the figure was brought into the
presence of two Egyptian Initiates--the Eumolpid Timotheus and Manetho
the Sebennite--who, immediately pronounced it to be Serapis. The priests
then declared that it was equipollent to Pluto. This was a masterly
stroke, for in Serapis the Greeks and Egyptians found a deity in common
and thus religious unity was consummated between the two nations.

Several figures of Serapis that stood in his various temples in Egypt
and Rome have been described by early authors. Nearly all these showed
Grecian rather than Egyptian influence. In some the body of the god was
encircled by the coils of a great serpent. Others showed him as a
composite of Osiris and Apis.

A description of the god that in all probability is reasonably accurate
is that which represents him as a tall, powerful figure, conveying the
twofold impression of manly strength and womanly grace. His face
portrayed a deeply pensive mood, the expression inclining toward
sadness. His hair was long and arranged in a somewhat feminine manner,
resting in curls upon his breast and shoulders. The face, save for its
heavy beard, was also decidedly feminine. The figure of Serapis was
usually robed from head to foot in heavy draperies, believed by
initiates to conceal the fact that his body was androgynous.

Various substances were used in making the statues of Serapis. Some
undoubtedly were carved from stone or marble by skilled craftsmen;
others may have been cast from base or precious metals. One colossus of
Serapis was composed of plates of various metals fitted together. In a
labyrinth sacred to Serapis stood a thirteen-foot statue of him reputed
to have been made from a single emerald. Modern writers, discussing this
image, state that it was made of green glass poured into a mold.
According to the Egyptians, however, it withstood all the tests of an
actual emerald.

Clement of Alexandria describes a figure of Serapis compounded from the
following elements: First, filings of gold, silver, lead, and tin;
second, all manner of Egyptian stones, including sapphires, hematites,
emeralds, and topazes; all these being ground down and mixed together
with the coloring matter left over from the funeral of Osiris and Apis.
The result was a rare and curious figure, indigo in color. Some of the
statues of Serapis must have been formed of extremely hard substances,
for when a Christian soldier, carrying out the edict of Theodosius,
struck the Alexandrian Serapis with his ax, that instrument was
shattered into fragments and sparks flew from it. It is also quite
probable that Serapis was worshiped in the form of a serpent, in common
with many of the higher deities of the Egyptian and Greek pantheons.

Serapis was called *Theon Heptagrammaton*, or the god with the name of
seven letters. The name *Serapis* (like Abraxas and Mithras) contains
seven letters. In their hymns to Serapis the priests chanted the seven
vowels. Occasionally Serapis is depicted with horns or a coronet of
seven rays. These evidently represented the seven divine intelligences
manifesting through the solar light. The *Encyclopædia Britannica* notes
that the earliest authentic mention of Serapis is in connection with the
death of Alexander. Such was the prestige of Serapis that he alone of
the gods was consulted in behalf of the dying king.

The Egyptian secret school of philosophy was divided into the Lesser and
the Greater Mysteries, the former being sacred to Isis and the latter to
Serapis and Osiris. Wilkinson is of the opinion that only the priests
were permitted to enter the Greater Mysteries. Even the heir to the
throne was not eligible until he had been crowned Pharaoh, when, by
virtue of his kingly office, he automatically became a priest and the
temporal head of the state religion. (See Wilkinson's *Manners and
Customs of the Egyptians*.) A limited number were admitted into the
Greater Mysteries: these preserved their secrets inviolate.

Much of the information concerning the rituals of the higher degrees of
the Egyptian Mysteries has been gleaned from an examination of the
chambers and passageways in which the initiations were given. Under the
temple of Serapis destroyed by Theodosius were found strange mechanical
contrivances constructed by the priests in the subterranean crypts and
caverns where the nocturnal initiatory rites were celebrated. These
machines indicate the severe tests of moral and physical courage
undergone by the candidates. After passing through these tortuous ways,
the neophytes who Survived the ordeals were ushered into the presence of
Serapis, a noble and awe-inspiring figure illumined by unseen lights.

Labyrinths were also a striking feature in connection with the Rice of
Serapis, and E. A. Wallis Budge, in his *Gods of the Egyptians*, depicts
Serapis(Minotaur-like) with the body of a man and the head of a bull.
Labyrinths were symbolic of the involvements and illusions of the lower
world through which wanders the soul of man in its search for truth. In
the labyrinth dwells the lower animal man with the head of the bull, who
seeks to destroy the soul entangled in the maze of worldly ignorance. In
this relation Serapis becomes the Tryer or Adversary who tests the souls
of those seeking union with the Immortals. The maze was also doubtless
used to represent the solar system, the Bull-Man representing the sun
dwelling in the mystic maze of its planets, moons, and asteroids.

The Gnostic Mysteries were acquainted with the arcane meaning of
Serapis, and through the medium of Gnosticism this god became
inextricably associated with early Christianity. In fact, the Emperor
Hadrian, while traveling in Egypt in A.D. 24, declared in a letter to
Servianus that the worshipers of Serapis were Christians and that the
Bishops of the church also worshiped at his shrine. He even declared
that the Patriarch himself, when in Egypt, was forced to adore Serapis
as well as Christ. (See Parsons' *New Light on the Great Pyramid*.)

The little-suspected importance of Serapis as a prototype of Christ can
be best appreciated after a consideration of the following extract from
C. W. King's *Gnostics and Their Remains*: "There can be no doubt that
the head of Serapis, marked as the face is by a grave and pensive
majesty, supplied the first idea for the conventional portraits of the
Saviour. The Jewish prejudices of the first converts were so powerful
that we may be sure no attempt was made to depict His countenance until
some generations after all that had beheld it on earth had passed away."

Serapis gradually usurped the positions previously occupied by the other
Egyptian and Greek gods, and became the supreme deity of both religions.
His power continued until the fourth century of

<span id="img_02700"></span>

[![THE ALEXANDRIAN SERAPIS.](tn/02700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02700.jpg.md)  
THE ALEXANDRIAN SERAPIS.  

From Mosaize *Historie der Hebreeuwse Kerke*.

Serapis is often shown standing on the back of the sacred crocodile,
carrying in his left hand a rule with which to measure the inundations
of the Nile, and balancing with his right hand a curious emblem
consisting of an animal with the heads. The first head--that of a
lion--signified the present; the second head--that of a wolf--the past;
and the third head--that of a dog--the future. The body with its three
heads was enveloped by the twisted coils of a serpent. Figures of
Serapis are occasionally accompanied by Cerberus, the three-headed dog
of Pluto, and--like Jupiter--carry baskets of grain upon their heads.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

the Christian Era. In A.D. 385, Theodosius, that would-be exterminator
of pagan philosophy, issued his memorable edict *De Idolo Serapidis
Diruendo*. When the Christian soldiers, in obedience to this order,
entered the Serapeum at Alexandria to destroy the image of Serapis which
had stood there for centuries, so great was their veneration for the god
that they dared not touch the image lest the ground should open at their
feet and engulf them. At length, overcoming their fear, they demolished
the statue, sacked the building, and finally as a fitting climax to
their offense burned the magnificent library which was housed within the
lofty apartments of the Serapeum. Several writers have recorded the
remarkable fact that Christian symbols were found in the ruined
foundations of this pagan temple. Socrates, a church historian of the
fifth century, declared that after the pious Christians had razed the
Serapeum at Alexandria and scattered the demons who dwelt there under
the guise of gods, beneath the foundations was found the monogram of
Christ!

Two quotations will further establish the relationship existing between
the Mysteries of Serapis and those of other ancient peoples. The first
is from Richard Payne Knight's *Symbolical Language of Ancient Art and
Mythology*: "Hence Varro \[in *De Lingua Latina*\] says that Cœlum and
Terra, that is universal mind and productive body, were the Great Gods
of the Samothracian Mysteries; and the same as the Serapis and Isis of
the later Ægyptians: the Taautos and Astarte of the Phœnicians, and the
Saturn and Ops of the Latins." The second quotation is from Albert
Pike's *Morals and Dogma*: "'Thee,' says Martianus Capella, in his hymn
to the Sun, 'dwellers on the Nile adore as Serapis, and Memphis worships
as Osiris: in the sacred rites of Persia thou art Mithras, in Phrygia,
Atys, and Libya bows down to thee as Ammon, and Phœnician Byblos as
Adonis; thus the whole world adores thee under different names.'"

### THE ODINIC MYSTERIES

The date of the founding of the Odinic Mysteries is uncertain, some
writers declaring that they were established in the first century before
Christ; others, the first century after Christ. Robert Macoy, 33°, gives
the following description of their origin: "It appears from the northern
chronicles that in the first century of the Christian Era, Sigge, the
chief of the Aser, an Asiatic tribe, emigrated from the Caspian sea and
the Caucasus into northern Europe. He directed his course northwesterly
from the Black sea to Russia, over which, according to tradition, he
placed one of his sons as a ruler, as he is said to have done over the
Saxons and the Franks. He then advanced through Cimbria to Denmark,
which acknowledged his fifth son Skiold as its sovereign, and passed
over to Sweden, where Gylf, who did homage to the wonderful stranger,
and was initiated into his mysteries, then ruled. He soon made himself
master here, built Sigtuna as the capital of his empire, and promulgated
a new code of laws, and established the sacred mysteries. He, himself,
assumed the name of Odin, founded the priesthood of the twelve Drottars
(Druids?) who conducted the secret worship, and the administration of
justice, and, as prophets, revealed the future. The secret rites of
these mysteries celebrated the death of Balder, the beautiful and
lovely, and represented the grief of Gods and men at his death, and his
restoration to life." (*General History of Freemasonry*.)

After his death, the historical Odin was apotheosized, his identity
being merged into that of the mythological Odin, god of wisdom, whose
cult he had promulgated. Odinism then supplanted the worship of Thor,
the thunderer, the supreme deity of the ancient Scandinavian pantheon.
The mound where, according to legend, King Odin was buried is still to
be seen near the site of his great temple at Upsala.

The twelve *Drottars* who presided over the Odinic Mysteries evidently
personified the twelve holy and ineffable names of Odin. The rituals of
the Odinic Mysteries were very similar to those of the Greeks, Persians,
and Brahmins, after which they were patterned. The Drottars, who
symbolized the signs of the zodiac, were the custodians of the arts and
sciences, which they revealed to those who passed successfully the
ordeals of initiation. Like many other pagan cults, the Odinic
Mysteries, as an institution, were destroyed by Christianity, but the
underlying cause of their fall was the corruption of the priesthood.

Mythology is nearly always the ritual and the symbolism of a Mystery
school. Briefly stated, the sacred drama which formed the basis of the
Odinic Mysteries was as follows:

The Supreme, invisible Creator of all things was called All-Father. His
regent in Nature was Odin, the one-eyed god. Like Quetzalcoatl, Odin was
elevated to the dignity of the Supreme Deity. According to the Drottars,
the universe was fashioned from the body of *Ymir*, the hoarfrost giant.
Ymir was formed from the clouds of mist that rose from Ginnungagap, the
great cleft in chaos into which the primordial frost giants and flame
giants had hurled snow and fire. The three gods--Odin, Vili, and
Ve--slew Ymir and from him formed the world. From Ymir's various members
the different parts of Nature were fashioned.

After Odin had established order, he caused a wonderful palace, called
Asgard, to be built on the top of a mountain, and here the twelve Æsir
(gods) dwelt together, far above the limitations of mortal men. On this
mountain also was Valhalla, the palace of the slain, where those who had
heroically died fought and feasted day after day. Each night their
wounds were healed and the boar whose flesh they ate renewed itself as
rapidly as it was consumed.

Balder the Beautiful--the Scandinavian Christ--was the beloved son of
Odin. Balder was not warlike; his kindly and beautiful spirit brought
peace and joy to the hearts of the gods, and they all loved him save
one. As Jesus had a Judas among His twelve disciples, so one of the
twelve gods was false--Loki, the personification of evil. Loki caused
Höthr, the blind god of fate, to shoot Balder with a mistletoe arrow.
With the death of Balder, light and joy vanished from the lives of the
other deities. Heartbroken, the gods gathered to find a method whereby
they could resurrect this spirit of eternal life and youth. The result
was the establishment of the Mysteries.

The Odinic Mysteries were given in underground crypts or caves, the
chambers, nine in number, representing the Nine Worlds of the Mysteries.
The candidate seeking admission was assigned the task of raising Balder
from the dead. Although he did not realize it, he himself played the
part of Balder. He called himself a wanderer; the caverns through which
he passed were symbolic of the worlds and spheres of Nature. The priests
who initiated him were emblematic of the sun, the moon, and the stars.
The three supreme initiators--the Sublime, the Equal to the Sublime, and
the Highest--were analogous to the Worshipful Master and the junior and
Senior Wardens of a Masonic lodge.

After wandering for hours through the intricate passageways, the
candidate was ushered into the presence of a statue of Balder the
Beautiful, the prototype of all initiates into the Mysteries. This
figure stood in the center of a great apartment roofed with shields. In
the midst of the chamber stood a plant with seven blossoms, emblematic
of the planers. In this room, which symbolized the house of the Æsir, or
Wisdom, the neophyte took his oath of secrecy and piety upon the naked
blade of a sword. He drank the sanctified mead from a bowl made of a
human skull and, having passed successfully through all the tortures and
trials designed to divert him from the course of wisdom, he was finally
permitted to unveil the mystery of Odin--the personification of wisdom.
He was presented, in the name of Balder, with the sacred ring of the
order; he was hailed as a man reborn; and it was said of him that he had
died and had been raised again without passing through the gates of
death.

Richard Wagner's immortal composition, *Der Ring des Nibelungen*, is
based upon the Mystery rituals of the Odinic cult. While the great
composer took many liberties with the original story, the Ring Operas,
declared to be the grandest tetralogy of music dramas the world
possesses, have caught and preserved in a remarkable manner the majesty
and power of the original sagas. Beginning with *Das Rheingold*, the
action proceeds through *Die Walküre* and *Siegfried* to an
awe-inspiring climax in *Götterdämmerung*, "The Twilight of the Gods."

<span id="img_02800"></span>

[![THE NINE WORLDS OF THE ODINIC MYSTERIES.](tn/02800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/02800.jpg.md)  
THE NINE WORLDS OF THE ODINIC MYSTERIES.  

The Nordic Mysteries were given in nine chambers, or caverns, the
candidate advancing through them in sequential order. These chambers of
initiation represented the nine spheres into which the Drottars divided
the universe: (1) *Asgard*, the Heaven World of the Gods; (2)
*Alf-heim*, the World of the light and beautiful Elves, or Spirits; (3)
*Nifl-heim*, the World of Cold and Darkness, which is located in the
North; (4) *Jotun-heim*, the World of the Giants, which is located in
the East; (5) *Midgard*, the Earth World of human beings, which is
located in the midst, or middle place; (6) *Vana-heim*, the World of the
Vanes, which is located in the West; (7) *Muspells-heim*, the World of
Fire, which is located in the South; 8) *Svart-alfa-heim*, the World of
the dark and treacherous Elves, which is under the earth; and (9)
*Hel-heim*, the World of cold and the abode of the dead, which is
located at the very lowest point of the universe. It is to be understood
that all of these worlds are invisible to the senses, except Midgard,
the home of human creatures, but during the process of initiation the
soul of the candidate--liberated from its earthly sheath by the secret
power of the priests--wanders amidst the inhabitants of these various
spheres. There is undoubtedly a relationship between the nine worlds of
the Scandinavians and the nine spheres, or planes, through which
initiates of the Eleusinian Mysteries passed in their ritual of
regeneration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ancient Mysteries and Secret Societies, Part Three](sta06.md)
