[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sta09)  [Next](sta11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

# Isis, the Virgin of the World

IT is especially fitting that a study of Hermetic symbolism should begin
with a discussion of the symbols and attributes of the *Saitic Isis*.
This is the Isis of Sais, famous for the inscription concerning her
which appeared on the front of her temple in that city: "*I, Isis, am
all that has been, that is or shall be; no mortal Man hath ever me
unveiled*."

Plutarch affirms that many ancient authors believed this goddess to be
the daughter of Hermes; others held the opinion that she was the child
of Prometheus. Both of these demigods were noted for their divine
wisdom. It is not improbable that her kinship to them is merely
allegorical. Plutarch translates the name Isis to mean wisdom. Godfrey
Higgins, in his Anacalypsis, derives the name of Isis from the Hebrew
ישע, *Iso*, and the Greek ζωω, to save. Some authorities, however, for
example, Richard Payne Knight (as stated in his *Symbolical Language of
Ancient Art and Mythology*), believe the word to be of Northern
extraction, possibly Scandinavian or Gothic. In these languages the name
is pronounced *Isa*, meaning *ice*, or water in its most passive,
crystallized, negative state.

This Egyptian deity under many names appears as the principle of natural
fecundity among nearly all the religions of the ancient world. She was
known as the goddess with ten thousand appellations and was
metamorphosed by Christianity into the Virgin Mary, for Isis, although
she gave birth to all living things--chief among them the Sun--still
remained a virgin, according to the legendary accounts.

Apuleius in the eleventh book of *The Golden Ass* ascribes to the
goddess the following statement concerning her powers and attributes:
"Behold, \* \*, I, moved by thy prayers, am present with thee; I, who am
Nature, the parent of things, the queen of all the elements, the
primordial progeny of ages, the supreme of Divinities, the sovereign of
the spirits of the dead, the first of the celestials, and the uniform
resemblance of Gods and Goddesses. I, who rule by my nod the luminous
summits of the heavens, the salubrious breezes of the sea, and the
deplorable silences of the realms beneath, and whose one divinity the
whole orb of the earth venerates under a manifold form, by different
rites and a variety of appellations. Hence the primogenial Phrygians
call me Pessinuntica, the mother of the Gods, the Attic Aborigines,
Cecropian Minerva; the floating Cyprians, Paphian Venus; the
arrow-bearing Cretans, Diana Dictynna; the three-tongued Sicilians,
Stygian Proserpine; and the Eleusinians, the ancient Goddess Ceres. Some
also call me Juno, others Bellona, others Hecate, and others Rhamnusia.
And those who are illuminated by the incipient rays of that divinity the
Sun, when he rises, viz. the Ethiopians, the Arii, and the Egyptians
skilled in ancient learning, worshipping me by ceremonies perfectly
appropriate, call me by my true name, Queen Isis."

Le Plongeon believes that the Egyptian myth of Isis had a historical
basis among the Mayas of Central America, where this goddess was known
as Queen Moo. In Prince Coh the same author finds a correspondence to
Osiris, the brother-husband of Isis. Le Plongeon's theory is that Mayan
civilization was far more ancient than that of Egypt. After the death of
Prince Coh, his widow, Queen Moo, fleeing to escape the wrath of his
murderers, sought refuge among the Mayan colonies in Egypt, where she
was accepted as their queen and was given the name of Isis. While Le
Plongeon may be right, the possible historical queen sinks into
insignificance when compared with the allegorical, symbolic World
Virgin; and the fact that she appears among so many different races and
peoples discredits the theory that she was a historical individual.

According to Sextus Empyricus, the Trojan war was fought over a statue
of the moon goddess. For this lunar Helena, and not for a woman, the
Greeks and Trojans struggled at the gates of Troy.

Several authors have attempted to prove that Isis, Osiris, Typhon,
Nephthys, and Aroueris (Thoth, or Mercury) were grandchildren of the
great Jewish patriarch Noah by his son Ham. But as the story of Noah and
his ark is a cosmic allegory concerning the repopulation of planets at
the beginning of each world period, this only makes it less likely that
they were historical personages. According to Robert Fludd, the sun has
three properties--*life*, *light*, and *heat*. These three vivify and
vitalize the three worlds--spiritual, intellectual, and material.
Therefore, it is said "*from one light, three lights*," i. e. the first
three Master Masons. In all probability, Osiris represents the third, or
material, aspect of solar activity, which by its beneficent influences
vitalizes and enlivens the flora and fauna of the earth. Osiris is not
the sun, but the sun is symbolic of the vital principle of Nature, which
the ancients knew as Osiris. His symbol, therefore, was an opened eye,
in honor of the Great Eye of the universe, the sun. Opposed to the
active, radiant principle of impregnating fire, hear, and motion was the
passive, receptive principle of Nature.

Modern science has proved that forms ranging in magnitude from solar
systems to atoms are composed of positive, radiant nuclei surrounded by
negative bodies that exist upon the emanations of the central life. From
this allegory we have the story of Solomon and his wives, for Solomon is
the sun and his wives and concubines are the planets, moons, asteroids,
and other receptive bodies within his house--the solar mansion. Isis,
represented in the Song of Solomon by the dark maid of Jerusalem, is
symbolic of receptive Nature--the watery, maternal principle which
creates all things out of herself after impregnation has been achieved
by the virility of the sun.

In the ancient world the year had 360 days. The five extra days were
gathered together by the God of Cosmic Intelligence to serve as the
birthdays of the five gods and goddesses who are called the sons and
daughters of Ham. Upon the first of these special days Osiris was born
and upon the fourth of them Isis. (The number *four* shows the relation
that this goddess bears to the earth and its elements.) Typhon, the
Egyptian Demon or Spirit of the Adversary, was born upon the third day.
Typhon is often symbolized by a crocodile; sometimes his body is a
combination of crocodile and hog. Isis stands for knowledge and wisdom,
and according to Plutarch the word *Typhon* means *insolence* and
*pride*. Egotism, self-centeredness, and pride are the deadly enemies of
understanding and truth. This part of the allegory is revealed.

After Osiris, here symbolized as the sun, had become King of Egypt and
had given to his people the full advantage of his intellectual light, he
continued his path through the heavens, visiting the peoples of other
nations and converting all with whom he came in contact. Plutarch
further asserts that the Greeks recognized in Osiris the same person
whom they revered under the names of *Dionysos* and *Bacchus*. While he
was away from his country, his brother, Typhon, the Evil One, like the
Loki of Scandinavia, plotted against the Sun God to destroy him.
Gathering seventy-two persons as fellow conspirators, he attained his
nefarious end in a most subtle manner. He had a wonderful ornamented box
made just the size of the body of Osiris. This he brought into a banquet
hall where the gods and goddesses were feasting together. All admired
the beautiful chest, and Typhon promised to give it to the one whose
body fitted it most perfectly. One after another lay down in the box,
but in disappointment

<span id="img_04500"></span>

[![ISIS, QUEEN OF HEAVEN.](tn/04500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04500.jpg.md)  
ISIS, QUEEN OF HEAVEN.  

From Mosaize *Historie der Hebreeuwse Kerke*.

Diodorus writes of a famous inscription carved on a column at Nysa, in
Arabia, wherein Isis described herself as follows: "I am Isis, Queen of
this country. I was instructed by Mercury. No one can destroy the laws
which I have established. I am the eldest daughter of Saturn, most
ancient of the gods. I am the wife and sister of Osiris the King. I
first made known to mortals the use of wheat. I am the mother of Orus
the King. In my honor was the city of Bubaste built. Rejoice, O Egypt,
rejoice, land that gave me birth!" (See "Morals and Dogma," by Albert
Pike.)

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

rose again, until at last Osiris also tried. The moment he was in the
chest Typhon and his accomplices nailed the cover down and sealed the
cracks with molten lead. They then cast the box into the Nile, down
which it floated to the sea. Plutarch states that the date upon which
this occurred was the seventeenth day of the month Athyr, when the sun
was in the constellation of Scorpio. This is most significant, for the
Scorpion is the symbol of treachery. The time when Osiris entered the
chest was also the same season that Noah entered the ark to escape from
the Deluge.

Plutarch further declares that the Pans and Satyrs (the Nature spirits
and elementals) first discovered that Osiris had been murdered. These
immediately raised an alarm, and from this incident the word panic,
meaning *fright* or *amazement* of the multitudes, originated. Isis,
upon receiving the news of her husband's murder, which she learned from
some children who had seen the murderers making off with the box, at
once robed herself in mourning and started forth in quest of him.

At length Isis discovered that the chest had floated to the coast of
Byblos. There it had lodged in the branches of a tree, which in a short
time miraculously grew up around the box. This so amazed the king of
that country that he ordered the tree to be cut down and a pillar made
from its trunk to support the roof of his palace. Isis, visiting Byblos,
recovered the body of her husband, but it was again stolen by Typhon,
who cut it into fourteen parts, which he scattered all over the earth.
Isis, in despair, began gathering up the severed remains of her husband,
but found only thirteen pieces. The fourteenth part (the phallus) she
reproduced in gold, for the original had fallen into the river Nile and
had been swallowed by a fish.

Typhon was later slain in battle by the son of Osiris. Some of the
Egyptians believed that the souls of the gods were taken to heaven,
where they shone forth as stars. It was supposed that the soul of Isis
gleamed from the Dog Star, while Typhon became the constellation of the
Bear. It is doubtful, however, whether this idea was ever generally
accepted.

Among the Egyptians, Isis is often represented with a headdress
consisting of the empty throne chair of her murdered husband, and this
peculiar structure was accepted during certain dynasties as her
hieroglyphic. The headdresses of the Egyptians have great symbolic and
emblematic importance, for they represent the auric bodies of the
superhuman intelligences, and are used in the same way that the nimbus,
halo, and aureole are used in Christian religious art. Frank C. Higgins,
a well-known Masonic symbolist, has astutely noted that the ornate
headgears of certain gods and Pharaohs are inclined backward at the same
angle as the earth's axis. The robes, insignia, jewels, and
ornamentations of the ancient hierophants symbolized the spiritual
energies radiating from the human body. Modern science is rediscovering
many of the lost secrets of Hermetic philosophy. One of these is the
ability to gauge the mental development, the soul qualities, and the
physical health of an individual from the streamers of semi-visible
electric force which pour through the surface of the skin of every human
being at all times during his life. (For details concerning a scientific
process for making the auric emanations visible, see *The Human
Atmosphere* by Dr. Walter J. Kilner.)

Isis is sometimes symbolized by the head of a cow; occasionally the
entire animal is her symbol. The first gods of the Scandinavians were
licked out of blocks of ice by the Mother Cow (Audhumla), who symbolized
the principle of natural nutriment and fecundity because of her milk.
Occasionally Isis is represented as a bird. She often carries in one
hand the *crux ansata*, the symbol of eternal life, and in the other the
flowered scepter, symbolic of her authority.

Thoth Hermes Trismegistus, the founder of Egyptian learning, the Wise
Man of the ancient world, gave to the priests and philosophers of
antiquity the secrets which have been preserved to this day in myth and
legend. These allegories and emblematic figures conceal the secret
formulæ for spiritual, mental, moral, and physical regeneration commonly
known as the Mystic Chemistry of the Soul (alchemy). These sublime
truths were communicated to the initiates of the Mystery Schools, but
were concealed from the profane. The latter, unable to understand the
abstract philosophical tenets, worshiped the concrete sculptured idols
which were emblematic of these secret truths. The wisdom and secrecy of
Egypt are epitomized in the Sphinx, which has preserved its secret from
the seekers of a hundred generations. The mysteries of Hermeticism, the
great spiritual truths hidden from the world by the ignorance of the
world, and the keys of the secret doctrines of the ancient philosophers,
are all symbolized by the Virgin Isis. Veiled from head to foot, she
reveals her wisdom only to the tried and initiated few who have earned
the right to enter her sacred presence, tear from the veiled figure of
Nature its shroud of obscurity, and stand face to face with the Divine
Reality.

The explanations in these pages of the symbols peculiar to the Virgin
Isis are based (unless otherwise noted) on selections from a free
translation of the fourth book of *Bibliotèque des Philosophes
Hermétiques*, entitled "The Hermetical Signification of the Symbols and
Attributes of Isis," with interpolations by the compiler to amplify and
clarify the text.

The statues of Isis were decorated with the sun, moon, and stars, and
many emblems pertaining to the earth, over which Isis was believed to
rule (as the guardian spirit of Nature personified). Several images of
the goddess have been found upon which the marks of her dignity and
position were still intact. According to the ancient philosophers, she
personified Universal Nature, the mother of all productions. The deity
was generally represented as a partly nude woman, often pregnant,
sometimes loosely covered with a garment either of green or black color,
or of four different shades intermingled-black, white, yellow, and red.

Apuleius describes her as follows: "In the first place, then, her most
copious and long hairs, being gradually intorted, and promiscuously
scattered on her divine neck, were softly defluous. A multiform crown,
consisting of various flowers, bound the sublime summit of her head. And
in the middle of the crown, just on her forehead, there was a smooth orb
resembling a mirror, or rather a white refulgent light, which indicated
that she was the moon. Vipers rising up after the manner of furrows,
environed the crown on the right hand and on the left, and Cerealian
ears of corn were also extended from above. Her garment was of many
colours, and woven from the finest flax, and was at one time lucid with
a white splendour, at another yellow from the flower of crocus, and at
another flaming with a rosy redness. But that which most excessively
dazzled my sight, was a very black robe, fulgid with a dark splendour,
and which, spreading round and passing under her right side, and
ascending to her left shoulder, there rose protuberant like the center
of a shield, the dependent part of the robe falling in many folds, and
having small knots of fringe, gracefully flowing in its extremities.
Glittering stars were dispersed through the embroidered border of the
robe, and through the whole of its surface: and the full moon, shining
in the middle of the stars, breathed forth flaming fires. Nevertheless,
a crown, wholly consisting of flowers and fruits of every kind, adhered
with indivisible connexion to the border of that conspicuous robe, in
all its undulating motions. What she carried in her hands also consisted
of things of a very different nature. For her right hand, indeed, bore a
brazen rattle \[sistrum\] through the narrow lamina of which bent like a
belt, certain rods passing, produced a sharp triple sound, through the
vibrating motion of her arm. An oblong vessel, in the shape of a boat,
depended from her left hand, on the handle of which, in that part in
which it was conspicuous, an asp raised its erect head and largely
swelling neck. And shoes woven from the leaves of the victorious palm
tree covered her immortal feet."

The green color alludes to the vegetation which covers the face of the
earth, and therefore represents the robe of Nature. The black represents
death and corruption as being the way to a new life and generation.
"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." (John
iii. 3.) White, yellow, and red signify the three principal colors of
the alchemical, Hermetical, universal medicine after the blackness of
its putrefaction is over.

The ancients gave the name Isis to one of their occult medicines;
therefore the description here given relates somewhat to chemistry. Her
black drape also signifies that the moon, or the lunar humidity--the
sophic universal mercury and the operating substance of Nature in
alchemical terminology--has no light of its own, but receives its light,
its fire, and its vitalizing force from the sun. Isis was

<span id="img_04600"></span>

[![THE SISTRUM.](tn/04600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04600.jpg.md)  
THE SISTRUM.  

"The sistrum is designed \* \* \* to represent to us, that every thing
must be kept in continual agitation, and never cease from motion; that
they ought to be mused and well-shaken, whenever they begin to grow
drowsy as it were, and to droop in their motion. For, say they, the
sound of these sistra averts and drives away Typho; meaning hereby, that
as corruption clogs and puts a stop to the regular course of nature; so
generation, by the means of motion, loosens it again, and restores it to
its former vigour. Now the outer surface of this instrument is of a
convex figure, as within its circumference are contained those four
chords or bars \[only three shown\], which make such a rattling when
they are shaken--nor is this without its meaning; for that part of the
universe which is subject to generation and corruption is contained
within the sphere of the moon; and whatever motions or changes may
happen therein, they are all effected by the different combinations of
the four elementary bodies, fire, earth, water, and air--moreover, upon
the upper part of the convex surface of the sistrum is carved the
effigies of a cat with a human visage, as on the lower edge of it, under
those moving chords, is engraved on the one side the face of Isis, and
on the other that of Nephthys--by the faces symbolically representing
generation and corruption (which, as has been already observed, is
nothing but the motion and alteration of the four elements one amongst
another),"

(From Plutarch's *Isis and Osiris*.)

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

the image or representative of the Great Works of the wise men: the
Philosopher's Stone, the Elixir of Life, and the Universal Medicine.

Other hieroglyphics seen in connection with Isis are no less curious
than those already described, but it is impossible to enumerate all, for
many symbols were used interchangeably by the Egyptian Hermetists. The
goddess often wore upon her head a hat made of cypress branches, to
signify mourning for her dead husband and also for the physical death
which she caused every creature to undergo in order to receive a new
life in posterity or a periodic resurrection. The head of Isis is
sometimes ornamented with a crown of gold or a garland of olive leaves,
as conspicuous marks of her sovereignty as queen of the world and
mistress of the entire universe. The crown of gold signifies also the
aurific unctuosity or sulphurous fatness of the solar and vital fires
which she dispenses to every individual by a continual circulation of
the elements, this circulation being symbolized by the musical rattle
which she carries in her hand. This sistrum is also the yonic symbol of
purity.

A serpent interwoven among the olive leaves on her head, devouring its
own tail, denotes that the aurific unctuosity was soiled with the venom
of terrestrial corruption which surrounded it and must be mortified and
purified by seven planetary circulations or purifications called *flying
eagles* (alchemical terminology) in order to make it medicinal for the
restoration of health. (Here the emanations from the sun are recognized
as a medicine for the healing of human ills.) The seven planetary
circulations are represented by the circumambulations of the Masonic
lodge; by the marching of the Jewish priests seven times around the
walls of Jericho, and of the Mohammedan priests seven times around the
Kabba at Mecca. From the crown of gold project three horns of plenty,
signifying the abundance of the gifts of Nature proceeding from one root
having its origin in the heavens (head of Isis).

In this figure the pagan naturalists represent all the vital powers of
the three kingdoms and families of sublunary nature-mineral, plant, and
animal (man considered as an animal). At one of her ears was the moon
and at the other the sun, to indicate that these two were the agent and
patient, or father and mother principles of all natural objects; and
that Isis, or Nature, makes use of these two luminaries to communicate
her powers to the whole empire of animals, vegetables, and minerals. On
the back of her neck were the characters of the planets and the signs of
the zodiac which assisted the planets in their functions. This signified
that the heavenly influences directed the destinies of the principles
and sperms of all things, because they were the governors of all
sublunary bodies, which they transformed into little worlds made in the
image of the greater universe.

Isis holds in her right hand a small sailing ship with the spindle of a
spinning wheel for its mast. From the top of the mast projects a water
jug, its handle shaped like a serpent swelled with venom. This indicates
that Isis steers the bark of life, full of troubles and miseries, on the
stormy ocean of Time. The spindle symbolizes the fact that she spins and
cuts the thread of Life. These emblems further signify that Isis abounds
in humidity, by means of which she nourishes all natural bodies,
preserving them from the heat of the sun by humidifying them with
nutritious moisture from the atmosphere. Moisture supports vegetation,
but this subtle humidity (life ether) is always more or less infected by
some venom proceeding from corruption or decay. It must be purified by
being brought into contact with the invisible cleansing fire of Nature.
This fire digests, perfects, and revitalizes this substance, in order
that the humidity may become a universal medicine to heal and renew all
the bodies in Nature.

The serpent throws off its skin annually and is thereby renewed
(symbolic of the resurrection of the spiritual life from the material
nature). This renewal of the earth takes place every spring, when the
vivifying spirit of the sun returns to the countries of the Northern
Hemisphere,

The symbolic Virgin carries in her left hand a sistrum and a cymbal, or
square frame of metal, which when struck gives the key-note of Nature
(Fa); sometimes also an olive branch, to indicate the harmony she
preserves among natural things with her regenerating power. By the
processes of death and corruption she gives life to a number of
creatures of diverse forms through periods of perpetual change. The
cymbal is made square instead of the usual triangular shape in order to
symbolize that all things are transmuted and regenerated according to
the harmony of the four elements.

Dr. Sigismund Bacstrom believed that if a physician could establish
harmony among the elements of earth, fire, air, and water, and unite
them into a stone (the Philosopher's Stone) symbolized by the
six-pointed star or two interlaced triangles, he would possess the means
of healing all disease. Dr. Bacstrom further stated that there was no
doubt in his mind that the universal, omnipresent fire (spirit) of
Nature: "does all and is all in all." By attraction, repulsion, motion,
heat, sublimation, evaporation, exsiccation, inspissation, coagulation,
and fixation, the Universal Fire (Spirit) manipulates matter, and
manifests throughout creation. Any individual who can understand these
principles and adapt them to the three departments of Nature becomes a
true philosopher.

From the right breast of Isis protruded a bunch of grapes and from, the
left an ear of corn or a sheaf of wheat, golden in color. These indicate
that Nature is the source of nutrition for plant, animal, and human
life, nourishing all things from herself. The golden color in the wheat
(corn) indicates that in the sunlight or spiritual gold is concealed the
first sperm of all life.

On the girdle surrounding the upper part of the body of the statue
appear a number of mysterious emblems. The girdle is joined together in
front by four golden plates (the elements), placed in the form of a
square. This signified that Isis, or Nature, the first matter
(alchemical terminology), was the essence- of the four elements (life,
light, heat, and force), which quintessence generated all things.
Numerous stars are represented on this girdle, thereby indicating their
influence in darkness as well as the influence of the sun in light. Isis
is the Virgin immortalized in the constellation of Virgo, where the
World Mother is placed with the serpent under her feet and a crown. of
stars on her head. In her arms she carries a sheaf of grain and
sometimes the young Sun God.

The statue of Isis was placed on a pedestal of dark stone ornamented
with rams' heads. Her feet trod upon a number of venomous reptiles. This
indicates that Nature has power to free from acidity or saltness all
corrosives and to overcome all impurities from terrestrial corruption
adhering to bodies. The rams' heads indicate that the most auspicious
time for the generation of life is during the period when the sun passes
through the sign of Aries. The serpents under her feet indicate that
Nature is inclined to preserve life and to heal disease by expelling
impurities and corruption.

In this sense the axioms known to the ancient philosophers are verified;
namely:

*Nature contains Nature,  
Nature rejoices in her own nature,  
Nature surmounts Nature;  
Nature cannot be amended but in her own nature*.

\[paragraph continues\] Therefore, in contemplating the statue of Isis,
we must not lose sight of the occult sense of its allegories; otherwise,
the Virgin remains an inexplicable enigma.

From a golden ring on her left arm a line descends, to the end of which
is suspended a deep box filled with flaming coals and incense. Isis, or
Nature personified, carries with her the sacred fire, religiously
preserved and kept burning in. a special temple by the vestal virgins.
This fire is the genuine, immortal flame of Nature--ethereal, essential,
the author of life. The inconsumable oil; the balsam of life, so much
praised by the wise and so often referred to in the Scriptures, is
frequently symbolized as the fuel of this immortal flame.

From the right arm of the figure also descends a thread, to the end of
which is fastened a pair of scales, to denote the exactitude of Nature
in her weights and measures. Isis is often represented as the symbol of
justice, because Nature is eternally consistent.

<span id="img_04700"></span>

[![THOTH, THE DOG-HEADED.](tn/04700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04700.jpg.md)  
THOTH, THE DOG-HEADED.  

From Lenoir's *La Franche-Maconnerie*.

Aroueris, or Thoth, one of the five immortals, protected the infant
Horus from the wrath of Typhon after the murder of Osiris. He also
revised the ancient Egyptian calendar by increasing the year from 360
days to 365. Thoth Hermes was called "The Dog-Headed" because of his
faithfulness and integrity. He is shown crowned with a solar nimbus,
carrying in one hand the Crux Ansata, the symbol of eternal life, and in
the other a serpent-wound staff symbolic of his dignity as counselor of
the gods.

<span id="img_04701"></span>

[![THE EGYPTIAN MADONNA.](tn/04701.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04701.jpg.md)  
THE EGYPTIAN MADONNA.  

From Lenoir's *La Franche-Maconnerie*.

Isis is shown with her son Horus in her arms. She is crowned with the
lunar orb, ornamented with the horns of rams or bulls. Orus, or Horus as
he is more generally known, was the son of Isis and Osiris. He was the
god of time, hours, days, and this narrow span of life recognized as
mortal existence. In all probability, the four sons of Horus represent
the four kingdoms of Nature. It was Horus who finally avenged the murder
of his father, Osiris, by slaying Typhon, the spirit of Evil.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

The World Virgin is sometimes shown standing between two great
pillars--the Jachin and Boaz of Freemasonry--symbolizing the fact that
Nature attains productivity by means of polarity. As wisdom personified,
Isis stands between the pillars of opposites, demonstrating that
understanding is always found at the point of equilibrium and that truth
is often crucified between the two thieves of apparent contradiction.

The sheen of gold in her dark hair indicates that while she is lunar,
her power is due to the sun's rays, from which she secures her ruddy
complexion. As the moon is robed in the reflected light of the sun, so
Isis, like the virgin of Revelation, is clothed in the glory of solar
luminosity. Apuleius states that while he was sleeping he beheld the
venerable goddess Isis rising out of the ocean. The ancients realized
that the primary forms of life first came out of water, and modem
science concurs in this view. H. G. Wells, in his *Outline of History*,
describing primitive life on the earth, states: "But though the ocean
and intertidal water already swarmed with life, the land above the
high-tide line was still, so far as we can guess, a stony wilderness
without a trace of life." In the next chapter he adds: "Wherever the
shore-line ran there was life, and that life went on in and by and with
water as its home, its medium, and its fundamental necessity." The
ancients believed that the universal sperm proceeded from warm vapor,
humid but fiery. The veiled Isis, whose very coverings represent vapor,
is symbolic of this humidity, which is the carrier or vehicle for the
sperm life of the sun, represented by a child in her arms. Because the
sun, moon, and stars in setting appear to sink into the sea and also
because the water receives their rays into itself, the sea was believed
to be the breeding ground for the sperm of living things. This sperm is
generated from the combination of the influences of the celestial
bodies; hence Isis is sometimes represented as pregnant.

Frequently the statue of Isis was accompanied by the figure of a large
black and white ox. The ox represents either Osiris as Taurus, the bull
of the zodiac, or Apis, an animal sacred to Osiris because of its
peculiar markings and colorings. Among the Egyptians, the bull was a
beast of burden. Hence the presence of the animal was a reminder of the
labors patiently performed by Nature that all creatures may have life
and health. Harpocrates, the God of Silence, holding his fingers to his
mouth, often accompanies the statue of Isis. He warns all to keep the
secrets of the wise from those unfit to know them.

The Druids of Britain and Gaul had a deep knowledge concerning the
mysteries of Isis and worshiped her under the symbol of the moon.
Godfrey Higgins considers it a mistake to regard Isis as synonymous with
the moon. The moon was chosen for Isis because of its dominion over
water. The Druids considered the sun to be the father and the moon the
mother of all things. By means of these symbols they worshiped Universal
Nature.

The figure of Isis is sometimes used to represent the occult and magical
arts, such as necromancy, invocation, sorcery, and thaumaturgy. In one
of the myths concerning her, Isis is said to have conjured the
invincible God of Eternities, *Ra*, to tell her his secret and sacred
name, which he did. This name is equivalent to the Lost Word of Masonry.
By means of this Word, a magician can demand obedience from the
invisible and superior deities. The priests of Isis became adepts in the
use of the unseen forces of Nature. They understood hypnotism,
mesmerism, and similar practices long before the modem world dreamed of
their existence.

Plutarch describes the requisites of a follower of Isis in this manner:
"For as 'tis not the length of the beard, or the coarseness of the habit
which makes a philosopher, so neither will those frequent shavings, or
the mere wearing \[of\] a linen vestment constitute a votary of Isis;
but he alone is a true servant or follower of this Goddess, who after he
has heard, and been made acquainted in a proper manner with the history
of the actions of these Gods, searches into the hidden truths which he
concealed under them, and examines the whole by the dictates of reason
and philosophy."

During the Middle Ages the troubadours of Central Europe preserved in
song the legends of this Egyptian goddess. They composed sonnets to the
most beautiful woman in all the world. Though few ever discovered her
identity, she was Sophia, the Virgin of Wisdom, whom all the
philosophers of the world have wooed. Isis represents the mystery of
motherhood, which the ancients recognized as the most apparent proof of
Nature's omniscient wisdom and God's overshadowing power. To the modern
seeker she is the epitome of the Great Unknown, and only those who
unveil her will be able to solve the mysteries of life, death,
generation, and regeneration.

### MUMMIFICATION OF THE EGYPTIAN DEAD

Servius, commenting on Virgil's *Æneid*, observes that "the wise
Egyptians took care to embalm their bodies, and deposit them in
catacombs, in order that the soul might be preserved for a long time in
connection with the body, and might not soon be alienated; while the
Romans, with an opposite design, committed the remains of their dead to
the funeral pile, intending that the vital spark might immediately be
restored to the general element, or return to its pristine nature."
(From Prichard's *An Analysis of the Egyptian Mythology*.)

No complete records are available which give the secret doctrine of the
Egyptians concerning the relationship existing between the spirit, or
consciousness, and the body which it inhabited. It is reasonably
certain, however, that Pythagoras, who had been initiated in the
Egyptian temples, when he promulgated the doctrine of metempsychosis,
restated, in part at least, the teachings of the Egyptian initiates. The
popular supposition that the Egyptians mummified their dead in order to
preserve the form for a physical resurrection is untenable in the light
of modern knowledge regarding their philosophy of death. In the fourth
book of *On Abstinence from Animal Food*, Porphyry describes an Egyptian
custom of purifying the dead by removing the contents of the abdominal
cavity, which they placed in a separate chest. He then reproduces the
following oration which had been translated out of the Egyptian tongue
by Euphantus: "O sovereign Sun, and all ye Gods who impart life to men,
receive me, and deliver me to the eternal Gods as a cohabitant. For I
have always piously worshipped those divinities which were pointed out
to me by my parents as long as I lived in this age, and have likewise
always honored those who procreated my body. And, with respect to other
men, I have never slain any one, nor defrauded any one of what he
deposited with me, nor have I committed any other atrocious deed. If,
therefore, during my life I have acted erroneously, by eating or
drinking things which it is unlawful to cat or drink, I have not erred
through myself, but through these" (pointing to the chest which
contained the viscera). The removal of the organs identified as the seat
of the appetites was considered equivalent to the purification of the
body from their evil influences.

So literally did the early Christians interpret their Scriptures that
they preserved the bodies of their dead by pickling them in salt water,
so that on the day of resurrection the spirit of the dead might reenter
a complete and perfectly preserved body. Believing that the incisions
necessary to the embalming process and the removal of the internal
organs would prevent the return of the spirit to its body, the
Christians buried their dead without resorting to the more elaborate
mummification methods employed by the Egyptian morticians.

In his work on *Egyptian Magic*, S.S.D.D. hazards the following
speculation concerning the esoteric purposes behind the practice of
mummification. "There is every reason to suppose," he says, "that only
those who had received some grade of initiation were mummified; for it
is certain that, in the eyes of the Egyptians, mummification effectually
prevented reincarnation. Reincarnation was necessary to imperfect souls,
to those who had failed to pass the tests of initiation; but for those
who had the Will and the capacity to enter the Secret Adytum, there was
seldom necessity for that liberation of the soul which is said to be
effected by the destruction of the body. The body of the Initiate was
therefore preserved after death as a species of Talisman or material
basis for the manifestation of the Soul upon earth."

During the period of its inception mummification was limited to the
Pharaoh and such other persons of royal rank as presumably partook of
the attributes of the great Osiris, the divine, mummified King of the
Egyptian Underworld.

<span id="img_04800"></span>

[![OSIRIS, KING OF THE UNDERWORLD.](tn/04800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04800.jpg.md)  
OSIRIS, KING OF THE UNDERWORLD.  

Osiris is often represented with the lower par, of his body enclosed in
a mummy case or wrapped about with funeral bandages. Man's spirit
consists of three distinct parts, only one of which incarnates in
physical form. The human body was considered to be a tomb or sepulcher
of this incarnating spirit. Therefore Osiris, a symbol of the
incarnating ego, was represented with the lower half of his body
mummified to indicate that he was the living spirit of man enclosed
within the material form symbolized by the mummy case.

There is a romance between the active principle of God and the passive
principle of Nature. From the union of these two principles is produced
the rational creation. Man is a composite creature. From his Father (the
active principle) he inherits his Divine Spirit, the fire of
aspiration--that immortal part of himself which rises triumphant from
the broken clay of mortality: that part which remains after the natural
organisms have disintegrated or have been regenerated. From his Mother
(the passive principle) he inherits his body--that part over which the
laws of Nature have control: his humanity, his mortal personality, his
appetites, his feelings, and his emotions. The Egyptians also believed
that Osiris was the river Nile and that Isis (his sister-wife) was the
contiguous land, which, when inundated by the river, bore fruit and
harvest. The murky water of the Nile were believed to account for the
blackness of Osiris, who was generally symbolized as being of ebony hue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sun, A Universal Deity](sta11.md)
